going to start with Senator
Stewart's Special Education Act.
She then has to get over the
rules if she can get back, we'll
put her back on on 2:38 whenever
she gets here next after Senator
Stewart, we're going to go up to
Senate Bill 125, Senator
Padilla's bill, um,
The my bill on the math changes
and Senator Pope will kind of be
last if Senator Maestas gets
here. So we're gonna be bouncing
around a little bit. I'll try
and keep reminding people where
we are, what's coming up next.
Uh, there are a couple of
things. This is, uh, the week
when the New Mexico School Board
Association is in town and on
Friday they are hosting a
legislative breakfast over at
the El Dorado Hotel from 7 to 8,
and then uh chairman uh.
Romero and I speak to that group
and so we will not be starting
until 9:30 on Friday, uh, as a
result of that, uh, after we
actually get through our list of
things today, we'll put out
Friday's agenda at that point.
Um,
We are gonna have some guests
coming in at some point. Uh,
what else do we need to?
The other comments before we get
started, you know, Senator
Boone, welcome back. I hope
you're feeling better.
Wonderful.
Um, and with that then Senator
Stewart on Senate Bill 38, the
Special Education Act.
Uh, good morning. Thank you so
much, Mr. Chairman. It seems
like the microphones are working
today. Can you hear me?
Uh, so a bill of 38, uh.
Is based on the executive order
that the governor did several
years ago.
And the special education bills
that we've passed over the last
uh so this bill creates and
statute the office of Special
Education, OSE.
Uh, 2, ensure that we have the
right personnel, the right
people working on these issues
that have come up repeatedly
over the last.
So the, the mute of it, a lot of
this is already a statutory
language, especially the last 4
or 5 pages, uh, but what this
does is um.
Creates the department.
Uh, sets up their uh duties.
Uh
Um, does definitions in the
beginning on 3 is the deputy
secretary and the powers and
duties of that deputy secretary,
the Office of Special ed would
be in the public education
department but would have a
deputy in charge of it right
now, that is Doctor Margaret
Cage, uh, who is my expert today
and I'll let her do a mop up and
clean up after I quickly go
through this bill, um.
And we do have an amendment. I
want to talk about the bill just
a little bit and then uh section
5 is the duties of the office,
and these are basic education
duties.
Uh, one thing that this does do
is that it uh.
It
Improves our statute on dyslexia
just by putting in uh some of
the supports that we need to do
for dyslexia.
Uh, it moves the special
education on but into the public
education department but not in
the office of special education.
So it would have a separate part
in the public education
department we have a few issues
right now with the ombud which
now really only works with
parents and students and the
people that are supposed to fix
the things the ombud comes up
with are part of that process,
so we put them into the public
education department, then
they're more fully uh able to
use the powers of the PED to fix
issues with special education.
Um
It moves, uh, it moves a one
person who's still in the public
education department, uh.
In the ECECD, uh, for the 3 and
4 year olds, the 3 and 4 year
old special it has been with the
ECECD for a while, but they, uh,
IDEA money that still rests in
PED would move over to ECECD.
So
In in uh in the drafting of the
bill, uh, I believe it was kind
of accidentally scooping up the
the term gifted children.
So we're one of the very few
states that have gifted children
under our special education act.
So that is the amendment and if
we could go to the amendments so
I could talk that through. Yes,
thank you. If someone would like
to move the amendment.
For discussion purposes.
I move amendment 0.230683.1 for
discussion.
So the main thing this amendment
does is goes through this bill
and whenever we say uh and
gifted children, we strike that.
And then we reinsert that part
of our statute that talks about
special ed so um.
I can go through this. I'll just
do it quickly, one at a time,
Mr. Chairman, would you like me
to do that?
On page 14 is the 14 line 9
strike and then this is outside
of that gifted, uh, we strike
lines 13 and 14, uh, really hard
to do what they were asking to,
and so we're moving the
explanation of program cost, uh,
being expanded and disaggregated
by grade that is being removed
in the amendment, uh, page 17 is
the first.
incidents where we say students
with disabilities and gifted
students and were striking and
gifted students. We do that on
page 18, line 13, we do it on
page 21. There's 3 incidents,
but what we're reinserting is uh
basically what is in statute now
for special education students,
uh, A is a little bit more
detailed about uh district's
responsibility.
for gifted students, if you look
on the back side.
Uh
BC and D are basically current
language and we're just read
lettering after a.
Uh, so that is the purpose of
the amendment, we, you know, we
also uh gifted children are part
of our special education
program, they're not part of the
federal IDEA program and so we
have to ensure that we don't get
caught up in those uh cross
purposes and so that was the
purpose of the amendment. So a
Stanford question on the
amendment.
Senator, um, and again we're
just talking about the amendment
now, not the overall bill. Uh,
so anyone in the audience in
support of the amendment.
I would like to speak. Anyone in
opposition?
The couple would like to come
down and speak in support of the
amendment.
Our wonderful, uh, sergeant at
Arm 8 here to assist with the
microphone. Thank you, sir.
Thank you Mr. Chairman, san
rounds for the school
superintendents we really
appreciate this amendment. I
want to thank Doctor Cage for
spending the amount of time with
me that she did on this bill and
also the the sponsor, uh, we've
worked together a lot on a lot
of these issues this does clean
up the issue as the sponsor
indicated, we think it's a great
amendment. We urge you just to
uh adopt it.
Anyone else on the amendment?
Anyone in opposition, let me ask
you again, on the amendment,
anyone?
OK.
Uh, questions from the committee
on the amendment.
Seeing no questions if I am,
yeah, Senator Thornton.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I, I, I'm
still reading through the
amendment, but
So it says here on the amendment
and
Page 2, topic says the
department shall adopt standards
pertaining to the determination
of who is a gifted child.
So who is going to be making
those determinations exactly and
how will those determinations be
made?
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Chairman, uh, senator, this is
current language.
So this is what we have already
in statute about special
education.
So there's a process, there's a
referral process we have
diagnosticians who do testing,
um, if you look at E, we try to
ensure that we're not leaving
out students that might kind of
be right on the edge, but
because of their background,
they don't reach 1:30 on an IQ
test, for example.
Uh, so we have a, a, a firm
process that goes on right now
all over the state tested
properly if they're referred
parent is always in involved.
Some parents don't want that.
Most parents do, uh, so they're
involved, it's a process, it's
not too lengthy unless we don't
have diagnosticians available,
uh, but, and we have timelines
um to make sure that we do these
processes in a timely manner.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Any other questions
on the amendment?
Senator.
Madam, uh, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Protem, I do have a
question on your amendment.
And it's changed and it's
changed and it's changed, and I
understand why you're doing what
you're doing with this
particular amendment, but I do
have a question.
Uh, and I'm not seeing it. Maybe
I'm just missing it and I, I
need you to point it out to me
whenever you are on page 2 of
your amendment under C.
You're talking about that team.
Tell me who.
Who puts these teams together at
the school that does it, uh,
multidisciplinary teams.
And that team and that team
shall consider information that
team shall also consider
disabling conditions.
In the identification referral
and evaluation process. And, and
Senator, that is all current
language so that really isn't a
change in the, the amendment
changes to the law that we're
looking at now and so that, you
know, we don't need to go into
the whole thing about gifted
education other than where there
are changes, I think. OK, but my
concern is the teams, uh, where
is that reference in your bill
itself in the bill proper.
Um, Mr. Chairman, uh,
So this is current language this
is the statute for uh gifted
children's school, um, or an IEP
team, you know, once they're
tested and are approved.
And Mr. Chairman and Senator,
that was my question. I didn't
know if it was already pointed
out someplace else that was not
reflected in this area right
here. So thank you for
clarifying that. So it is the
school that does this. Thank you
very much for that answer.
Thank you, Senator. Uh, other
questions from the committee?
If not, someone would like to
make a motion to adopt the
amendment.
I move adoption of the amendment
230683.1 to send a bill 38 move
by Senator Viadroa. Is there a
second?
The second, is there any
opposition to the amendment?
The opposition
See no opposition, Senator, you
have an amended bill.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman. So
I think we've covered the major
points. I'm sure they'll be
questions and we stand for
questions.
Thank you. We are now on the
main bill, um, Senate Bill 38 of
those in the audience just
quickly a show of hands in
support of Senate Bill 38.
Those in opposition, OK?
Then, would you like to come up
in opposition, please, and then
we'll go to the, those in
support.
Mr. Chairman, san rounds again
for the school superintendents
and the coalition of Educational
leaders, Mr. Chairman, words
matter.
Mr. Chairman, recently you and
Cheryl Marrow and all members of
both committees who are
educators.
We berated and disrespected.
Mr. Chairman, with you, our
superintendents were also
maligned and disrespected.
Our president pro tem, the
sponsor of this bill, as an
educator, a longstanding
educator was also disrespected.
We want you to know from the
sheep potatoes and the coalition
we support you.
We trust you and you are the
right people to make the right
decisions for education.
Our superintendents work long
hours to give service to their
districts and provide their
field insights to assure you get
our best counsel.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, this bill is
unnecessary.
This bill will lock future
governors into practices that
are currently underway.
Through executive order.
Mr. Chairman, nothing in this
bill will change today's
practice.
As far as special education
nothing except for two items.
The two items are the transition
services section that is in here
which by the way we support.
We also support the other part
which is moving the ombuds to
the public education department.
Mr. Chairman, words matter.
Please join us in opposing this
legislation and help us send a
clear message that words matter,
respect matters, and unnecessary
legislation need not pass. Thank
you.
Thank you, Stan. Anyone else in
opposition?
Anyone in opposition online?
OK.
Those in support, if you'd like
to come and speak in support.
You have up to 2 minutes.
Mr. Chair, uh, members of the
committee, uh, Jim Jackson here
for disability rights in New
Mexico, um, we do support uh
most of this bill elevating the
Office of Special Education,
making sure that this is
recognized. We have a deputy
secretary at this point, and we
think that's a really important
way of reassuring that special
education really matters, and we
support the goal of this bill to
um to make it clear that there
that the department and the
division.
have a lot of responsibilities
for making sure that kids with
special needs get the education
that they're entitled to. So we
strongly support the intent of
the bill as the bill moves
forward, we do hope that they'll
review this issue of where the
ombudsman ombud goes, it's a
pretty independent agency now
and it's we feel it's important
for parents of kids in special
education to have an independent
way of addressing the concerns
that they may have, and we have
a little bit of concern that
moving
In the PED might limit the
effectiveness of that, but the
overall intent of the bill is a
good one and we urge your
support. Thank you.
Thank you, Jim.
Next please.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Katie Ellis.
And I am a person with a
disability.
If it was not for IDEA.
And the people that work in the
office, special education. I
would not be where I am today.
That is why we need to make sure
that the offices special
education is protected under
state law.
So that children like I
King gained a master's degree in
social work and become licensed
and help propel our state
forward. Thank you for your
time.
Thank you.
Good, good morning, uh,
committee. I just wanted to
Offer my support for this bill
as the daughter of a special
education teacher in the state
of New Mexico for 32 years and
is also a staff member of the
current Office of Special
Education. I can currently say
that we are doing things that
have never been done before. We
are supporting teachers, we are
supporting students, we are
supporting families. Um, our
teachers are seeing professional
development that has never been
offered in decades that is
coming out of our office. I have
not been a part of any
conversation with.
leaders with teachers, with
parents that do not want to do
better for our students, but
they are simply not given the
tools to do so. And I truly
believe that the plan and under
the fantastic leadership of
Doctor Margaret Cage. Um, we are
headed in that direction to get
us in moving in the where the
moving in the right direction in
which way we should go. Thank
you so much and I really hope
that we can continue to support
this bill and get this put in
law for the Office of Special
Education. Thank you.
you.
Thank you.
A few minutes to
No problem, we'll give you some
time to back out. Katie, can I
make a beeping sound, please?
Do with that.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. Good
morning, committee members. My
name is Michelle Trigembo. I am
the special education umbu for
the state of New Mexico. I
currently work for the
Developmental Disabilities
Council and do work very closely
with the public education
department and Doctor Cage and
the Special Education Office. It
is imperative that we support
this bill and continue to
elevate special education in New
Mexico. Students with
disabilities and their families
deserve the support that they
are getting. We are moving.
in the right direction. We need
to continue that and ensure that
the state of New Mexico supports
these families and their
students as, you know, future
looks uh could be looking very
different. So again, please
support this bill, and um,
And again, I appreciate all of
the work that the Special
education department has done,
um, the special education office
has, has done so far. I do work
with families and schools
currently. Thank you.
Thank you.
Yes, sir. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
uh, members of the committee. My
name is Valentina Naya. I am uh
currently sitting on the
executive board for the DDC and
uh I was looking through this
bill last night.
And I saw where it says creation
of state um but, um, this body.
And other committees as well as
uh the whole Senate and House.
Past
The, the bill to create this
state ombud position.
Uh, she's been in, in her
position about 2 years now, 3
years. There's good things
happening.
the fact that it's separated
from PED. Parents like myself,
my son Gogo, my wife.
Um
We are able to meet with
somebody that's a little bit
separate from PED.
To help address issues and um
this isn't the case in every
school district, but in some
school districts, it's very hard
to get services done without the
support of a state arm but that
is separate from PED, so I
support everything in this bill.
Except for that we should strike
that create this data but and
continue uh to stay on but where
it is because it's
I, I think it's a fair that we
haven't given it enough time.
get
It uh going real good, uh, but I
think it's a good place. Parents
are comfortable meeting the
state um but outside of PD.
Thank you very, thank you very
much, chair.
Mr. Chairman, committee members,
good morning. Uh, my name's
Edward Webster. I'm the uh
commun uh government relations
director with NEA in New Mexico
and we stand in support of SB
38.
SB 38 would create the Office of
Special Education within public
education department. There were
the responsibilities would
include, among others,
monitoring funding from SCG to
make sure the disabled and
special needs children are
getting the resources they need
to be successful and developing
an online system for.
plans to be used statewide. NEA,
New Mexico strongly encourages
you to vote yes on SB 38. Thank
you.
Thank you
Uh, good morning, chairman, uh,
committee members, uh, just
wanna be frank this uh Bill SB
38, uh means enough to me to
come up here and speak with you
because I tend to like to be in
the background. Um, my name is
Ria Gill. I'm the assistant
deputy director for the Office
of Special Education, believe
this bill will offer
accountability and the bridge
that is offered by having the on
bud communicate with the office
of.
special education is important,
but again, I think, you know,
meeting the needs of kids and
again that accountability piece.
Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, we have, it looks
like 7 or 8 people online, uh,
and so Hope Morales.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Hope Morales, and I'm
the executive director for Teach
Plus New Mexico. I have the
opportunity to work with amazing
teachers across the state,
including special education
teachers. A quick Google search
indicates that the public
education department aims to
ensure that all students are
prepared for college, career and
life. This goal is not limited
to any student group, but as a
vis a vision for all students in
New Mexico. In an effort to
ensure that special education
students across our
state have access to our best
systems of support, strategy,
and oversight for students with
disabilities. This legislation
will also ensure that there is
alignment and collaboration
between the PE and districts, so
that all qualifying students get
the same access to quality
support without placing all of
the responsibility on schools
and districts. Although words
matter, students matter most.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Uh, next we have
Duval Westfall.
Thank you, Chairman and
committee members Duval Westfall
from the Greater Albuquerque
Chamber of Commerce, supporting
Senate Bill 38 because this bill
is designed to make sure New
Mexico's special education
students received the care and
the attention that they need and
that they deserve, starting when
they're in preschool. In great
part, this codifies work already
being done by the office of
Special Education, creates the
office of special education with
TED includes students with
disabilities and gifted students
in
the definition of special ed,
and that's important. Our
special education students
deserve a uniform standard of
education, no matter what
district they attend. That's why
it's essential OSE not only
continue with its oversight and
enforcement of state and federal
special education law, but also
trained the school boards and
the governing bodies, the school
administrators and the school
personnel on specific topics
related to the education of
students with disabilities or
with our, our gifted students.
This bill is all about putting
special ed students first.
Please support it. Thank you.
Thank you. And next, next Alice
Lou McCoy.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. Members
of the committee. My name is
Alice Lou McCoy, I'm the
executive director of the
Developmental Disabilities
Council. Uh, the council was
appointed is appointed by the
governor, and we have worked
since the beginning of the
administration to highlight
special education. Education is
one of the most important issues
and is the most important issue
to the council. We've been
working on it for years, and
through this work, the Office of
Special Education, uh,
was created and in just the past
22 years, a year and a half
years since the office was
created.
The amount of work and
improvement done in the special
education field has been
incredible. We believe that this
bill will continue that momentum
of the work, the ombud works
incredibly well with PED and the
Office of Special Education, the
Obed will continue to strongly
support students and families,
no matter what department, no
matter what agency it's in,
there is a mandate from the
executive that we highlight
special education in this bill
does just that.
Uh, we
Urge the members of the
committee, Mr. Chair, for you
all to support this bill, it is
incredibly important one. Thank
you very much.
And next, Krista Coolidge.
Good morning, Chairman, members
of the board, um, my name is
Krista Coolidge. I am in my 40th
year as a special educator, the
last 28 in New Mexico. Um, I
spent 25 years as a classroom
teacher, 15 years as a director
of special education and had the
pleasure of watching the um
special education bureau become
the Office of Special Education,
and I appreciate that they now
have a seat at the table, um, in
regards to being able to be part
of
the decision making process and
very active within the
leadership. I believe that that
in and of itself helps make
better change for students
across the state of New Mexico.
So I do support and hope you do
support Senate Bill 38. Thank
you.
Thank you, uh, Rafa, it looks
like.
Good, good morning, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee. This
is Ralph Martinez. I'm the
executive director and
co-founder of the Albuquerque
Sign Language Academy. I'm also
the father of a of a multiple
need uh uh child, uh, so I, I'm
so I'm the head of school with a
majority, where the majority
student population, um, are on
IEP and also like, as I said, a
father, and I strongly support
SB 38, and I, I urge the
committee to to pass this bill.
I think anything that um serves
the
Special ed community, you know,
in a igning services processes,
uh, is just better for the state
as you know, in general, so, um,
I urge the committee to pass the
bill. Thank you so much.
Thank you. Uh, next, Doctor
Tyree Jenkins.
Uh, good morning, chair, and
members of the committee. Good
morning. My name is Doctor Tari
Jenkins, and I serve as the
deputy director of the Office of
Special Education. Um, I've had
a wonderful privilege of working
alongside Doctor Margaret Cage
for the last year, um, to
strengthen the office of Special
Education's mission and vision
and making sure that it aligns
with improving outcomes for
students with disabilities
across the state. For sure, this
bill is critical to securing the
long-term stability and
effectiveness of special
education services in New
Mexico, um, by codifying OSC
into law. We are making a clear
commitment to ensuring that
students with disabilities
receive the support they need
consistently inequitably. Uh,
this bill is not just about
structure. It is about ensuring
that students with disabilities
in New Mexico receive a high
quality equitable education,
free from unnecessary barriers.
Um, is also about that parents
have a system that is
transparent, responsive, and
accountable. Um, it is about
making sure that our educators
have the resources and guidance
necessary to best deliver best
instruction possible. So by
passing this bill, we are not
only improving the educational
landscape for students with
disabilities today, but we are
also laying the foundation for
sustained long-term success in
special education across our
state. I urge the committee to
Senate Bill 38 and take this
critical step forward for New
Mexico students, families, and
educators. Thank you so much for
your time and consideration.
Thank you. And last, we have
Greg Trap.
Go ahead, Mr. Trap. Good
morning. This is Greg Crap. Mr.
Chair, can you hear me?
Yes.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, I am the
executive director of the New
Mexico Commission for the Blind.
We strongly support this bill.
We work with children who have
blindness and low vision. We do
that at starting at age 14
through our vocational
rehabilitation program,
providing transition services,
and we work with even younger
children through our technology
for children program, providing
them a social tech essential
technology that they need to
thrive in the school
system. All too often we see
that children who are blind and
low vision.
are struggling to get the
services that they require. This
bill will help to raise the
profile of the Office of Special
Education. It will really make a
difference for children who are
blind or have low vision. We
strongly, strongly support it.
We really appreciate the work of
Dr. Cage and raising the profile
and the work of the governor and
Eirang stand in strong support
of this bill. Thank you.
Thank you
Uh, Senator, would you like to
make a comment or two before we
go to questions from the
committee.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
I, I forgot to uh talk about the
IEP process, the the statewide
IEP that the special education
office is going to do, I'm
excited about that, um, as a
special ed teacher myself, those
IEPs were pretty miserable, uh,
so, uh, that's one task that
they have taken on, uh, uh.
There's one other thing I
forgot, but I'll remember it
later, so thank you.
Thank you. And likewise,
senator, I was a special ed
teacher in the gifted area. I
probably spent 2/3 of my time.
Paperwork on a computer, not
working with students. So if we
can clean that up.
Uh, Questions from the
committee, please.
Senator Pope
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you sponsor and thank you,
Doctor Gauge. Um, I, I'm gonna
be supporting the bill, but um I
did get a few emails and
concerns just about the movement
of the ombudsman.
So, if you can just kind of
explain again how this changed.
Um
Will still, you know, make sure
that
Our students and families are
still being advocated for and is
there a benefit to this, but
just want to understand that a
little bit so there's no.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Senator Pope,
thank you for the question.
It is one of those parts of the
bill that you've got some on one
side and some on the other, so.
I mean, we passed the ombu bill,
I think it was 3 years ago.
Um
The um but has really helped.
elevate issues within our public
school special education
programs.
And
Uh, she has really helped
certain parents and kids, um,
but she's.
Although she said she worked
with PED, a PED isn't really
involved in how to take care of
of kids and parents with their
shoes, uh, so, uh, for example,
I I heard the story in in Santa
Fe of um but at a school with
the child that really needed
help.
Um
But
It's not in the PED, so she
didn't have resources. She
didn't have a backing really to
change what she needed to
change, so.
So we were originally gonna put
it in the office of special ed.
Took it out of that.
To have it be its own office, so
they're separate from the
special ed, there's still an on
but for special ed, but they're
in the public education
department, that's the
department that is tasked to do
this work with our special ed
students, so it to cut off right
now and I hear the concerns.
From the developmental
community.
Uh, saying that.
You know, they don't trust the
PED.
Um
So I think what's going to
evolve is a better trust with
the PED because of what we're
doing with the office of special
education, more accountability,
elevating the transparency of
what's happening with their
special education students
training teachers, uh, you heard
several mentions of wow we
finally get professional
development. I'm excited about
them training special ed
teachers on structured literacy.
It just.
Get more of our special ed kids
to learn to read, it really is
foundational, so, um, that,
that's my answer. I would like
to turn it over to Doctor Cage.
Good morning, uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
Senator Pope, thank you for that
question. It is the big question
on everybody's mind, um, I can
tell you that we have done a lot
of work in the office of special
education in the area of
relationship building. And I am
not naive to think that
everybody's gonna be happy with
everything, but I can tell you
the reason why I support the
onboard and also share a little
research with you on the Obud.
Uh, the pur the purpose of
moving the special education um.
But into the uh public education
department is not to stop the
work of the Abad. It is to
enhance align, elevate, support,
and provide resources for the
on but that uh that department
may not already have, um, if you
are aware, we have the
administrative services
division, the Indian Education
Division, the educate quality
division, the charter school
divisions, all of these
divisions are under PED but they
operate in their own fashion.
Um, it also gives the Abud a
layer of protection with chief
counsel service under our
general counsel Services
Division. It also gives the Aba
office immediate access to be
able to collaborate with the
office of Special Education and
also ensure that we act quickly
and responsiblely on things, we
have our own uh parent liaison
as well and we also have our own
legal team that works to resolve
issues. Um.
I can also say that we are going
to do some work with training
our educators on the Aba
processes, um, because there is
a feel out there, even though I
know the Amba personally work
very closely with her, um, we
still, my philosophy is to
ensure that um the people we
serve, which are our
superintendent school boards,
teachers, uh, our EAs, our
students, our parents that we
all have a basic understanding
of how these processes work.
So bringing the ombud in is
definitely a plus, and I can
tell you there are a few states,
well, a lot of states, I'll just
mention a few, um, that
currently have the Abut that
works directly under the State
Department, um, as a division as
we're trying to do, which is
California, Minnesota,
Massachusetts, Oregon,
Connecticut, New Jersey,
Colorado, New York, Washington,
and the list goes on.
Thank you. Thank you, Senator.
Thank you, uh, Doctor Cade.
Thanks for the answer and
And you're right, it does give
resources and puts it in the
department. I, I just think
there's always concerns with
folks just like.
In the government, like
Inspector generals that are
under departments and things
like that and that independence.
So, um, I think we just have to
ensure that the ombudsman.
Continues to be able to do their
job.
Being in there and having the
resources.
Having that
want to see more done.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
centeren Hickey.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for bringing this bill
forward. I'm very excited about
this. My children did attend
public schools here, um, one of
them has my affliction pretty
severe dyslexia. Nothing got
done about it, um, 504, we moved
to New York. All that was
addressed.
And so I think this is
absolutely critical from a
personal point of view. And um
so I'm in strong support. I'm
just confused about one thing,
and I apologize for being late,
traffic from Albuquerque was
heavy, more than I expected, and
uh,
But I'm, is there a uh an
appropriation with this bill?
Um
I'm just reading the summary
here and I have some confusion
about because I, I'm glad to see
the heads going up and down. I
just want to be sure that we're
backing it with the
appropriation to be able to get
it done.
Um, so thank you again for
bringing the bill and any other
comments you have.
Uh, Mr. Chairman and Senator
Hickey, thank you for that
question, so.
Um
the secretary has had
conversations with the
appropriation chair, um, funding
for this is in the governor's
executive budget and it we've
been told it's also now in.
They sent her Senator Thornton.
Thank you, Chair.
So just uh
Couple of questions for the
senator and, and uh Doctor Kate.
So one of the key things for me
is, is accountability and, and I
know you came to my office and I
appreciate the conversation we
had. Um.
How will you measure the success
of this restructuring.
Once this occurs, what, how are
you going to be measuring your
success as, as the head of this.
Special education office and how
will we have confidence then
that you are making progress as,
as we expect this restructuring
might do that. So help me on
that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator, for that question. That
is a fabulous question because I
didn't get to speak earlier, but
I can tell you we are, we
currently have a state plan, and
in that state plan are very
clear objectives and priorities
of how the office operates. I'll
make sure that you get a copy of
that and come sit, talk with you
so I can share with you those
things. Um, however, over the
last year and a half, we've been
able to put in some uh
accountability measures that
have been uh
missing for a while, um, such as
our, uh, DMS monitoring, which
is where we monitor our school
districts on programmatic
services, service delivery
models, um, we were able to go
into 158 schools within a 4
month period.
And monitor the processes, that
means the IEP. That means how
the teachers are delivering
services, that means the
education plans that we have for
them, the behavior plans and all
of these other things.
Um, we also monitor our
indicator work, being under the
US Department of Ed for as long
as it continues to exist.
Um, office of special education
programs, which we refer to as
OSEP.
Um, has very clear specific
requirements and criteria of how
we're graded.
So we send up reports to them
where we're supposed to be
showing progress every year, so
that's a report that is released
to you, uh, we also have to
create a report every year based
on the progress of our state
plan, that it, that will also be
released to you, um, and our
indicator work, we have to also
uh.
maintain progress with that as
well.
Um, so those are the ways that
we measure our program.
Thank you for that, Mr. Chair.
Um, other question I have is
with respect to
Again, I think uh Senator Pope
raised the issue with your
armbus. I, I used to actually be
an ombuds for a company I worked
for, uh.
Long time ago, and uh there is
a.
There's to the requirement for
Ombuds to maintain neutrality.
And so the big issue with
regards to the ombuds is, is
Working under the PED, um, one
question is how neutral they can
be, uh, when they serve in that
role.
I, I know when I served as an
ombuds for a particular company
I reported directly to the CEO.
Independent of HR, independent
of all the other organizations
so that people could come
independently have confidential
conversations and then you serve
more as a mediator.
Uh, sort of smoothing over the
issues, making sure if it wasn't
an HR issue, you could refer
them to that if it was something
else peer to peer problems, you
can have them work through
those.
So, so in some sense, an
ombudsman has to be neutral. And
so the concern that I'm hearing
expressed from some people is
the fact this
This being put in PED they may
end up reporting to the PEV
director.
And
Not necessarily remain neutral
in in how they deal with their
relationships. So how can you
assure us that that won't occur?
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Senator,
um, thank you for that question.
Uh, I've had to do a lot of
research on this particular uh
move, one, because when this
act, the arms but act was
created in New Mexico. It was
created very different from what
you may see in other states. It
was created more of a parent
advocacy center or uh division
than that of one that is more
neutral, um, that's where a lot
of the contention comes in
honestly on both sides of this
coin.
As Senator Stewart said earlier,
uh, we have our educators that
also need to feel supported in
that neutrality, and we also
have our families that need to
feel comfortable enough to go in
and be able to ask a question
and receive support. I really
see this as the first step in
creating those relationships and
aligning those services where
both sides understand through
professional development
training, technical assistance
and support, where their roles
lies, right?
Now, no one understands their
role. The educators doesn't
understand their role, the
parents, uh, what we're trying
to do is stop that us against
them mentality. Stop that, it's
your fault or your job, your
responsibility, mentality. So
bringing the Aba into PED as a
separate division with a voice
at the table, ensures that they
will not succumb to just
reporting to the secretary.
Thank you for that.
Um, had one last question now, I
think it's just.
Just left me.
With regards to, I know when we
talk about special ed, there's a
lot of questions regarding
Those with disabilities.
I also want to make sure that uh
gifted kids are provided the
opportunities to shine.
And I think New Mexico probably
has a lot more gifted kids than
we are aware of.
Um, and so,
I saw the, with the addition of
the uh
Amendment here we're gonna put
the emphasis on gifted kids as
well.
It sounds like to me that
It's uh an additional.
He said the funding's gonna be
like, I'm sorry, the secretary,
the, the uh funding's gonna be
available uh to do this through
the executive governor's
executive office.
And
I just want to make sure that
the funding actually goes to the
gifted kids and that it's not
diverted, uh, to other programs
to support, you know, the needs
of the other areas as well
because uh I think we have an
opportunity here to
To raise our kids up as well and
so how are we going to ensure
that?
Uh, so, Mr. Chairman and Senator
Thornton.
I really liked her question,
that it really does reflect. OK,
let's explain education to
everyone, so uh gifted students
are part of the IEP process.
So they generate themselves
funding through our state
equalization guarantee.
As do other special ed students,
so, uh, that that funding is
generated by those students up
and it goes into the formula and
um.
And then it's the districts have
to provide those programs, uh,
so, and those programs are are
quite varied, uh, we have
actually some students that we
call twice exceptional.
You can dyslexia.
Uh, you can be a, you can be a,
a, a gifted student and have all
kinds of other disabilities, so
those twice exceptional students
generate twice as much funding
through the formula so we do pay
for these services through our
state equalization guarantee.
Thank you for that.
Uh, being new to the education
community, it's, it's important
that we get educated. So, uh, so
I appreciate the the background
in the history. Um.
Think with that
I think that's all I have, uh.
Mr. President, uh,
Chair, thank you very much.
Please don't elevate me at it's
not a role that is not a role I
aspire to and in any way, shape
or form. Uh, other questions
from the committee.
A.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, Senator, and Doctor
for bringing this bill forward.
I, um, want to also welcome all
the students that are here,
walking and I thank you for
joining us today.
I think it's really important to
also acknowledge, Mr. Chairman,
um, the importance of
Folks who live with disabilities
and uplifting their voices
because we can be as advocates
as much as we can.
But to claim that we understand
and experience that we have not
undergone is an incorrect
statement. So I think it's
extremely important to have.
advocates and folks with lived
experience at the table. Thank
you, Katie, uh, because your
voices are the most important.
Folks can have PhDs in anything,
but lived experience is not
acquired through a degree, and I
just want to tell you how
important that is to me, how
important it is to our
communities and how important it
is that you come up and that you
take space and that you uplift
those experiences and to all of
you students, just
Do it because your voices
matter, um.
Mr. Chairman, uh, Senator,
I appreciate the statutory
mandate to ensure the long-term
stability, um, regardless of,
uh, who's in power as well, um,
and I do, I am, I do have some
concerns about the ombudsman,
uh, situation just as shared
with by the other senators, um,
and I would, I do have a
question in terms of a
recommendation to see if you
would all consider it, um, Mr.
Chairman, on page 9, section 5,
5L where it specifies
Uh, which special education data
is needed to evaluate the
state's compliance with federal
or state laws related to special
education, um, I don't see any,
uh, collection of data specific
to suspensions, expulsions, and
informal removal of students
with disabilities, and I'm
wondering if that could also be
collected.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, thank
you, Senator. That is a part of
our indicator work that we are
already collect, so a part of
the reports that we send up to
uh OSEP as I referred earlier,
uh, reflects, uh, suspensions
and expulsions.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, doctor. Appreciate you.
Thank you. Other questions,
Mister Chair, I move a do pass
on Senate bill 38 amended.
Have a motion for a due pass,
seconded by Senator Hickey.
If you'll call the roll, please.
No.
cell
No, and I would like to explain
my.
Nova? No.
Yes.
your soul? Yes.
You have a do pass, uh, and
Senator Z Zelda explained her
vocals.
Mr. Chairman, the reason I voted
no on this bill, I too have a
problem with um but moving into
PET and being able to maintain
the neutrality that I think is
very important to this bill. So
that is my reason for voting no.
Thank you very much.
Thank you. So Senator, you have
a due pass.
Um, let me look, do we have is
Padilla.
Mm
Not in, not, not that. Senator
Pavia.
Senator Padilla is not in the
room, uh.
Center my est, oh, Senator
Maestes, come on down.
You're the next contestant.
And I think other students, are
you all the ones uh from the
Mandela International School.
Welcome there in the back.
Sorry, we have a full room. It's
you kind of watching from the
back, we appreciate you being
here and education is always a
place we appreciate having young
people and students because
we're very much talking about
your education. So thank you,
welcome.
Be in here. Uh, there may be
some seats as if everybody will
kind of quickly move take
conversations out into the hall,
please.
As soon as it clears out a
little bit, senator, we'll get
started.
Get continue conversations, take
them outside, please.
OK, Senator, I think we've got
it pretty well.
calm down in the back there if
you would please on.
A Senate Bill 160 student use
and wireless communications.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
Honorable members of this bill,
Senate Bill 160.
Uh, requires that each school
district and charter school
adopt and implement a policy for
cell phone use and requiring a
pet to provide a policy
guidelines, um, cell phones have
proliferated, particularly in
the past 1015 years where it's
not just a.
Uh uh
phone in your pocket, but a
computer and everything else
that has addictive qualities and
Really, uh
Takes away from fos
concentration. Mr. Chairman,
members, there's a uh
An amendment I'd like the
committee to consider. Do you
want me to present that now or
just wait in the middle of the
hearing. Is this one that's
already written or this is
written in the committee has it
if I can.
Uh, if I can uh make reference
to it, it might be speed things
up.
Let, let us get the the
amendment handed out.
And if I could, if I could get a
copy as well.
Everybody have a copy of the
amendment.
OK.
Uh, somebody like to move the
amendment for discussion
purposes.
That there was
For discussion purposes. Very,
very good. How we formally got
that sitting on the table.
Senator, tell us what that does.
Thank you, Chairman. Thank you,
members. So this amendment, uh,
On page 3 removes subparagraph
C.
F and G, essentially removing
the requirements for a public
meeting, uh removing the
requirements for uh annual
evaluation and, and uh removing
the requirements for training.
We, we just want to make it
simple, requiring that each
school district come up with a
policy by this next coming
school year, um, and there's
policy guidelines in the bill on
page 2.
Uh, lines 10 to 25, essentially
prohibiting students from using,
uh, and I'll say cell phones,
but the words in the statute are
wireless communication devices,
which capture all potential.
Devices. So, so, Mr. Chairman,
members, it would prohibit
students from using uh cell
phones during instructional
hours unless of course, that
cell phone is used in the
instruction, for example, a
computer or a translator or
whatnot, um, that, uh, it would
allow
Uh, the policy to include
students using the wireless
communication device in the
event of emergency or, or
healthcare issues, uh, and would
provide for protections for, for
student privacy.
And the uh the communication
device, Mr. Chairman, is defined
as a cell phone or smartphone,
tablet, computer, laptop
computer.
Uh, or gaming device.
Uh, which I believe captures um.
Uh, uh, a, a watch.
Thank you, Senator, we're
talking about the amendment at
this point.
Oh, for me, please walk us
through what the amendment does.
I did that really quickly. I'm
sorry, Mr. Chairman. So, Mr.
Chairman, the amendment um would
include the, the word
smartwatch.
Uh
And the amendment on page 3
would remove.
The requirement for public
meetings, it would, it would
delete subparagraph C.
Lines 5 through 9.
And then further down it would
delete or remove rather uh
subparagraph F.
Lines 20 through 22, uh removing
the need for annual evaluations.
And then it would also strike
subparagraph G.
Which is lines 2425, as well as
1 through 5.
Uh
Removing the uh the requirement
for training of teachers and
administrators. So it wouldn't
involve.
Uh
You know, public meetings or.
Reports or trainings, it, it
merely would outline a policy
that each school district would
would be required to come up
with on their own by the next
coming school year.
OK, on the amendment, you know,
just to show of hands, those in
the audience in support.
In opposition to the amendment.
Anyone need to speak on the
amendment.
Well, the
So now that you'd like to come
down, please.
Ma'am, yo, you gave a short
summary of what the amendment
does. I can summarize a third
time.
That Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, we thank the sponsor
for bringing this amendment to
the bill. It takes the
bureaucracy, the mandated
bureaucracy out of out of it.
Um, and they, therefore we can
actually talk about the policy.
We have a number of schools,
charter schools that are several
years down the path of excluding
cell phones from the class
during instru.
Um
A lot of these actions they
took, it's not necessary to take
anymore. It's the norm, um, and
so having a public uh
A public meetings
This past, any LEA or school
district would go down the path
that makes sense for their
community to implement the
policies.
sponsor for the amendment.
Thank you. Anyone in support
else in support of the
amendment.
When in opposition online on the
amendment.
Committee on the amendment.
Senator
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much, Senator Maest just, I do
have a question on the first
page of your bill, where you
added the words or smart watch.
Why was that inserted instead of
just going along with wireless.
Mr. Mr. Chairman, uh, Senator,
so wireless devices, uh, we
wanted to define that word, so
the word wireless communication
devices used throughout the
bill.
And if there's any confusions
or.
disputes, you just go straight
to the definition, which, which
I believe captures all.
Cell phones or or things that
that could distract a student
during, during the class time.
OK.
And I know that one of our
concerns was
Before you added this language,
the uh omission of smart watches
on this, so I'm glad you added
that in, Mr. Chairman, thank you
very much. Thank you, Senator.
Thank you. Other discussion on
the amendment.
They like to make a motion on
the for the amendment, Mr.
Chairman, go ahead, go ahead,
Mr. Chairman, I move a do pass
on the amendment 230608.1.
Motion for a do pass on the
amendments. The 2nd.
Senator Thornton
Is there opposition to the
amendment.
No opposition.
You haven't amended.
OK, back on the main bill.
Anything else on the, the main
bill, Senator?
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, the
nurse also now it's just a clean
bill requiring a policy. It also
includes uh.
Uh, that, that a device can be
used for a medical necessity or
does not conflict with the
individualized education
program.
And that the policy should be
published, uh.
On, on the school's website. And
with that I'll stand for
questions. Thank you so much.
OK, we are now on to the main
bill of in the audience first to
show of hands, those in support.
Of the policy
Those in opposition, OK? Uh, the
opposition, if you'd like to
come up.
Yeah
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee, Joe Guian with
the New Mexico School Boards
Association. While we support
the intent of the bill, uh, we,
we feel it is an unfunded
mandate. It is requiring boards
to, uh, adopt these policies and
not providing any additional
funding. There is a similar bill
out there that leaves that to
the discretion of the boards,
uh, and school districts and
also provides funding.
Uh, for implementation of, of
their policies. So uh that is uh
our comment. Thank you.
Thank you, Joe.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Stan
rounds for the superintendents
and coalition of education
leaders again as Joe said, we
appreciate the intent of the
bill, however, the difficulties
always in the details. I would
note in your LESC um review of
this of the, the, it notes
Albuquerque, Santa Fe, Las
Cruces, Rioso, and Hobbs, which
appear to have policies would be
contrary to what
This sense and so the other
standard I would ask you to
consider is how much local
control is there.
In developing this along with
how do we fund it. Thank you.
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, Greg Frosted,
Assistant Secretary of Education
at the Public Education
department, we stand in support
of this bill and appreciate the
sponsor bringing it forward, uh,
and wanted to mention that the
superintendents recently did
their own survey to ask
themselves if they would support
legislation banning cell phones
in schools and 74% said yes, and
the reasons for saying yes are
they wanted to reduce
distractions and improve student
focus. That was overall the main
message, but um they
also noted that this would
improve equity issues as some
students don't have phones or
have inferior phones. It would
make the school environment is
safer, it would enhance social
interactions, it would reduce
social media bullying and
harassment.
Other states that have done this
have seen extensive improvement
in student engagement and
achievement, it would reduce
discipline issues. It would
improve student behavior, it
would reduce cheating. It would
improve mental health as
demonstrated in the anxious
generation research, it would
stop arranging and filming of
fights and filming of teachers
and other students without their
permission.
And they also noted several of
them noted that there are
reasons to have a statewide ban
instead of just local policy,
including it would set statewide
expectations for families and
schools. It would take pressure
off of school districts, and it
would shift the responsibility
and push back to legislators
away from teachers and schools,
uh, and school administrators.
And outcomes uh were mentioned
for some of the districts that
already have no cell phone
policies, including, um,
A reduction in discipline
referrals, including, um, uh,
15 seconds, please.
Including more dialogue in
hallways and increased student
engagement and expectations for
classrooms, um, without having
cyber, uh, with a reduction in
cyberbullying reports. Thank
you.
Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee. Amanda Aragon,
executive director of New Mexico
Kitscan, and I want to start by
thanking the sponsor for
bringing this bill forward. Um,
whether we're looking at teacher
surveys, student surveys, or uh.
Psychological studies. We know
the major impacts that cell
phones are having on teenagers
and our students in the
classroom. And so those studies
are telling us that these cell
phones or mobile devices are
preventing a huge challenge, not
just to our students' learning,
but to their mental health. So,
we are really excited about the
opportunity to follow states
like Ohio, Minnesota, and
Virginia who all have passed
similar policies to this one
specifically, or states like
Louisiana, South
Carolina or Florida that go even
further and outright ban cell
phones during instructional time
across the entire state. We
believe it's time to pass this
policy and help our schools
ensure that instructional time
is spent on what our students
need the most, which is engaged
high quality instruction that
will provide them with the
skills that they need to
accomplish their dreams. Thank
you.
Thank you.
Good morning, senators, I am
Yang Chen and I'm a student from
Mandela International Magnet
School, and I believe that I am
in support of this bill,
however, I am not well known
about what extent this bill goes
to. Does the bill allow students
to use their cell phones during
lunch breaks, or does it not
permit them to have cell phones
at all.
And
I do believe that it is.
I do believe that it is good
that students are not supposed
to be using cellphones during
instructional periods so that
they can focus more on their
classwork. However, I did
understand that we can't use
them during emergencies times.
And if in class perchance if
this bill was passed and a
student was to be using their
cellphone, what action would be
taken if they were to use their
cell phone in that time. Thank
you.
Anyone else
In the room in support.
Online, I have 2 online, so Hope
Morales.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee. My
name is Hope Morales and I'm the
executive director for Teach
Plus New Mexico, and we are in
support of SB 160. I have the
honor of working with hundreds
of excellent teachers across our
three programs. Mr. Chairman,
technology has become an
essential tool in teaching and
learning, because technology is
now a vital part of everyday
learning. It is the
responsibility of our local
schools and districts to ensure
that students have access to
these resources. While cell
phones can be used as a
resource.
in many cases, utilizing
computers, Chromebooks, and
other devices provided by our
schools, better support equity,
ensuring all students have
access to comparable resources,
while also providing support and
safety that are oftentimes
missing with personal cell phone
usage in the classroom. Mr.
Chairman, we have a lot of work
to do in education and teachers
must be supported by limiting
distractions and ensuring
student safety and equity are
priorities. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you and Val Westfall. Good
morning again, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee, Duval
Westfall again, executive vice
president of policy and programs
at the Greater Albuquerque
Chamber. This still wisely
allows PED to set a uniform
policy regarding cell phones,
tablets, laptops, gaming
devices, and now we know smart
watches within the classroom. To
the question posed earlier, it
has fair and smart carveout for
teacher discretion and student
accessibility needs and allows
students to use their
devices when it's
non-instructional time. The
chamber advocates for policies
that support teachers, raise
student performance and support
healthy social development for
our students, and we support
this bill because it's gonna
align with all those policies
that we believe will improve our
education system. Specifically,
the bill's gonna help teachers
do their already difficult job,
and it's gonna help students
focus academically and even
socially. And it's needed. A
recent survey shows 97%
of 11 to 17 year olds use their
phone in some way during school
hours. And there's multiple
studies that show the negative
effects of cell phones in
classrooms on mental health and
bullying and teaching and
learning. So we urge your
support of Senate Bill 160.
Thanks so much.
Thank you, Chairman, this uh,
this bill stemmed from a United
States Department of Education,
uh.
Uh, document urging school
districts to come up with
policies. I think it's important
that during.
At the very least during the
instructional hour.
That a cell phones not be
available for students. Thank
you.
Thank you. Questions from the
committee.
Mr. Chairman of
Senator, thanks for bringing
this bill. I, I
Only really like this bill. The
only thing I don't like is we.
Come out and we pass bills that
are unfunded, and we pass that
over to the school districts and
you know, past school school
board member myself.
I, I don't like when we pass a
bill and don't fund and don't
help the school districts fund
the objective. So, um.
Is there any
Way that you would uh.
Consider mending this into your.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, uh,
Senator Ramos, that was the um.
Uh the recipes of the, of the
amendment. The amendment as
mentioned was kind of required
overly bureaucratic work.
So this excludes uh as amended
it excludes.
The majority of that work that
was in the original bill.
All this bill does is require a
policy.
And so presumably a school
district.
Uh, can come up with a proposed
policy and then the board can
debate it and
And amended in
In its official board meeting,
but
I don't think it would
necessarily require uh funding
to do that. I know that it's a
huge concern on funded mandates
from Santa Fe, but this is
merely a policy that frankly,
Should already be in motion, uh,
considering smartphones have
been around for, you know, 1012
years.
No, no other questions.
Thank you. Other questions.
Senator Azel.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much, Senator Maestas.
I love what you're saying in the
first part of it.
Telling that each school
district, not coming from state
but each school district, but it
also on page 2, I think there
might be a little bit of a,
well, I don't know if it would,
um.
Even though the
PED is gonna provide the
guidelines, it is.
Up to the local school boards to
make the determination on the
policies that they're going to
enforce, but on page two of your
bill on line 5.
It does state each school
district and charter, I can't
tell.
Each school district and charter
schools shall adopt and
implement.
So this is more or less
mandating that they have to come
up with a plan as far as
wireless devices. Mr. Chairman,
Senator correct by the fall
school year, each district and
charter school uh shall adopt a
policy. That's the, that's the
crux of the bill.
And I think with the change you
made on the uh amendment, I
think that.
Any appropriation is not
applicable here, is that
correct, Mr. Chairman and
Senator Maest, Mr. Chairman,
Senator, I mean, appropriation
would be nice on, on every bill.
This, I don't believe this is a.
Overly burdensome mandate uh to
come up with the policy. So I,
so I agree.
And Mr. Chairman, whenever the
PED does provide the guidelines
to go to each.
Individual school district for
those that were elected to the
school board to make the
decision on what's right for
their school. I think that's
very important.
Cause I'm the one that's always
pushing for more local control
in our schools.
And Mr. Chairman.
I guess my next question is
earlier on and during this
session, we heard a bill from
Senator Brandtley at Senate Bill
11.
By any
Why should I perform? Could
these two bills be tied in
together.
Just throwing it out there, Mr.
Senator, uh, Mr. Chairman
Senator, yes, I have not written
Senate. I have not read rather
Senate Bill 11, I've spoken
briefly with Senator Bradley
that they may in fact be able to
coincide.
Um
And so I'll, I'll continue that
dialogue if this bill were to
were to get out, but you're
correct, it's, it's a local
district comes up with a local
policy that's conducive to that.
Uh, you know, to the
To the leadership of that
community.
And thank you for that Mr.
Chairman, Senator, whenever we
are talking about what is
already in place, we have
Albuquerque Public Schools,
Santa Fe Public Schools, Las
Cruces Public Schools, Ridozo
and Hobbs.
And um
Most of them are
Prohibit use during the school
day requires to devices to be.
Uh, to remain off and out of
sight.
They can be used, uh, they can
be stored in students'
backpacks, pockets, or purses
during school hours, but they
are allowed.
Before school, at lunch, and
after school.
I think that's pretty clear cut
and the parents know when these
students can have their phone.
And
To me, it's
Local control again.
And I think it's very clear cut
that the intent and the
guidelines that may be coming up
from PED told school districts.
To me, this is kind of a
no-brainer.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much. Thank you, Senator Master.
Mr. Chair, I move, uh, to pass
on Senate Bill 160.
As amended.
Thank you, uh, I have a couple
of questions before. Are there
others that have, you have a
question, Senator?
We'll, we'll keep your motion on
the table.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you for bringing this very
important bill uh if school
districts or schools want to go
even further and say, um, you
deposit your cell phone in the
basket in the morning and you
pick it up at the end of the
day. I mean, again, it's, it's
the
There are a lot of reasons for
this bill, but it's the
negative, uh, mental impact of
Pears going back and forth and
hitting each other so on or the
hobo fear being left out and all
that, that, uh, be great if we
could just get that out of the
academic day altogether.
So I don't know if people can go
further. Thank you.
For bringing the bell. Thank
you.
chairman Senator Hickey correct
that the school district can go
further than these basic
guidelines if, if, if they so
choose it. It's conducive to the
local control leadership.
Any other
Questions
I have a couple of questions on
the amendment, uh,
Senator, it now includes smart
watches. I wear a Fitbit.
You know, if I were a student
wearing a Fitbit, am I illegal?
Mr. Chemisson, I don't, I don't
know what word you use just now,
a Fitbit or it's a particular
kind of I guess Apple Watch or
whatever, you know, I use it
mostly to count steps, but I can
get the weather on this, you
know, I could, could do all
kinds of other things. My eyes
are too old to see the little
print you do look kind of like
James Bond.
I think other people were, Mr.
Chairman's also, I think uh that
would depend on the policy, for
example, the policy could say
obviously you wear it to tell
time or whatnot, just not use it
local policy.
say, oh, no folks are on their
watches too much, put them in a
basket or in your backpack. It
would be up to that local uh
school district.
Come up with the policy, but it
would require that student not
to.
Utilize that watch uh during the
during the instructional time
with the exception of maybe
glancing at the clock.
And so Senator, on page 2 on
line 10, it says prohibit a
student from using a wireless
communication of which earlier
we had indicated a smartwatch
now.
is there.
Thank you, yo, if I were a
student, I'm not allowed to look
and see how many steps I've got
so far if I'm sitting in class.
Mr. Chairmans and our souls
correct that the using of the
wireless communication device
would
Would uh
Prohibit
Looking at the smart watch for
anything other than the time, I
suppose, yeah.
So, Senator, and this says that,
you know, the policies adopted
shall, they must.
Prohibit students from doing
that. Doesn't that take away
from local districts' ability to
determine what's right for their
district. They can't just set
any policy. It says this has to
be part of the policy that they
cannot be used during
instructional hours.
Is that correct, Mr. Chairman's
inner souls. That's correct.
This, this, uh.
Skeleton guideline would
prohibit student use during the
instructional hour when that
bell rings and that bell rings a
second time, it would prohibit
use during that time with the
exception of using the device
for educational purposes or
medical or, or other reasons,
but you're correct this, any
policy would have to include
that provision as the bill is
written now.
And Senator, could districts now
under current law, make that
part of their policy if they
choose? Why do we have to
require districts that may
choose not to have that
restrictive a policy. Why do
they have to have that a policy
now.
Mr. Chairman and her soul, I
think it's a policy decision for
us that the proliferation of
cell phones out outpaced
society's ability to
To manage that situation, it has
such addictive qualities.
That I think I thank God that
cell phones went around when I
was in law school. There's no
way I would have been able to
concentrate the, uh, I think
that that's a policy decision
for this committee, and I think
uh regardless of whether you can
use them in the halls or before
lunch or whatnot, I think.
I would hope that we would agree
that that that children should
not be able to glance at their
cell phones ongoingly during the
instructional hour.
And so Senator, you know, I kind
of think, you know, there are a
number of people are parents in
here. How many of you don't
allow your child to take a cell
phone to school with you.
Essentially, that's what we're
talking about doing is, you
know, telling parents, you know,
and right now, your parents
could do that if they were
concerned about it.
Yeah, they want somebody else to
be the bad guy saying you can't.
Uh, instead of stepping up and
being the parent, uh, and I feel
the same way about schools and
districts, um, if a district.
You know, districts have to do
this now.
What if a district, they've got
the policy, but they don't
enforce it. What is the penalty?
Mr. Turns and our souls.
I don't know if there would be a
penalty, but it would be there.
Their charge as leaders in that
community come up with a sound
policy that that they can
mutually agree upon, uh, but
there would not be a penalty
necessarily or a consequence
other than.
Uh, you know, the, the PTA or
students or principals or
whomever saying.
We need to come up with a better
policy because this happened or
that happened.
Senator, who would be
responsible for monitoring that
all districts have this policy
in place.
Um
Mr. Chairman Senator, while each
individual district, I suppose
each superintendent, each school
board president.
Uh, and each parent, I mean this
would just send a strong message
and guidelines to all New Mexico
students and parents that.
This is what's
Conducive to a good educational
outcome, and this is not, this
is what's not. Senator, you said
guidelines. This isn't
guidelines, this is a very
specific policy that must be in
place. That's not a guideline.
So what if a district chooses
not to, uh, does the head come
in and say you have to, I mean,
who, who insures that this
happens if this becomes law.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman
Senator. So, so the bill is a
guideline, but you're correct,
each district would have a
policy based on that guideline.
And yeah, I would imagine, you
know, a phone, a phone call from
the secretary to the
superintendent or things of that
nature.
I just um
You know, we're we're a we live
in a law abiding society. I
don't anticipate someone.
Thumbing their nose at the at
the statute, but um.
But the hopes would be that each
district would have a policy by
the first day of school.
I understand the hope and this.
Yo, this isn't where each has a
policy. It says specific things
that they shall do.
You know, that doesn't give the
local district the ability to
determine their own policy, it
pretty well spells out exactly
what the policy must be.
For them to adopt. I mean, this
looks like a template that you
hand to districts and say you
must put this into your
policies.
You know, I could see the one
place if somebody sues later on
that uh because there's a, you
know, some of the things you
hear about, there's a fight
that's planned online and all of
those things that the district
can hold it up and say, hey, not
us, we have a policy. The kids
broke the policy.
You know, not our fault, you
know, we, you can't sue us, but
other than that, it seems pretty
feckless as far as what to do
other than we really, really
mean it.
Uh, right now, districts can say
we really, really mean it. Don't
have cell phones in classes.
I've been a teacher not too
distant past, I rarely had
problems with cell phones in
class. We actually used them on
a regular basis. Mhm.
For instruction, you know, if
this were in place, it would be
very cumbersome on some.
Instructors who use cell phones
regularly to say, OK, we're
gonna put the policy aside
because I need you to get out
your phones right now to, to
look up, you know, I would use
to teach AP psychology, uh,
which ones or, you know,
teaching math, students often
use their phones as a calculator
now. Now we've got to make sure
that every student and hand out
a calculator to each one.
Uh, you know, and so I just see
some things that I don't think
this is necessary. It can be
much more done already by
districts with us without us
making a blanket policy that you
cannot have them in schools. And
again, there's a multitude of
wireless devices, like I said,
you know, my little watch, you
know, I can get the whole world
on here if I choose. Are we
going to make students take the
watches off? Do they have to
have a long sleeve shirt to
cover it up, uh, you know, how
does a teacher comply with the
policy when they're so
ubiquitous.
Thank you Mr. Chairman. Senator
Souls, no, those are great
points, um.
It's, you know, we just have to
as a society make a decision and
how we deal with electronic
devices during class time. What
you suggested would not be in
the guidelines. This does not
prohibit.
Uh, devices at schools, it
merely prohibits the use of the
device during instructional
hours except as really relates
to learning.
So there's a, and these were the
national uh standards set forth
by the Department of.
Senator, I, I cannot support it
for the reasons I think this is
a way overreach that here we
should not be making this level
of policy determinations for our
districts. Uh, we talk regularly
about local control, and we
believe that until we don't.
Yeah, and, and then we have
districts, some who want us to
pass a policy because they don't
want to do the hard work with
their parents about doing a
local policy. Uh, they don't
want to do the hard work of
talking to students about what
appropriate use is and isn't.
They want to blame all those
legislators say we have to, you
have to do it.
Type of thing.
I, you know, I think the local
control cuts both ways, that
it's incumbent upon districts to
get a spine and backbone if you
want to have a restrictive
policy, and if you don't want to
have a restricted policy than to
manage the cell phone and, and
wireless uses where it is. I do
not think it is appropriate for
us as legislators to be making
those determinations for
districts, uh, and there are
lots of other places we could be
doing very specific
micromanaging of
Districts
That I don't think districts
want, um, and I quite frankly
don't think it's our role. So
I'll, I probably will be
outvoted on this, but I do not
think that this is appropriate
for, for doing so.
Questions already, so
Thank you,
uh, Mr. Chair, you
Uh, raise.
Important issues, um, I would
point out that this is a public
health issue.
And that we do take statewide
action on public health issues.
This is a mental health issue.
And we often forget that mental
health is just as important, if
not more important than bodily
health and the damage that this
can do mentally in the schools.
I, I believe gives us a stance
to take a statewide action on
this for the mental health of
our uh young students. Thank
you.
OK, we have a motion on the
table. Is there a second?
Seed by Senator Hickey, if
you'll call the roll, please.
No.
Excuse me,
send to Figueroa.
Senator Hickey. Yes.
Yes.
No, and I think I have explained
my vote.
Uh
You have a DuP pass, senator.
Ramos and
That are Thornton who explained
their votes chair center, I, I,
I did vote yes with the
anticipation that the sponsor
will speak with Senator Bradley
and hopefully we can come up to,
come up uh with a, with a better
bill, you know, hopefully we'll
help each other improve this
and, and, uh, and move forward.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr. Chair. I, I, I
voted no because because of the
same thing, because the Senate
Bill 11, which is available, I
think that's something that
could be added to it. And then
based on the conversation with
the
Uh
Chair
Uh, I thought maybe if you
looked at your number one shell
policy on on page 2 was the
number 1 prohibit a student from
using a wireless. All of your
other items that you're
outlining that the policy must
contain are OK. I think he was
really having a discussion about
the number one, that number one
policy. You limited that.
Then this would be a good good
bill.
So you might want to go back and
take a look at. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. We'll look, we'll
continue to look at the
guidelines.
Thank you, Senator.
OK, we don't have Padilla. He is
stuck over in finance, I think
Senator Stewart is stuck in.
Rules, uh, senator Pope, do you
want to go now or do you want me
to do the math bill.
Uh, why don't you ask him
OK? If you'll take over as chair
for me.
So for those in the room and
online, we are now going to go
to.
Senate Bill 235 school math
changes.
And Senator So you have the
floor.
Thank you, uh,
About a week ago or last Friday,
I kind of gave a brief
introduction as to why this is
important, uh, for the last
several years, we've very much
been focused.
Oh, OK.
Just, just wanna let folks know,
please, um, exit the committee
room but um let's, uh, be quiet
and do it in an orderly fashion.
You may proceed, Senator.
Thank you. Uh, we, I've sort of
stood by keep reminding people
how important math is also, uh,
as we've worked on structured
literacy within our schools,
very important area.
But it's now time that we start
talking about math and the very
low performance of students in
New Mexico in the math area, and
in fact on the Martinez Yazi
lawsuit math was a larger
concern of, of
Judge Singleton, then the
reading area and we've sort of
pushed it aside. Um, again, if
you remember the other day after
we finished talking about the
reading and literacy, all the
people got up and didn't want to
talk about the math thing or
weren't as interested in how
poor our performance is, which I
think is a little bit of
reflective of society, uh, that
math is hard, not everybody
likes math, not everybody's good
at math, you know, the, it's,
you know, it's a lesser area
apologies, um.
didn't mean to cut you off. Uh,
we do have a committee
substitute correct so I wanna,
if we could get a motion um to
um.
Go over the uh committee
substitute for discussion
purposes.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Soulz, you may continue.
Thank you. And there's been a
lot of work now done on this and
I very much appreciate the work
of the secretary of the deputy
secretaries in instruction area
and the many hours of the LESC,
my staff in working towards
something that we could get
right. Uh, the main differences
in the committee sub, there was
lots of discussion and we took
out the, the words about
dyscalculia, there is still
discussion about
How you would monitor, measure
that, and it just muddied things
and so we now talk about uh
students with math difficulties.
The
Lots of the pieces of the bill,
uh, on page two, it defines what
math difficulties are.
Yeah, all the other things up
through that are all current
law. If you move over to page 4,
it starts talking about
monitoring and the
implementation of instructional
materials. So these are things
that the department is going to
be working on the real meat of
the bill starts near the bottom
of page 4 with the math
professional learning plans,
instructional leadership
framework. Uh, what this
initially built on math and I
suspect over the next couple of
years, there will continue to be
others as we.
through the processes, um, but
it requires schools to adopt and
implement a math professional
learning plan, those have to be
updated at least once every 2
years. Many districts already
have this for some districts,
they will need to do so. Uh, it
also has the department working
with the colleges of education,
the teacher preparation.
Programs uh to determine what
level of math courses and math
requirements as part of the
teacher preparation programs for
the various levels of licensure
within the state of New Mexico.
And so it's got some strong
components about what those
teacher preparation programs
need to do. It also indicates
that if districts are working
with a math coach that they have
certification, uh, as a math
specialist.
Um
The the department down in D,
I'm on page 5, established math
instructional leadership
framework for public schools.
Um,
But that's intended to do is
To, to work on uh
The framework for standards of
math.
All of these are things some
districts are already doing it,
but we've got to make sure we've
got everybody on board. Uh, if
you notice on that the next set
of requirements don't begin
until 26, so a year and a half
out from now that allows
sometimes for districts to get
caught up on what's going on.
Uh, lots of discussion was, and
we have many districts that are
so called early adopters.
But that already we're hoping
that they will do some of this.
We've talked about some
incentives out of the department
for them, but so we can get
information and through the LESC
over the next 2 years, really
focus on the
math programs within our schools
and how do we make those work?
So we'll get information from
those early adopters as to how
they're managing things and use
that through the LESC process to
study more of what kinds of
things are available for
For the map areas, um.
Then down on page 6, and if you
may notice, I
Think on the ones that you have,
uh, line 7 of page 6, it says
dyscalculia when we were
redrafting things, they missed
them a couple of places. And so,
you know, I would like to, after
I get through my little
presentation, do a very quick
amendment to strike dyscalculia
the couple of places that we
found it that was supposed to be
stricken.
The
The substitute and so those
still need to be done with, with
a quick amendment.
Down below in some of this is uh
what those school districts are
going to need to do when they
pick this up in 26, um, and so
Very much when you've identified
a student in in New Mexico, it's
about 75% of our students are
not on grade level for math and
so lots of them are going to
need things, but it explains the
various things of what kinds of
services are available, uh,
research into math, what kinds
of options there are for
parents, for others, so that we
start getting those students the
the supports in the backgrounds
that they need, the, you know,
and it continues on into page 7.
the public school identifies a
student in kindergarten through
5th is having characteristics of
there's the other one on page 7
line 6, dyscalculia that's
supposed to be out of there of
math difficulties, dyscalculia
is a specific identified by a,
you know, licensed, um.
Diagnostician, thank you. Uh,
and so we wanted to just stay
away from, from those pieces at
this point that quickly moves
into the special education realm
with that is, but math
difficulties, um.
For instruction, intervening
strategies, we've got to make
sure teachers have the skills
and the resources of what kinds
of things to do for students who
are behind and what are
effective mechanisms. That again
is where the LESC would come
forward, um.
The last paragraph there is
starting July 25th is the
department is going to be
working with districts on
outreach and looking for those
early adopters and providing
them the supports for how we
begin and do all of this. Um.
Normally, if you know when I
present bills, I don't go into
quite so much detail. I expect
you all to, to read and ask
questions and understand. This
has a lot of new pieces in it
and I wanted to make sure people
understood.
The gravity of
getting the math programs within
our, our schools, right and very
much again appreciate the
department understanding if we
pushed all of this to start
immediately that we get
resistance and, and other
problems and, and recognizing
it's going to take a while for
the districts to move and find
appropriate programs. We've got
to upskill our teacher
preparation programs. There are
a lot of things, but the time is
now to start working on it and
getting it done. And so with
that, and would you like to add
any
Any comments.
Thank you. So we then are open
for questions. Uh, would you
like to do the amendment to
strike this calculia any place
that it appears in the draft.
Um, Senator, yes, we can, we can
do that.
And that would kind of be the
amendment, strike this calculia
anywhere it appears in the.
the substitute bill, right? Do I
have a I think that we found 3
places.
So do we have a second?
On that amendment?
Have a second from Senator
Hickey.
Do we have any, uh, opposition
on that.
the committee.
We don't, all right. The
amendment is accepted.
So we're then open for questions
sir with that amendment.
And now we'll go out to the
audience.
Do we have any uh supporters.
Of this bill.
Do we have any opposition?
Looks like we have no opposition
online, any any support or
opposition? OK.
Uh, for, for we're on the, we're
on the committee substitute.
So if I could have, there's no
opposition, I could just have a
few uh supporters come up and
make comments, you have 2
minutes.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. I am
Stephanie Rodriguez and I'm the
higher education secretary. I
stands in strong support for
Senate Bill 235, and I think
Chairman Souls for bringing it
forward. There are many
components of this bill that
will strengthen math education
in New Mexico. However, I want
to draw your attention to the
screeners for 5th graders to
identify math difficulties early
on and get the services they
need to be successful. This is a
very progressive legislature
that has done tremendous work in
dyslexia. However, there has not
been the
the same courtesy to
dyscalculia, quote unquote,
dyslexia with numbers. Um, just
so you all know, I have
dyscalculia. And unfortunately,
it took many years of struggle
to figure that out. Every
weekday after dinner, I would
sit at the kitchen counter with
my mom and watch her face glow
with subjects like history and
language arts. However, she
always saved.
And ended the homework session
with Steffi. I am so sorry. I am
bad at math. Therefore, I went
through the public education
system, also believing I was bad
at math. But I was, when I was
very young, I loved numbers,
because 2 + 3 is 5 and 3 + 2 is
5. However, when numbers got
bigger, 24 plus 24 is 48, but it
was 24 + 42 or 42 plus 42, and I
guarantee you that doesn't equal
48.
I struggled with Matt till
college. It wasn't until failing
two semesters of math that I
finally went to the student
success center and took a
screener for the first time in
my life, and found out I had
dyscalculia. It took 15 years of
struggle for me to figure it
out. So constant struggle, bad
grades to finally know that I
had it. But I was one of the
lucky ones, because regardless
of my struggles in math, I still
went to college, but there are
many other children in New
Mexico who will go there entire
life for schooling, thinking
they
may not be college material or
may not enter a trade program
because math is too hard.
Therefore, please consider
passing this bill so every
student can go through school
confident in math and shifting
the narrative to, I am good at
math. Thank you for listening
today.
Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee stand rounds for the
superintendent's coalition of
Educational leaders. We stand to
support this is a good piece of
work. We want to thank the
deputy secretary, the secretary,
and even the sector of higher
education as we've talked about
the components.
The important things for you to
know.
is that we now have a year.
For those who want to be early
implementers to begin rolling
that ball.
In the original bill, not all
the answers are there yet about
what the tool set is and about
what the best practice is. This
gives us a chance to do that and
utilize the legislative
education Study Committee, the
Department of Education, and
others, so that as we roll it
out in the larger sense, we can
get it right. Thank you.
Thank you. Next.
Thank you Mr. Chairman, uh,
members of the committee, Joe
Gui and with the New Mexico
School Boards Association. We
thank the sponsor for bringing
this forward. We also thank the
public education department for
rolling out a program a major, a
major initiative similar to the
reading initiative that we need
so badly in our schools. We look
forward to working with all the
partners, uh, in implementing
this, and we support the uh uh
bill. Thank you.
Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. My name
is Ellen Bernstein. I'm the
president of the Albuquerque
Teachers Federation. When I went
through public schools, I
learned math by practicing.
We were assigned a lot of
different problems, and then we
did the problems, then we had to
correct the problems that we
didn't get right.
So when I became an elementary
teacher, that's how I taught
math.
And it wasn't until I had
excellent professional
development after the first
rollout of the math standards
that I really understood the
importance of both accurate um
math skills, but also conceptual
understanding of math. So this
focus on math that I was able to
experience change the way I
taught all subjects. It helped
me understand the conceptual.
Underpinning that we need to
apply the skills, but I do ask
you, when you look at this and
when the LESC talks about this,
please consider the workload
that elementary teachers are
currently bearing.
It is extreme.
Please also consider how many
tests we are giving young
children.
They are overtested.
So when we look at new
initiatives, we have to look at
both the workload of the
instructors and the testing that
we require of young children.
Thank you.
Thank you all.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, uh, Mandy
Torres with New Mexico and a
former elementary teacher. I, I
think New Mexico stands in
support of this bill because of
the great need we have in our
state for quality math
instruction. Teachers need to
feel confident in their own
understanding of math concepts
before they can make math fun
and exciting for students.
Content knowledge is extremely
important when it comes to math,
and we hope the training will
include teachers having the
opportunity to work with and
understand standards in a safe
place where they can ask
questions when the
teachers don't understand. Um,
we also share a concern about
the, the workload on teachers
and at least hope that maybe
that training could also count
for something else, such as a
microcredential.
Um, it is just as crucial for
teachers to understand where
students need support, just as
with reading. A screener can
help identify some of the gaps
in their understanding. We also
hope that a screener would be
given one on one to a child, it
would not simply put students in
front of a computer screen.
Math was my favorite subject to
teach as an elementary teacher,
and I look forward to the
hands-on work and helping
students learn how to play with
numbers. Not all elementary
teachers like teaching math, and
all, all of them would consider
themselves math people. We have
to show them that they can be
and should be for the benefit of
their students who also need to
see their teachers excited about
math. We ask that you vote yes
on SB 235. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Torres.
Uh, good morning, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee. I'm
Doctor Jacqueline Costales. I
work at the public education
department as the current
division director of Curriculum
and instruction. Um, uh, we've
heard a lot of the technical
aspects. I really appreciated,
uh, Senator Soul's really going
piece by piece, but I just wanna
Stop for a second, because the
technical, I believe, with the
educators across the state, with
your support, uh, at the PED. I
believe that we can, um,
Uh, get through the technical
pieces. What I want to put on
your mind today is the kind of
leadership and vision that this
committee um has shown in the
past and what
You galvanized in terms of
literacy. We've seen 5%
increases since we passed Senate
Bill 398 and this bill will do
the same thing in mathematics.
The concern that our students
even fared worse in mathematics
after the pandemic, then they
did in literacy is a red flag
that says, let's bring that
focus, that vision, let's mob.
and capitalize on the expertise
of our teachers, our principals,
our educators, with your
support, I urge that you pass
this bill. So we are sure that
every student in New Mexico has
equitable opportunities to learn
mathematics before they leave
the system.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, good morning, Amanda
Aragon, executive director of
New Mexico Kids can, uh,
following, uh, Ms. Costales, I
think, just reiterating what
some of the national data just
told us two weeks ago, only 34%
of New Mexico's 4th grade
students are meeting what we
call proficient on the national
assessment for Educational
Progress, and that number falls
to 14% of students being
proficient in 8th grade. As an
example, one of the questions on
the 4th grade assessment is,
Identifying a number on a number
line.
And more than 3/45% of our
students cannot do that. So, if
that does not tell us that we
have a crisis in math, then I'm
not sure what does because it's
really hard to be an engineer or
an astronaut or design planes or
balance a checkbook. If you
don't have basic numeracy.
And so we really, really applaud
the department for bringing this
forward. And, and, uh, Senator
Sws, because we could be on the
leading edge of this. I think on
literacy, we're catching up to
what other states have proven as
possible, and we could really be
one of the flag bearers for
advancing these policies as a
state, and instead of watching
all the states around us and
then saying, oh, yeah, we should
do that too. This would be an
example of New Mexico saying,
we're ready to do this, and
we're ready to deliver these
supports for our students.
The thing that we particularly
love is the parent notification,
a recent poll conducted by
Gallup, um, by an organization
called Learning Heroes shows
that 9 in 10 parents think that
their child is on grade level in
math.
9 out of every 10. So if you
think your kid is doing great in
math.
You're not getting them
tutoring, you're not signing up
for the after-school
programming. You're not uh
prioritizing a parent-teacher
conference. When that parent is
finally notified to say, hey,
3/4 of our 8th graders are not
on grade level. They will be
better partners with our schools
and making sure our kiddos get
what they need. Thank you so
much.
Thank you. And now we'll go
online. uh Hope Morales.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Hope Morales and I'm the
executive director for Teach
Plus New Mexico. This year we
have a team of teachers focused
on improving math outcomes for
students. They are conducting
research and bringing their
personal experiences to ensure
we are improving strategies and
systems in the classroom. Our
educators had the opportunity to
get feedback on SB 235, and we
strongly support this
legislation. Lawrence Scott, one
of our amazing teachers and
policy fellows who sent an email
to the committee this morning.
shared. This bill will have a
direct impact on my students and
on their future as
mathematicians and citizens of
New Mexico. This bill correctly
places emphasis on interventions
in early elementary school and
on having professional math
learning plans for elementary
and secondary educators. Mr.
Chair, this is an important step
and ensures that we are making
math a priority. We look forward
to continuing to work with PE on
more of the specifics of
implementation, and we ask that
you support this vital effort.
Thank you.
Thank you. Next Duval West.
Good morning again, committee,
uh, and Mr. Chairman, uh, I'm
Duval Westbaum, executive vice
president of policy and programs
for the Greater Albuquerque
Chamber. Here again to happily
testify in favor of a really
smart bill. It's sponsored by a
career educator. It's designed
to not only establish statewide
math requirements in K-12, but
employ the screening and the
interventions needed for
students who are struggling with
math, as well as implementing
math coaches.
given our state's abysmal mass
proficiency rates, less than 1
in 4 students can do math at
grade level and it gets worse in
the later grades, according to
the LEST analysis.
It feels long overdue, and we
applaud the sponsor for bringing
it forward.
We at the chamber believe every
New Mexico child can learn, and
Senate Bill 235 will to our
school and our teachers have the
tools that they need to help all
children learn math.
We heartily endorse this bill
and we encourage you to vote
yes. Thank you.
Thank you. Next, Patricia
Cardin.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman and
committee members. My name is
Patricia Carton, and I am
co-chair of the New Mexico
Partnership for Math and Science
Education.
As a 31 year math educator in
New Mexico and former math
specialist for the Math and
Science Bureau. I have the
utmost respect for the work
being done with Senate Bill 235,
that will elevate map in New
Mexico, which is long overdue.
As co-chair for the partnership,
I would like to state that we
support the intent of Senate
Bill 235, with hopes that as
Senate Bill 235 moves forward,
members established a more
comprehensive rollout plan with
structures and supports along
with adequate funding for
implementation. Thank you.
Thank you. And next up we have
Ling Faith, um, sorry, I don't
want to mispronounce the rest of
your last name. I'll let you
pronounce. Thank you. Um, good
morning, Mr. Mr. Chair and
committee members. My name is uh
first, I wanna say I was online
Friday morning to support or to
provide my support for this
bill, and I was cheering on
Senator Souls as he spoke about
climate and culture of
mathematics in our state across
our nation, and the much needed
shift of how we view being good
or bad at math.
My name is Lingei Tertz and I'm
the executive director of New
Mexico Mesa. Mesa stands for
math, Engineering, Science
Achievement, math being at the
forefront of our name shows our
belief that math is foundational
to the work that takes place in
STM education and without solid
math skills and our students,
K-12 journey, they will not be
fully prepared for a career or
college major in STEM.
Mexico Mesa is in support of
this bill and is
And it's concentrated focus on
mass support for students
specifically and just calculia
and intervention in elementary
school. My colleagues in the New
Mexico Math and Science
Partnership sent concerns last
night about timeline and
implementation, but I think this
will all be worked out as it
moves forward. Therefore, New
Mexico may provides its full
support of SB 235. Thank you.
Thank you and last will be uh
Palo Ome.
Thank you. Can you all hear me?
Yes, we can hear you.
Very good, thank you. Good
morning. On behalf of the math
and science advisory Council
MSA, I would like to thank the
chairman and committee for the
opportunity to provide comments
on this bill. My name is Doctor
Paul Ome, and I'm the co-chair
of the math and science advisory
Council. Our council advises the
math and Science Bureau and
legislature on ways to improve
STEM education and student
achievement. We produce an
annual report on the state of
STEM education in New Mexico.
Members of the council reviewed
this bill and provided comments
at our last meeting this past
Friday.
I would like to elaborate on our
5 recommendations. First, all
intervents during core
instruction need to be at grade
level, high quality mathematics
instruction relies on
identifying students'
developmental matter skills.
This bill is crucial because
early intervention can
significantly improve later's
math skills and help them see
themselves as capable in math.
However, math intervention
should occur during core
instruction and on a grade level
and be targeted, not as pull out
the engines. Second, we
recommend supporting and
funding.
professional development for
educators in math instruction,
according to our latest annual
report on mathematics teachers
should participate in ongoing
job embedded professional
learning on math content and
pedagogy as a requirement for
maintaining their professional
license. Adequate funding is
necessary to support this bill,
this recommendation. Third, all
elementary schools should be
required to have at least one
math specialist, and Zac has
successfully advocated for the
creation of an elementary math
specialist endorsement. This
will benefit from making it.
A requirement for elementary
schools to include a math
specialist on their staff for,
we need to expand parent support
to ensure they understand that
their students may just math
difficulties but not necessarily
have a learning disability. It
is important to help parents
understand the math difficulties
identified by screeners are not
diagnostic of a learning
disability. This understanding
can help avoid stigma and
promote growth mindset. And
finally, regarding the timing of
written communications or
notifications.
This should align with the
district plan or calendar
monthly notifications will place
an undue burden on educators and
school staff, notification will
be more effective if they align
with the district's schedule for
communicating students' progress
reports. Thank you for
considering, considering our
recommendations and your
continuous support of education
in Mexico.
Thank you. Uh,
Senator Risel.
man thank you very much. The
reason I'm smiling. I always
read the monitor up there and
then one, and one of them said
automatic teachers, and I just
got tickled about that, I
thought it's kind of funny.
Mr. Chairman and Mr. Chairman.
Under your new material.
That does start on page 4, but
my concern is on page, or not my
concern, my question is on page
5.
Line 11, can you tell me what an
alternative license is. Thank
you, Senate, Mr. Chair and and
Senator, uh, in New Mexico,
there are several different ways
students can get alternative
licenses or public education or
our uh universities have
alternative licenses, people
that may come with it already
with a degree, uh, that looks at
other ways of getting licensed.
uh, there's some other
mechanisms for that. It can you
explain what that means by
alternative licenses, but
So it, it's ones that are not
going through the formal
undergraduate teacher
preparation programs. Yes, uh,
chairman and, uh, uh, senators
though, I think what Senator so
said just now is, um, really the
definition of an alternatively
licensed teacher, that is
someone who may have already
gotten a bachelor's or a
master's degree, and then they
decide to come into the field of
education, and we offer programs
so that they can become a
teacher. OK, thank you for that
clarification, and Mister
Chairman and Mister Chairman.
On, uh, page 3 of the FIR.
I was reading here.
And
It's talking about ice station
and the performances.
An assessment as uh.
Especially in elementary school
for the component.
Uh, uh
An ability to be able to read
and measure the growth and that
ability. I also have read there
here that I station also is a
math test component.
Why aren't we using that in the
state Mr. Chair and, and
senator, I station is one
mechanism that could be used.
This bill does not want to limit
to a particular mechanism for
determining that that really is
gonna be up to, it may even be
down to the particular school
within a district and so don't
want to limit to one mechanism
for determining math
difficulties.
And uh whenever we're talking
about the math part of it, and I
think math is very important
part of
A student's curriculum.
Uh, the state only starts
assessing math proficiency on
the annual standardized test
known as MSSA, beginning in the
3rd grade.
To me that's very troublesome.
Why are we waiting that long to
make any sort of assessment, Mr.
Chairman and Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chair and Senator, I think
that's part of the point of
doing this, that we are going to
be doing more uh formative
assessments, early assessments
and things like that. That's
when the the formal numbers come
that rank states is first around
3rd grade, but the idea of this
is to start trying to identify
early students that may be
falling behind, so we can catch
them up before they get to some
of those crucial testing times.
And Mr. Chairman, Mr. Chairman,
I agree with you completely. The
longer we put this off, the
harder it is for a student to
pick up and excel in this and.
I think meth is a very important
part, like I said earlier of it.
Students learning.
Mr. Chairman and Mr. Chairman,
uh, last week.
I think it was last week, uh,
anyway, it was Senate Bill 116.
And it was the math lab pilot
project.
Senator Branton Representative
Grola brought that bill forward.
We did pass it out of this
committee.
How will your program?
Work with this program if both
of them get through both houses
and are signed by the governor.
Mr. Chairman and and Senator
Denzel, they work together. The
other one is just one of the
mechanisms that a school or a
district could use to assist
students who are falling behind
to encourage students to enjoy
math. It's just one of the tools
that could be in the toolbox for
a particular districts where we
had talked about and that's part
of the reason for the one year
delay is to find good models of
that sort and have districts use
those and, and get data and
information as to how's that
working? Uh, and so we can
spread it to others.
And so they're not in conflict
in any way, that would be one of
the tools that a school or a
district could use to improve
their math.
And Mr.
Chairman, I appreciate that
response. I also see
Your bill being implemented
along with Senate Bill 116 and
any school that already has a
STEM pro program in place as
well. My concern here is though,
Mister Chairman, Mr. Chairman,
is PED even though there is a
delay on this particular bill
235 is PED going to be able to
implement this in a timely
fashion if these bills are
passed.
Madam or uh Mr. Chair and uh
Senator.
I believe so, and I think that
was part of the reason for the
one year delay is so that they
also can see where they need to
ramp things up. I make sure that
those supports for teachers and
students are in place and are
able to do that so that we
aren't on both sides that the
districts are fully ready, that
the department is fully ready.
Everybody knows what's coming.
We've got a year to do multiple
pilot programs and early
adopters try all those things
out as we move forward.
Would you like to add.
Yes, and uh chairman and
senator, I think that I would
add just a couple of pieces to
your question, um, we, uh, this
year as a PED we're ready to
start pushing out much of this
work now and um through the
budget process last year, um,
the math and science bureau was
zeroed out, so we did not have
budget to sort of continue doing
some of this work, um, and we
are ready to move forward but
uh.
Back up about 2 sentences and
start over.
You said something that just
really caught my.
attention.
Yes, ma'am.
spending.
German, German and senator
and senator, if I might, on page
7 on section F of the very last
part.
There's in their subject to
available funding.
And so all of these come down to
funding for the public ed
department and education in
general through the schools and
last year, some of the funding
for math got zeroed out. Uh, the
LESC and the department have
tried to increase funding for
math, but we are not the finance
committee or the final arbiters
for how that goes through. And
so I think that's what you're
alluding to and why we had to
put that in there is we are
hoping and here I'm gonna do a
little bit.
of uh lobbying of everyone,
please make sure if you have
friends on the finance committee
that they understand how
important math is and that we
get fully funding. I would get
off that soapbox.
OK, and Mr. Chairman, Mr.
Chairman, thank you for that,
but I guess.
Would it be permissible for me
to ask?
ED why there was a funding
shortfall whenever they do
submit their budget. This really
bothers me.
I was kind of stunned whenever I
heard your expert witness make
that statement is do what
offending shortfall?
I know how much money we do put
into education for there to be a
shortfall, I'm appalled.
So Mr. Cherry, would it be
appropriate to have the, the
secretary or Ms. Casal someone.
Whichever someone, if someone
would like to come and keep in
mind we're not throwing rocks at
you. I just want to know why
there is a funding shortfall and
then we may throw rocks.
Mr. Chair, Senator, thank you so
much for the question and thank
you for being bringing attention
to the need for funding to
support.
This work, um, the funding for
math to support basically
everything that is in this bill
was in the agencies request, uh,
last session, however, it did
not receive funding.
Um, this year again, it is in.
The executive budget request, it
is also in the LES request,
and it is also in the LFC
request this year, um, and we're
looking at funding for 3 year
time frame, so we very much feel
that uh with the support of
what's in the budgets currently
that we are able to implement uh
everything, the time frame that
is in the bill as well as
something that is absolutely.
Well, I'm I'm still just stunned
over the news I heard earlier. I
appreciate your response on
this. Uh, is it going, I'm sure
that uh legislative finance is
aware of the need for this and
how crucial it is to the success
of our students.
And
Is this going to be a problem.
Whenever it goes over to the
house side for discussion.
Mr. Chair, Senator Azel, um, we
have been talking about the need
for funding for math every
single chance we get.
In every committee hearing that
we have been in, um, to talk
about the budgets, I feel like
we have the support, again, it's
in all three budgets this year.
It is, um, we're going to Senate
Finance next, so we will
absolutely be reforcing
reinforcing that with them, um,
and again, every uh conversation
that we have with house
appropriations and finance
Committee, as well as Senate
Finance were emphasizing the
importance of math, so.
Um, I feel good about where
we're at currently. OK, and
Chairman, Mr. Chairman and
expert witnesses.
Who made the determination to
cut the funding for the math
part of it. I, uh, that's what I
want to know, I want to know
who's responsible for this.
very important component of the
education process for our
children.
Why isn't that why isn't it?
Taking place.
Mr. Chair and Senator, as I
recall when it happened, we were
getting a budget proposal, uh,
the day before the final budget
came out and I'm quickly
scanning through all of the
education budgets.
And essentially asked it like
what happened to the $10
million?
Everybody kind of looked around
and nobody, it's like who took
it out? Everybody looked around,
but it was gone.
And I was very unhappy in that
I'm the chair of education if
you're gonna cut my education
budget by $10 million I'd at
least be consulted about that.
So I don't know who, where, how,
but the day before the budget
came out, it disappeared.
Which brings me to another
question. Every time you say
something that that sparks
another question for me. I need
to be quiet then I'm teasing.
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Chairman,
expert witnesses.
Can somebody refresh my memory
on how much was allocated to
just strictly PED last year.
As far as the budgets go. I
know, I know. I've slept since
then.
I mean
Mr. Chair, um, Senator itself
for the agency budget, which is
how we run PED, um, our agency
budget is about $24 million. Is
is that the number you were?
Referencing the agency budget.
I'm, I'm very curious, not
necessarily the pre-K program,
but K through 12 program is what
I'm asking about what is the
total budget there for that?
Mr. Chair and Senator, are you
talking about the total
education budget or just the
public in agency portion of
things because they're very
different.
If the numbers are available for
both both I'd like to, I, I'm
sorry, I can't remember what
they were,
results about $5 billion.
Uh, for K-12 education in the
state.
A through 12 $5 billion and then
we drop math.
Maybe those people need to take
a look at their math program,
OK?
That's unbelievable, and Mr.
Chairman, Mr. Chairman, expert
witnesses, I'm sure because of.
Money that does come in from the
largest industry in our state
helping to fund these programs
and the leases on our state
lands.
I'm sure there has been an
increase in that particular
budget for this coming year. Can
anybody provide me with?
Mr. Chair, Senator, can you tell
me, are you asking how
much the PED or for the K
through 12 program. I want to
know specifically for that.
What's the percentage increase?
It's about, it's about a 6%
increase to last year's or this
current.
Fiscal year budget for K-12
education.
Well, that's amazing, Mr.
Chairman, Mr. Chairman, expert
witness, Mr. Frosted, thank you
for that information. So in it
from the $5 billion.
Uh, budget budget that did
happen last year where at 6%
onto that.
Correct
Yeah, and, and Mr. Chair and
senator and those we handed out
those spreadsheets those very
first day that had the LESC, the
agency, the LFC budgets, those
are all being reconciled now as
to what we're actually going to
get. OK, and that, that was my
concern.
But it has been presented, it is
in the works right now.
Folks, all I can say is that
industry that does educate our
kids, be very disappointed
whenever they hear that there
was no funding for the math
program.
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Chairman,
thank you very much.
Thank you. Do we have any other
questions, Senator Nova?
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Senator
Souls. Thank you for bringing
this bill forward, specifically
addressing, I think it begins to
address, Mr. Chairman, the
consolidated lawsuit of Martinez
Yazi, um, and I think it's a
pathway to start addressing
those, uh, deficiencies, um, but
I do have some questions,
specifically on the LESD
analysis, Mr. Carman, it points
out some data and research from
the National Council of Teachers
of Mathematics, principles and
of actions, and they pointed
out, uh, Mr. Chairman, that
according
To that research, there are
specific essential elements of
excellence to ensure that these
programs are possible, um, and
some of those things that they
point out are a commitment to
access and equity, a powerful
curriculum, appropriate tools
and technology, meaningful and
aligned assessments and a
culture of professionalism.
My question, Mr. Chairman, is
How will Senate Bill 235, uh,
direct had to create a system
that contains all of the
essential elements of excellent
uh mathematic programs.
Mr. Chair and and Senator Nava,
I think that's within that whole
framework in the new section.
Uh, those are also some of the
pieces to get worked out as we
have the early adopters as to
which pieces are working, uh,
they're also and please correct
me if I'm wrong, but there are
math advisory councils of our
teachers within the state, lots
of people who are very
interested in working on all of
these pieces to make sure that
we have a robust, solid
framework and program for
districts then to get them.
materials to get the uh
The techniques to provide
professional development, uh, to
provide the training on the
front end and our teacher
colleges, all of those things
to, to all align towards
student.
Uh, performance in math.
Thank you Mr. Chairman. Thank
you Senators. Go ahead. Sure,
and Chairman and uh Senator
Nova, I think um some other
components that we have been
working on at the agency are
really around those high quality
materials that you just
mentioned as a way to uh begin
to work towards addressing the
Yazi Martinez students, which
are, we know, 71% of our kiddos.
So, um, making sure that we are
hitting all of the elements, so
we are boldly saying that we
want to get things that the that
the department will do, the
agency, the pet, we want to
support what
s are doing, what school leaders
are doing, what teachers are
doing, how families are involved
and are how students are
involved as they are working to
um achieve high quality math
performances because they are um
being taught by highly qualified
math teachers with materials
that are appropriate for them.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you. uh, Senator Soulles, uh,
and one last question, and I
think you might have pointed it
out, uh, but will schools be
meeting with parents to develop
the plans or how will parental
engagement take place through a
culturally competent lens.
Yes, uh.
This is requiring districts to
do more.
Working directly with parents
and giving parents uh
Materials giving them strategies
for how to work with their kids.
Um, in some ways, it may be help
your child by estimating as
you're driving, how far away is
that hill? You know, and guess
how many miles and then let's
check it as we go when you're at
the grocery store, you know,
what do you think the total is?
OK, keep in mind, you know, how
much is the, the total bill
gonna be and let's estimate what
it might be. And so lots of just
those math.
Concepts about how do you think
about it and giving parents
direct.
Mechanisms for doing that, and
it may also be, here's a whole
bunch of child really needs to
get their, their multiplication
facts down. Here's a game that
you can play to get them to be
quick and fluent, so that when
they get to algebra and are
doing um
Uh, trying to to uh separate out
things where you have to know
that 6 times 7 is 42 and 42
divided by 6 and 7 and be able
to do that quickly without
pulling out your calculator all
the time. It's gonna help with
the fluidity of their math
skills. So strategies with
parents like that to bring them
in as partners.
In their child's mouth.
Yes, and if I may, I just add,
um, our, um, um.
Senator, chairman and Senator
Nova are math instructional
framework has been in existence
for the last um couple of years
and within that there are
mechanisms to support teachers
and helping to have those
conversations with families, but
one of the most important pieces
of this is um what we heard from
um one of the supporters is that
many families are misled to
believe that their children are
performing at grade level in
math, and so having very honest
early conversations about, um,
where
a student is and what a family
can do to help support be a
partner with the school is.
A really big intention of the
work in the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I
thank you, uh, Senator Souls and
experts. I appreciate the
holistic approach that I think
you guys are all taking.
All right, I don't see any
questions or comment, Senators
or Senator Thornton.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
I'm just looking at the fiscal
impact report and it has a graph
of New Mexico's math proficiency
rates.
Uh, going from FY 22, 23, and
24.
And you look at from grades 678,
and.
2111
Every year we're getting worse.
Um
That's concerning to me.
And so
I guess when it gets back to
accountability.
And I'm gonna be real big on
this since I'm gonna be here for
4 years.
I, I'm gonna want to see those
curves going in the other
direction.
Um, so we, we use, were you, uh,
commit to coming back to here on
an annual basis and giving us an
update on.
On the process of this new path
that we're going on with respect
to math.
Uh, Mr. Chair and Senator
Thornton, uh, probably will be
doing it more than once a year,
right? It's going this area is
going to be one of the major
topics for LESC study through
this summer of which I will be
the chair of as well as our
teacher preparation programs are
the main things that I want to
focus on. So we will be delving
into the details here, but also
looking at what's going on in
the middle school area in
particular when students start
to get into the more abstract.
and why are we losing them at
that point. Uh, and that's a
conversation that's being had in
math around the country that
other, other countries, Finland
and others don't seem to be
having that we, you know, and
whether that's how we teach
math, whether it's societal
problem, we don't know that that
really seems to be where it
starts to turn is middle school
when they start getting into the
more abstract.
Types of math.
Thank you, Mr. Cha. I, I was
listening to the news this
morning and uh I think there's a
educator from Louisiana that
said that they went back to
basics in Louisiana, started
doing flashcards.
Back to analog.
You know, just having kids go
through the multiplication
tables and things like that.
And they have seen significant
improvements in, in the status
of their kids just by making
them go through rote training,
memorization, those types of
things, things that we did when
we were all young.
So I'm wondering, um, I'm hoping
that with these screeners that
you have been putting in place
that they can identify issues
early on and and allow them to.
Uh, to start maybe.
Training them early on in this
in the process because
I'm an engineer, Math is fun.
I know, and I know you agree
with that, so thank you very
much. I'm going to support this
bill. I think this is something
that's incredibly needed and I
look forward to seeing the early
reports coming in as we go
forward with it. Thank you.
You send her or go back, send
her.
Mr. Chairman is just to come in
on what Senator Thornton said.
He referenced when we were all
young and I'm gonna reference
the FIR from last week stating
that we were all born in the
last century, you know, so.
That's all, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Senator Rossin. Any
other questions or comments? I,
I just want to thank you for
stepping up and leading on this,
um, you're always a champion to
make sure we're addressing.
Yazi Martinez dressing what
happened after COVID focused a
lot on literacy.
And this is, I think the math
on.
Um, that being said, um, do we,
what is the will of the
committee?
We have a motion.
Move forward pass.
As amended.
Alright, so, so here's what
we'll do.
A move do not pass on Senate
Bill 235 and a do pass on Senate
education Commit substitute for
Senate Bill 235 as amendment.
I and then right so Senator,
Senator Figueroa made the
motion. Senator Thornton
seconded if you could uh take
the role, Mary. Thank you.
Yes.
Yes
Yes.
And center of a unanimous due
pass. Thank you all, everybody
OK, uh, for those watching,
we're going to go to Senate Bill
246, the safe or the seizure
Safe Schools Act, uh, we're
trying to see if Senator Stewart
is going to be available to come
back over for her other bill.
Uh, I don't know where Senator
Padilla is in finance committee,
so we may get to those, anybody
is online waiting for Senate
Bill 201, the public ad reform
Fund uses that bill is not going
to be heard today will probably
be heard on Friday. Also a
remind
on Friday, we have a late start
due to the school board
association morning breakfast.
We will not start until 9:30 on
Friday.
So Senator Pope, uh, Senate Bill
246. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Senate Bill 246, the seizure
Safe Schools Act, um, aims to
improve the management and care
of students with seizure
disorders in schools. It
mandates training for school
personnel.
The development of individual
Caesar seizure action plans and
the availability of trained
staff to provide care.
In this bill, all school
employees and bus drivers must
receive annual training on
seizure disorders including
recognizing symptoms and
providing first aid.
Each school with a student
diagnosed with the seizure
disorder must have at least 2
trained personnel.
School nurses or designated
school employee that has the
training.
seizure action plans. Parents
and guardians slash guardians of
students with seizure disorders
must submit a written.
Seizure action plan detailing
medical care, accommodations,
emergency response procedures
and contact information.
school employees and bus drivers
responsible for the students
must be informed of the seizure,
action plan.
Do schools must also ensure that
students with seizure disorders
receive appropriate care during
school hours, extracurricular
activities and transportation.
Designated personnel can
administer.
Seizure medications and assists
with medical devices like vagus
nerve stimulators.
Legal protections and
compliance. Seizure care
personnel do not need to be
licensed healthcare
practitioners.
The act does not override
existing federal protections
under the individuals with
disabilities, Education Act, I
idea, Section 504 of the
rehabilitation Act or the
Americans with Disabilities Act.
And school employees acting in
accordance with the Act are
granted immunity from civil and
professional liability for care
provided in good faith.
Once again this bill seeks to
ensure safety of students with
seizure disorders by providing
structured training, a clear
response plan and legal
protections for caregivers.
Uh, within schools. With that,
Mr. Chair, we're ready for
public comment and any
questions.
Thank you. Out to the audience,
those in support of Senate Bill
2246.
If you'd like to come up and say
a few words.
Mr. Chairman, stand around for
the superintendents in the
coalition of Educational
leaders. We appreciate the bill,
we support it in general.
There's one issue in this that's
the two personnel in every
school in smalls, we have a
problem that's staffing and is
this bill moves forward, we
would ask that the sponsor work
with us on how best to
accommodate them.
Mr. Chairman, members, uh, good
morning. Uh, my name's Edward
Webster. I'm with NEA New Mexico
government relations director.
Uh, we stand in strong support
of SB 246, uh, as Senator Pope
said, um, this allows, well,
first and foremost, NEA in New
Mexico, the biggest concern we
have is the safety of our kids.
And I think this bill goes a
long way in making sure that
staff are trained, they have
annual trainings, uh, there are
required staff that are able to
address symptoms of seizures and
provide medication or
uh medical assistance. So we
strongly urge you to vote yes on
this bill. Thank you.
Thank you. Anyone else in
support, Joe?
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee, Joe Guiha with
New Mexico school boards. We
support the intent of this
program, and we think it's very
much needed, uh, it is an
unfunded mandate. There are many
requirements here. We hope that
we can work with the sponsor to
get some resources in there,
thank you.
Thank you, Joe. Anyone else in
support in the room?
Online we have one Marco.
So friend?
Good morning.
Chairman and committee. My name
is Marcos Saran. I'm a US
veteran and in my early 30s, I
began experiencing seizures.
A struggle that led to brain
surgery in an attempt to control
them, a mild stroke, and I've
not only shaped my life, but it
also exposed critical gaps in
our school's emergency
preparedness too often teachers
are forced to act as first
responders before the school
nurse arrives.
This legislation is designed to
ensure that every district in
New Mexico has a standardized
and effective protocol for
managing seizures and supporting
students with epilepsy.
We propose partnering with the
New Mexico Epilepsy Foundation
as a board member of the New
Mexico Epilepsy Foundation and
other reputable organizations to
develop and implement these
training programs. These are
free programs provided by these,
by the epilepsy Foundation.
By investing in proactive
training, we cannot only save
lives but also alleviate the
long-term financial burden on
families in our healthcare
system.
I myself have been inspired by
the tireless work of two
extraordinary mothers. Nina
Begay and Amber Gross, who in
the early 2020s launched
initiatives known as nezoni and
Athena's law. Their passion,
commitment to the safer children
to the safety of children in
epilepsy have further fueled my
dedication to this cause, not
only to myself but children in
school. We can create a safer,
safer, more inclusive learning
environment for the thousands of
students in all of New.
Mexico. I respectfully urge all
of you to support this bill by
mandating seizure safety
training for all school
employees, we have the
opportunity to ensure that every
student receives the prompt,
effective care they deserve and
that every parent can have
confidence in the safety of
their children's educational
environment. Thank you.
Thank you
Uh,
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I, I, uh,
forgot in my presentation, I
just want to say that um.
This is really being supported
and pushed by the New Mexico
epilepsy Foundation, and it was
brought to me from Nina Begay
and Amber Gross, who are both
actually educators. The reason
why they can't be here today,
they're actually in the
classroom and uh Nina Begay,
her, her daughter suffers.
Um, from seizures and a lot of
this has been developed because
of what she had to deal with
going through K through 12. So
just wanted to let folks know,
um, kind of where this is coming
from.
And uh why folks are supportive
and why we're trying to step up.
Thank you. Uh, we now questions
from the committee.
If not questions, is there
motion.
Then you wanna wait.
Senator Hickey
I move, uh, that's a bill will
be duly passed by the committee.
Thank you Mr. Chair and
appreciate the motion but also
appreciate the time to ask a
question, and maybe PED would
want to respond. I, I am
interested, Mr. Chair, in how
this changes current practice or
current law.
Uh, because to the best of my
knowledge.
We already require this.
And schools better be doing
this, so what's different?
Just to be clear.
And Mr. Church senator was that
question for me or for?
Mr. Tay sponsor for anyone who
can answer.
I, I,
um, I would just say from my
perspective.
I, I believe you're correct when
it comes to APS, I think, um, in
some ways they're already
following and doing this,
especially in 504 plans.
Um, but I don't know if every
school district and
Um, is doing it to this level,
and I think that's where this
came about.
So, um,
I, I would allow.
or anyone else to come up to
maybe give their perspective.
Um, the folks who I'm working
with on this field are not to
say that.
They don't have the resources.
Anybody interested in
responding.
Ed or someone, Stan?
Uh, Mr. Chairman, thank you.
This is part of a school safety
policy in the schools across New
Mexico. It doesn't cut us
deeply.
And as I mentioned in my
comment.
Of the staffing of two positions
is a.
For us to meet in small
districts, so we look forward to
how we can vet that out.
It doesn't minimize the minimize
the issue in schools, that's why
for, I think it's about 8 or 9
years we have had this in school
safety plans and have trained
personnel seated with me as the
superintendent of loving New
Mexico. He has one school nurse
for all of his schools.
That is the individual in his
school district that is the
trained individual.
And so that creates logistics,
and so that's why the comment
Mr. Chairman, uh, Senator
Figuero, we, we have had this in
place for some time.
OK, um, Mr. Chair and sponsor
that, that's what I wanted to
get at if it's not being
executed, Mister Chair, because
The resources aren't there.
passing this law is not gonna
fix it unless it's followed with
the resources.
Um
That's all, um, thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Senator Ramos, Mr. Chair, thank
you, Senator. Thank you for
bringing this like this bill in
front of us today. I, I.
Definitely see where you come
from. It's a, it's.
intentions are great, but in
rural New Mexico.
With another unfunded mandate.
goes through, it's gonna really
affect our schools. And, and,
uh, on page 3.
Uh
Line 21, it says each governing
body shall ensure that each
school attended by a student
with a seizure disorder has at
least 2 school employees,
including school nurses or
seizure care personnel.
Now, as a school bus driver
myself.
That, that's a huge liability.
OK, it's hard enough to get
school bus drivers as it is. Are
they going to accept that
liability?
You know, um,
Having nurses.
Having to, uh, having to pay
nurses to travel on a wrestling
trip or a band trip with
students when you only have one
nurse per, per, uh
For for your district or for
your high school?
Um, it's just
It's wishful thinking for us. I
mean, in a, in a perfect world
and perfect funding, I think we
can do it, but as of this point,
I
I
Really feel that we need
something in place, but at this
point, I don't think we're ready
to uh.
You move forward on this bill.
So I'm gonna have to vote
against it. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Senator Hickey
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Senator Pope for bringing
this forward.
And
My colleagues, I, I understand
uh both another unfunded
mandate.
is what I heard in healthcare
all the time.
The, um, on the other hand, if
I, it's been a long time, but if
I go back and recollection of my
training and so forth.
Uh, the training to do this is
not complex. Um, it's, uh,
Relatively easy, I think, again,
I could be wrong, but I don't
think it's more than.
a few hours and just getting
people. It's almost like a CPR.
Um, essentially, in terms of
keeping the airway open and um
essentially that and bring the
person on the side and what have
you.
So, I, I, it's not like everyone
has to be on the school bus. I
mean that that they have to be
on the school bus. I mean, this
is just covering the percentages
by having two people trained in
the school, and I think that
that can be done relatively
easily. It's, it's in the
oversight that isn't actually
getting done. um I think we're
the complications are probably
gonna occur, but I think that
the the bill is
is, is doable, and I, I would
vote for it on that basis that.
It's, it's pretty easy like
training. Thank you.
Thank you. Other questions?
Not, I'm a question or two that
I have, having been in high
school, I had a student who had
seizures, uh, was on a 504 plan.
Don't 504 plans indicate how
many people need to be around
and trained, and I know as one
of the teachers, I suspect the
other teachers for that student
had to get at least basic
training of how to stabilize and
manage until we could get the
school nurse there. Don't 504
plans essentially cover what
this bill does?
Um, Mr. Chair, I, I believe so,
but, um, talking with the.
Advocates, um, I believe this is
not been the case, but I, I, I
believe you're correct. That's
really what it's supposed to be
happening.
And so I think
We'll have to do further
investigation and see on that,
but that was always my sense of
isn't this already covered?
Isn't this already being done,
but I was looking at a pers at
it from a perspective of being
in Albuquerque and APS, um, and
hearing this from other parts of
the state. Um, so I, I, I
believe you're correct.
But I believe these families
don't feel that that is
sufficient enough.
And, and thank you, Senator, and
part of the reason I bring it up
is in a high school, for
instance, where the student may
have 6 or 7. This requires 2 to
be trained. Seems like there
ought to be 6 or 7 that at least
have a basic level of training.
And so I think 504 would
supersede anything that this is
doing and students that have
that level of seizure
difficulties.
My understanding and experience,
they almost certainly would be
on a 504 with a school nurse
monitoring and making sure that
everyone that's doing is.
Alone with, I mean, meaning the
adult in the room would have
basic training of what to do,
who to call in order to manage
all of that, this seems like it
is not needed, at least from my
experience working in New
Mexico, and I believe, you know,
even our rural districts.
Have access to a school nurse
who's helped set up those 504
plans and make sure that
everybody who is
Impacted by the student need has
the training that they need. So
I'm, I'm going to oppose it
because I think it's not needed
in at least in practices, how we
do it and I don't want to overly
mandate to our districts.
Something that is a maybe when
it seems like the 504s are
working and have more power of
law than this bill would.
Thank you.
If I could comment on that,
yeah, I, I, I think you're
correct, but I, I think it's
kind of what was stated here in
the committee room. You have
some districts that might have
One school nurse for the whole
district, you're not at the
schools and I think maybe
there's some shortfalls and um I
understand your concerns and,
and what's there and even folks
on it being an unfended unfunded
mandate, um, and so regardless
of what happens in the
committee, I think this is
something that I continue to
work on with advocates and see
what we can even do from a 504
plan or or what can happen, but
I think the key is, is that
we're given the resources to um
schools around the state that
are not like.
I said in Albuquerque, um, I
haven't heard about this issue,
and we just, I, I really want to
follow up to make sure that
really all of our students are
Be taken care of. So I
appreciate your comments.
Thank you. Other questions, if
not the pleasure of the
committee.
Oh, we have a Du pass motion
from Hickey and seconded by
Nava. I apologize.
So, uh, you'll call the roll
please.
No.
Yes
Yes.
No
So Senator Bill did not pass
through this committee, uh, but
thank you. I think it was a good
discussion and reminder that the
process of 504 is to, to handle
these uh very acute or specific
types of, of issues within
districts and remind districts
that they need to do that. We
have a couple of people who had
Senator Zel wanted to explain
your vote.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much.
Uh, I do, I'm in agreements on
504 plan does cover and one
other thing I do feel that it's
an unfunded mandate.
And for those reasons, I did
have to vote no on this bill.
Thank you very much for bringing
it forward though.
Thank you, Senator. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Thank you committee
members.
And I see we have uh Senator
Padilla back in the room, so.
Thank you for being able to come
back.
Thank you Mr. Chairman and
vice chairman and ranking
member. I was stuck like a
Luck and finance and I just
could not leave, so I appreciate
you doing this,
um.
I am here today, Mr. Chairman
and members of the committee
with Senate Bill 125. I also
have expert Dr. Ellen Bernstein
of the Albuquerque.
Teachers Federation, excuse me,
running in circles and around
buildings, Mr. Chairman, but
essentially what Senate Bill 12
and we do have an amendment uh
that you were presented with
earlier a couple of days ago,
Mr. Chairman, and I, uh, but
would you like me to introduce
the bill and then go to the
amendment or how would you like
to do this?
Senator, it's up to you. I
appreciate that. I'll just give
you a high level on what the
bill does, but um I think we all
know that summer temperatures in
New Mexico are hitting all-time
highs repeatedly and then they
get even higher than that the
next year, um, essentially
global warming is is negatively
impacting our classrooms in a
really big way. There is a lot
of research, uh, Mr. Chairman
and Mr. Vice Chairman and
ranking member and members of
the committee that uh this
negatively impacts student
learning and student outcomes.
I, I can go through all 9 of the
reasons why this.
is important, a reduced
concentration and focus,
decreased cognitive function,
fatigue, and drowsiness,
increased irritability,
physical, physical discomfort,
reduced motivation, lower
attendance, lower information
processing, stressing anxiety,
not just for the students but
also for the professional
teachers that are in these
classrooms.
And others in and out of them.
We have approximately 70% of
classrooms in New Mexico are
still on swamp cooling, and I
think we all know that that just
doesn't quite cut it here in New
Mexico anymore. And so we're
coming before you today with
this measure to uh uh keep our
schools, our, our schools
school. There was a real cool
name that we had for this. I
just don't remember what it was,
Mr. Chairman. Cool our schools,
excuse me. And so essentially
the legislation removes some of
the barriers to ensuring that
these projects get considered
appropriately when the
SCOC takes a look at the dollars
that are available for these and
grants these. The amendment
actually had to clean up the
bill because we, we did find
that we um we inadvertently, uh,
it didn't quite accomplish what
we want to do. We got some
really great feedback from the
FIR. We did strike the
appropriation as well because
there is a fund that is
available for this kind of work
through, through the uh uh
PSCOC, but, but I think the
biggest thing that that we
accomplish with the amendment.
Is um it's just it, it removes
the, the matching barrier that
constantly knocks these projects
down in the list and it puts
them on equal footing, equal
playing field with, with the
other larger projects that may
exist in these districts. And uh
I know you're in a hurry, Mr.
Chairman, so I'm gonna ask my
witness just to answer when,
when we have some uh some
questions that are technical,
but you do have an amendment
that's essentially what the bill
and the amendment does.
OK, uh, would you like us to
move the amendment so we're,
we're talking about that final
vote would be.
Yes, sir.
I'll move the amendment of.
Wait 2
30546.1, the amendment for
discussion of anything specific
on the amendment or well I did
mention that in my introduction,
Mr. Chairman, but um,
essentially the amendment uh
ensures that that that that um
matching requirement is, is, is
removed and then also does
strike the uh the appropriation
because it's no longer necessary
because it puts it on the same
playing field with other PSCOC
awards. are discussion on the
amendment.
Those in the audience in support
of the amendment.
Well so you probably haven't
seen the amendment.
Or some might
Um, anyone in opposition to the
amendment?
Anybody who'd like to speak in
support of the amendment?
Nobody jumping up, uh, we're to
the committee.
when discussion on the
amendment.
no discussion on the amendment.
Can I have a motion?
To approve the amendment.
So moved by Senator Hickey,
seconded by Senator Figueroa. Is
there opposition to the
amendment.
Seeing no opposition.
You have, you have an amended
bill.
Thank you, Chair and members.
OK, back onto the, the main
bill, those in support.
Out in the audience.
Anyone like to come up and, and
speak for up to 2 minutes,
please.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee, Gabe
Hawkins, deputy superintendent
and chief operating officer for
Albuquerque Public Schools. And,
um,
Sorry, this is acting funky
here. Um, I would just like to
say this would be awesome as, as
Senator Padilla mentioned and uh
Doctor Bernstein really
classroom environments are
imperative for our students to
uh be successful in reaching
both their literacy and numeracy
goals, but also that
comfortability piece.
Albuquerque Public Schools, 70%
of our roughly around 25,000
cooling units are evaporative
coolers and with the extreme
heat and, um, you know, you had
any humidity to that, it has
been quite challenging.
For us to do as far as
maintenance and upkeep, we've
been able to upkeep those and,
and, uh, maintain and keep our
evaporative coolers up to par,
but even the maintenance that
we're having to provide for
those is very labor intensive
and very costly. So we want to
begin moving in that direction,
um, continue moving in that
direction and hopefully sooner
than later transition that with
our hotter summer that we're
seeing. So we absolutely,
Albuquerque Public Schools
supports this. Thank you.
Thank you.
Next please, if we do are trying
to get to the floor in a
reasonable amount of time, so
please keep comments short.
Thank you, Joe. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman, members of the
committee, I come to you on this
one with 2 hats on one as
executive director of the New
Mexico School Boards Association
and also as chair of the public
school Capital Outlay Council.
So, uh, uh, we have seen many
requests for HVAC uh projects
throughout our, uh, uh, our
meetings, uh, the need is great
out there, uh, and we have seen.
Legislation come to us.
Uh, that sets a side bunny with
limited match so as my other hat
now, uh, I do support, uh, a, a
special appropriation or a set
aside with limited uh matching
requirements for this project
throughout the state. It's very
much needed.
Thank you, Joe.
Yes, please. Good morning, Mr.
Chairman, members of the
committee. My name is Melissa
Bernardin. I'm here representing
the Sierra Clu Rio Grande
chapter and our 35,000 members
and supporters. Thank you to the
sponsor for bringing this
important legislation. Our
school infrastructure is in need
of upgrades.
Excuse me, with modern HVAC
paired with solar panels. We can
improve the indoor air quality
of the school while at the same
time, helping to respond to the
climate crisis that is making
our school environment so much
hotter. The bill would for the
first time allow this sort of
capital outlay to support solar
panels on schools, saving our
institutions money on their
electric bills. Thank you.
Thank you. Yes, sir. Thank you,
Mr. Chair, members of committee,
John Liputes with the New Mexico
Federation of Labor AFL-CIO
representing over 40,000 workers
throughout the state. Just
wanted to quickly say that we
stand in strong solidarity with
our educators and believe that
not only our educators but all
students deserve a safe and cool
uh environment to learn in. So
thank you very much.
We to questions from the
committee.
Dinner is out.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much for this opportunity to.
still something that is very
important pertaining to this
bill.
3 years ago, whenever I was in
the house serving on the House
Education Committee.
I was notified of a problem that
was taking place in.
The Dexter Independent School
District.
Relatively new school. It's
beautiful building and
everything. It was the
elementary school there and I
see several of my friends out
there in the audience that
remember what I'm fixing to tell
you all about.
There was a problem with the
HVAC system on this particular
school. What was happening was.
Something was going wrong with
the unit.
In the middle of
Right before Christmas break
from.
I believe it was Thanksgiving
on.
The temperatures inside that
school rose to over 90 degrees.
It would set off the alarm
system, the fire system. Kids
would have to evacuate the
building.
They would have to check, make
sure, call the fire department
in, everything seemed to be OK.
They put the kids back in.
This went on for, I don't know
how long whenever it was brought
to the attention of the parents
during Christmas break.
They said we have to have
something done because of the
mandates that are put on our
public buildings.
There was a company I'm not
going to name names out of one
of the major metropolitan areas
of our state, and y'all can make
your own deductions there.
They, they kept coming down to
check what was going on, they
got so frustrated with it after
numerous trips down there.
They disabled the alarm system.
Parents found out about it they
threw a fit about it and I would
have too if I would have had a
child in that school.
Whenever it was all said and
done.
PED and whoever they worked
with.
Determined that that school now
be demolished.
These children are not allowed
to go back to school there
whenever this did happen after
the school, after the winter
break and all this went on.
These children, all the
elementary kids that go to
school in Dexter.
They found last rooms in the
high school and the middle
school that are probably the
size of one of the interior
offices there and that's how
these children are being taught.
As it stands right now, here's
the structure set down in
Dexter. That is not inhabited in
any way, shape or form.
And now that expense is to build
another school closer to the
high school and the junior high
school.
To me, that's appalling.
I don't know
Why if this bill would have been
in place, would that have, Mr.
Chairman and Senator Padilla.
Would that have uh alleviated
the problem that we are now
faced with in that particular
school district and Mr. Chairman
and Senator, I, I do recall when
that happened. I remember
reading some media and seeing
some of it, and I would have to
say that yes, this would have
been very helpful in that
situation, not knowing, not
being a structural engineer. I'm
not quite sure what the other
secondary tertiary issues were,
were the reason for calling that
it be demolished, but uh, but
where the HVAC issue were
concerned, I'm guessing they
could have easily and much
quicker.
Had this been in place, been
able to act on that.
What concept.
Mr. Chairman, Senator Padilla,
whenever we whenever we have
constraints on us down there in
the southeastern part of the
state trying to get somebody to
come in, make the necessary
pairs for the safety and
well-being of our students as
well as the teacher, the staff.
Uh, cafeteria workers,
janitorial, the whole gamut of
it, it's very frustrating for me
to see that we have to call in
people from out of state to take
care of these problems.
Therein lies the concern I have
with this. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Chair and Senator
Rio.
Thank you, Senator. Other
questions?
Senator Thornton.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, Senator, I have a question I
have is with regards to um
actually, I was glad to see that
you took out the appropriations
because of the fact that the FIR
stated that there was a $1.6
billion dollar fund now. I
appreciate the fact that I'm
assuming you're gonna be tapping
into that fund as opposed to
requesting an additional 10
million. Is that correct? Mr.
Chairman and Senator Thornton,
you, you are correct, um, not
the entire $1.6 billion but the,
the reinvestment, the spin-off,
you know, all of that will now
be
these projects will be on the
even playing field with all the
other PSCOC projects that are
submitted and that's why it'll
happen a little faster, and
that's why I use that term.
So Mr. Chair, we'll, we'll, the
same evaluation process be done
in terms of identifying the
schools that have the need or
are these schools are
Independent of the current
system that's already in place.
Senator Thornton, yes, they,
they are already it's it's a
defined process. There were some
things that we had to clean up
here that pushed those projects
further down and so the 27
projects that were done last
year or approved last year, only
10 of them were for HVAC
purposes and and and we know
that 70% of the classrooms in
this is gonna move these
projects a lot,
and Senator Padilla, uh, one
last question with regards to
the 40%
the cost
How did you come up with that
number in terms of cost share
for the distribution systems.
Mr. Chairman and and Senator
Thornton, you know, I really
wish I could tell you, I don't
know. I'm not, but I do know
that that that is a standard um
percentage for these projects,
um.
across the many years that
they've done them, but I I I
couldn't say I know exactly why
that is.
Thank you, all my questions.
Thank you, Senator. Other
questions, then Figaro.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator, um, my question, and
you may have answered it, and I
apologize. I had to step out.
Um, is how this kind of
bifurcated process is gonna work
now.
How are they going to analyze
and prioritize.
All the projects and then the.
Uh, thank you Chair and Senator
Figueroa. So I'm not quite sure.
Did you hear the discussion on
the amendment?
I did, and I'm looking at it and
I didn't find my answer there,
so if I missed it, tell me
again.
Thank you, Chair and Senator.
What winds up happening is now
these are all in the same
playing field. So there's not a
bifurcated approach anymore.
That's what the legislation
actually does. It removes that,
that um that pushing down of
HVAC projects and planes by
removing the matching component,
it places them on an even
playing field or even playing
with the rest of the Thank you
Mr. Chair.
Thank you.
Hold on a second, Senator, let
me ask a couple of questions and
then if you've got like one
quick one, we can go back.
The senator is, as I look at
this and let me find where my
notes are. I was looking forward
on a another one of the bills
for just a moment.
Um
I'm 25, OK. Um
Page 2.
Line 25 and then on to line 23,
that section, that new section
down there.
The council shall review an
application public hearing and
subject to availability of
funds, it sounds like there's a
billion dollars in there, so
that's not a problem as far as
availability funds.
Approve
It doesn't sound like they
cannot approve. And so every
application it gets through will
be approved. That's what it
says.
Well, it also says on the page 3
in accordance with the
priorities adopted by the
council. So the priorities would
be whatever the council at that
period deems a priority.
So that doesn't mean they're all
going to get prioritized or
they're all going to get
approved.
Well, it, it does, it just may
be what order they get in, but
it says they're all going to be
approved. Could the council do
this currently without this law?
We don't believe so, and that's
why we're here.
I, I might ask Joe.
Do you currently do this? Why is
this law needed?
You have to move up to it, you
have to get on a microphone
because you're
currently we have two pots of
funding for the money that's
available to the council. One is
for overall renovation and new
construction of uh of uh school
buildings. The other part we
have is called our systems
projects where districts can
come in and apply for particular
systems.
Uh, roofing systems, uh, safety
systems, those kinds of things.
As I mentioned earlier, the
legislature has from time to
time.
Uh, taking money from the from
the fund and set it aside and
directed that appropriation to
the uh.
To the council for uh this uh
distribution.
So those are the, so it can be
done.
Not to the extent that I think
the senator is is wanting to me
it seems like you would like a
set aside of some kind so that
these could take priority
amongst themselves.
On the uh systems projects we
take the top 300 buildings in
the state, the worst and worst
condition and uh on the regular,
uh, new buildings and
renovation, we only take the top
100. So I hope that explains a
little bit our process and maybe
we could would uh fit the system
a little bit better.
Thank you, Joe, and you know,
stay nearby cause I, I may have
questions because I know you
deal with us on a fairly regular
basis, uh, doesn't HVAC fall
under the systems and when we're
talking about extreme heat,
doesn't that fall under health
and safety type of things. Why
can the funds not be used now to
do all of these projects if in
fact they are, and is there a
limit? that you said there are
two spots. Is there a limit to
the system's pot.
Generally there is, but.
Again
When we've taken systems,
special systems like this, the
legislature has determined that.
Couple of years ago, roofs were
in safety.
Uh, entrances and.
Fencing and those kinds of uh.
Priority
So, uh, in those cases, they've
indicated that there would be
no.
No match for those, so uh I
think that uh your question is
yes, they could come right now
with that.
But it would require a match.
And that's why, chair, I called
out the word on top of line page
3 priorities of the council, the
council's priorities, as you
heard, were roofs several years
ago. At other times they were
fences.
We want to make sure that now
HVAC is considered.
with all of those priorities.
OK, I guess I'm wondering if
everything's a priority, which
is the highest priority? How do
we determine that? Is this now a
highest priority above fencing
and other things, and if this is
already things that the council
can do, can't they change the
priorities? Do we have to have a
lot to say?
Which is the highest priority
for them.
And, and kind of then begs the
question if, you know, we've got
100s and hundreds of schools.
Do they all become a priority?
Is there enough money in the
fund if every one of them wants
to move to refrigerated air as
opposed to
um
Evaporative I'm
how do we manage all of that
because this essentially says
they're all going to get funded
if there's money in the fund.
Based on the priorities of the
council.
At the time, but I'll ask Doctor
Bernstein too.
Senator Souls, members of the
committee.
Um, my answer to your question
would be where prioritizing it
for two reasons.
The first reason is it's just so
much hotter than it ever was.
I taught in the Albuquerque
Public schools since 1982.
Um, my classroom had swamp
coolers. I didn't suffer the way
the kids and the teachers are
suffering because it is so much
hotter and swamp coolers are
inadequate.
But also because the second
reason is
The
Clear impact on student
learning. All of us every year
talk about the most important
things we could do to impact
student learning in a positive
way, and the research is clear,
and I'm happy to send it to you,
um, if you would like, but the
impact on student learning is
significant.
There was a national study done
by the National Bureau of
Economic Research called What
Works and for whom effectiveness
and efficiency in school capital
investments and what they found
was that old HVAC systems in
schools does more than expel
warm air according to a study in
2024 that analyzed data from
over 10,000 districts in.
29 different states spending on
school infrastructure can lead
to dramatic increases in
academic achievement, especially
for low-income students, and so
I think the priority on this
particular thing at this
particular moment as those two
reasons behind it.
Thank you, and I don't disagree
with any of that.
But my question really is,
doesn't the council already have
the ability to prioritize, for
instance, in the hottest parts
of the state.
That HVAC, new HVAC systems are
a higher priority, but under
systems we've also got roofs.
We've got other things and for
some schools having a roof
that's not leaking, maybe a
higher priority than
Putting in an HVAC system, I
think that's why we've got a
council with people on there to
make those judgments as to which
ones are the most important one.
I get back to, I don't
understand why we have to tell
them what the highest priority
is, they know those sorts of
things.
Why do we, why do we have to
have a lot to do so? That's,
that's what doesn't make sense
to me. You know, I understand
the importance of a learning
environment. I understand all of
that. That's not the question.
Doesn't the council already have
the ability.
To make the priorities for doing
HVAC systems under current law.
Um
Chairman of
Yes, we can accept applications
from any entity at any time.
For these types of projects.
Uh, it's just a matter of the,
the district determining that
that's a priority they want to
bring forward.
So I get back to why do we need
a law to say we really, really
mean it.
Um. Again,
Uh, just past practice we've
seen the legislature set aside
money from this big fund as
well.
But didn't we take the 10
million extra money out of it.
There's already money sitting in
the fund that seems to be
adequate to do this.
I, I'm still not hearing answers
as to why we have to pass
something else in order to get
this done when it seems like
it's already under the purview
of everything that the council
has everything they need in
order to make these
determinations as to what the
highest priorities are.
You know, in the hottest parts
of the state where needed.
Yeah
You know, and compared to other
systems like, you know, a roof
that's falling in or something.
One difference, Mr. Chairman, is
that, uh.
They all compete against each
other. If there's not a set
aside at that first come, first.
Served till then
Uh, they would compete these
these HVAC projects would
compete with roofs with new
buildings with a water systems,
sewer systems, those kinds of
things, so it wouldn't be a set
aside.
Specifically for that to address
that need.
Thank you,
Joe, I guess I get back to,
please show me in here where's
the set aside out of the council
for those monies cause I don't
think that's in here. It's,
there's a big pot of money for
systems.
to do this. I don't see a set
aside. So we, we, we definitely
um might have overstepped with
this amendment.
So we, uh, when we struck uh
item number 3 on the amendment,
uh, page 5 lines 13 through 19,
um, if the committee would,
would, uh, well, so we're
calling this um building system
innovation projects.
Essentially, that's what the,
the title of the yeah, the, the
legislation is there in the
title, um.
If the committee would would uh.
Permit us, we would like to put
that back in because there is
the $10 million set aside right
there.
For for building system
innovation project fund to that
for this project, which, which
that's why we went over the
whole reason why it's important
with the learning loss and all
that.
OK.
Is 10. Well, then my questions
would change in that is 10
million sufficient for the
number of districts and schools
that are going to need um
upgrades to the HVAC systems and
things. I think that's probably
inadequate.
Uh, and there's lots of money in
the the system to do that. I, I
kinda, I don't understand the
need. It just seems like there's
money there, there's a council
with expertise. They can
prioritize these things, that
can push the money out.
I
You know, maybe I'm, I'm beating
the dead horse and but.
and on line 16, we also have it
in and subsequent years. So it's
not just $10 million it would be
$10 million if this council
would have, um, every year to
prioritize projects of this
nature or building system
innovation.
Probably wouldn't get them all
done in one year. Right now, if
you were to fund
Uh, the projects, yeah, we we'd
love to come in here and let's,
let's drop a half a billion
dollars and fix every school all
at one time, but we just know
that that's not possible from a
labor standpoint or whatever.
So, but if we were to to make
this available, you're looking
still at 8 to 10 to 12 years to
get all the schools completely
updated.
So that if, if the committee
would permit, we, we would ask
that someone on the committee,
um,
Strike
The amendment that we just did,
just, just item number 3 on that
amendment.
I'm trying to hang on to get
this thing done for my advocates
here, Mr. Chair and Senator,
please understand, yeah, I don't
think the.
The problem is the money. Uh,
right now, at least, you know,
the
The fund is pretty flush with
money, uh, certainly it's the
prioritizing.
You know, this and whether
there's the capacity to do all
of that. I'm not saying that
it's not a good thing that we
ought to be doing it. I just
don't understand why we need a
law to, to do what we've already
got a council that's there
prepared already prioritizes
projects. There's money in it to
do all of that. I don't
understand the need, when we've
already got everything in place
to make things happen.
Um, other than to say we really
want you to do uh HVAC first and
be, you know, move that up on
the list, but it's still up to
that committee as to what's the
most important project.
Oh
Doctor Burns, oh sorry.
Mr. Chair, I'm just trying to
get some clarification because I
think you raised some points
here. And so I'm trying to
understand what's the difference
between this bill and the
existing system in place, and it
seems to me that
You're asking for electrical
systems to be photovoltaic
technology, which is not
included in the original bill.
Is that correct?
In the original or is that or
have you eliminated the
photovoltaic distribution system
from your
required senator we're we're
calling this for these purposes,
building innovation projects.
Um, but Doctor Bernstein, if you
want.
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator, one of
the reasons we were inspired to
ask the senator to help us with
this is because there are
matching funds right now in the
inflation reduction Act, so if
school districts can, um, not
have to match to do HVAC.
They can also get matching funds
from the federal government to
make that modernization solar
and thus reducing the cost and
the climate footprint on the
modernization projects. So
school districts could do a lot
more.
To provide upgrades in HVAC and
with solar because of this
moment.
OK, and that's, I guess I'm
trying to understand the
difference there and and if
that's I'm beating a dead horse.
I still haven't heard anything
that sounds like something the
council can already do that it's
not lacking for money that we've
got people there that already
are prioritizing what are the
most important things they could
prioritize all of these. I just
don't understand why there's a
need, but I'll, I'll drop it at
that because we're just going
round and round.
Good.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator, I've got, I've got a
quick question and then and then
a comment or it might turn into
another question but so it is a
mandate.
That this has to be solar.
Uh, no, Mr. Chairman, it's not
so, so it does.
OK, well my comment following
that.
That's simply an option, an
option, OK, well, my comment,
I'll just go ahead and throw it
out was one analysis I read was
that the the schools in the
United States on average.
Uh
Or 42 years old.
And I, I would just.
Thinking about and wondering
how.
feasible is it gonna be to.
Go back and retrofit and tie a
modern.
Pretty costly, vulnerable.
Solar system too.
Who a building that's 42 years
old, you know, and where we're
gonna be on in 40 more years or
even 20 more years, so that was,
that was my comment thank you
chair and thank you senator and
I think you're right. I mean,
all of that does need to be
considered but that's why we're
calling it the building
innovation projects that that
would all of that would come
into it, but it wouldn't have to
be photovoltaic. It could be the
school is, uh, you know, the
cost to benefit ratio to do it
here is not going to be take,
it'll be something else.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator.
OK, will of the committee.
Have a motion to table and
seconded by Senator Zell.
If you'll call the roll, please.
No.
No,
So
Yes.
54
that
The bill is tabled I.
You know, I think I made it
clear as to why it's not that I
disagree with the systems with
anything.
Um.
Thank you. Thank you, Senator.
The
The only thing we still have on
the list, I believe is senator
Stewart's Bill. Uh, I'm happy to
go down and put that on. It,
it's a fairly simple bill, you
know, if there's any long
discussion or anything, we can
wait until she's here, but if
you, if the committee kind of
nods their head, they'll go sit
there and.
And act as the, the person for
it if that's all right with the
committee.
And let me make sure I take down
there.
238
All right, for those in the room
and those online, we are now
going to.
Senate Bill 238 and it will be
presented.
by Senator Soles for
Adam prote Stewart, Senator Soz.
Thank you, uh, Senate Bill 238
is $1,450,000 for appropriation
of the youth behavioral health
prevention Project, please don't
ask me tough questions.
Thank you, Senator. Do we have
any supporters on Senate Bill
238 in the room.
If you could start making your
way up front for comments. Do we
have any opposition in the room?
If we could get a few comments,
you have 2 minutes.
Uh, good morning. Almost
afternoon, uh, Mr. Vice Chair,
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee. I will talk fast. My
name is Rachel. I go by Rach and
I'm here today in personal
capacity as a resident and
voting constituent of Bernelio
County. Um, most importantly,
I'm a mother to two young
children, one of which first
attempted to take their own
life?
By self strangulation at just
the age of 5 years and 1 month
old.
At the time of the attempt,
which was last March, um, my
child was in New Mexico, um, E
ECD pre-K program.
In a public school district here
in New Mexico.
Uh, this school year they
continue to verbalize suicide
suicidal ideation, excuse me, on
a month to bimonthly basis.
We're still in public school and
unable to receive critical
services that are urgently
needed to keep my child alive.
Such as counseling by a licensed
psychologists, social worker,
other professional.
To support their mental and
emotional well-being and prevent
disruptive and dangerous
behaviors which can not only
result in harm to themselves in
the school setting, or to other
children in the same classroom.
Despite meeting our eligibility
criteria for special education
under IDEA, um, for other health
impairment as well as gifted,
we've not been able to receive
these necessary supports to
mitigate my child's social and
emotional distress which
precipitates the observed
behaviors in the school setting
and at home.
According to the CDC, uh,
suicide is a leading cause of
death, as you likely know for
children and youth in the United
States, as well as in New Mexico
specifically.
The American Academy of
Pediatrics and American
Foundation for Suicide
Prevention's blueprint for youth
suicide prevention recommends
universal suicide prevention
that is prevention,
intervention, and postvention,
which includes critical supports
that I'm referencing that
include follow-ups.
children and youth as well as
survivors of suicide attempt.
Thank you. I cry a lot.
Um, for children and youth of
all ages, and that's my argument
here today.
As a mom to a very young
survivor of suicide attempt, I'm
thankful for the introduction of
this bill and fully support it.
Yeah, I do not feel that it goes
far enough.
Not all children are able to
engage in the proposed virtual
supports, um, the telehealth
proposed. Thank you. And for
some children who have critical
and urgent need for in-person
professional support. I urge you
to vote in favor of this bill,
which with amendments to
explicitly include some of the
factors that had emailed to some
of you, um, to provide crucial
sport for support for children
and youth in all ages in every
New Mexico school and pre-K
program. Thank you for your time
and consideration. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, thank you. Stan
Ros for the school
superintendents, coalition of
Educational leaders, we stand in
support of this bill. Uh, this
probably is not enough money.
Something we need to move into
our system.
It's a critical issue that's
being faced in every district.
We have one, intervention that
we have that's working well on
about 12 of our districts, which
is the Cook Center.
And um this would enable those
kinds of issues leading to, as
you heard in the last case, the
next step is the then the, the
physical intervention face to
face, it helps vet that out and
gets people pushed also supports
parents in understanding how
they can handle those stressors
that are happening. So, Mr.
Chairman, we stand in support of
this and hopefully we'll move
this forward. Thank you.
Thank you.
Uh, Edward Webster, NEA, uh, New
Mexico, uh government relations
director, uh, we stand in
support of SB 238, um, mental
health issues for students as we
know through research has really
significant impacts on academic
outcomes, and so any resources,
any tools that can be added to
assist teachers, counselors,
educational assistance, we
welcome. So we strongly
encourage you to support SB 238.
Thank you.
Thank you. And online we have
Duval Westfall.
Support
Thank you again, Mr. Chairman
and committee. Deval Westall
with the greater Albuquerque
Chamber, chamber, and here to
support another smart bill this
morning uh regarding our state
students. According to the state
Department of Health are suicide
rate is the 4th highest in the
nation, and the causes are
individual, but there are common
characteristics that include
alcohol and substance abuse,
mental illness, trauma, abuse,
family health history, easy
access to lethal means and the
stigma or sense
isolation that's associated with
asking for help. SB 238 tackles
this head-on.
It appropriates funding to TED
to establish a digital platform
that provides our students with
online behavioral health
education resources,
pre-moderated peer to peer
support services and online
private sessions with state
licensed behavioral health
professionals. The CDC has
established that student mental
health is a key contributor to a
student's academic success, and
research has found that mental
health conditions like anxiety
and depression are linked to
reduced academic performance.
Students struggling with their
mental health are more likely to
contemplate or engage in suicide
or self-harm. Experience
disciplinary issues, could be
chronically absent. SB 238 is
gonna help ensure our students
have access to the mental health
support they need to succeed,
both academically and in life,
and we commend the sponsor for
bringing this bill forward, and
we urge your support. Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, there's no
opposition, so we'll go ahead
and take any questions or
comments from the committee.
Anyone want to be on the list?
Senator his own
Chairman, thank you very much,
Mr. Chairman.
In regard to Senate Bill 238.
I guess my question would go
back to PED over this.
I am so sorry for the problems
you went through. I really.
And it's very disturbing to me
to to realize that we have that
many students throughout our
state that are need to need of
services. I'm not. But in case.
Something really, really,
really, really bad happens to
one of these students is.
PED or that local school.
board
Would they be liable?
Under this particular bill with
the funding that goes through
there with the.
If there is a call in from a
student in in a crisis
situation. Senator, I'll allow
you to answer, but Mr. Frostick
and I was just gonna say, Mr.
Chair and, and the senator.
I'm not a lawyer. My initials
are BS, so I could make things
up, but I don't believe they
would be.
sir, we have enough of that
anyway going on, so no.
Mr. Cha and Senator, uh, I mean,
I don't, I don't believe that
there's anything in this bill
that would change who would be
responsible in in a situation
like this where um a student
were to um
To self-harm.
Yeah, this is another uh this
bill as, as I read and
understand the bill, it proposes
additional resources available
and would not change
responsibility. OK.
Mr. Chairman and Mr. Chairman,
Mr. Frosted, can you tell me why
it's such a specific amount,
$1,450,000. That is very
specific.
I would like an explanation on
that. Can anybody answer that
question for me?
I don't see anybody here that's.
They're all going like this. So,
Mr. Chairman, it's kind of.
To me, whenever there is a
specific amount such as this
right there seems very odd that.
set up for something.
Mr. Chair and and Senator, I, I
often have those same concerns.
I do not know.
Yep.
And Mr. Chairman, uh, let's see,
where is it?
I'm also reading here under the
administrative implications, uh,
that PED would if if there is
states, if a sole source
procurement is necessary, the
department will need to further
demonstrate the need for so so
sourcing the services in
addition to process, and it says
that this this particular bill,
which is Senate bill 238.
It also relates to House Bill
58.
And that bill funds an
organization to train school
staff, students and community
members and culturally
appropriate suicide prevention
and trauma-informed care and
mental health rooms.
So I I understand the need for
this. There are students out
there that.
Through their short lifetime,
they have.
seen many changes, especially
with the pandemic that we had.
Um
The need is out there, but.
I, I'm concerned.
With a specifics there.
And it sounds like if this is
related to the House bill over
there, that one's going a little
bit further than what we're
trying to get done in this, so
there are concerns there, um.
I guess that's about all I have
on this.
But whenever I'm reading that
uh.
The New Mexico crisis access
line.
The calls that they have
received just through.
2024 staggering.
It really
12,000 calls.
That is very concerning.
Parents sit up and take a look
at your kids if they're in a
crisis, do something active.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Senator. Any other?
Senator.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, uh, Mr.
Chair, I just, it, it seems that
this $1.45 million is going
primarily for a platform. It
sounds like a a a software
platform that that.
Codes, behavioral education
resources. It says pre-moderated
peer to peer support services.
And even online private
sessions, so.
I'm assuming this is gonna be
available to every school.
In the state
And anyone can access it, so.
Sounds like a fairly cheap price
for that amount of money for
that kind of access.
Um, but it's a recurring expense
and it will recur every year.
I am concerned about the
specificity of the
Of their request and that this
may already be targeted for a
particular vendor. And so,
Um, without further information,
I, I feel concerned about.
About supporting something like
this, given, given the fact that
it, it sounds like it's isolated
toward a particular individual.
Um, other than that, I think,
obviously, it's a need that the
state has, and I too am I
shocked by the number of calls
that people are uh are.
The need that's out there. It's
obvious, so.
That's all I have. Yeah, thank
you very much.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Hickey.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair and
thank you, Senator for bringing
this bill forward. um, you know,
I'm gonna be at.
Greatly in support of this, it's
a huge issue. Uh, does this go
to what committee does this go
to next? Would it be finance?
because it's an appropriation,
it would be going to finance. I
do not believe it's currently in
the budget, so this would be an
add-on or an addition.
Oh,
I, I would advocate for more
money. It's gonna take more
money than than what's here that
um
But, uh, knowing that it's an
add-on in finance, I probably
wouldn't try it this year.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator. Um,
You know, I, I think I echo a
lot of the sentiments from folks
about we also.
achieve what we want.
Ivan
Um
I'm gonna do something that's
not normally done, and you could
talk to me later from.
We're doing this, um, but I, I
would like to have um.
Young lady that did the public
comment. It come up I would.
I like to ask
Um
What this means.
What we're trying to do here on
this.
If that is OK. And if you could
introduce yourself again.
Uh, hi, thank you, um, senator,
I am Rach Rachel, um, I don't
know that I could speak to the
funding specifically as that's
not, um, my area of expertise,
but I think more support is
certainly needed, um, not only
for all of the schools and in
rural communities and throughout
New Mexico, but.
You know, my school that my kid
attends um in in Bernao County,
uh, in terms of the support that
we've received, it's um, and ah,
you know, for full disclosure,
we're very um health literate,
knowledgeable and privileged
family, we have insurance and we
have access to.
The best healthcare in the state
of New Mexico, but it even
required, you know, me calling
30 providers in the state and
looking at out of state options
that were, um, uh, you know,
self pay thousands of dollars
for evaluations and then the
challenge that we see um with
the special special education
department is that they don't,
um, necessarily view the
suicidality as a risk in the
educational setting. Um, and so
they only viewing the observed
behaviors, quote unquote under
idea.
Um, which is the federal law and
um so they tell me that, you
know, my child does really well
in school most days and then
when he comes home, it's like
some flip switches and all of a
sudden it's my problem to deal
with when he has a meltdown,
right, and of course the entire
school day is precipitating
that.
Um, so I think, you know, in
terms of the funding, of course,
there's a state procurement code
which would, you know, um,
provide guidance to the actual
procurement process. But I
agree, um, with Senator Hickey,
you know, this amount of funding
is not enough for kids in New
Mexico we have anywhere from,
you know, 12 to 20, uh, child
deaths in New Mexico per year
due to suicide. And if you look
at the quarterly mental health
surveillance reports, we have
more children in New Mexico
presenting to the emergency
departments.
On a monthly and quarterly basis
as well, uh, 980 is also a
wonderful resource, and
unfortunately it was little to
no help in our experience. They
asked why I didn't take my child
to the hospital, um, my child's
not strong enough to kill
themselves by strangulation, um,
you know, their 5 year old
little hands can't do any harm,
so why would I take them to the
hospital in in retrospect, I
probably should have done it
just to get the documentation,
but again, uh, that's just more
money for me out of pocket and
more time and energy for me out
of pocket. Um, and then.
you know, 988 also recommended
that I um seek uh an inpatient
long term residential facility
for my child, who again is 5
years old and that itself would
be, you know, extremely
traumatic when again there was
no immediate, you know, lethal
risk, um, for their life.
Um, so I greatly support, you
know, all of the funding, uh,
that this legislature would
provide for suicide, um.
And just a distinction ah to
Senator's point, uh, prevention
is the um House Bill 58 that's
really looking at, um, training
up a school staff, um, to
identify the signs and work
proactively to prevent that
mental health crisis, right?
Intervention is providing those
um services such as mental
health rooms, and that's not
specific or explicit to suicide,
and then the postvention is
really um that teleservice, uh,
the counseling in schools and
and providing.
that kind of holistic wrap
around support for a child who
has experienced that crisis or
has attempted their life, thank
you.
I was just gonna move a new
pass.
All right. Do we have a second?
I, I will secondary. Is that OK?
You can call the roll.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes. Yes.
All right, Senator, you have a,
a due pass.
And I'll let you come back up.
Thank you. I think that
completes our work for today. I
appreciate the hard work of the
committee, uh, reminder people
watching online in the
committee, we have a late start
on Friday due to the school
board association would
encourage you to go over to the
El Dorado for that breakfast in
the morning, uh, your districts,
your uh superintendents, uh,
school boards all like to see
legislators there and talk about
the good work that we're doing
trying to make things better for
kids in New Mexico, um, with
that, we are.
adjourned.
Yes, ma'am.
That
Friday morning.
Yes.
Uh
Friday morning, yes.
