Um,
probably there'll be about 5 or
6 bills that day on Friday,
looking forward and I'll make
announcements on the Senate
floor for all of these also.
Friday morning, uh, 7:30 to
about 8:30 in here will be a, an
education, social gathering type
thing, uh, sponsored hosted by
the Three Education secretaries,
early childhood, K-12 and higher
ed secretaries, um, and we're
gonna encourage not just
education but any
legislators who want to come and
kind of hear from them, talk
with them, their priorities,
they'll be burritos and coffee
and such. Also with us that
morning will be um Jose Munoz,
who is the executive director of
Education Commission of the
state, uh, we'll be here that
Friday, uh, to meet people
during that time and then he
actually will be doing about a
15.
Uh, half hour
Uh, 15 minute half hour
presentation on the national
education landscape and where
things are and legislation going
on and what kinds of things to
expect, um, and then we'll hear
bills, um, let's start though
with some introductions, and I
see most of our regular players
are in the audience, as well as
the legislators, but if we can,
let's start with legislators,
uh, Senator Thornton, if you
would please, quick
introduction, background, where
you're from, why you're on
education, what you hope to see
and do.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, my
name is Aunt Thornton. I'm the,
uh, Bernao County, Torrance,
Santa Fe, and Sandoval, District
19, uh, senator, um, I'm a
retired aerospace engineer from
Sandia National Laboratories,
spent 27 years at San Die, um,
actually worked for Lockheed
Martin for
I left Sandia for about 7 years
to go work at Lockheed Martin at
the Skunkworks which is.
Uh, got involved in
And uh
Politics probably late in life,
and uh just after I retired from
Sania I decided I would get
involved in politics to to try
to move.
Uh, New Mexico forward also um.
The reason I'm in education is
because, well, my background, I,
I, my father's stress education
growing up. He was one of those
where, uh, when I was, he was
transferred, he was in the Air
Force for several years and we
went to Canada.
And in Canada, I was behind in
2nd grade and uh he encouraged
me, so my first report card I
got like.
C's and 1 B.
And he looked at me and I
thought I was gonna get scolded,
and he said, you can do better.
And he said, so I'll tell you
what, I'll give you a, a $1 for
every A you get from here on
out.
I ended up getting 72 A's that
year. This was, this was back in
'62, and uh and I love Tootsie
Pops and Tootsie Pops were 2
cents each, so I,
so I at the end of the year I
gave him my report card and he
ended up handing me 20 bucks.
And I was still happy with that.
And so, um, so basically I
recognize that uh that education
was very key and one of the
things I learned was the more I
learned, the more I earned.
Uh, and I sort of made that
connection in 2nd grade, and I
also recognized that I, I could
do it when, when the right
incentive was there and so the
key here is what can we do here
to incentivize the kids here in
New Mexico to do better.
Uh, I also wanted to announce
that I have a, uh, my district
aide here, Tracy, Tracy, uh,
Major. She is going to be
helping me throughout this
session and then throughout
whenever she's not even hired
right now, she's already
volunteering her time. I can't
hire her until April. So that
shows you how dedicated she is.
And with that,
Back to the chair. Senator
Boone.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. My name's
Pat Boone. I'm, I'm District 27
down Southeast New Mexico.
Uh, I get my mail at a little
town called Elita.
Um
Tallis County seat there. I have
parts of Curry, parts of Chavis,
parts of Lee and all of
Roosevelt and uh Dubaca
counties.
Uh, I'm a rancher lifelong
rancher 5 generations.
Um, I suppose the reason I'm, I
asked to be on this education
committee. I have a very
Deep interest in a very uh.
A big affection for education. I
served on a lot of school board
for a number of years, uh.
was chairman of that board
whenever we implemented the 4
day week back in '95 and um.
Just have a great interest in
it. I, I went to college for 4
years. I do not have a degree,
uh.
I look back on that, I regret
that not finishing it, but I, I
at the time I was, I was a young
cowboy that was wanting to do
other things. I was wanting to
get home to the ranch and get to
work and so I abandoned that. I
look back on it and I wish I
hadn't because both my parents
were.
Highly college educated both my
children are highly college
educated. My son has a master's
degree and he's a college
basketball coach and I just have
a great interest in in education
and for the furtherance of it
and for the betterment of
betterment of it, so that's why
I'm here.
Thank you, Senator. Welcome to
education. Senator Isel.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good
morning. I'm State state
senator, oh sorry, sorry, I
didn't say it didn't come all
the way out, Senator, I didn't
even have to be the one to do
it, to give it to yourself. I
did it myself 20 years in the
house, OK? and uh while I was on
the in the house, I was on the
education committee for a few
years, and I love that
committee.
Now I am lucky enough to be on
the Senate Education Committee.
And uh I am a product of.
Artesia Public school system. I
went to grade school at
Cottonwood Elementary School,
which is no longer there.
And I think uh the neat part
about that is I was, I was a
minority out there, OK?
That's whenever the bracero
program was in effect.
All these men that were working
for the local farmers, they, the
farmers were helping them get
their families across legally.
And whenever those young kids
started school, at Cottonwood at
Loco Hills at Hope and at a
token, those were the four rural
schools for Artesia.
Uh, we were lucky enough to have
Miss Valenzuela out of
Cottonwood.
And the first day of school, all
parents had to attend. Miss
Valenzuela told those parents of
the kids that were just fresh in
the United States.
From 6 years old to 16 years
old, you will learn in English.
Parents, if your kid comes home.
Speaking English, you'd need to
learn English yourself if you
want your child to succeed, you
need to learn how to speak
English and they will learn how
to speak English, and you
participate in everything your
child does here, folks, you look
back now at those kids that I
graduated with from Marticia
High School.
And they have all that's the key
parental involvement.
I, uh
I'm a strong proponent of local
control.
I am a strong proponent.
Of these rural schools for the
four-day a week learning.
And do you know what uh.
It's uh
Kids are good kids.
They need guidance.
We need to promote our teachers.
And folks
That's what I'm here to do.
Let's give it back to local
control because local control
knows more about their own
school than somebody sitting in
Santa Fe.
Thank you very much Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator.
Senator Ramos and as you are a
ranking member with this and
welcome back to Senate
Education, though you're
sitting on the other side. Yes,
sir. Thank you, thank you so
much. I appreciate that and uh I
am the senator for, I'm Gabriel
Ramos Center for District 28,
uh, home of copper egg and, and
cattle country. Um, I'm really
glad to be back. I served in
2019 and 2020. So I see a lot of
familiar faces out there, um,
you know, I'm really out for
equitable equitable funding for
our rural areas. We really need
to, uh, you know, get together
and figure things out of course
for the whole state of New
Mexico and the students.
It's, it's, it's all about
coming together.
Um
I've served 23 out of the last
26 years in some kind of
elective capacity and, and I'm,
I'm excited to be here again.
I've served as a county clerk, a
county commissioner, a school
board member for the Kobry
schools, the Hurley Town
Council, and, and the state
senate and uh again I'm I'm here
to utilize that experience to,
to, uh, to reach across and help
each other and do what's best
for the state of New Mexico and
its students.
Thank you so much. Looking
forward to it.
Thank you, Senator.
Center.
I
Welcome to the Senate.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Natalie
Figueroa, Senate District 18,
um, and like my colleague
senator is.
Um, I am coming over from the
house and happy to do it, having
spent some time on the House
Education Committee. I am in my
thirty-fourth year of teaching
high school students.
And
I am the daughter of two
educators, the granddaughter.
A grandmother who taught school
in a one room schoolhouse out on
the prairie.
So it's in the blood, so to
speak, although most of my time
in university, I studied
engineering.
I teach high school math and I
don't teach math any longer. I'm
licensed to teach math. I teach
high school Spanish.
Now, and it is
The most challenging and
satisfying work there is.
Um, I'm saying that, so if
anybody's out there listening.
Come and teach, be a teacher.
Recruitment, training and
support of teachers are um
probably my strongest focus.
Thanks, Mr.
Thank you, Senator. Senator
Hickey.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and uh,
Welcome everyone. I can say that
because uh
here for 4 years and I'm going
to build upon that. Uh, I, as
most of you know, I'm a
physician and my focus really is
on healthcare and you'll see
that in the legislation.
Although I've got a few, maybe
Controversial bills that are
going to be education based.
Yeah, so that should be most
interesting, Mr. Chair, I'm so
glad to hear you mention higher
education.
Um
The uh
You know, it's been kind of
floating out there by itself,
and only really overseen by a
department.
And I think it's time for the
legislature, really.
Way and then some of the things
that are happening.
And um and by higher education.
I also look at not just
colleges but degrees for
individual in trades and other
areas, uh, because that's where
a lot of the future of New
Mexico plays, and I hope that
we'll be looking at that
supporting.
Trades there is so much to be
built here and there are so few
people to do it.
So few trainers uh or people who
aren't going to leave the field
to come in and take a job that
has the price and
Or I mean have the conversation.
So I, when I say higher
education, it's really kind of a
cross.
area. So very thrilled that
we'll be looking at that.
And uh I look forward to the new
members and their experiences
and point of views in the
committee, and I think it will
be a very rich environment going
forward and, and the one area
where I will cross with
healthcare, and this has a
Equity and education is being
sure that we have health
benefits for our teachers.
Um see you.
So that they are not second
class citizens and health
benefits, which they absolutely
are today.
look forward to maybe in this
committee discussing some of
that as those come forward that
they should be on the same par
as everyone in Albuquerque
throughout the state.
So much less. So that's kind of
forecasting some of the things.
That I'll be uh personally
looking at, but I'm thrilled to
be in this committee and I have
said and and with all due
respect to my other senior
colleagues. This is one of the
best run committees.
That I have
participated intercept and they.
Yeah
Thank you, Senator. Senator
Nava.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Buenos
Diaz.
My name is Cindy Nava. I see
many familiar faces here. I am
thrilled to be here. I am your
newly elected state senator for
Senate District 9, very proud to
represent the town of Bernalillo
and Dia Pueblo, West Side
Albuquerque, Placita Corrales
Algodones.
Um, and I am a very proud
product of APS Santa Fe Public
schools, SFCC and UNM. But most
importantly, I am the proud
daughter of a construction
worker and of a housekeeper, and
education was absolutely the
foundation that led me to being
here today, um, as the daughter
of Mexican immigrants as an
immigrant myself and as a first
former DACA recipient to be
appointed in the to the White
House and to win a seat in
elected office in the state
senate seats. I am extremely
proud.
and I feel a whole lot of
responsibility for the many
unheard voices that for far too
long have escaped these rooms,
and ironically enough, Mr.
Chairman and members.
My entire life of advocacy
started in this room in 2005,
uh, as the high school student,
um, with former state senator
Cynthia Nava of Las Cruces, and
um it is extremely ironic,
extremely meaningful, and I just
thank you for your diligence,
for your work, and really for
the commitment to build for the
youth and for kids and families
and children of New Mexico,
because there's a lot of
responsibility that we carry
here.
And additionally, as one of the
two youngest members in the
Senate. It's extremely important
to me that we get youth voices
at the table and that we recruit
and that we we make sure that we
retain, um, and our students,
especially as they graduate,
especially in fields that are
heavily needed in the state that
we open opportunity and that we
educate ourselves and cohesively
learn from one another to get
things through in a bipartisan
manner because at the end of the
day we're serving our
communities. This is not about
ourselves. This is about growing
together and
impacting and serving our
communities, muchas gracias.
Thank you, Senator. Senator
Pope, uh, vice chair. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Uh, State Senator
Harold Pope Junior, Bernard Leo
County, Albuquerque, uh,
northwest part of
Albuquerqueinana ranch, the
petroglyphs, uh, it's an
auditors serve again as a vice
chair. I want to thank the
chairman for, uh, really the
support and and helping me
navigating, uh being a new
senator. That's not the case
anymore. second term, but happy
to be here. Um, my journey here
in my background, I'm retired
Air.
Of course, I really don't have
an education background per se,
but it's just education has
really impacted my life and
brought me to where I am here.
Um, and because of that, I
really wanted to really
be involved more and understand
what's going on in our state.
I'm currently a substitute
teacher.
really understand what's going
on in our classrooms and
See what they're really dealing
with.
Um, I'm also pursuing a a.
doctorate in education. I just
started through Vanderbilt as
well. Um, I think would be
really helpful.
Um, but more importantly, I just
want to see what we can do to
really make improvements.
In our education system, whether
it be dealing with Yazi
Martinez, dealing with support
for our educators, support for
our families and schools. These
are things that I see every day.
I see the workload that
educators are dealing with.
They're just working so hard,
but they need support.
And so we're gonna be dealing
with some important issues here,
important legislation that comes
forward.
Um, in my view, this is the most
important committee. It's always
finance.
worry about what happens
judiciary, but what we do here
really impacts lives.
Once again, I'm not here.
If I don't have that educational
background and support.
And for me, it happened later
where I got the support
mentorship in the military.
What are we gonna do for the
kids here now? They shouldn't
have to join the military to get
that.
And I see so much potential for
our young people here today that
even have more potential than
me. And so one of them should be
uh stepping up and running me
some.
You know, taking my seat, the
way I look at it.
So, um, that's all I have. Thank
you, mister. Thank you. And I'm
Bill Souls. I've been the chair
of this committee for the last 8
years, was vice chair 4 years
before that. And so since I've
been in the legislature, I've
been
In in this role in Senate
education and part of that is
because I regularly tell people
is they ask me how do you like
being a senator and I say, I'm a
teacher and an educator, being a
senator is just my public
service. Um, I had
Retired in, I think it was 2017
with 29.5 years in education and
I missed the kids and went back
and was teaching part-time until
COVID hit. Um, that was the
hardest teaching I've ever done
in my life was that 2 months
when COVID first hit, when we
had to shift everything and try
and keep kids engaged and, you
know, it, it was, you know, I
see lots of the teachers out
there nodding. It was awful. Uh,
we're doing the best we could to
keep things going while trying
to keep people alive. Um, I
always feel very fortunate to
get to chair.
It's similar to Senator Pope is
lots of the other committees are
dealing with what is right now,
this committee deals with the
future of New Mexico.
Uh, we very much work on trying
to set up what is the right
future for our children, our
schools, our students, because
they represent the future.
Of New Mexico, um.
My background besides 29 years,
I've grew up around New Mexico
State University, was faculty
and staff there, was
administrator at Carlsbad
Community College for a year or
so. I have a PhD in
interdisciplinary studies, which
is psychology and education.
The
See, I was on the local school
board. I was president of the
New Mexico School Boards
Association. I've been a middle
school principal, an elementary
principal, high school teacher,
uh, university faculty and staff
and education. I mean, just, I
haven't been a superintendent.
Stan's tried once or twice to
get me recruit me a little bit,
but I used to tell our
superintendent no matter how
much we pay you, it's not enough
for what you have to put up with
as a superintendent. Um, but
almost everything else in
education I used to teach uh
early childhood education.
in the developmental psychology
courses. Um, this committee is
very near and dear to me, uh,
very pleased we have an
incredible staff that works with
us, that makes this all work
well, uh, as well as our
partners, you know, that are
here regularly in our, our team
of legislators that really stay
focused on what's best for kids
and what's best for New Mexico.
So I'm very honored always to,
to be allowed to, to be the
chair of this committee.
Uh, with that,
I want to introduce the person
who really runs the committee,
uh, and Mary Anne, who has been
here, uh, we have a deal when I
took over as chair, that as long
as I'm chair, she has to be my
uh committee secretary, and
she's like, as long as I'm
committee secretary, you have to
be chair. And so both of us are
like, so how long until one of
us decides we're gonna retire
and have to force this deal uh
somehow, but Mary Anne, if you.
Well I say a few more words or
whatever.
Mary Anne Roberts sin, and I am
a
I have been with the legislature
for 23 years.
And 21 of those years has been
an education.
I come from a family of
educators, but out of 12
grandchildren, only one of them
would be.
I retired 31 years.
And then the year after I uh
retired, given this job, which
has been for me to be during
retirement people and I'm
thrilled to be back with
education it's.
Never thought when I was growing
up that there was more than just
K through 12 education. When I
was growing up, there was no
kinder but.
I never realized how many other
facets of education there are,
and it's a, people think it's uh
it's just school.
It's not, it's all about our
lives and continuing education
for us that are in the senior
world. So thank you everyone.
Thank you, Mary Anne, um, she
also, she's very modest. She
also is like the head secretary
of the committee secretaries and
trains all of the other ones and
make sure they're doing it right
and shows them how and takes
over when they have to be gone
and so she's very valuable to
the entire Senate, but I'm not
their boss, no.
No, you, you are their mentor. I
am not boss. Your mentor.
Um, also, I'd like to introduce
my two staff members who uh are
my analysts, Mary Beth and Lena.
Lena is new to us this year. Uh,
it's already hit the ground
running. They've been analyzing
the bills we're gonna be hearing
on Wednesday already, and
certainly if people have bills,
I'm happy to have either side.
You'll have them review. They'll
give you straight answers as to
whether they think there are
issues, concerns, how to make
things better. That's kind of
their job is to make sure deals
that come out of this committee
are as good
legislation.
Um, also, my
secretary, my, uh,
It keeps me straight, makes sure
I'm where I'm supposed to be on
time, uh, my calendar and
everything, but, you know, this
is, is Anne Moniz, and she'll,
she lives right outside the door
here and things. Uh, we also
have some of our great
attendance back if you all will
introduce yourself, they make
sure I've got coffee, but they
will get you pencils, paper, uh,
notebook, your lunch, whatever.
anything?
Thank you and sit.
also
And Sid's been with us for many
years as well.
And
uh senator sorry no bad habits.
I've been a politician like I've
been called a lot worse.
So, uh, Senator, yes, I have Ms.
Baxter who's our analyst here on
the, on our side and uh he's
already kept us on our toes and
uh give us some good
information. So if we ever need
any, any help through and uh
help out. So thank you very much
mis Mr. Chair.
Thank you. And we do have a Zoom
master, uh, because we do take
public comments by Zoom and
other things, please make sure
and keep me on track. Also that
we are always, uh, webcasting
this and we have to shut down if
the webcast goes down, we'll
stand in place till it comes
back up. But if you'd like to
briefly introduce yourself,
please. Uh, my name is Matthew
Gutierrez. Uh, I am also.
Thank you, Matthew.
The and
I guess now we head out to kind
of our regulars. Oh, I'm sorry.
Yes, and and, and David.
John, I'm sorry.
And and John with Sergeant
Barnes to briefly introduce
yourselve. I apologize.
Thank you, thank you.
Wonderful. Thank you and I
appreciate you always being here
just in case and make sure that
things help.
Run smoothly always and always
very professional. You're in the
committee, uh, at this point,
kind of would like to very
quickly go around the room with
some of our education partners
who are in the room with us
regularly, uh, before we do
that, I would like to introduce
a uh.
A new person to the legislature.
You know, that
Doctor
Doctor Fermi, if you would, the
new president of uh NMSU.
Oh, I'm sorry.
OK
And I'm sorry.
I
Mr.
You look a lot like the new
president. I apologize. I
thought he had come in boy, it's
gonna be a long session.
Well, no, when you came in, it's
like I know this person's like
where, oh, it's probably the
new.
I apologize.
Gene Strickler from, yes.
But we'll just start with you
and go around the room of doing
quick introductions.
Boy
Thank you, Vanessa.
Clayton
Thank you. Did you want to or
you're good with
OK.
Thank you and welcome to send it
in, Greg.
Jo
Thank you, Joe, Stan.
What
Thank you, Stan. I can't over
here, this is the protem analyst
pool for the Senate.
Thank you. I'm gonna skip the
next row cause you guys are
gonna be on a little later, not.
Thank you, Matt.
to the next row. Would you like
to introduce yourselves?
Thank you
I was gonna say, you better
mention that part because that's
a really important important
Thank you. Would you all like to
introduce yourselves?
Not required to if you don't
want to, so.
Thank you. I think we got
everybody in the room, um, let
me talk for just a few minutes
about kind of procedures for the
committee. This is the education
committee, which means there's
kind of like a bell that rings
at 9 o'clock. We try and start
on time. Um, also, I make a
commitment to the committee that
when the floor sessions start at
11, we will close down 10
minutes prior to that. Um,
sometimes that means in the
middle of a bill, we're gonna
stop it, we'll roll it over and
pick it back up at that point.
Uh, but I want to make sure that
the, that you don't have to
worry about whether we're gonna
get to the floor on time or not.
Uh, gives us a bit of a deadline
and sometimes deadlines uh
create urgency to get some
things done and, and moving
through. Um.
Uh, work closely with the
The uh
Ranking member, I'm gonna say
minority is like the ranking
member as far as things that are
on the agenda and heads up, try
not to ever, you know, put
things on the agenda at the last
minute unless it's a reason and
let you know about it also and,
and why we're doing that. For
the most part, we follow pretty
much down.
The the agenda for things, but
again, as those who have been
around the legislature depending
on people that have to come in
from other committees, we bounce
around some as we need to. Uh,
one of the things we do that
Marianne, uh, instigated and
was, has been very helpful as we
always put what bill we're
working on, so everybody can see
and at home can see and also
talk regularly. I'll announce
what the next bill coming up is
going to be, uh, trying to make
sure everybody's able to
participate appropriately.
when we do public comment is I
limit public comment to 2
minutes per person. Uh, and san,
I'm gonna pick on you, Stan, who
can be long-winded knows I will
gavel you and stop you at 2
minutes, not finish your
sentence at 2 minutes, at 2
minutes, you're done. So I
usually say 15 seconds left, so
you can start wrapping it up.
Most of what that does is after
a time or two, everybody
finishes by about 1:45, and we
don't ever have to do things,
but do try and control some of
the, the public comment.
And encourage people, I've
certainly we want to hear, but
you don't have to say exactly
what everybody else has said,
you know, if it's been said, we
heard it or you can just kind of
say, and I agree, you know, and,
and be good with that. Uh, we,
after we do public comment in
the room.
Probably not as consistent, and
I don't do it on purpose,
whether I start with fours or
against or whatever, that's just
whatever happened to flash
through my head at that moment.
I tell people now as I'm getting
older, I have age-appropriate
cognitive decline. And so I
blame all those kinds of things
on that. Uh, but after we take
public comment of people in the
room, then we'll go to the
people that are in the waiting
room.
Or on the Zoom and try and get
through all of those comments.
And again, they're limited and
webcaster when it gets 2 minutes
and I say thank you, you can
link them off and it's sometimes
humorous to watch people whose
mouths are still moving, but,
you know, we're, we're done
listening to him at that point.
Um.
We do sometimes as those who
have been around the
legislature, there are big
issues and there's likely to be
cameras in the room. I don't
have a problem with that, but
kind of want to ask the
committee provided the cameras
are not, while we're right in
the middle of things that, you
know, right here disrupting
having cameras in the room. I
mean we're legislators were on.
film and tape all the time.
Anyhow, is that OK with
everyone?
You know, and if somebody is
being disruptive about filming
or anything of that sort, it'll
be my responsibility to, to
close that down if you all are
uncomfortable with some of that,
let me know. I'll try and, and
handle.
Uh, controlling the room, if
anything of that sort starts to
happen.
Um
General processes when somebody
is uh presenting a bill, please
try and go through the chair
regularly. Most of the time it
seems cumbersome, but when
things get touchy, it keeps
people from debating directly
back and forth and such and
keeps me from having to bang the
gavel to try and get control
again. Uh, most of the time it's
not a problem, but just try and
remember, I'm not one that's
gonna be mean about it. I might
gently remind you if you're
getting in a good conversation
with someone, we still need to
go through some of those
formalities.
Um
Other
Questions or people remember
from other things or have
questions Senator.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much. I appreciate.
Introductions by everybody. I
recognize quite a few.
ISIS out there, but some of them
are new. Is there any way that
we can get contact information
for members of the committee and
from staff, you know, their
email, phone number, we do have
questions.
Uh, I don't have a problem with
doing that. Uh, there's people I
would there's a wide range of,
I'm talking about just the
members of the committee and the
staff that works for us in case
we have questions or want to
discuss a bill with one of our
other members of the.
Yeah, I know those numbers and
phone numbers, I mean we is our
sort
OK we have
it's gonna come out of the.
OK may be organizing some rooms
as far as numbers.
Could be, but
remind me if we don't have all
that in the next meeting or two
I am talking without my. Any
questions, come for the rest of
the world we were having quite
private conversations, uh, uh,
any, any other questions from
anybody of our regulars out in
the
The audience about processes and
stuff, you're here every day.
If not, then it is pleasure to
have kind of education, finance
101. We have our amazing LESC
staff, uh, the assistant
director, if you, uh, Jessica,
if you'd like to come up and
kind of introduce the rest of
the staff and lead us through
the presentation and uh make
sure we do get the others
introduced.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of Senate Education Committee,
um, I'll introduce myself last,
so I'll actually have our team
introduce themselves first, and
I'll start with Danielle
Stupignon, who's next to me, and
then we'll have everyone kind of
stand up and let you know their
name, their title, and the
content that they cover for the
LASC.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman. My
name is Daniel and I cover
public school finance for the
LESC.
Fine.
How's that? Can you hear me OK?
Tim Badele, I do all things data
for LESC, so, uh, assessments,
accountability, I manage our
data dashboard, uh, all of our
data in-house, if you ever need
any education data at all, uh,
you know where to find me.
Thanks.
Morning, members. Mark Motoya. I
cover senior policy and I
covered Cali, um, infrastructure
and gardens.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Alonzo Waka, and I am the office
administrator.
morning, Mr. Chair, members, uh,
my name's Annie Armitage, and
I'm your senior policy analyst
covering the morning chair
members of the committee. I am
Natasha Davalos. I am black and
at the LESC.
Uh, good morning, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee. My
name's Connor L. Hicks. I'm if I
may, these are people that are
truly work for all of us, and if
you have education issues, you
want them to review a bill and
give you their thoughts and
ideas. You have an idea for a
bill. They're great, great
resources that work in this area
every single day, uh, and work
very well with counsel service,
uh, in getting bills drafted and
such, and they also are ones
that do the interim the
Legislative Education Study
Committee endorsed bills, you
know, have gone through and that
they have, have worked.
Yes
Thank you. um, and as mentioned,
my name is Jessica Hathaway and
I'm our team's deputy director.
So you have, um, actually two
folks that were missing who.
May actually come in. They're
just in health education. Our
director Mr. John Senna will
probably join us, um, as that's
wrapping up for their floor
session at 10, and then we have
Merri Andrews, who's one of our
senior policy analysts covering
whole child education.
You have a green folder in front
of you that we've brought
materials for you. There's a
couple of documents I'm gonna
walk you through quickly and
some of our team may exit to go
back to the office, just FYI,
whereas other people will be
here throughout, um, someone
from our team will be here the
entire um session for you all in
that green packet, there is one
document we're calling it our
overview and resources document.
So this is just um a quick
primer on us, um, we are a
permanent bipartisan bicameral
interim committee where
year round staff, um, we have 10
voting members, 21 advisory
members, um, Chairman Souls is
our vice chair on that and our
chair for the last couple of
years has been representative
Andres Romero.
So that's who we are and we're
here, um, year round during the
session we'll be stopping Senate
Ed and House Ed, um, but that
being said, we have many work
products, and on the back of
this page we highlight some of
our key work products for the
last, um, interim, the 2024
interim. You'll note that we
cover all topics, whether that's
school designations, structured
literacy, um, RSCG students in
foster care experiencing
homelessness, attendance, cash
balances. If there's a topic
that you've got a question on
We probably have a document on
it, and so those QR codes will
take you to our newly redesigned
website, which will actually
link you to quite a few reports
that you might want to take a
look at.
The second QR code there will
actually take you to a school
district dashboard. That
dashboard is focused on school
districts right now, um, but it
will have a lot of information
for you in terms of enrollment,
achievement, capital outlay
information, teacher workforce
information for all of our 89
school districts.
Another item that's in there,
um, is actually just a contact
list of all of those folks that
you just met.
As well as our director joining
us, um, and it'll list to what
they're covering kind of
generally, but also the content
that they'll be covering during
the session, so feel free to
reach out to us, um, our office
is in the annex, the capital
North annex, um, down by the
fountain. If you've been down
there, it's just right on that
lower level, so we're here for
you.
Um, and today, uh Chairman Souls
asked us to come and present
kind of an education budgets
101, we're not getting into
every single line item and some
of the spreadsheets that follow,
uh, Mr. Stupinan is gonna walk
us through kind of some of the
nomenclature that we use above
the line, middle of the line,
below the line, what that all
means, um, as well as kind of a
primer on our public school
funding formula, and then we
will close by going over the um
11 bills that our committee has
endorsed for this legislative
session. So with that,
I'll pass it over to Mister
Supinion.
Chairman, members of the
committee, thank you all for
having us as a heads up.
I bit my lip on Friday and then
I bit my tongue last night. And
so bear with me as I struggle
through this presentation, but
you all have 2 documents in
front of you for public school
finance. You have what's called
the.
of the state equalization
guarantee, which essentially
just provides an overview of the
public school funding formula,
we're going to start with this
spreadsheet called public school
support general fund high level.
For those members who are new to
the legislature. Uh, this is,
this document is what we refer
to as the high level and it's
designed to provide you all with
a visual of your public school
support recommendations.
And her background, you all have
every year 4 recommendations
that come to you for public
school support. The first of
which comes from PED that
usually comes around December,
the executive and LFC also have
their own recommendations for
public school support and the
LESC also provides you all with
its own recommendation for
public school support.
For the last few years, the LESC
recommendation for public school
support usually comes in a few
stages. I usually provide an
overview of basic general uh
priority areas for the committee
somewhere around in the summer,
June or July, in October, I come
back with some preliminary
numbers for the priorities that
were given to us by our
committee. I'll present this, a
draft of this actual document to
our committee in December. We'll
take the committee's feedback
and we'll come back with a final
version in January, which is
then uh
presented for endorsement by the
committee.
And so if you all want to just
refer to the document page one,
that first section.
The vast majority of your
support for public schools comes
through the state equalization
guarantee, which you'll hear
about otherwise referred to as
the SCG and that's flexible
money that can be used by school
boards, by charter school
governing bodies to find and
support the priorities that
they've identified in their own
communities. So again, this is
flexible money that you all
appropriate to school boards, to
school districts, 2 charter
schools, uh, for flexible use.
at the local level. And so if
you look at the actual
spreadsheet, you're going to see
that first column, the second
column called FY 25 Operational
budget, that's what you all
appropriated for the SCG.
In FY 25. FY 25, the fiscal year
runs from July 1st, 2024.
June 30th, 2025. And so this
second column is what you all
have already appropriated to the
SCG for the current fiscal year.
The next 3 columns that you all
see on that spreadsheet are the
separate recommendations for the
SCG that come from the executive
in that 3rd column from LFC.
In that 4th column and that last
column is the LESC
recommendation for the SCG and
so our goal every, every year is
to have as much consensus as
possible, build as much
consensus as possible throughout
the interim, so that when we
come to you all in January, we
have already before the session
built as much consensus as
possible, uh, before the
session. And so every number
that you all see moving from the
top.
to bottom
is in addition to or subtraction
from the SCG for a specific uh
priority area. So that top row,
row 2 is what you all
appropriated for the SCG and FY
25, every number below that is
in addition to or subtraction
from the SCG and so some of
those areas that you see listed
in those rows are for changes to
the SCG House Bill 63 that I'll
talk about in a bit.
Uh, increases for compensation
for teachers in all public
school personnel increases for
insurance support, fixed cost,
stuff like that. And if you
refer to row 27, that's the
total amount that's being
recommended for the SCG for that
flex for that flexible funding
from each recommendation. So
you'll see on row 27 under the
executive recommendation, the
executive is recommending $4.372
billion.
for the SCG.
increase of 4.8% from FY 25.
LFC is recommending 4.421
billion, an increase of 6% and
the LESC is recommending 4.5
billion.
increase of $334 million from FY
25.
So we're gonna pause there for a
bit and then jump over really
quick to this other document
that that's called the primary
public school funding formula
overview. So in House Bill 2,
section 4, when you all
appropriate that total number to
the SCG, that's just the
appropriation to the formula.
The formula itself, the SCG is
designed to equalize educational
opportunity throughout the state
by assigning weights.
To students based on the
characteristics of those
students. And so if you refer to
the front page of the primer,
you'll see a list of some of
those areas. So you'll see uh
early childhood and basic units,
basic program is where the vast
majority of program units are
generated in the formula. Those
are usually uh generated
depending on the enrollment of
the students themselves.
You'll see special education,
you'll see bilingual, bilingual
multicultural education,
elementary PE, K-12 plus. Those
are all separate components of
the formula that they each
generate program units, uh,
separately.
And to get the actual funding
piece, once the formula uh is
determined, uh, it's the use of.
units, the weights generate.
Um
Not sure what's happening there.
Not sure what's happening there.
Yeah.
Let me just, let me, let me just
lean back a little bit.
All good.
So, the basic unit of
measurements.
The front page of the primary
itself.
The front page.
On the front page, you all have
a list of the different
components of the formula
itself, uh, each of which have
different weights in the formula
and if you go through the actual
primer, it'll actually go into
context over what weight is
generated by each component of
the formula. So again, the vast
majority of program units,
program units are how the
formula actually uh distributes
money through the formula. The
vast majority are generated in
basic program. So if you flip
the page.
To page 2, there's no page
numbers on the primer
unfortunately, so I'll try and
go slow.
The vast majority of funding
that flows through the formula
is generated by basic program.
If you look at that table on the
top right of the actual page,
you'll see the weight that is
assigned for each student based
on their grade level.
That those weights were
determined several decades ago,
uh, based on class size
requirements. So the weights
here are designed to pay for the
actual class has requirements
that are already included in
statute. So for an example, a
kindergarten student.
As a weight of 1.44.
Or the equivalent of about $9000
using the FY 24 unit value.
a first grade student has a
factor of 1.2, uh 1.18 for 2 and
3rd grade.
1.045 degrees 4 through 6 and 1
point.
5
1.25 for grade 7 through 12.
In this session, you're gonna be
asked a pretty profound question
to decide on.
These weights were last adjusted
in 1993.
The secondary factor, the one
for 7 through 12 was last
adjusted in 1976.
And so clearly,
Public education has evolved
substantially since 1976,
especially for grades 7 through
12, we have
Big proliferation of CTE
programs across the state that
cost a lot of money, a lot of
communities want secondary fine
arts programs. A lot of
communities want behavioral
health services for their
students. And so this session,
you all will be asked in-house
Bill 63.
Whether or not you all want to
revise the basic program waits
for grade 6 through 12.
If you jump a few pages in the
primer.
If you keep jumping again, no
page numbers.
Uh, your hit.
At the at-risk index.
Give you a few seconds to get
there.
The at risk index.
So you are pretty familiar with
the Martinez Yazi lawsuit.
The lawsuit essentially
determined that the state has
failed to meet its obligation to
sufficiently serve low-income
students, English learners,
Native American students.
And special education students.
The at-risk index is where you
all have significantly increased
your investment in the SCG since
the Martinez Yazi lawsuit to
serve uh at-risk students.
The at-risk index includes 3
separate indicators.
low income students?
Mobility
And English learners.
So to address the lawsuit
itself, you all have responded
by significantly increasing the
factor itself for the at-risk
index, but we have not as a
state, as a body, really gone
back to really hone in on the
actual methodology of the
at-risk index itself.
So as I just said, it has 3
separate components in one
index, those program units flow
out to the school districts to
the charter schools.
But there's no real way to
actually distinguish which
program units were actually
generated by which students?
So again, House Bill 63 will ask
you all to decide whether or not
you all want to revise the
actual methodology of the
at-risk index. So currently, uh
low-income students are
identified through federal Title
One data.
As your staff member in the
legislature, I have no ability
to actually audit that data. I
don't really know how it's
calculated. The federal
government just comes and tells
me us as a state, this is the
number of Title I eligible
students that you have in this
district.
Period.
For English learners, again, no
separate indicator in the SCG.
There's really no ability for a
district or a charter school to
really distinguish which at-risk
program units they were actually
generated by EL students.
Uh, and mobility, mobility is
determined by the number of
times that a student moves, uh,
schools within their same
district. So one of the
challenges we have again is that
inability to really audit that
income data, the mobility data
is pretty messy, it's pretty uh
reliant on school secretaries
being really trained, uh, how to
actually code those students
when they do move and again EL
students are just one of 3
indicators. So House Bill 63
will ask you.
To repeal
The 3 existing indicators of the
risk index?
It'll ask you to create a
separate.
indicator for EL students,
English learners.
And it'll ask you to use the
family income index, as the
indicator for poverty in the SCG
and the family income index
essentially identifies student
poverty using state tax returns,
and use a snap, Medicaid, and
the census to really hone in on
the concentration of poverty in
each community, and we do have
the ability to really audit that
data, really verify the accuracy
of the data which we don't have
right now with federal Title One
data.
So, those are the two components
of the SCG that you all will be
asked, uh, pretty profound
policy questions in the current
session.
So just to jump back to this
spreadsheet really quick the
front page.
Everything above the SCG, the
SCG itself is considered to be
above the line.
So all that flexible funding
that flows through the formula,
uh,
is above the line. Everything
below that, starting on row 30
where you see categorical
appropriations, you're gonna
read these numbers from left to
right.
A categorical appropriation uh
is not a flexible pot of money.
It's appropriated by you all to
be used for a specific purpose.
So here in this first section,
you have the transportation
distribution, uh, that's money
that you all appropriate to
transport students uh to and
from school.
If you go down to row 42, we
have other categorical
appropriations like the Indian
education fund assessment,
supplemental appropriations, uh,
and out of state tuition, again,
that's not flexible money. You
all appropriate that money to be
used for specific purposes.
And that's considered to be
categorical or middle of the
line.
If you turn the page.
To page 2.
And you refer to line to row.
Row 80, that's what we call
total public school support and
that that number that $4.8
billion in the LESE column,
that's the total recommendation
for the SCG 4 categorical, uh,
for recurring items and for the
PED operating budget.
If you go to row 82, where it
says sections 56, and 7 and
other non-recurring
appropriations. These are all
non-recurring items that you all
appropriate money.
2 PD for a specific purpose.
So, for example,
row 88, out of school learning
programs, uh, you'll see at the
LESC is recommending $20 million
for out of school learning part
time programs. That's money that
you all appropriate on a
one-time basis every year to
PED.
For that specific program.
Uh, PED then issues requests for
applications, districts and
charter schools that want to
participate in those programs,
apply for that funding, and
they're reimbursed uh by PED.
So those are all non-recurring
appro if you flip the page
again.
And you scroll all the way down.
To row 165.
You're gonna see section 9
appropriations. This is another
area where you all will be asked
a pretty profound question
around whether you all want to
engage in more multi-year
budgeting for K-12 uh programs
and services.
in the last session, if you all
were here in the last session,
uh, you all passed the
government results and
opportunity expendable trust
fund, otherwise known as Gro,
you all transferred a pretty
significant amount of money to
that program fund and you all
are supporting 3 years of
funding for specific programs,
uh, in terms of K-12, you're all
supporting teacher residencies,
principal residencies and
special education differentials
with those 3 year funding
appropriations.
In this session, you all will be
asked whether you all want to
engage in more uh multi-year
budgeting for K-12 programs and
the items listed from rows 165
down to the bottom of that page
are the appropriations that LFC,
the executive, and LESC are
recommending uh for that initial
multi-year budgeting.
So that was pretty quick.
Uh, I hope I didn't confuse you
all.
But now we'll turn over to
committee endorsed bills.
Chairman, members of the
committee, and Daniel for that
uh overview. I would say the key
terms to remember and all of
that again, we can go through
this um at the chairman's
discretion later in terms of
specific budget questions, but
the key terminology that you're
going to hear is above the line,
that's your SCG, your state
equalization guarantee, that
kind of middle of the line,
those are your categorical
appropriations and um then the
below the line, which are your
non-recurring appropriations and
so those terms you're gonna hear
thrown down, cried quite a bit.
as you're hearing bells
throughout this session in terms
of is it in the budget? If so,
where is it in the budget? Is it
in the above the line, middle of
the line below the line, so the
chairman asked us to come and
kind of present that general
overview for you all, and again
we can um.
At his discretion, go into
specific questions about those
budget recommendations, but the
other kind of high level item
that we were covering for you
all today is the LESC in excuse
me, endorsed to legislation.
So you have one final handout in
your packets, and it should say
at the top summary 2025 LESC
endorsed legislation. I'll give
you all a moment to find that,
and then we'll run through quick
overviews of those bills.
OK.
Great, so our committee, um,
again bipartisan bicameral, they
work throughout the year, um,
many of you on Senate Ed also
serve on the LESC, uh, endorsed
11 bills this, um, last interim,
and so the first one, is in some
of these you'll see we listed
the ones that actually have bill
numbers on them first. Some of
them are not yet introduced so
that we don't have bill numbers
for those, but for the ones that
we do have bill numbers for,
they're listed for you here. Um,
Daniel mentioned House Bill 63.
In that bill, um, the short
title is Public school funding
formula changes. It's being
sponsored by a representative
Andres Romero, as well as um
Senate President Pro Tempore
Stewart.
And as Daniel already alluded
to, this would amend the state's
public school funding formula,
which again is known as the
state equalization guarantee,
we're going to keep throwing
lots of acronyms out at you all,
but the SCG.
Um, and so some context on this
that is important is actually in
2023, um, the House of
Representatives signed House
Memorial 51, which directed the
LESC to study the SCG in its
full comprehensive nature and
make recommendations to evaluate
it for its responsiveness, um,
for adequate and sufficient
funding for all students.
So there's a 2-year working
group that met during the 2023
interim and the 2024 interim to
study that, um, we worked in
partnership with the Legislative
Finance Committee, the Public
Education Department,
Superintendents around the
states, key educational leaders,
um, and it makes 3 key changes.
So the first is that it updates
the at-risk index, that's why we
provided an overview of that
index too before this, and it
would replace the current
existing indicators of poverty,
which are Title I mobility.
An English learner with the
family income index methodology,
while also increasing that
multiplier from 0.33 to 0.40.
Won't get into all of the
technical nature of that, but a
couple of important notes on
that, um, a few years ago, you
all as a legislature created a
family income index program.
And this is a little bit
different from that because with
that program, there was a
methodology put in place to
identify poverty not so much at
the district level but at the
actual school site level which
um Daniel alluded to earlier, um
was really new. Before that, we
have relied a lot on federal
data. All of these are proxies
of poverty, but this family
income index is unique to New
Mexico, and it actually allows
us to understand concentrations
of student poverty at the school
site level.
It's done by um PED actually
sending student data, uh, to the
taxation and revenue Department
to match income tax returns, and
then data is sent to the
healthcare authority if it's not
matched there to actually match
public benefits data and then
finally uh US census data. So
it's kind of a three layered
approach for us to understand
concentrations of poverty, we
found that the methodology
itself is very effective, um,
for fiscal year 25, only 9
students out of our roughly
300,000 were.
not matched in that data.
So it allows us to again
understand school level. So
that's the first update that it
would propose to make in House
Bill 63.
The second is that it would
create a standalone English
learner factor, um.
For English learners but also
students who have been
reclassified as fluent English
proficient at a factor of 0.33.
So the current at risk has
English learners as one of your
components, so this would
actually um take it out and
create a standalone factor so
we're not disregarding English
learner status um in the
formula.
And then the third is it would
change the secondary student
factor by increasing it so as
Daniel mentioned, um, it was
1976 that our secondary student
factor was last updated. It's at
1.25. This would increase it to
1.30 and also add a 6th grade to
secondary students. Currently
secondary only includes 7
through 12 students. We know
that since the 70s, actually a
lot of our 6th grade students
are in middle school settings
rather than being in K through 6
settings and so.
As the 3rd change that it would
make.
So that's the first spell, House
Bill 63, um, Chairman, would you
like us to take all questions at
the end after we go through, or
would you like questions along
the way?
Thank you, Jessica. I think just
kind of briefly, you know, an
overview of what each of these,
then we'll open it up for
questions and also would
encourage individual members,
you know, have someone from your
staff, by the way, and director
Senna is here. Come and meet
with them individually to go
over, you know, things that are
more granular in nature or a
specific bill.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
promise you all that is the most
technical bill, so we'll go
through the rest of them a
little bit more quickly, um, and
as the chairman said, happy to
please come see us, we'll come
see you if you have more
granular questions. So the
second item listed there um is
House Memorial 2, and this would
be um a, a memorial, obviously
to request the LESC to study
artificial intelligence use, but
also broader data governance.
Um, this one is sponsored by
Representatives Garrett, Baca,
and Grola.
Um, and this one would
essentially help us to
understand one of the issues
that we found is really missing
is data governance, not just at
the public education department,
but across the contingency of
agencies that really cover
education. And so this would
allow all of those agencies to
kind of sit at the table
together and come up with
operating rules to better
understand how, for example,
early childhood data then
transfers to public education
department data to higher
education data. So it's a
memorial asking us to study
that, um, and turn around a
report um by.
October 31st, 2025.
The 3rd item is Senate Bill 64,
uh, the short title on this is
school career Development
Success Project. This one's
sponsored by Senator Brand as
well as Representative Gurola.
And this would actually create
incentives for school districts
and charter schools whose
students earn industry
recognized credentials. It kind
of fits into a continuum of CTE
funding where we actually um we
when you all created in 2019 a
pilot program on CTE that was uh
kind of taking into account
startup costs. It's called the
NextGen CTE pilot project, so
we've been operating it for a
few years, um, and then we have
the SCG funding to kind of help
with the operational.
This is kind of that back end
funding where it would actually
give a small appropriation, um,
to the public education
department to administer, and it
would allow school districts and
charter schools to receive again
on the back end, um, kind of
incentive funding for when their
students earn industry
recognized credentials.
Important here, the bill does
define industry recognized
credentials as credentials that
are recognized by employers
themselves, so for example, it
could be CPR and first aid,
that's often um needed in in
many jobs.
But it can also be much more
technical, such as a welding
certificate, but the key there
is that um PED would have to set
up a tiered system of funding to
give awards for different types
of um credentials earned.
The 4th item, um, is Senate Bill
82, public school capital outlay
changes, um, sponsored by
Chairman Souls. So I'm happy to
talk through this or defer to
you, Mister Chairman, if you
would like to.
You're welcome to, or I can just
very quickly, um, what it does,
the cost of construction has
gone through the roof. We're
trying to catch up from pandemic
type things, this eases the
local match to push more money
out to get those fixed with the
sunset on it of a couple of
years so we can try and get
those things done, um, and then
sunsets back to where we were.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
exactly, and it extends actually
provisions that you all already
passed in 2023, that we are
seeing working um to again
reduce that match um by
different amounts based on the
school size, um, but it would
extend it through fiscal. OK,
the 5th item that we have, um,
is Senate Bill 102 to study a
universal basic income, um, and
this is also sponsored by
Chairman Saltz. So again, happy
to defer to you or explain it.
This just comes out of the work
of the Nobel laureate economist
James Heckman, uh, that
quantified how investments in
early childhood have the largest
dividends and paybacks and uh it
provides a cash transfer to
low-income families, uh, when
they're pregnant until the child
turns one year old, uh, so that
they don't have to worry about
being evicted, food insecurity,
uh, all of the other kind of
things that cause trauma for the
rest of their lives. So it's
trying to reduce ACEs rather
than dealing.
with it upfront and make sure
that they've got a, a solid
start.
Thank you. I, we'll go to our
next one, which is Senate Bill
107, and this would uh the short
title is NMSU STEM Center of
Excellence, and this one is
sponsored by Senator Pope. Um, I
will cover it as he is not here,
um, but this bill would
establish an innovation network
for STEM education and provide a
corresponding appropriation. So
we've been hearing uh for the
last couple of years, there's a
need to coordinate STEM
resources across the state, and
we've heard that directly from
the from NMSU, but also the
Lannell Foundation.
the Society of Women Engineers
and a lot of others who've
really been calling for a one
stop shop to help schools access
STEM resources. So this would
create a center of excellence at
New Mexico State University to
serve as kind of a central hub
for STEM education. It is a
3-year pilot in terms of the
language in the bill and that
pilot would be there to
establish the network,
coordinate with local
communities and then allow for
the creation of regional and
tribal hubs statewide, um, the
bill would again create that
infrastructure for all of the
work to happen.
and and the steering committee
actually to help decide on those
regional and tribal hubs, um,
and it uh comes with about a $6
million not about, it is a $6
million appropriation um in the
LESC budget recommendation,
about 2 million per year again
set up as a pilot to allow for
more coordination of STEM
resources.
OK, the next few, um, do not
have bill numbers yet. They may
um drop within the next few
days, so I'll just tell you kind
of the short titles on them.
So the 7th item um would be
changes to administrator
preparation programs and
establishing separate licenses
for principals and
superintendents.
So this is another bill that's
reflective of a couple of years
of work, um, and how educator
preparation programs are
preparing principles. Some of
you who are here may recall that
a bill was brought last session
to work on just principal
preparation, um, which prompted
further work during the 2024
interim. So working group,
including LESC staff but also
LFC lawmakers themselves,
educator preparation programs,
current principals and
superintendents, I worked to
refine this concept over the
last interim, um, and adds.
superintendence to this. And
what this bill really does is
differentiate licensure between
superintendents and principals,
while strengthening preparation
for both, we know that while
those jobs are similar, they're
also very different. And so it
would create different pathways
for those different jobs. One
really important note on this is
that anyone who is already a
principal doesn't have to do
anything different, their
license would be grandfathered
in, and that is the same with
superintendents, so this is only
for new folks coming into those
types of administrative role.
s
All right, the 8th item is on
restraint and seclusion. This,
uh, bill would propose
amendments to current law to
better address the use of
restraint and seclusion in
schools, and it does this by
clearly defining restraint and
seclusion and adding additional
definitions such as time out and
physical escort, um, this one
also comes from a couple of
years' worth of work, um, the
LESC had a pretty intensive
special education working group
during the 2023 interim, they
built on this during the 2024
interim, um, because those
students.
are disproportionately impacted
by restraint and seclusion,
although it is an issue of all
students, so again, better
define what restraint and
seclusion are to keep kids and
teachers safer in classrooms.
The 9th proposal would amend
existing law to increase minimum
annual salaries for teachers
statewide. So current law, um,
for those of you who don't know
and apologies for those of you
who already do know. We have a
tiered licensure system for our
teachers where you are either a
level 1, level 2, or level 3
teacher, and we have current
minimum annual salaries for
those at 50,000, 60,000, and
70,000 annually.
This would increase each of
those tiers by 5000 to 55,000,
65,000 and 75,000.
So this one is also uh in that
budget recommendation that you
all already saw and all school
personnel would receive those
increases. Um, the mechanics on
this is that there are some flat
salary increases proposed first.
Those would apply and then there
would be additional funding to
get people to those new
minimums, um, if they don't
already get there across the
flat proposal.
Um
OK.
There's lots to say on that one,
but I'll pause there, just
increases each tier by 5000.
OK, the 10th, just 2 more, I
promise. Um, the 10th 1 would
establish a minimum annual
salary of $30,000 for public
school personnel.
So you all a couple of years
ago, um, voted to change minimum
salaries for educational
assistants to 25,000 annually.
This goes beyond that, um, and
actually raises salaries for all
public school personnel,
including your cafeteria
workers, your custodians, anyone
working within those school
sites. And so, and this one
would raise it to 30,000.
And I will pause there on that
one. And then the final one, so
I'm cruising through these, um,
would expand the LESC to study
all public education.
So currently the LESC, our
committee staffed by all of us
and with you all as lawmakers,
um, is statutorily limited to
just kindergarten through 12th
grade, um, education with the
exception of your educator
preparation programs. So this
would um be a bill that you've
actually seen before, LESC has
endorsed it a couple of times.
It passed the legislature in
2023 and 2021, but was vetoed
both times, and what it would do
is expand the remit of the LESC
to not just K through 12
education, but
early childhood and higher
education as well.
And that is a nice race across
the line. I'm sure you have many
questions on all of these, but
we're happy to to answer
anything that comes up.
Thank you, Jessica. Um, and kind
of the point of this is just
kind of give you a heads up of
some of the things that are on
the way that are coming, uh,
that we're going to be dealing
with. There's going to be a
whole bunch of other bills, some
of them just straight
appropriation bills, you know,
other ideas and issues. These
are the ones that the LESC has
been studying, working on as a
bipartisan bicameral uh
committee over the last 9 months
or so, uh, certainly this staff
is there and available to you
individually with ideas you
might have.
developing things, uh, doing
research for you in the
education space, any of those
type of things, uh, they, they
work for us all as legislators,
but with that, let me open up
for if you have any brief short
questions about
The funding formula, those
particular bills or things will
get into a lot more detail along
the way, but just kind of the
overview. So,
Senator
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much. I know in the past that
y'all were following students
whenever they were incarcerated.
Mm
The education was going through
there while they were
incarcerated, but then after
that some of these students.
They just kind of dropped.
Dropped out
Have we gone back and figured
out how we can follow up on
making sure that they are back
attending school or what the
status of those particular
students are because I know it
makes a big difference in some
of the schools around the state
as far as their enrollment goes.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Ezel, um, in terms of, um,
formerly incarcerated, it's an
interesting question. I think
with our focus on K through 12,
we haven't specifically
researched that in the last
interim, um, but certainly happy
if our director wants to add any
more um information he might
have on that.
Mr. Chair, Senator, thanks for
the question. So, yeah, as you
said, uh, incarcerated students
generally receive some level of
of education, not through the
through the what we would
consider the K-12, um.
Education system, they're
generally served through your
state supported schools through
CYFD, uh, juvenile justice, so
those programs operate
differently than uh than K-12.
Um, if they finish their
education, usually they're
probably getting some sort of uh
might be getting some sort of
general education department,
the GED or high school
equivalency through those
programs.
If there's still school age,
which I should say is students
who are 22 and younger once once
a student is over 22.
Uh, they no longer qualify for
school age funding.
Um
If there's still school age, but
do not enroll.
In a in a in a K-12 system.
It's, it gets increasingly hard
to track where they go, you
know, just the same as when a 15
year old decides, 16-year-old
decides they don't want to go to
school and they just sort of
drop off the map. It's hard to
track them that way.
Well, and, and I know that that
has been a problem.
Several years ago, whenever this
funding came up regarding these
particular students because it
did make it a difference.
In some schools were reporting
as what their enrollment was. So
I was just curious if anything
had been done.
Yeah, yeah, Mr. Chair, senator
in 2019 when they changed that,
that age.
Was that those folks who are
over 22, whether incarcerated,
formerly incarcerated or not,
would be served through your
adult education programs which
runs through the higher ed.
Department, um, and it is funded
through a separate formula.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chair Senator
Thornton.
Uh yes, Mr. Chair, um, I just
have a quick question for
Daniel. Actually, I'm more
asking for his time, um, HP 63,
you're you're saying you're
asking us to change the formula.
And so what I'd like to do is to
sit down with you. I'm a bit of
an analytic.
So I'd like to sit down with you
if possible tomorrow.
Um, I think 3 in the afternoon,
so we'll get some time together,
uh, to understand, I, I guess I
want to understand how these
figures are going to, how that
adjusts in terms of what are we
talking about in terms of
dollars under what I understand,
but the uh
SEG SCG.
How that impacts the overall
budgets that go forward and it
seems like you want a
significant increase for the
Yasi Martinez folks as well, so
I need to understand what that
looks like.
So you can have some time, I'd
appreciate it.
Thank you, Mr. You bet. Thank
you. And, and that's exactly the
kinds of things that they're
here to do when we're in
session, particularly. Yes,
absolutely, so we, um, Daniel,
we'd love to meet with you
tomorrow. Um, we do want to say
the analysis for that bill is
posted for House Bill 63, which
does include a very thorough
description, but also some
spreadsheets on the back to
actually look at the fiscal
impact, so we'll make sure you
get that as well.
Other questions this time.
LESC will be in the room with us
on a regular basis. Um, we can
ask them questions as we're
going through bills. They also
are very good about getting back
or looking it up on the fly,
Daniel astounds me. It's
actually quite frightening
sometimes is you ask a question,
he's like, oh, that's on line 32
or line 181. Yeah, it's like,
how, you know, is this your
nighttime, bedtime reading to,
to memorize this stuff, but he's
amazing. The staff is wonderful
and very helpful and supportive.
Please take advantage of.
That.
Anything else?
Anything else we need to talk
about?
We will be meeting Wednesday at
9 o'clock.
Same time, same bat station, uh,
we have seen that channel, uh,
that's right, this channel not
stations back then, uh, but, uh,
we're gonna try and start right
about 9 o'clock. We've got about
5 or 6 bills. We'll see if we
get through all of those. If
not, we'll roll the other ones
over. I, there are more bills
gonna to be introduced and
dropped into the education
committee and we'll start
working our way through them. So
thank you all, thank you all for
our regular partners who are
here and again, welcome to
Senate Education. We have a
great year coming.
