got agreements with them for in
state level tuitions for those
programs and likewise they come
in here. So we'll have a
presentation of that on Friday
morning.
Oh, if not, then Senator
Padilla, the early childhood
trust fund.
Uh, good morning, Mr. Chairman
and Mr. Vice Chairman and Mr.
ranking member and members of
the committee, uh, so always
great to come to you. I served
on this committee for 9 years
and sat in that chair for 9
years and um I'm here with Madam
Secretary Elizabeth Ginski of
the Early Childhood Education
and Care department and Shelly
Strong, who is the chief counsel
for the department. Uh, we're
here before you today on and I'm
Senator Michael Padil and uh
we're here on Senate Joint
Resolution 6, as you know, uh,
New Mexico made a gigantic
decision.
years ago to create the early
childhood and care department.
Early childhood education and
care department and we want to
make sure that it is funded in
perpetuity and this is one of
the most important things that
we can do to make that happen,
um, essentially, uh, the fund
will provide dedicated financial
resources for prenatal and early
childhood programs and services
enhancing support for children
from birth until they are
eligible for kindergarten, uh,
some of the key provisions in
the measure are that it creates
the early
Childhood Trust Fund, it creates
um the standard investment and
earnings management strategy
that we use for all of our funds
here in New Mexico. It does
create annual distributions of
5% of the 3-year average of the
fund or $500 million.
Some of the key reasons we want
this done is that it creates
again that sustainable funding
for early childhood programs,
um, it enhances child
development outcomes, which
we're already starting to see.
Uh, there is a massive economic
benefit for every um there's a
13 to 1 return on early
childhood programs. Uh, this was
a study conducted by Dr. James
Heckman of the University of
Chicago, uh, Mr. Chairman, I
know you're very well aware of
that that that study that was
done and and those are 13 to 1
future benefits.
1313 to $1 on every dollar that
we invest. It just, you know,
for the rest of that child's
life, you can't beat that
investment return. Uh it does
support the families, um, that,
that we've um
We're supporting here, uh, been
at it all weekend, Mr. Chairman,
so I apologize if I'm a little,
uh, literally was in this
building, um, so again, we did
make this major decision here in
New Mexico and I just want to
say that uh this fund is doing
exactly what we were expecting
it to do. It's only doing it a
lot faster. And now we have a
way to ensure that early
education is um is protected
that way. So I'm gonna ask the
secretary to say a few words and
then we'll go in whatever
direction you'd like. Thank you.
Thank you, thank you, um,
Senator Peril, uh, Mr. Chair.
members of the committee, um,
just want to echo what the
senator said and really
emphasize what he what he says
it's doing better than expected
and that really is due to the um
oil and gas and the federal
mineral leasing and the revenues
we've seen from that. I think
the other thing that it's
allowed us to do is really lead
the nation in early childhood,
you know, we're number one in
our early intervention program
for finding children under the
age of 2 with we we've set the
trend for what it means to
provide a universal um prenatal
to 5 system. So I think to
ensure
our children, we improve our
school readiness, we improve our
maternal and infant health
outcomes, really encourage this
committee to, you know, help
pass at a joint resolution 6 so
that the voters can decide
whether this fund should remain,
um, should be protected by the
Constitution, what is not
protected are, are the
distributions, um, are what goes
in how the funds are
appropriated into the trust
fund. And again, if all state
revenues were needed to balance
the budget, you could get into
the early childhood trust fund.
So I think those are important
things to know, um, but we've
we've had great success, and I
hope you all feel proud and uh
have have heard that from your
constituents as you've traveled
the state. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. That's our
opening statement.
Thank you. First, out to the
audience, those in support.
in opposition.
Supporters would like to come up
the microphone. You have up to 2
minutes.
JD
Thank you. Good morning, Mr.
Chairman, members of the
committee. My name is JD
Bullington and I am speaking to
you today on behalf of the
Greater Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce and the Puebla of
Laguna. The early childhood
Trust Fund has been a booming
success, and we should keep it
that way, free from political
influence and secure for future
generations. Early education and
care is a critical to the state
for cultivating our future
workforce. Our maternal labor
force participation rate is 10%
higher than the national.
Savage, and that's due to our
incredible investments in early.
Early childhood education and
care. Research suggests that 13%
return on investment.
On our investments in early
childhood education, so this
resolution provides a stable and
predictable funding source for
early childhood programs and
services, the chamber and the
Pubblo of Laguna urge you to do
pass this bill, this resolution.
Thank you JD
When, welcome back. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Um, good morning, Mr.
Chair. My name is Gwen Perea
Warnerman, and I am the
president and CEO of the Lano
Foundation. Uh, we urge you, a
strong due pass for this
resolution. It protects a
critical legacy that you as a
legislature have established,
um, incidentally, as you heard
from Senator Padilla, this type
of investment has the highest
return for our society. Uh,
given an appropriately
conservative FIR from your
legislative finance.
Committee, uh, that still states
long term sustainable fund
maintenance over time, um, and
this amount of funding will can
transfer and support home
visiting, um, pre-K, um, as you
heard from the secretary,
childcare assistants and all of
these are upstream endeavors to
support the health and
well-being of our children and
families. In particular, I'm
here representing um rural
communities across northern New
Mexico. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Gwen. Yes, ma'am.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee. My name is
Barbara Luna Tedro, and I am a
provider in Farmington, New
Mexico and have been for 25
years, and more importantly, I
am the policy chair for the New
Mexico Early Childhood
Association, and in 2020 we
worked very hard and very
closely with the late Senator
John Arthur Smith on the early
childhood Trust Fund. We worked
collaboratively and we were told
that we should, um, work
together to make sure that we
had a fund to take care of the
early childhood workforce.
The late Jenners, um, late
Senator John Arthur Smith
promised us that we would have a
fund that we could take care of
the workforce because without,
without a workforce, we do not
have early childhood and so we
are still here 5 years later. We
are waiting so that we can work
together with the department. We
are wanting to work with Senator
Padilla to protect this fund so
that we can get the things that
we were promised back in 2020.
The early childhood workforce
needs higher wages. We need a
retirement plan and we need a
medical benefits.
And this bill urges and protects
the fund so that we can get
those things that we were
promised back in the day in
2020, so we need those funds to
take care of the workforce, so
to please pass and we urge you
to pass this joint resolution to
protect the funds for what it
was meant to do in 2020. Thank
you.
Thank you.
Yes, ma'am. Good morning. My
name is Bridget Dixon. I'm the
president CEO of the Santa Fe
Chamber of Commerce, and we
represent over 600 member
businesses here in Santa Fe. The
Santa Fe chamber, we strongly
believe that access to quality,
affordable childcare is
essential for a thriving economy
and workforce. We recognize the
childcare challenges place a
significant burden on our
working families and turn the
business community. That's why
the Santa Fe chamber we invest
in invest by having an
employer-based childcare task.
We offer childcare at every
event because we know that when
parents have reliable childcare,
they can fully participate in
workforce and contribute to New
Mexico's economic success.
The early childhood trust fund
provides a stable long-term
investment in our future
workforce by ensuring families
have access to essential early
childhood programs. Businesses
across New Mexico are
struggling.
And with workforce shortages and
the, and the availability of
early childhood education
directly impacts parents'
ability to work, earn, and live
and help grow our economy by
constitutionally protecting this
fund, we safeguard these
critical resources for
generations to come here in New
Mexico and we stay competitive.
We urge you to continue to, to
support this resolution. Thank
you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee. My name is
Rebecca Barron Reese, and I work
at Growing Up New Mexico, which
is an early childhood nonprofit
serving thousands of families
across the state. We deliver
home visiting, childcare, pre-K,
early pre-K, as well as business
and quality supports for
home-based childcare programs.
We strongly support SJR 6 to
ensure the prenatal to 5 system
sustains the necessary stable
and predictable source of
funding to build a full and
comprehensive.
System to serve all families,
including infants and toddlers
with developmental delays, home
visiting, childcare, pre-K, and
the wages that we need across
the workforce to truly recognize
and compensate our early
childhood professionals and I
think you heard from some of our
other partners that this truly
is a cross-sector investment
that boosts the entire economy,
so we do hope you support this
resolution. Thank you.
Thank you.
Yes, ma'am. Good morning, Mr.
Chair. Good morning committee.
My name is Gabrielle Lubaaz. I
am the executive director of New
Mexico Voices for Children, and
we stand in support of this
joint resolution, as many of you
may know, New Mexico is one of
only 5 states in the nation to
have a dedicated early childhood
department at a cabinet level.
We are a leader. Last year, we
brought experts from across the
nation to see what we're doing
in New Mexico. And so, we want
to ensure that this funding
continues to support our most
Precious, precious resource, our
children. Um, also, I wouldn't
be voices if I didn't give you
some stats, um, over 50% of
families who take advantage of
this funding make $47,000 or
less a year for universal
childcare. And as you saw in the
news, $23,000 is the average
cost to have two kids in
childcare at this time. The
other stuff I would like to
share for you is we're building
something from the ground up,
and we've done a lot in 6 short
years. Um,
50% of our child care centers
are now 5-star centers. That's a
10% increase in quality in 6
years. That's a really hard
thing to do. We want to keep
building, we want to keep
growing. So help ensure that
this fund stays dedicated to
young children and services for
children even before birth
because of the inclusion of
prenatal services. Thank you and
thank you, Senator Padilla.
Thank you.
Buenos dias, Mr.
Chair.
Uh
Padilla.
For proportionate
constitutional and significant
For proportionate constitutional
and significant la mejora
de la remuneras delos primera
infans.
Apiaristas mejora minorafancia
compensation professional
chemos.
Esthera constitutional is
necessary buttestura
quelaletura creo prime.
I guess you can.
Porque
is professional denial
Mexicans ran
infantil
pue gracias.
and we're very fortunate we do
have a translator who will
translate uh roughly what she
said. Thank you. Uh, good
morning, uh, Mr. President and
members of the committee. My
name is Karen Gonzalez, and I am
a member of OA. I want to thank
Senator Padilla for proposing
the constitutional amendment.
Our governor and legislator have
made significant progress in
improving the pay of early
childhood educators. Despite
this improvement, we still have
a long way to go. Most uh early
childhood educators still live
in poverty and are well below
the professional compensation we
deserve. This constitutional
amendment is necessary to
protect the
that the legislator created for
for early childhood education
and to ensure that they remain
permanent because until all
early childhood educators are
lifted out of poverty and
enjoyed professional wages that
value both their credentials and
years of experience in New
Mexico must continue to increase
its investments in early
childhood education. This
amendment will allow us to
continue building the model
early childhood education system
that all, all our communities
want and that the rest of the
country can follow. Thank you.
Thank you.
My name is Terrence Mantilla and
I'm a parent and a member of OA.
I stand in support with SJR 6
because early childhood funding
should be constitutionally
secure with their early
childhood trust fund. Insuring
long-term funding for prenatal
programs in early childhood
programs until a child is
eligible for kindergarten, even
though New Mexico has done more
than other states in early
childhood education by raising
pre-school teacher wages, but
many of them are still in
poverty, by passing SJR 6, New
Mexico will secure these
resources needed to establish a
professional wage and career
ladder.
uh, for early educators to end
the cycle of poverty wages that
has persisted for generations.
Additionally, as federal funding
for childcare becomes
increasingly uncertain, SAR 6
were guarantee that New Mexico's
children will be funded their
programs, even if the federal
government falls short of its
obligations. Please vote yes for
SJR 6 to help build a more
sustainable, prosperous future
for New Mexico's children's
families, and educators. Thank
you.
Thank you, and we have one on.
On Zoom, and so, uh, Deborah
Baca.
Good morning. I am Deborah Baca,
vice president of the Early
Childhood Education and Family
Development Division at Youth
Development and also board
member of Voices for Children,
and we stand in favor of SJR 6
at YDI we provide 4 home
visitation programs, model
programs, as well as
center-based services at 26
centers in 3 counties,
Bernalillo, Riariba, and Taos
County, not only do we provide
Head Start services, but we also
collaborate with the ECEC.
CD department to offer pre-K
services. The foundation created
an early childhood education
lasts a lifetime, not only in
child outcomes but also family
incomes. I strongly urge the
favorable uh passing of this
bill to create the early
childhood Trust Fund to be used
exclusively for prenatal and
early childhood programs. Thank
you very much.
Thank you. I don't, was there
anyone in opposition in the
room?
When in opposition
And if you would like to make
any comments, we'll go to
questions from the committee. I
want to respect the committee's
time. I think the the speakers I
couldn't have said it any
better. Thank you.
Thank you. So questions from the
committee.
Senator
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much, Senator Padilla and
secretary. I'm kind of confused
because on some of.
were made, they were talking
about wages.
Right now I know that you have
360 employees, is that correct?
That's what you told me that
Saturday.
So I'm, I'm confused here, is
this going towards wages, I mean
80% of it, it sounds like it's
gonna be going.
to uh
Uh, personnel. Is that correct?
Uh, yeah, Mr. Chair, Senator
Zel, yes, and the employees that
they're they're referencing are
the people that we contract or
provide grants to, so childcare
businesses across the state,
home visiting programs, early
intervention programs, so the
department takes the funding we
get from the legislature and
then contracts or grants it out
to community-based.
And those rates, yes, exactly.
I'm sorry, yeah, and the way we
set those rates is we we.
We include how much their staff
should be paid and so it's based
on 80% of that rate ends up
being used to pay their
employees.
I'm sorry, I'm really confused
here. Pay whose employees?
The um entities that we either
contract with or provide grant
agreements to.
So Mr. Chairman and Senator
Padilla and secretary.
We are talking then about
private enterprise being part of
this.
Uh, Mr. Chair and and Senator,
yes, absolutely. We want to
ensure that the private
providers are able to compensate
their workers, which you heard
from a few today at a
commensurate rate for the work
that they're doing. Uh, this
will help ensure that those
salaries are protected and, and
essentially enhanced over time
based on knowing that that
there's a sustainable funding
source for.
Mr. Chairman and Centro and
secretary.
We are talking about private
facilities, is that correct?
That's correct. OK, I just want
my, I want that very, very
clear.
Um
These funds can't, Mr. Chairman
and Senator Padilla.
And Madam Secretary.
These funds can possibly be
swept, isn't that correct?
Um, Mr. Chair and Senator, I
want to make sure I understand
your term of sweat, you mean for
other purposes in state
government. This can be accessed
even after this whole exercise
is complete. These, these
dollars can be utilized should
there be a need.
And Mr. Chairman and Senator
Padil and Secretary.
I just want to point out that
all this money we are spending
like hand over fist, folks. This
is what bothers me. It may not
be there soon.
This money is coming in from the
oil and gas industry, we have
them to think.
And Mr. Chairman,
Senator Padilla
With the current state of what
is happening up here in Santa
Fe. I'm very, very worried that
we may not have an oil and gas
industry in our state, and that
is very troublesome because the
jobs it provides, what it does
for a state's budget, what it
does to help our kids schools,
our libraries, first responders,
the list goes on and on, so we
do have them to think and I
think oftentimes that they're.
Be upon other than being thank
you for your work.
So I just want to point that
out.
Um, Mr. Chair and Senator Ezel,
I, I completely agree with you.
It is never lost on me. Thank
you for the oil and gas industry
does for the state. I can I do
at least
I would say almost every year
that I've been here, I've gotten
up on the Senate floor when
we've had this conversation and
thanked oil and gas for redoing
my elementary schools and mid
schools and helping this program
and what have you this is what
we're here for today is to
protect that funding for in
perpetuity. It simply has done
it faster than we expected.
And Mr. Chairman, Senator
Padilla's secretary.
Under the technical issues, and
I'm assuming that you do have
the FIR.
I've kind of got a problem there
because the comment that the SIC
made.
State Investment council.
The states because this bill
changes the name of the current
early childhood education and
care fund, and it, it notes the
section right there.
To the early childhood trust
fund, but it doesn't repeal.
The existing ECECF.
So what is going to is one going
to go away if this one is
adopted by the voting public
as far as
senators, that's absolutely
right, uh, but you have to have
this happen in a in a chain of
events we do actually already
have and it's already moved its
way through its first committee,
the enabling language also.
OK
we're trying to be as proactive
on this thing as possible. OK,
well, that was my concern. I, if
there's a concern from the state
investment council. I just
wanted that pointed out that
there is going to be a sequence
if the voters do elect to do
this.
Let's see what's my other
question here, that one's
already been answered there.
I mark up my pages.
Let's see.
Mr. Chairman and Senator
Padilla's secretary.
Will this fund to be totally
self-sustaining will we have to
come back to the legislature to
get more money on it. Will this
be a recurring expense to the
state budget that's coming out
of the general fund.
Mr. Chair and Senator Reel, I'm
so glad you asked. I was hoping
one person on this committee
would ask me a question similar
to that.
Uh, the beautiful thing about
what we're doing here right now
is
This is very close, very quickly
gonna reach a $500 million a
year, um,
Distribution, the, the funds to,
to fully fund early childhood
education and care in the state
when I created that department,
I had no idea how quickly that
we were going to be able to fill
that self-funding gap. Uh, we're
somewhere between $800 million
and a billion dollars a year to
provide early education, I would
say that by 2030, 2035, if the
trends continue, which they
appear to be, and that they're
going to continue, we won't put
another penny of taxpayer
dollars into early education
will simply fully.
it through this mechanism here.
Can you imagine how quickly and
how wonderful that is for all
New Mexico children. It's really
just truly amazing. I cannot
believe we're here at this place
at this time.
I'm so glad that it was the
whole reason I ran for the
legislature to begin with. I'm
gonna be able to see this in my
lifetime. I assumed it was gonna
be someone else after me that
was gonna have to work hard to
get this done. Thank you for
that, I like your passion on
this, Mr. Chairman Senator
Padilla, the secretary, how much
money is in the fund right now?
Approximately, I believe it's
9.2 billion or is what the
projection is for this year,
somewhere in that neighborhood.
$9.2 billion is what's in the
fund right here
at the end of 25.
So
Mr. Chair
here and uh center and
secretary.
Oh
But right now the ask is what?
Um, Mr. Chair and said it'd be
asked.
Can you clarify that there will
be another investment made into
this, so what is the ask for
this year?
Investment, Mr. Chair and
senators into the fund, OK,
that's hard to determine. It's,
it's going to be whatever the
the funding mechanism, the the
the um.
The,
the, uh, what's
the just right.
Yeah, Mr. Cha, exactly here all
week I'm I'm just can't. I need
some coffee. I think it's um
it's as it's outlined in the
current statute, um, you know,
it's the surplus and it fills
the tax stabilization. There's a
tech a stabilization reserve and
then whatever's left flows into
the trust fund.
That's how and thank you, yeah,
uh.
That's what I was trying to say.
Um.
But so it's hard to tell exactly
what that's going to be, but
with current trends it's looking
as though by the end of 25, the
fund will be valued.
Whatever that distribution is
and all the really smart people.
Sonny Lou and others that are
sitting behind me, uh, can
probably tell you this is, is
gonna be a valued at
approximately 9.2 billion.
OK.
Thank you very much for that
whenever you're talking about
the number of employees, Mr.
Chairman and Senator Padilla and
Secretary.
You said right now currently
there's approximately 360
employees.
What is the distribution?
Of these employees, where are
they located? I want to know.
My kids are just as important as
anybody else's.
ask the secretary to take that
one. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
Senator Rosel, and as we talked
on Saturday, I, I can give you
the list we have about 27, 2.
9 offices around the state, um,
down in your park, Travis and
Roswell and Hobbs and Clovis,
um, we have them in Deming, uh,
we have them in Las Cruces, so
we have staff all over the state
depending on, and we've been
building that out as the
department has grown, so we used
to just have the childcare
assistance and childcare
regulators out in those offices
now we have home visiting staff,
we have pre-K staff as the
programs have expanded. Uh, we
have programs up in Farmington,
offices in Farmington, so I can
give you the break.
though but opposite but to be
clear, the the staff that
benefit most from these
resources are the ones that are
out there in the communities,
and that's about right now
18,000 early childhood
professionals who are providing
services in early, you know,
anything from prenatal up to age
5.
So through the mixed delivery
system. So uh you can guess that
about half of those are private
providers and those are some of
the only options in some of our,
our community center.
You you know that, I know that.
And you're exactly right,
Senator Padilla, Mr. Chairman,
whenever I'm talking about our
rural areas, I am talking about
those particular areas that are
hit the hardest as far as trying
to find any good childcare or
any help.
With
prenatal care on all the way up,
so Mister Chairman and Senator.
Um
I've lost my train of thought
here.
And I know everybody out in the
audience is probably going,
yeah.
And, and well, Mr. Chair,
Senator finds her I want to just
make a correction on something
that I said. I want to make sure
the record is correct. I said
that by the end of 2025, the
fund would be a valued at
approximately 9.2. It's actually
9.6 billion.
9.6. By the end of this year.
Thank you for that.
9.6 billion, that's Mr. Chairman
and Senator, I'm assuming that
there will be yearly audits done
on this fund. Absolutely, yes.
SIC.
Independently
Mr. Charon and all of the
standard auditing processes
applied to this fund just like
any others. OK, I just wanted to
make sure that that's awful lot
of money.
Mr. Chairman and senator.
Oh, it's over here on this I
guess it was.
This was started by uh Senator
John Arthur Smith, Mr. Chairman,
and Senator Padilla, can you
tell me what year this?
He, he proposed this
legislation.
Mr. Chair and Senator, there
would be 2020 as well as
representative uh Doreen
Gallegos OK.
And Mr. Chairman, I guess my
question is to to the secretary.
Has there been an instance where
there has been any people that
did not want the help of.
provide.
Mr. Chair, Senator Azel, all of
our programs are voluntary.
So people only take them up.
And if there is um a desire so.
Mr. Chairman and Centripe as
secretary.
And this is applicable to all,
even though our birth rate is
down in the state of New Mexico,
this is applicable to all
parents, all mothers that may be
expecting soon.
Will it start in the hospital or
prior to?
Mr. Chair, as Senator Roel, such
a great question, um, yes, it
starts, um, prenatally, could
start as soon as they learn
they're pregnant, they can
enroll in our home visiting
programs, we also, um, are
working and have started and
have been certified in
Bernalillo for a family
connects, which is every family
in New Mexico who has a baby
born in a hospital, gets at
least 1 if not 2 or 3 visits to
make sure that they have what
they need and that mom and baby
are doing well and it's a nurse
who does that visit, so we only
have that right now in the.
a Leo area, but the goal is
statewide and again with these
funds being able to to expand
that to every birthing hospital
in New Mexico.
OK, Mr. Chairman, I guess you
brought up a very
Another question I have here
whenever you're talking to about
every baby that is born in a
hospital. There are lots of
mothers that do give birth at
home. What is the protocol
there?
Mr. Chair, Senator Azel, I mean,
similarly, many of our home
visiting programs work closely
with like the New Mexico doula
Association, the breastfeeding
task force lactation
consultants, so they're all part
of our what we call our early
childhood ecosystem. OK.
And so Mr. Chairman and
It's been quite a while ago, is
the Lalay League still a factor
in New Mexico, I might, Senator,
you know, this really is about
setting up this fund not about
the specific programs to make
sure that the money that
that we're putting in there is
being put to use for the benefit
of these children.
So that's
Senator, I can't, I don't know
if they are. I don't know. I'm
aware of what you're talking
about, but I don't know OK.
So Mr. Chairman and
Senator Padilla, whenever we're
talking about this trust fund,
it will go to the voters and if
this does pass, will it be on
the 2026 ballot.
Uh, Mr. Chair and uh Senator, it
should, should we get it through
the legislature this year um and
then like as I mentioned, we do
have Senate Bill 167, which is
the enabling language.
Or a statute and we hope to get
this fully vetted out by 2020.
OK
Mr. Chairman,
Senator and secretary, thank you
very much. Thank you.
Mr. Chair, I move a do pass on
SJR 6. I have a motion for a due
pass. Second, are there other
questions from the committee?
Senator Thornton.
Just one question, uh, Mr.
Chair.
Senator Padilla just
What's the worst that would
happen if this bill is not
passed through this.
I, I believe, Mr. Chair, and
Senator, I think that, you know,
we're gonna well as you can see,
I'm a very shy person.
And so
I will continue working on this
thing until we get it done,
number one, until this money is
protected forever and then 2,
you know, we're gonna have to
have a lot of uncertainty.
You know, we'll just, we'll have
some uncertainty until we get
this done. Uh, but I, I feel
confident that the professionals
that are providing this, these
services and working very hard
in these areas. We'll get this,
we'll, we'll find a way to get
this done, but I think why, why,
why don't we just take that
piece out of the way and keep
plowing forward. We've made this
decision as a people here in New
Mexico and I think this is a
great way to do it.
Thank you. That's all, Mr.
Chair. Thank you, Senator.
Thank you. We're on a Du pass
motion. If you'll call the roll,
please.
Center boom
Yes. Sinriel.
Cinder Figueroa.
Hickey
Senator Nova.
Senator Ramos.
Senator Thornton.
Senator Pope. Senator Souls.
Yes. You have a do pass motion
onto your, your next stop. Thank
you all very much.
And again, just a quick reminder
if you'll quickly punch your mic
on and off as when you make your
votes so that they do get
recorded, um.
We next are going to be going to
Senator Figueroa.
386, then we'll do uh 394 both
of the Gonzalez.
Bills and then on to SB 286, uh,
while you all are getting set up
by personal privilege, would
like to introduce my guests, uh,
Brett and Ashley Hanson.
How they are friends from Las
Cruces. He's a retired
neurologist with the army, you
know, and recently moved about a
year ago to New Mexico and
They say
OK.
Why I get Haley and Ashley.
Haley, and she is a legal
specialist uh with commercial
real estate, but they're both my
guests.
So if you all kind of welcome
them, but, but they're very
interested in what's going on.
Thank you Senator, go ahead.
Thank you Mr. Chair and
committee. It's a great day to
have a guest neurologist.
Um, Mr. Chair, this.
Bill addresses a section of law
that it allows the safe return
of students to school after
they've suffered a concussion.
So according to this bill, if
you see the new language on page
5 and page 10, it allows
chiropractic doctors to join the
list of physicians and medical
providers who are allowed to
sign that student return form.
It does not change the practice
of chiropractic doctors treating
patients who have suffered
sports injuries, that's an area
of specialty.
Um, that's um chiropractic
physicians specialize in.
Um, and I think we'll leave it
there for questions. I will
introduce my expert witness,
Doctor Ryan Rouse, past
president of the New Mexico
Chiropractic Association in case
we have technical questions or
questions about chiropractic
training.
Thank you. Ready for the
audience or?
OK, uh, I'm in the audience,
those in support.
Anyone in opposition?
Bonnie, would you like
Thank you. Good morning, Mr.
Chairman, members of the
committee. My name is Bonnie
Lightfoot, uh, past president of
the Superintendent Association,
current president of the
Coalition of Educational Leaders
on behalf of the superintendents
and the, and the NEMSA
coalition, we stand in support
of this bill. Thank you for the
sponsors, taking care of our
kiddos' brains is important to
all of us. We urge you to pass.
Thank you, Bonnie. Anyone in
opposition in the room?
If you would please go ahead,
whoever's online.
Mr. Chair members of the
committee.
Uh, my name is Doctor Michael
Pritha and I am the vice
president of the New Mexico
Chiropractic Association, and I
work in
Private practice and in a
federally qualified health
center in Albuquerque, and I
stand in support.
Of this legislation.
Thank you. I don't think we had
anyone in opposition, so
questions from the committee.
Senator Hickey.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you.
For bringing this bill forward.
Uh, the, uh, I just got the FIR
so I'm looking for the
Position input from
The uh legislative council and
Um
So I'm
Trying to
See if they had any particular
comment on that. Um, I'm a
little unclear.
As I read through the bill.
That
It it talks about protocols and
being in being trained in the
protocols. Where are these
protocols come from? Who does
the training?
And overseas that the training
is completed.
And uh that the individual is
fully qualified. I don't see
that stated in the bill. It just
talks about coaches being. And
Mr. Chair and senator, that's uh
not a section of the bill we're
changing that in a different
place in law, we are simply
adding a chiropractic physician
to the list on page 5 where you
see um.
That a licensed healthcare
professional in this list.
Is a physician or an osteopathic
physician or a nurse
practitioner, um, or an
osteopathic physician assistant
and in each it says licensed
according pursuant to their
provisions, right? So we are
adding.
A practicing
Chiropractic physician licensed
pursuant to the chiropractic
physician Practice Act.
And that is where the licensing
protocols come into play,
they're not in this bill.
Um
This chair and, and senator.
I understand that it adds that
the bill, but my understanding
of chiropractic is pretty much
spying on down. It's not the
head.
Now
So
Where is the detailed training.
That somehow gives that
background.
The ability to extend to the
head, where are those?
Uh, connections and
qualifications.
Madam Chair and senator
chiropractic physicians are
trained in etiology, diagnosis,
management of concussions in the
basic education of their degree,
so they're required to do the
coursework in neurology,
neuroanatomy, spinal anatomy,
which you've mentioned,
physiology and diagnostic
imaging, and I will let my
expert witness go into more
detail.
Mr. Chair and Senator, thank you
all for allowing me to be here
today. Our practice Act already
states uh the under diagnostic
procedures specifically
outlining the entire neurologic
system.
Um
And that's already, that's
already in place under the uh
New Mexico Chiropractic Act.
Thank you, uh.
Experts and uh Mr. Chair.
The uh I noticed that the
Analysis done by the committee,
says chiropractic medicine may
Be qualified, that is.
Qualified
Um
I, I also noticed in the act
that
physical therapy.
Um
Is, is put into that and, and
trained.
Athletic or
Specifically trained athletic
trainers.
Um
I'm, I'm, I'm just, I'm, I'm
uncomfortable that in this
expansion of scope of practice
that we're seeing, Mr. He.
And
The state
is starting to push the bounds
of safety and
The uh
Some
individual hasn't had
significant.
clinical training in the entire
body and systems and as it
relates.
Uh, the certainly the signs,
symptoms of concussion can be
nausea is, uh, and, and
Uh
GI, um, other systems may show
up and
I'm, I'm just concerned that
there's not
In here, some sort of reference
to a detailed training manual
for those last ones that I just
mentioned, let alone the
chiropractic.
And, and while I, I am a
An advocate of expanding scope
of practice, uh.
much to the chagrin of my
colleagues, I will be supporting
the optometry laser bill.
Um, but I will not support the
Surgical
Optometry. They just don't have
the training I'm expanding,
trying to expand.
Clinical pharmacy.
Services and they have a very
detailed.
Scope in particular areas where
they have to get not only
academic training.
Uh
over a period of hours in the
class, the training.
Uh, in the clinical arena where
they're actually seeing patients
under supervision and it's very
extensive. I just don't see that
here.
And that makes me very
uncomfortable. I, I would
recommend to you to go back.
Um, and, and expand without a
definition of what that training
is or referring to a manual
again this, this talks about
coaches getting training that
may occur. It doesn't talk about
the training that all of these
ought to have and, and quite
frankly, even physicians, nurse
practitioners and uh physician's
assistants should have.
If, if a, uh, an extensive
course that we know is somewhere
and that is reviewed, and that
is reviewed by neurologist, uh,
uh, neurosurgeons.
Um
And others, to be sure that it's
completely thorough.
So
Uh
I, I, I think, I mean that I'm
glad you brought this to my
attention, and I will bring it
to the attention of the
Department of Health, the
healthcare authorities the
purchasing agency, not a health
authority.
Um, it's really, I mean, it has,
it's, it's an administrative
authority over things. It's,
it's not about health per se.
Um, but I, I think that we need
to flag this for future.
Um
Program in the department.
Of health that anyone who's
doing this training has are
doing this assessment.
Has a
particular training package that
applies. So until I see that, I,
I can't simply extend go to
extend these privileges. Um, I
think we need to go back to the
drawing board and bring it back
and quite frankly bring it back
for everyone.
Not picking up a concussion.
And
Is, is could be.
Essentially, uh,
Very devastating to a child.
And I, I mean, and, and you just
have to watch football.
Um, and you see some of these
people are taken out for 3 and 4
weeks on the basis of that,
that's in some, some of them get
to go back out on the field.
That's really pretty technical
training.
And I think that even for kids,
that for kids, we should have
even.
More depth in training. So, um,
I'm, I'm not saying this just
to, to chiropractors alone. I'm
saying it across the board, we
need to take this much more
seriously as we understand the
brain injuries and the terminal
uh concussive injuries, uh, over
a lifetime. And if you start
that at a very young age.
It would be
probably
Probably.
can only guess and include.
Probably include the
Um
Likelihood of more serious
disease later in life.
So I, I appreciate you being
bringing this and we'll bring it
up with the Department of Health
and some sports medicine and
neurology and see if we can put
something together.
Through the UNM Health Sciences
Center that everyone, thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator is out.
Other questions.
The
I've got a couple of questions
or concerns similar to uh
And Hickey is that typically
chiropractors.
Aren't dealing with the, the
head injury with
Is there a
Problem, I guess you know I'm
one of our analysis it says
they'd be empowered to examine
youth athletes after a brain
injury and certify their
readiness to return to
competition.
You know, that requires really
detailed knowledge about
concussions, concussion
protocols, you know, how long
and things of that sort, which
is not typically areas that
Chiropractors.
Function in, and I recognize
that they get a broad general
education to begin with, but so
do ophthalmologists and and
others who certainly wouldn't be
working in this area. So please
try and alleviate my concerns.
Sure, Mr. Chair, and, and to the
senator's concern as well. This
is about keeping students safe
and this piece of law is in our
education, public education
code, not in our health code, so
it doesn't address scope of
practice, it doesn't change
scope of practice for any of the
practitioners listed on page 5
and 10. What it does is say that
if these folks are part of the
team treating a.
child who's had a concussion.
Then these are the folks who can
sign off on their form to
return.
There are chiropractic doctors
who specialize in sports
medicine to an extreme degree,
including neurology and
concussion, and if they are part
of a student team treating, um,
we're adding them to the list
who can sign off and say they
have completed treatment, they
are able to return to practice,
this is already being done in
terms of treatment, we have
chiropractic physicians who are
treating these students in.
their sports medicine
specialties. So all we're doing
here is allowing them to say
they have completed that
treatment in terms of
preparation and practice, I
would say that I'm practicing
chiropractic physician.
probably has more training.
Well, I shouldn't say that. I'm
not gonna go down that road, but
look at the folks who are on
this list, we are talking about
a physician.
Would you like to add anything,
Doctor Rouse,
thank you for the question. And
she speaks to an important
point. I'm gonna just share a
quick story. I was unaware that
this was even an issue until 4
years ago.
And
We, every day in our office, we
see concussive cases based on
slip and falls, based on car
crash, all these different
things that come into our office
and we are in fact seeing these
patients. This is just
particular to the release of a
sports athlete in high school,
uh, who is supervised by the NMA
under the rules of the NMAA.
So I was on the on the cusp of
Purchasing a very expensive
software that would not only
help for diagnostic purposes,
but also for treatment and
Um, released back to life care,
school, sport, or these
athletes.
There was an incredible uptick
in the young athletes in San
Juan County, who we were seeing
particular to soccer.
So I reached out to the uh the
local athletic trainers at the
high school, and they said, wow,
this would be great. So then
looked forward to, they said,
well, let us check with the
NMAA. So the NMAA says, well,
I'm sorry, but you're not listed
as in under their rules as a
qualified medical provider.
OK. So where did the NMAA come
up with their list of qualified
medical providers and they took
that straight out of the
original SB 38, a piece of
statute.
That was last amended in 2017.
So that got me down the rabbit
hole of we're already doing
this.
I would like to help more as it
pertains to that small.
piece of the population and keep
our kids safe.
And then was simply told, well,
we're sorry.
You, you're not, you're not
gonna be allowed to do that
anymore.
Thank you, and, and I appreciate
lots of that going on, um.
Certainly
Chiropractors, there are lots of
injuries and student athletes
that have to do with the spine
and the.
Um
The structure of the bone
structures and other things.
This is specifically towards
brain injuries.
Um
I know there's a shortage. I, I
guess I'm, I'm just
I'm a little torn on both
directions. I, I recognize the
need and to get people out there
and that you're already doing
some of it.
But that seems beyond what
typically people go to
chiropractors for is usually not
a brain injury, but more of a
spinal injuries and
Structural injury, so, but I'll,
I'll leave it there. Senator
Rosel, I think you had
questions.
Not on this one? OK.
Ramos, Mr. Chair, Senator,
Out of the 457 active licenses,
how many would be qualified
through the already protocol.
the
Mr. Chair and Senator, are you
referring to the licensed
chiropractic physicians in the
state of New Mexico under the
current Practice Act, any of
those chiropractors could be
qualified to treat concussive
cases.
Thank you.
Senator Hickey.
OK.
That's the issue.
You can get blanket permission.
We need to go back. I mean, this
is a very, very serious injury
area, and we need to go back and
relook at who, whatever the
license.
They've got to have the
training.
do this very specific skill set
that needs to be.
Thank you.
of the committee.
Anybody?
Mr. Chair, I move a no wreck.
have a motion for a no wreck.
a second for that.
For people watching and no wreck
means it would continue on out
of this committee, but not with
a favorable or an unfavorable,
it just moves on.
Uh and goes to judiciary.
So and seconded by Senator
Boone. You'll call the roll on a
no wreck.
Cinder boom.
Yes.
cell
Yes
Cinder Figueroa
Sender Hickey.
en ger nova.
Center Ramos.
Senator Thornton
No
Senator Pope
No.
Tender souls. No.
With that.
So it does not move on, uh, and
I believe that means it just
Didn't, did not get a due pass,
so anybody.
And so without recommendation.
Didn't
did not
Yes
did not pass out of our
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair
and committee.
Oh he's no wrecks in some of
those you have to be careful
cause they sometimes feel like
they're opposite of what, what
you think you're voting on.
Um, next, uh, Senator Gonzalez,
and you have 2 bills in front of
us. You want to start with the
UNM Tas Observatory.
For every, for everyone in the
room and online, we are now on
Senate Bill 394 UNM Taos
Observatory, Senator Gonzalez,
you now have the floor.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee, um.
With the Senate Bill 394.
Um, there's some history to this
and we have been working on this
for a few years.
And uh with this uh does is uh.
A request of 1.5 million.
UNM Tao's observatory
construction and to build this
and uh Mr. Chairman members I
have two expert witnesses that
have a very detailed
information.
And maybe you might guide us to
maybe a few minutes each or can
proceed in telling us about the
request.
Yes, Senator, you can have your
uh experts introduce themselves
presentation.
Um, Mr. Chairman, senators, uh,
good morning, my name is Colin
Nichols. I've been an educator
in Taos County for over 20
years, first at the public high
school, but now he served as
chair of the Science department
at UNM Taos.
I've taught uh science and math
informally throughout the county
and I've found that there's
nothing better than astronomy to
inspire and hook students of any
age.
Um, you're guaranteed a wow, the
first time somebody looks
through a telescope and sees the
moon or the rings of Saturn.
Um
And that is the plan for the use
of the Silo Central Observatory.
The facility will not be used
for academic research.
It's to inspire students and
visitors, and to connect them to
the sky and their cultural and
ancestral heritage.
To get them hooked on stem,
basically.
We want to use the observatory
to train students in science and
math and to start them on a path
where they can get a career, um,
earning a professional salary
and live in the region and
support their families. We also
want to use that facility to
build a a workforce in uh
science and math or the state,
particularly in the space
economy.
So Mister Chairman and senators,
I urge you to support this bill,
and I thank you for your time.
Thank you.
Good morning.
Mr. Chair and senators, I'm
George Rankin and, and I, uh,
retired to about 5 years ago.
And prior to that, I was a
director.
And a contract manager for
University of California to Cal
State universities, University
of Alaska system.
Prior to that for the University
of Texas system and also for
Colorado state system.
Ah, in all my career in those
roles and stuff, I've never seen
a project like this.
uh
affects so many people.
I mean, it affects, you know,
our K through 12 students as
they come up.
It affects the the students at
the university that are
currently attending.
It affects the public,
it affects and is a real boost
for tourism.
For our community and it's uh
it's just amazing how many
people it it it does it.
Uh, my role right now is that
about for about a year I'm a
community liaison.
For the, for the university, I
do that on a part-time basis,
just trying to move the project
forward.
Uh, I'd like to read a couple of
statements and stuff, one from
the university of Taos.
In the observatory is the
developer of STEM workforce. Not
only does the observatory allow
us to contextualize college
level math and science,
therefore training the STEM
workforce, but it's also a site.
3K 12 outreach.
Unimals is a field trip
destination for schools in
northern New Mexico.
Observatory specifically will
help teachers contextualize math
and science skills.
In the pre-K 12 students who
visit UNM Taos.
Observatory is invaluable to an
operating pathways for
3K through 12 students to
matriculate the college.
Importantly, it inspires
students to learn math and
science and apply that
knowledge.
To their interests which may
deal with other disciplines.
Uh
Believe it or not, I have a 12
year old and she attends school
in Taos. Her school is uh Tisa.
And it is a uh spotlight school
for the state, which is the top
level, but
You have kids these days they're
impacted by
Greens and bones and you know, a
lot of things going on in the
world that weren't part of the
world when I was young.
And it's uh, so but it's more
and more challenging for him. So
this really provides an
opportunity.
provide leadership and and
So they can see where they can
go and stuff like that. My
daughter and her friends are.
They lack direction, and I think
that this will give a lot of our
students direction.
In math and science and to the
space economy which is gonna be
a big
Thing for the state is already
is.
There's a couple of statements
by supporters that I think are
really important.
This is we can kind of move on.
We've got a lot of bills we need
to cover today. OK, well.
That I, I just, you know, one of
our biggest supporters and stuff
is, uh.
Mr. Mason, who's uh Ben Mason,
young Mason, who's an executive
producer for the movie All
Mankind, which y'all might
remember from back around the
turn of the century.
He's also the exact creator,
writer, executive producer of
the series Mars, which is really
big like back in 15 and 16, and
uh, you know, he, he's a huge
supporter of it, and I think the
most important statement if I
could just read, read it real
quickly is uh looking up at the
dark sky as a gift for the soul,
especially through a telescope.
You experiences compared to the
thrill of first glimpsing
Saturn's rings or realizing that
a faint smudge of the night sky
is an entire galaxy.
Cello Centro ignite the sense of
wonder inspiring students to
explore the universe.
And reached their fullest
potential.
And that was a statement by
Scott McLaughlin, who is uh New
Mexico's executive director of
the Spaceport America down
south.
With that. Thank you very much
Mr. Chairman, just a couple of
things this also goes in hand in
hand with our outdoor education
program which this would bring
young children to
The observatory.
And transportation has been
worked out, you know, so that
would not be a burden to.
Have uh from the neighboring
schools, charter schools to to
visit this. The other part is
the telescope itself was a
donation.
So this is just to build.
Be able to build to
The structure to place it in.
With that will stand for
questions.
Thank you. First out the
audience, those in support.
I come up to the microphone.
Hold on, we're webcast, it's got
to be on the mic.
Thank you.
You have up to 2 minutes.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
esteemed members of the
committee. I'm Doctor Barbara
Medina and I represent the New
Mexico Association of Community
Colleges, specifically
Chancellor Gutierrez of UNM
Taos. I went to articulate very
briefly the reasons that I want,
would ask that you support this
effort for the observatory in
Taos. Uh, first of all, I
believe it increases the state's
commitment to STEM education.
Secondly, I think it builds upon
the community partnerships that
you've seen evidence this
morning's testimony.
Both the mayor of Taos and other
community leaders are behind
this project.
This project is shovel ready as
Gobonds have already been
expended. This large telescope,
which is 30 inches, will provide
public access, the only other
public access large telescope is
in New England.
There are also letters of
support from Kit Carson
Cooperative.
The Pueblo of Taos will be
involved in the educational
programs. Thank you for your
consideration.
Thank you. Anyone else in
support?
and we've got 2 online in
support, Larry Mapes.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman. Uh
and committee members, I really
appreciate you taking the time
to, uh, hear me. Um, I am a
member of, I'm uh actually on
the board for True Kids One,
which is an organization that
teaches digital media literacy
and safety. We've been in
existence quite a few years.
And I have some very successful
programs with some good solid
results. I've also served on the
uh county Taos County Chamber of
Commerce for many years,
particularly through the
pandemic.
One of the things that has
always been a conversation on
any organizations that I've
served was how to keep our
students, our kids in Taos being
and being able to make a living,
uh, and thus keep our New Mexico
culture alive and our history
alive.
Uh, we have, as we all know,
particularly in the Education
committee, you know, that brain
drain is a very severe problem
for our schools. We do a lot of
training and teaching, only to
have those students leave our
lands. The, the, one of the
things that's so important about
this telescope, and I couldn't
say this enough. And why it's so
important is when a student is
looking through the telescope,
they're looking
Not looking at digital content.
They are not looking at a
human-made creation.
They are looking at something
that happened millions of years
ago, light years away, and for
me, it inspires a wonderment
that leads to questions far
beyond what I
See that inspired me in the
science world that I applied to
my daily life from work to and
work to my relationships.
With the world around me. I'm
not a religious person. That
always changes when I look at
the nights, at our night skies.
For a student to be able to
look.
It
Uh student to look at those
night skies is very inspiring
and it gives them some
inspiration to really ask
questions and be curious, and
probably one of the most
important things.
Thank you.
And
Next we have Mary Guterres.
Good morning. Um,
Chairman stalls and members of
the committee. My name is Mary
Gutierrez. I'm the chancellor at
UNMA. Um, I'll be considered of
your time and just mention that
the
Um, observatory gives us an
opportunity as educators in New
Mexico to contextualize math
education and knowing where we
are in terms of achieving
outcomes in math education in
the state. It's exciting to have
an opportunity that helps
students understand.
Why they're learning what
they're learning in math.
Um, they get to understand it in
terms of application and the
hands-on learning environment of
an observatory.
I'm excited that students coming
to us for field trips will have
that opportunity to be learning
math in that contextualized
environment and that at the
college itself, we would be
helping to continue that work by
preparing students for a STEM
workforce in New Mexico that is
grow increasingly as spacesEM
workforce. So I thank you again
for your support, members of the
committee, chairman, and
especially Senator Gonzalez for
bringing this bill.
Thank you.
Thank you, and we don't have
anyone in opposition. OK.
Questions from the committee,
please. Senator Ramos.
Senator, uh, thank you for
bringing this bill to us today.
How much money is being
collected for this project and
how much has been collected from
the US.
The university funds have gone
into it, the planning and the uh
design of the reservatory. We're
already at 100%.
Uh, completion
Uh, complete CDs and stuff and
shovel ready and ready to go.
That's been uh probably like
$890,000 that have been invested
directly from the university. We
also have the 1.5 million from
the go bond.
The past, OK, so, and that is
the current uh levels of funding
and stuff currently.
Mr. Chairman, uh, senator, so
how much has come from the UNM
Foundation?
And the UNM Foundation itself.
I don't believe we've received
any direct funds from the Union
Foundation at this point. I
could be wrong on that though,
it could be.
And how much money has been
allocated.
I'm sorry to go through the
chair. Thank you.
How much money has been
allocated in the fiscal year 206
UNM budget for the.
In the current budget and stuff
that's going up is uh
There's approximately 4.5 or 5.
5.5 million?
And
Mr. Chairman and Senator, how
much uh money has come out of
the houses and the county of
Taos.
What have they contributed?
The city itself? Yes, sir.
Uh, I don't think there's been a
direct contribution stuff from
the city.
Or from the county at this
point.
They both support it heavily
though.
No further questions, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much, Senator Gonzalez.
Uh, has any
Grant's been given like through
the National Science Foundation,
I mean, they do participate in
projects like this and I'm
Concerned that there are prime
source of funding for
ground-based telescopes, so have
many grants been submitted to
them for the help of this
project?
Um, I researched that, uh.
Excuse me, excuse me, Mr.
Chairman and senators, uh, I
researched that with the NSF.
They had a program uh for a
small amount of money that was
possible, but what we're
assuming right now with um the
NSF is the possibility of
establishing a consortium of
regional schools so that we
could use the facility to train
people, so we're looking at a
building consortium and
curriculum, uh, to offer the
opportunity to a larger number
of students.
Rather than going through NSF
the actual equipment.
And they construction.
Thank you for that response,
Mister Chairman.
Um
Senator
If this is not.
If this is not funded, is there
a possibility that y'all might
have to return the telescope to
whoever donated.
We have so much invested on it.
I really feel that.
You know, if it's not completed
this year, but it might take us
more than one year.
I would say that uh we will just
move forward with building it.
Mr. Chairman and Senator
Gonzalez whenever I'm reading
the FIR and I'm sure you and
your expert witnesses have read
the FIR as well.
It's stating under significant
issues.
that the UNMA estimated the
total project cost to be 13.5
million. So you're asking for
1.5 million, is that correct?
Where's the rest of the money
coming for him?
Senator, as it was mentioned,
there's uh 1 1.5 from the geo
bond.
And then plus there was a.
There was also a grant well from
the legislature we had 1 million
prior year.
of
And with this, it would give you
1.5.
And then there is a request to
the governor and I can't speak
for the governor's staff or her.
That they're also aware that we
have a request to them.
So, Mister Chairman.
You're hoping that with our
help, the legislative bodies
help that you will get the
funding along with the help from
the governor on getting him
understanding.
Mr. Chairman, senator, that is
correct.
OK, Mr. Chairman, I do have to
point out one more time.
Um
We are spending a boatload of
money here, and I know where
that money comes from, and I
hope that Taos County is aware
of where this money is coming
from to fund projects like like
this.
And it is from the highest
grossing business in the state
of New Mexico, and that is the
oil and gas industry.
I, if this, if this does pass,
I'm assuming that y'all will not
be back to ask for more money
next go around.
Mr. Chairman and uh
Senator
I would say that it depends on
the level of what we do.
Have this coming year.
You know,
like
through the
Mr. Chairman
And senators, OK?
Ah
There's the 5.5 million, that
is, you know, in the current
budget that you referred to
later, there's a 21, there's 1.5
and the go bond, 1.5.
And the thing about the project
is it's been scaled.
In, in, in uh phases.
So this money will provide more
than enough money to build the
observatory.
In the amphitheater.
Which are the primary
Portions of, of, of the project.
And we have to delay doing the
classroom component.
And campus green component, it's
not gonna affect that.
And to me, it's like, I traveled
all the way to California to uh
Placerville see community, which
is very similar to the
observatory we're building and
those are the primary
components.
If you have the amphitheater and
the, the, the observatory
itself.
It's like those are the main
features and stuff that will
draw people and support it. The
other ancillary parts like the
campus green that extends down
into the campus.
And said, those can come later,
OK? But what we're trying to do
in this legislative session is
good enough to complete that
first phase and get that
observatory and get the uh
The the the observatory and, and
the amphitheater, which is the
primary components in place.
And so to answer your question,
If we get this funding, we will
be able to complete that.
And it would probably be a minor
amount of money that might
transfer over to complete the
full project.
But it's like face that way so
that first phase will be a
standalone component. That's the
most important, that's 90% of
the of the.
as far as I'm concerned. OK, Mr.
Chairman.
With the
Senator, an expert witnesses
with that.
Explanation you gave me, I'm
assuming there will be a need
for full-time employees at this
observatory, is that correct?
And Mr. Chairman senators, yes,
the intention is to, uh,
Post a full-time post as an
astronomy instructor and a um
observatory director, uh, which
we hope to post in December.
OK, so Mr. Chairman and Senator
Gonzalez, an expert witnesses
whenever you say you're going to
make that posting in December.
It all hinges on what happens
with this particular building.
Um, Mr. Chairman, senators, yes,
that's correct.
OK.
If the governor's money does not
come through, will y'all be back
again? That's my question,
Mister Chair.
a no, Senator.
As I mentioned, you know, the
whole emphasis of um
How we're working uh especially
with Capital Ali, we want to see
projects finished.
So if it's not, you know, then I
would say yes, we would be back.
Thank you.
Other let me see if others
Senator Pope, did you have?
I was just gonna move a Du pass.
394.
Can I get back to your motion
here in just a moment, Senator
Ramos, Mr. Chair, Senator, just
one more question, during your
study, how many users are you
thinking you're going to be
having for a year.
Mr. Chairman and Senator Ramos,
that's a very hard question
because it's new.
And
would like to see the expansion.
Plus first, you know, at the
university level, and also
bringing it down to the lower
grades and to.
The neighboring school
districts, so it's hard to say
but I would say that uh as it's
built.
Eventually, the
participation will increase
every year more and more.
So, uh
You know, I, I see it as being
fully utilized.
Mr. Chairman Sanders, so you're
seeing this as a big economic
driver for
Yes, I do, Mister Min and
Senator Ramos as I do.
Thank you very much, Mr. T.
Thank you. I have a couple of
questions. This sounds like it's
mostly a capital project. Is
that accurate?
Yes sir.
Um, Mr. Chairman, yes.
And
Typically, capital projects are
done either with go bonds,
you've done some of that, um,
and as legislators we each get
capital money for these kinds of
projects. I think senators are
going to be getting about 4.1
million. Are you putting a
million dollars of your capital
towards this as well?
Mr. Chairman, uh, in all
fairness, uh.
You know
I have 4 counties that I
represent, and I have to be
careful in my distribution, but
I do plan to.
Support them and the amount I
don't know yet.
we were several legislators, so
maybe uh.
By having all of us, you know,
we might come to that amount.
Thank you. And, and the reason I
ask is, you know, typically,
again, these kinds of projects,
uh, Senator, you sit on the
finance committee.
Is it common for finance
committee to.
And with general funds, capital
projects like this. I don't
think that's typically how we do
things.
Mister Chairman, in the past,
yes, there has been some.
You know,
It's hard to just recall exactly
which ones, but there has been.
I, I think that's my main
concern is, you know, this
committee, you know, if we
support something like this,
we're gonna have every community
around the state coming and
asking for their capital project
through direct appropriations
out of the general fund instead
of through the normal mechanisms
where we've got fairly robust
mechanisms for capital projects
that have been well funded and
supported the last couple of
years, you know, several years
back, we had a few years where
we got no
Capital funding, but it's been
very robust the last couple of
years, um, you know, I always
see that as for these kinds of
projects, if those are
priorities for those
communities.
Any comments?
Trevino.
Advice to submit uh.
Or a request
No
So we're here and we did that
last year also.
So that's why we're coming to us
to see.
And we can come with a full
funding for.
been able to complete this
project.
And as you mentioned, you know,
through capital Ali.
fairly limited, you know, with
what we can do as far as big.
Big requests such as this.
As individuals.
I just want, you know, when
this.
I'm sorry, Mr. Chair and
senator.
Ah
I just want to make one comment.
It's like when this
Early in the pandemic is when a
lot of this thing occurred, OK?
And since that time.
So, you know, the initial bids
on this were real, real low and
it's all of you probably know,
especially in in rural
communities.
Construction costs have
skyrocketed, OK? So, I mean,
that's part of the problem in
the funding is that.
You know, what was originally
allocated in those days would
have carried it a long ways, but
with the after the pandemic and
the, you know, I mean,
construction costs basically
doubled.
far as labor and his materials.
So that's what creates the sort
of the problem and in my mind,
you know, go bond and what
Senator Gonzalez is asking for.
And the other pieces we have put
together.
And yes, we, I think there is a
real opportunity in the
community to raise additional
funds.
I think we can at least get that
phase one, and I think that
phase one.
It's so critical.
For the area on an educational
basis in the economic
development. I mean, somebody
mentioned, you know, about as
far as tourism. I mean, astro
tourism is becoming a huge thing
and this observatory is designed
and will feed into that and
provide all sorts of, you know,
income and taxation money and
stuff coming into, into the
community, not beyond the
benefit to the students. It's
not just for Taos either. You
gotta realize as the only
observatory with this kind of of
a scope.
This kind of set up.
It's like, it's gonna, you know,
it's gonna be an asset for all
of northern New Mexico, if not
the whole state. There's nothing
in the whole state that's gonna
be like this. Not like we're,
you know, just building another
observatory and it's not just
for the town's community, it's,
it's, it's for the state.
And you know, you'll even get
students from like Southern
Colorado and stuff would be the
closest facility. You gotta go
all the way to Lowell in Arizona
or you know, or down to 4, you
know.
They was, you know, like we're
McDonald's, the big University
of Texas Observatory is.
I, I know the last 20 years I've
gone to.
Griffith Observatory
of seen us on special trip out
there to see how they operate,
which is very similar to our
operation I've been star parties
at University of, I mean, I
don't think people until you go
to those things, if you all have
been, you get a real idea of
what an asset it is economically
and educationally to that area,
you know.
and I don't disagree, it's just
typically we don't fund.
through the general fund, which
means that money's not available
for going into the education
system broadly or other things.
Typically capital types of
things are not funded that way.
Operational potentially would
be, but not typically capital,
and that's my concern.
Any other questions? We have a
motion for a due passed by
Senator Pope.
Is there a second?
Mr. Chairman, I moved with no
wreck.
We have a 2nd motion for a no
wreck which takes precedent over
the, the due pass. Is there a
second on and no wreck?
Seconded by a senator.
If you'll call the role on a no
wreck, meaning it would move
forward but without
recommendation.
Cinder Boone, yes.
y i
Yes. Figueroa,
yes. Hickey.
Cedra Nova Center Ramos.
said Thornton
Popeiner soul. No.
But with a 91, you have a no
wreck on to finance committee.
And senator, your next
No
Oh, I'm sorry, 81. I'm so sorry.
The, the vote was 8-1, not 9-1.
I've had 9 because there are 9
of us and then 1 against and my
brain didn't readjust the other
piece.
Well, I used to teach math and I
miscount papers and people's
like, but you're a math teacher
like I teach math. I'm not good
at counting though I, it's
counting I have problems with.
Uh, Senator Gonzalez, SB 201
public ed reform Fund uses.
Oh, thank you Mr. Chairman, this
is uh Senator Bill 201.
Requires the public education
and Senator, I believe we, we
have an amendment also and so,
you know, you want to move the
amendments that we talk about
that completely or talk about
the bill and then do the
amendment.
Chairman will go ahead with the
amendment.
OK, that way I think they'll
make the discussions, they'll
make more sense because we'll be
talking about what we've got.
So somebody like to move the
amendment.
Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, I'd like to move
the amendment 231123.1.
For discussion purposes, OK, so
we're on the amendment.
Um, and senator or Sonny, would
you like to explain?
And the amendment, the process
of working through that. Mr.
Chairman.
We do have Mr. Sonny Lu from uh
LFC.
As our expert witness, and yes,
he can go into the.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator. Uh, this amendment to
Senate Bill 201, um, expands.
The
available projects.
Designs for evaluation from just
causal impact studies to.
Um, causal impact studies
whenever possible.
And other experimental designs
were appropriate.
That's one of the biggest
changes. Secondly, it does
increase the involvement from
LFC and LESC in designing the
template that PD and DFA will
use for these proposals.
And last but not least, it
expands a little bit, the um
descriptions of who can be
involved in this process, which
allows more stakeholders to
provide input and potentially a
third party. So that, Mr. Chair,
makes a few technical
adjustments is a summary of the
amendment.
Thank you. And, and I'd like to
thank both of you for working
with my staff and working things
out so that we get a good bill
moving through and I know many
hours were put in and got
delayed a little bit because of
that, but I, you know, it looks
to me much better than than
where we started with. So thank
you for your, your hard work on
that.
Um, on the amendment, anyone in
the audience in support.
You know what I'm saying, don't
need to say anything. Anyone in
opposition.
On the amendment
Are we not? OK, uh, questions
from the committee on the
amendment.
Mr. Chairman, move with due pass
of the amendment. Motion for a
do pass on the amendment,
seconded by Senator Figueroa. Is
there any opposition to a due
pass on the amendment.
If not, then we are now.
Voting on an amended bill. And
so now senator Sonny, if you
would like to go through what
this bill does.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Senator.
So send a bill to 1 as amended
would require PD to develop
accountability and evaluation
plans that would be
Approved by DFA LFC and LESC.
Or any initiative that's funded
through the public education
reform Fund.
This bill also moves the
submission deadline for PED's
public school support budget
requests to September 1st, which
is in line with other state
agencies.
Currently, there are 6 major
initiatives in the budget.
contingent on an acting of this
bill totaling $82.5 million for
the next 3 years, um.
The amendment as you passed,
allows for the study of these
programs, essentially turning
the reform fund into a research
fund, um, typically when you see
evaluations from LFC or LESC,
they're a little bit focused on,
you know, what may not be
working well.
Uh this fun would essentially
give the state the ability to
look more at what's working.
And uh make proposals on how
this might affect funding for
schools in the future. With
that, Mr. Charro, it's time for
questions.
Senator, anything else?
Chairman, no, we're ready for
questions.
OK, out to the audience, those
in support of Senate, make sure
I get the right number. Senate
Bill 201.
Some of you like to come.
Speak on it.
Hi, good morning, Mr. Chair. My
name is Gwen Perea Warnerman,
president and CEO of the Linel
Foundation. I'm gonna start by
saying that the uhlannel
Foundation is the largest, um,
foundation committed to public
education, education in general
in the state. Um, so we're very
proud to stand in support of
this legislation, Senate Bill
201. We thank the sponsor, um, a
couple of things about this. I'm
gonna lean heavily on the LESC
analysis. Uh there are 4 things
that this piece of legislation
does that, I'm very proud of.
The first is really strengthens
the kind of accountability
mechanism through which you fund
and partner with state agency.
The second, is it really
supports multi-year budget and
multi-year funding, which I
think is a really strong
positive thing. The 3rd, it
drives innovation, responsibly.
And 4th, it partners with the
state agency in a really dynamic
way. I applaud the amendments
that just went through. Um, I
believe that it, um, does in the
best possible way, a dynamic,
well-developed plan to engage
all involved in education. That
is the best that we can hope
for. I think very highly of the
staff that is involved across
the board. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you, Gwen. Stand, please.
The chairman stand rounds for
the superintendent's College of
Educational leaders, we stand in
support of this amended bill. We
appreciate the amendments. Uh,
we appreciate the timelines that
are developed.
They're clear, they're concise
and school districts can
understand them, it also
relieves school districts from
many mid-year uh engagements
into new projects if we're gonna
use PERF as our uh go to fund
for uh for uh pilot projects,
things like that in the state we
need to really look at what the
dynamics are in local districts,
we think with the amendments we
have solved that and we stand in
full support.
Thank you. Anyone?
No one online, anyone in
opposition.
Right
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. Thank
you for the opportunity to air
some of our concerns with SB 201
this morning.
The agency does support
multi-year funding for
innovative initiatives and
appreciates a focus on
accountability and evaluation,
but this bill is not needed to
do either of those things. SB
201 will add bureaucratic burden
to the agency and could slow the
flow of funds from the PED to
schools. SB 201 is unnecessary
as the PED already submits
evaluation plans with the
submission of the agency's
public school support request,
the education budget.
The PED includes evaluation
plans that align to the
requirements of SB 201. We
already submit those plans to
LFC, LESC, and DFA in just as
part of our normal business.
PED is the agency for education
experts. It's unclear why the
fiscal experts at DFA would be
approving evaluation plans for
education initiatives.
SP 201 would require that the
agency, well, actually would no
longer require the causal
relationship, so that is, um,
that's a concern that we had in
this fixed with the amendment.
Um, the agency is also concerned
about the legislature making
appropriations contingent on
passing of this bill. We saw
last year that the agency lost
$50 million for Indian education
when the appropriation was
contingent on a bill, and the
bill did not pass. And the HAFC
budget, there's 82 million for
attendance, math, school
improvement, and other critical
education initiatives.
There would be significant
student impacts of these
appropriations were not
realized.
Thank you for your time and
consideration.
Thank you, Greg. Anyone else in
opposition?
You were in opposition online?
If not senator or Sonny, any
comments about public comments,
otherwise we'll go to questions.
Mr. Chair, thank you for the
opportunity to make comments,
um.
I just like to give an example
of what this bill intends to do,
which is something you may not
be familiar with.
Parent-teacher conferences,
right? It's really important
when you have
All of the responsible
individuals in the room talking
about what the next steps are to
help improve student outcomes. I
think for too long we've relied
solely on an appropriation.
To the department in hopes that
This game of telephone
sometimes, um.
Produces outcomes. Um, in this
bill.
What it's asking to do is to
make sure all the involved
individuals, the finance people.
The education people.
The Agency for implementation
are on the same room, all having
the same conversation, all
starting from the same page at
the beginning.
So that we're all jointly
accountable for the results that
happen in 3 years.
That Mr. Chair, we stand for
questions.
Thank you. Questions from the
committee.
Thornton
Sorry I came in uh I was trying
to, I thought I was gonna submit
a bill, but
They're delayed. Mr. Chair, uh,
just a question here. It sounds
like we're trying to create a.
Or legislate project management.
Is that?
Sort of what this bill is doing
is it overseeing projects
overall.
And forcing a certain schedule
and just go responsibility and
all this, is that what we're
doing here with this bill?
This chair, Senator.
Yes, in some ways. Um, there is
going to be a lot of.
Setting goals and setting
objectives, having an annual
check-in in which we can see
whether we need to pivot or
adjust.
But for the most part, it's
really trying to place the
planning heavily at the front
end and then letting the
department execute, knowing that
we're all looking at me.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, that's
exactly what project management
is though. It's, it's laying out
the plan.
You know
Setting up a strategy, laying
out the plan, and then, and
then.
Making sure you have checks and
balances as you go through the
plan and as time progresses and
being able to evaluate it.
Uh, uh, it's, it's, I guess I'm
a little concerned that we're
having to legislate this into
the system that's my only
concern. I think it's a good
idea.
Uh, if it's not being done, it's
definitely needed.
And so, um, but I just was
concerned that it
That's normal things, maybe in
my world, I, I, I'm an engineer
and so we typically do this on a
normal basis. So I, I, I thought
I would expect this from ED as
well.
Thank you very much.
questions.
The result
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much, Senator.
Uh, just
Exactly what?
senator sitting down here to my
right said any other business
already does this, and this is a
business. Our business is making
sure our kids are educated.
So whenever you're having these
agencies, I don't know, all
getting together what a con I'm
excited about it.
My question is, Mr. Chairman and
Senator Gonzalez, will there be
any oversight by the
legislature? Will there be a uh
An analysis made that it will be
presented to the legislature. I
think it's important that we
know what is going on to protect
the interests of the children of
the state.
Mr. Chairman, Senator, yes.
You know, as we get a briefings,
so.
Malay, but also um.
You know, through the interim
committees, so yes, there will
be.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for, um,
I have a hard time hearing you,
Senator, I'm so sorry.
Oh
Whenever I'm reading on the
analysis and other.
Analysis I've gotten in my
booklet.
I stated in
March of 24 PED published 122
page report.
Saying how New Mexico had
failed.
Effectively implement several
federal programs. Can you tell
me why, tell me the crux of why
these federal programs had
failed.
Mr. Chair, Senator, I believe
you're referring to the US
Department of Education audit on
PD's processes.
OK, I'm, can you move your
microphone, you don't move.
your microphone. Thank you.
Oh, OK.
Review and audit of PD by the US
Department of Education found
that they were not monitoring
the expenditures from.
Um, on key.
Federal programs such as special
education, Title One programs
that they were not.
Monitoring or evaluating for
impact, there is certain delays
in reporting or they were unable
to substantiate evidence on
certain um federal programs.
So the department said,
You know, you have 60 days to
Finish this corrective action
plan to get
You know your house in order to
make sure that you're
Monitoring and overseeing these
federal programs to the standard
that the US Department of
Education has said.
Um
There is a large influx of
federal aid, as you're well
aware, from the pandemic.
And so that also may have
contributed to some
um administrative burdens at the
department.
OK, Mr. Chairman, Senator, uh,
Can you give me an estimate. I'm
not asking for anything hard and
fast, but can you give me an
estimate about how many millions
of dollars were lost because of
the lack of input from PED.
That went back to the
Mr. Chair, Senator, if you're
referring to the federal
pandemic aid that came out.
Um, there was actually
An authorization for schools to
spend an extra 14 months after
the deadline to spend down their
balances.
To date from the first two
rounds of federal pandemic AIDS
schools have virtually spent all
of that.
And the last I checked they
were.
On track to spend about 85% of
the 3rd round.
Which is nearly a billion
dollars.
Alright.
This is all very interesting. I,
I.
What we're doing up here is
running a business.
That's why we should treat every
every bill that comes in here,
we are looking at this from a
doesn't matter if it's, if it's
educational.
Whatever the other committees
might be out there.
But if we have
Whenever you're stating here in
in the bill DFA consulting with
LFC and LESC.
Mr. Chairman
Senator, I only see this as a
good thing coming about.
What a concept.
Let's, let's communicate with
each other.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much.
Thank you. Other questions?
our Pope.
Thank you Mr. Chair. I just have
a few questions that I don't
know Mr. Chair.
Gonzalez.
Do you happen to have the um I'm
looking.
I wonder if you could kind of
break down. I'm looking at.
Recommendations on the funding,
and I know we were talking about
150 million.
kind of looking at what's laid
out. I think it's seems to be a
little less.
Mr. Chair, um, vice chair.
The LFC and LESC recommendations
had originally recommended 150
million going into the public
education reform fund contingent
on enactment of this bill.
The HFC substitute for House
Bill 2,
Reduces the amount to 82.5
million.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator.
Other questions. Senator
Figueroa, did you have?
Motion you're ready.
I'm ready.
I move a do pass
2nd 201 as amended
and seconded, if you'll call the
roll, please.
Sender boom, yes.
Sini
Yes, Senator Figueroa.
Yes, Senator Hickey.
Yes.
Senator Nova, yes. Ramos.
Senator Thornton
Yes.
Senator Pope
No.
Tinder souls. Yes.
So you have a do pass on an 8-1
vote.
Just to you.
Uh just a real quick comment is
it's very frustrating to me when
we have so much money and our
wealthy that we cut back.
From uh the 150 million back to
80 million makes no sense to me
that we're trying to do things
on the cheap and we've got high
quality people in the LESC, you
know, uh, PE department trying
to do good programs for
education and why we're cutting
back programs like that when we
were have a wealth of money.
Thank you, Senator.
Senator Brant.
And we're now on Senate Bill 286
Education Freedom Account Act.
Remind people we do have a hard
stop in about half an hour.
From now, uh, unless we get a
unanimous from the committee
that they want to continue on if
we don't get to the other bills.
Senator
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, um,
senators, appreciate the
opportunity to present. Sorry I
wasn't ready last week, um.
I wanted to make sure I had an
expert here that could answer
your questions because sometimes
I just don't know everything. I
know I tried to, but.
But uh this is uh very simple,
um, we've seen this, uh, here
before, and proposes educational
freedom Account Act, uh,
proposes educational freedom
accounts for economically
disadvantaged students to use
for private education expenses,
so the big change between this
one and the one I brought a
couple of years ago, um, after
listening to Jerry Ortizi Pino
bringing uh his bill, uh, I
really felt like he was right
that we really need to focus
this on the most at-risk.
children that we have in our
state.
What we know right now is a lot
of our outcomes are based on
what zip code you live in.
we've talked.
For years, Mr. Chairman, in ESC
about how um.
The income level of a family.
Can negatively negatively affect
their ability to get a quality
education. This bill will make
sure that that families up to
200% of poverty level receive
uh.
Bunning to put their children in
the school of their choice.
And that's
what the bill does, Mister
Chairman, and I would like to
introduce my uh expert which is
Jamie Gonzalez who used to work
for PE and and has lots of
educational experience.
Uh,
good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, I've dedicated
over 15 years to an education as
a classroom teacher and also an
education policy, I taught math
and reading at the middle school
and elementary school level in
Albuquerque.
I served as the policy director
for the New Mexico Public
Education Department and oversaw
regulatory changes under
Governor Martinez.
I lie to advocacy and policy
efforts um at a nation on a
national level for multiple
nonprofits.
Um, my experience is rooted in
ensuring that all kids have
access to high quality
educational opportunities, which
is why I was excited to sit here
next to Senator Brant and help
him move along his work.
Um, I am married to a 19-year
veteran APS teacher, um, and I
fully understand what teachers
and students are facing today.
Um, SB 286 represents a critical
opportunity to expand options
for all New Mexico families. And
I think it's something we really
need to talk about in this
state, considering the recent
NAEP scores, 14% of our eighth
graders are on grade level in
math, 19% of all eighth graders
are on grade level in reading.
20%, 1/4 graders on grade level
and uh reading and 23% are on
grade level in math. I think
it's important
when we talk about statistics
that we do celebrate those
students who are reaching grade
level. But we also should be
thinking about those numbers in
their reverse, and that would
leave 86% of math.
Uh, students in 8th grade, not
reaching grade level. Um, and
considering the conversations
earlier about science and the
importance of STEM, all of our
labs here in the state, it's
just something that I think we
should hopefully be grounded in,
um, as we continue the
conversation today.
Miss Sherman with that uh and in
the interest of time, I submit
for.
in the audience and then
questions.
Thank you, uh, out to the
audience, those in support.
You went and support online?
Thank you. So those in support
online, Nicky McCarty.
Go ahead, please.
Hi, can you hear me? This is
Nicky McCarty. Yes, please go
ahead. OK, good morning. My name
is Nicky McCarty and I'm a
retired public school math
teacher and athletic director
from a family deeply rooted in
public education. Teachers,
administrators and school
nurses. I've dedicated my life
to public schools, and I am
continue to support them.
However, I firmly believe that
every child deserves an
education tailored to their
unique needs regardless.
of their family's financial
situation. Education is not a
one size fits all. Parents
should have the right to choose
the best learning environment
for their child, whether that be
a public, private, charter or
homeschooling setting.
Families already contribute to
education funding through their
tax dollars, and those funds
should follow the student, not
be restricted by a system that
may not serve them well. Right
now, low and middle income
families are forced into public
schools that may not meet their
child's academic, social, or
developmental needs simply
because they cannot afford
alternatives. This is
fundamentally unfair. School
choice should not be a privilege
reserved for the wealthy. It
should be a right for every
family. I urge you to support
SBT.
286 and vote yes because
empowering parents with the
educational choices, not just
the right thing to do. It is the
best way to ensure every child
has access to the education they
deserve. Thank you.
Thank you. And now Jody
Hendricks, please.
Hello and uh good morning. Thank
you so much for the opportunity
to speak this morning. My name
is Jody Hendricks, and I am
speaking on behalf of New Mexico
Family Action Movement, and I'm
honored to speak on behalf of
advocating for families across
our state. Today I rise in
strong support of SB 286, the
educational Freedom Account Act,
legislation that represents a
transformative step toward
ensuring every child in New
Mexico has access to a high
quality education regardless.
of their zip code or household
income.
For far too long, many New
Mexico families, especially
those from low income
backgrounds have been left
without real options when it
comes to their children's
education. Our current system
assumes that a one size fits all
approach works for every
student, but we know that that's
simply just not the case.
Parents deserve the right to
choose the best educational
environment for their children,
whether that's a traditional
public school, a charter school,
a private school, or a home
education program. Education
choice empowers families to make
decisions that align with their
values, their child.
learning needs and their future
aspirations. SB 286 does exactly
that by providing parents with
greater flexibility and access
to the resources they need to
choose the school that best fits
their child. This bill isn't
about dismantling public
education. It's about
strengthening opportunities for
all families, especially those
who historically have had no
choice but to send their
children to underperforming
schools with few alternatives.
Educational freedom means that a
single mother in Albuquerque
struggling to make ends meet,
can send her
child to a school that truly
needs their academic and social
needs. It means that a family in
rural New Mexico can access
specialized programs that aren't
available in their local
district. It means ensuring that
every child, regardless of
income, background, or ability
has a chance to succeed. New
Mexico ranks near the bottom in
education outcomes, and we must
ask ourselves, are we doing
enough for our kids? I believe
that SB 286 is a crucial step
toward reversing this trend and
ensuring that education is about
students.
And now we have the Peterson.
Hello.
Uh, uh, yes, my name is uh
Michael Peterson, um, with
Freedom Families United, and I
just want to speak in strong
support of SB 286 um education
freedom, and I
Something that New Mexico has
focused on for a very long time
is
Fixing our systemic issues with
our underserved communities, and
I think that this is a really
big step in moving toward that
goal. Over 28% of New Mexico's
kids, so 123,000 or more,
according to the 2023 census are
under this this poverty line for
this bill that they would
target. And although I don't
think that your income should
necessarily determine, you know,
if you have a choice or not.
Because some middle, middle
class families, of course,
wouldn't be able to afford
private schools either, but this
is a really good start to moving
New Mexico forward in
educational freedom. It's a
really good start in allowing
every family, every student to
have the opportunity to succeed
no matter, like, like the, the
previous commenters have said,
what's your zip code is? What's
your income is, you know,
whatever cultural background or
if you're in English.
You know, language learner, no
matter where you've been, this
gives you the opportunity to
take full
Control of your own education,
of your kids' education. And I
think this is trending in the
country and New Mexico would be
really smart to, to follow suit.
So I, I definitely urge you to
please pass this educational
fund and continue this, this
momentum forward. Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, now, those in
opposition in the room.
You'd like to come up to the,
the mic.
Good morning, Chairman and
members of the committee. My
name is Whitney Holland,
president of AFT New Mexico. I
oppose this bill because it's a
voucher program by another name.
This would divert public funds
away from public schools. In
states with programs like this,
public schools lost hundreds of
millions of dollars leading to
larger class sizes and cuts to
essential programs. I also point
you to the significant issues
raised in the LESC analysis of
this bill.
In instead of instead of
draining our resources, let's
invest in our public schools.
Thank you.
Thank you, Joe.
Thank you, uh, Joe Guian
executive director of the New
Mexico School Boards
Association.
As she mentioned, a voucher by
any other name is is a voucher.
NSBA has a long time position
against using public funds for
private schools.
Voucher programs strip away
funds from public schools, they
lack physical and academic
accountability and are used
primarily for by families with
children already enrolled in in
private schools, tax dollars are
intended to, to better education
for all children, not the
private education of a few.
School vouchers funnel money
away from already struggling
public schools and children and
redistribute tax dollars to
private schools and middle-class
children. School vouchers fail
to accommodate and support
disabled and special students
and for all these reasons we
oppose this bill.
Thank you, Joe Bonnie.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Bonnie Lightfoot, a
previous superintendent
president association, current
president of New Mexico
Coalition of Educational
Leaders, um, statistics tell a
story anyway you want the
numbers to tell you, right? It'd
be nice if if all schools in New
Mexico um were given the NAT
test. I'm not sure how they are
randomly chosen, but it'd be
great if the scores could
include some higher performing
schools across our state, which
currently that is not happening.
Um, also, we'd like to remind
the committee that the NAEP test
does not test on common core
state standards, which of course
is standard to our state.
Who's currently, so we are to do
not pass.
Thank you. Anyone else? Anyone?
position
So Senator, if you'd like to
respond, then we'll go to
questions from the committee. I
thank you, Mr. Chairman and uh.
I think all of us understand the
situation that our education
system is in in New Mexico.
Bill would not take any money
out of public education, not a
dime.
It has its own appropriation
that would set up a separate
fund that would pay for this.
We didn't go in and say, well,
we should lower what goes to
public schools. In fact, this
bill might.
Bring more per student to public
schools.
Because of some of the students
that are in there now.
Move and put their child in a
private school, the SCG amount
would go up.
per unit.
That's the way our SCG works.
It's not funded based per
student, it's funded based per
unit.
Uh, this bill simply provides a
separate.
Fund
That allows those
At the highest risk.
Our lowest income families.
To be able to take their
children out.
Of a public school is not
getting the job done for their
children.
And get them into a private
school that will.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you. Questions from the
committee.
Uh, Senator boom.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and, and
uh.
Senator
I appreciate you bringing this
forward. I
I live
in a very remote area.
I live uh on the very far
western border of uh Roosevelt
County, about 2 miles from
Chavis County and.
And uh
I get my mail at Eli and so my
kids.
Growing up, went to school and
he lied in.
And uh
I've always been served on the
school board for a good number
of years. I've always been a.
They, uh, staunch advocate of
public education and uh and
still am.
But
The circumstances like you
talked about over the last, your
last remarks there.
Have brought me over the last
few years to thinking about
other things and I think there's
some really good ideas here, but
I've got one fear.
I've got one great big fear.
And uh
That concerns those little
schools like.
Those little schools are our
community.
And if we don't have those
schools, we're gonna lose our
community, you know, like we've
got very, very little left in
our community besides our
school.
And
I'm just afraid that if, if this
happens.
That it's gonna kill all these
little schools.
Eventually
We just don't have.
From from economic conditions,
farms and ranches, different,
different reasons we just don't
have the pop that we need to
provide those kids so we've got
to have.
Kids transferring from Portalis
and and other places coming in
there to support our.
Extracurricular activities,
sports and what have you.
And
I'm just afraid of.
If this happens and and these.
Private schools start getting
established that.
It's just gonna kill our little
schools and then in the process
we're gonna lose our community.
And
I hope you have got something
that you can allay my fears
with.
And uh I'm, I'm just gonna leave
it at that. I just, I just want
to express that.
I'm, I'm not
At this point
Gonna support it for that
reason, but I hope you can allay
my fears. Thank you. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Senator, I, I
appreciate your concerns about
those really small schools. I
think the problem is they're
already.
Drinking
I'm, I'm not sure this increases
that at all because
You know, one of the things if
you're gonna take your children
to private school, you're gonna
have to get transportation to
get them there, um, where you
live.
You know that'd probably be
Portales.
That would probably take a
while.
I'm not sure how many parents
if, if they're willing to do
that, their property already
doing that.
I'm probably already taking
them.
However, we also know that that
sometimes those little schools
like Elia, those students are
very happy in the school they're
in and those parents are very
happy with them there.
Because they actually get some
of the best results in our state
when it comes to our public
schools.
So I don't know that this would
affect it.
any more than the fact that you
have a shrinking population in
that area.
Um, I doubt that.
Allowing these funds to be
available to your lowest income
families in those communities
would change anything.
Because I don't think those
families want to take those kids
out of those schools because
those schools are already doing
a great job for the kids.
The problem isn't in those
really small rural communities
we see those schools actually.
Doing quite well.
Thank you, but I do think that
and the parents should always
have that choice.
Thank you, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you Senator, Senator.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much.
And I do want to point out.
And you just said it, senator.
Grant that it is our smaller
schools that are excelling in
our state and
People there are happy with
where their children are going,
they are participating in where
their kids are going to school,
and I think that makes it, I
know it makes a huge difference
in that student's success.
Mr. Chairman, whenever I'm
reading all the analysis that
I've gotten and everything on
this particular bill, it says
that 13 states have already
initiated this.
And I was real surprised
whenever I read that uh
Mississippi has as well.
And used to, I could say thank
God for Mississippi.
Because they made us forty-ninth
instead of 50th.
So, Mr. Chairman,
Can you attribute?
Mississippi is going this
direction as being the success
that they have had recently.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Senator, I
don't think we can attribute
that this has made it successful
in Mississippi. I think what we
can say is this didn't make it
less successful in Mississippi.
It didn't hurt public education
in Mississippi. What helped
public education in Mississippi
is the same thing that we looked
at.
12 years ago, 13 years ago when
I first came up here and we
didn't do.
We didn't focus enough on
reading K through 3.
We didn't make sure that kids
didn't get socially promoted
past 3rd grade.
Mississippi stopped that
practice.
there's a lot of things that
Mississippi has done that
changed public education that
made their public education
better.
Um, this was just done again as.
Parents deserve a choice.
And our lowest income families,
they can't afford to put their
kids in, and, you know, a fancy
private school.
I couldn't afford most of the
time to put my kids into a
private school.
Why I chose where I lived.
Where I live now
Because I was able to move zip
codes, not a lot of families can
do that.
Just make sure that those
families that are stuck in the
zip code they're in.
Have the opportunity to take
their children.
to some of the best schools in
our state.
Mr. Chairman, Senator Brent,
thank you very much for that. So
even that what you're proposing
to do is help those uh that are
of a lesser socioeconomic
background to be able to get
this done for the best education
possible for their kids.
Mr. Chairman and Senator Bread,
I noticed there is a
superintendent from one of my
schools in my district that's
here today and her school is
excelling. We have more students
going into that small school.
Because of the one on one
contact with the teachers with
the parental involvement that is
not necessarily mandated but
strongly encouraged.
So that those, and I do want.
I do want to point out one thing
on page, I think it's page 8 of
your bill down at the very
bottom, starting on line 24.
He's talking about what the
student and the parents have to
do to be able to change and go
to a different venue for their
education, but it stating.
Line 24 upon notice to the
department of part participating
student may choose to stop
receiving education freedom
account funding and enroll full
time in a public school,
enrolling as a full-time student
in a public school shall result
in the media suspension of
payment for additional funds
account.
And therefore, I'm assuming that
money does go back to
Public, is that correct?
Well, Mount Sherman, um.
Mr. Chairman
Uh, Senator.
No because this is a separate
fund so that money would just
stay in that in that account,
OK, I just wanted that cleared
up.
Mr.
Chairman and Senator Brandt, as
you, you may or may not be aware
of this. New Mexico military
institute.
Um, has one of the best.
Schools in our state, in my
opinion. It, it really does. The
standard is set real real high
for those kids coming out of
there. They can, after they
finish.
High school or
The junior college, they can
just about name whatever school
they want to attend if they're
furthering their education.
And it also goes into the
military branches.
At present time, Mr. Chairman
and Senator Brandt, New Mexicoil
Institute.
Has uh started two years ago,
their preparatory school.
And this will take in 6th, 7th,
and 8th grades right now since
they have completed 2 years,
they are going to be finishing
up their 8th grade.
I'm sorry.
They have just, they will be
completing their 7th year 7th
grade level.
Moving those students up to 8th
year.
Parents are thrilled about this
opportunity.
Because the level of excellence
in this school is outstanding.
They do have scholarships
available for those people that
are of a lesser economic.
Ability to be able to pay.
And the more
Input that we're getting from
not just the Rosal area, but
from the surrounding areas.
I know that uh the new general
and Mr. Chairman, I think you
have spoken with him. He wants
to expand these schools.
He is looking forward to not
necessarily anytime soon, but in
the.
future to expand to other areas
of our state for the, for these
kids to have that same
opportunity to be able to prep
their and then maybe.
Move on down to the institute or
go back into.
to the public school system
itself. So I see the benefits of
this, it gives people the
option.
That's all we're asking. It
gives people the option.
Mr. Chairman, Senator, thank you
very much.
Thank you, Senator Senator Nava.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Senator Brat, for bringing
this forward. I have a few
questions, um, and I want to
start out by pointing out page
3, line 10, where it says that
the education freedom account.
Program is created in the
department to allow the
department and contract with
parents of participating
students to pay for private
school and other qualifying
educational expenses through
educational freedom accounts,
um.
Referencing, uh, this section,
uh, Mr. Chairman Senator.
How much parental engagement do
you all believe that is required
for.
Mr. Chairman Senator, I, I think
for
Um
I think you'd have to have quite
a bit of parental involvement.
You're gonna have to have the,
the parents gonna have to
identify what school they're
gonna take their children to.
They're gonna have to fill out
the application with PE they're,
you know, uh.
That's gonna have to be
accepted, um, and then the, the
payment would actually go
directly to the school, it
wouldn't go to the parent, but.
Um, you're gonna have to have
some involvement. There's not
going to be public
transportation like there is
with a lot of the public
schools. Oh.
Some of our charter
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Senator. Um, yes, thank you
for, for your response. I think
it correlates with what we're
seeing in the FIR and in the
LESC report, um, where some of
the things that are noted, I
believe it says, uh, you know,
uh.
Ensuring that parental
responsibilities include
application of an educational
freedom account, um, and then,
and the LESC, uh, it notes it
once again, um, but it also, uh,
and also amplifies that the
parent, um, has to follow with
the procedures established by
the department and ensuring that
the student is eligible. There's
a few other things that are
pointed out there, um.
And
Because of that, I, I want to
uplift a concern that I have in
regards to parental engagement,
and we know that parental
engagement is crucially
important as someone who comes
from an educational background
as the first in my family to
graduate from high school, um,
as someone who comes from a low
income family. I am the students
that you're all talking about,
the ones that weren't supposed
to graduate, Mr. Chairman. Um,
and, uh, senator, and I
appreciate the investment in
education.
But I am
Extremely concerned about low
income parents with language
barriers who may not be able to
have as heavy of an engagement
as required, um, in order to
have these opportunities because
I think back to the communities
that I've worked with across the
state, across the country, and
the reality is many of our
parents unfortunately do not
have the ability to do this. And
Mr. Chairman, Senator, I am
concerned of how you all would
address the.
issues of inequity, um, when
trying to expand an opportunity
that does not reflect the needs
of communities across the state,
or how you would articulate the
challenges faced for these
individuals families.
Mr. Chair, um, senator, I think
you bring up a valid point. I
will point out that.
In this bill, there are
provisions about notification
for uh parents who have students
with disabilities.
Um, I also think that.
By opening up to private
schools.
private schools were actually
probably get the word out and um
when I'm thinking about that,
I'm thinking about my, so my
husband attended a Catholic
school from K to 8, he came from
a low income family. They cannot
afford tuition, and as a result,
they traded um maintenance on
the building, uh, to help with
tuition costs. And so I do think
that folks will in the community
will hear about these
opportunities, and I think that,
um, potentially.
Family is like the one you're
describing, we'll hear about
that from community partners and
this bill really does start to
outreach to community partners,
and I, and I think in a way
that's not meant to take away
from public schools, but really
to provide um an opportunity so
that we can improve the health
of our education ecosystem,
which is lacking in New Mexico,
and that is one of the reasons
why we're seeing results in
states like Mississippi,
Alabama.
Louisiana, where there are rural
populations, there are
populations who, um,
Our low income families and
those states are still seeing
results, but that is because
they are expanding opportunities
like.
Thank you. Thank you very much,
Senator and expert. I really
appreciate that, um, and on that
note, it also makes me add
because of the funding and
resources allocated for this.
This does not mean that a low
income family will be able to
substantially pay by themselves,
Mr. Chairman and Senator. So how
would you?
How would you address those
concerns given the fact that I
think in your lived experience
or your story, there was some
sort of a trade-off. That is not
the reality for the majority of
families unfortunately, even if
they tried, um, Mr. Chairman, an
expert, I think.
Looking and listening to
communities more than anything
is extremely important to me. I
think culturally competent, um,
strategies are extremely
important, especially in a state
like New Mexico, where a
majority minority communities
where we have heavy immigrant
communities where we have
English language learners, um, I
have a lot of concerns in terms
of the access and that could be
equitable for students and
families at large.
Thank you, um, Mr. Chairman,
and, and thank you, Senator
Nava.
Um
I, I think that right now they
have no access and nothing.
They're getting what's what's
there for them in the community
and that's it.
And most of the time.
It's not a great situation.
While my expert was talking
about.
was something that was done.
With a private school that this
would pay for.
her
Father-in-law
And to think through the
relationship. Her father-in-law
wouldn't need to do that now.
You wouldn't have to do his day
job.
To earn income for his family
and then go work.
For the private school, so his
son could actually attend there.
This would take care of it.
Um
This would pay for most private
schools except our most
expensive ones, right? You know,
we've got Albuquerque Academy.
You know, no one can afford that
except the very, very wealthy.
But there are a lot of schools,
Hope Christian school, there's
all the all the different
Catholic schools, there's,
there's other private schools
that aren't necessarily
sectarian schools that would.
Absolutely this would cover the
cost of.
And then that family would be
able to. Now, I think you'd
probably have, you know, one of
your NGOs.
That are in those communities
would say, I'll help you with
that paperwork, so your child
can get a better education and a
better opportunity. All we're
trying to do is make sure.
That families that are in the
lowest economic status in our
state.
Actually have a choice for their
children have a greater
opportunity because right now.
Our public school system is
failing them.
I mean, I've listened for the
last 13 years up here, how we're
gonna fix it. We're gonna fix
it. We're gonna fix it. We went
from.
49th to 50th we didn't fix it.
And we've more than doubled them
up. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you very much, Senator.
Um,
Additionally, I have some
questions about the
constitutionality of this, um,
according to the FIR, I, I
believe it's.
I don't have the page number,
but, um, the New Mexico Attorney
General notes, uh, that there's
some possible conflicts that I
wanted to ask you about, Mr.
Chairman and Senator, um,
specifically, I believe notes
Article 12, uh, section 3, where
it says that the provision
prohibits public funds from
supporting private schools, um,
and a few other, uh, points that
they are noting in terms of
conflicts. Can you uh please
speak to that.
Uh, thank you, ma'am. I think
I'm gonna leave this one for my
expert. She's been specifically
preparing for this.
Um, Mr. Chair, senator, thank
you for your question.
So the language in the New
Mexico Constitution actually
also includes um language
referring to religious schools,
uh, secretarian schools, and we
believe that as a result of
that, that kind of does actually
make that statement conditional,
um, this is actually re uh
relates to three prominent, uh,
cases and that the Supreme Court
has overheard, um, and they've
ruled on, um, which.
Actually, uh, make it to where
state funds can be used uh to
fund religious schools, um, and
you cannot exclude state funding
to schools like that just solely
on the basis of religion. Um,
it's a religious, uh, religious,
uh, liberty issue.
Um
Just a little bit of history in
case not everyone on the uh in
the committee understands, uh,
this amendment in our
Constitution, so the Blaine
amendment at the federal level
was not passed in the 19th
century, um, when states were
becoming, moving from territory
to statehood, they were
advocated to add the blade
amendment into their state
constitutions.
Um, but the Supreme Court as of
2017, 2020 and 20922, 2022 has
actually ruled that the Blaine
amendment is unconstitutional,
and when there is a discrepancy
between federal constitution and
state constitution, the federal
Constitution overrides the state
constitution. So we do actually
believe that it would be
constitutionally acceptable, uh,
to pass this legislation and
have this state state funds go
to private or religious.
schools.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Senator, and thank you
expert.
Senator
Other questions.
public
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Brandt. I know you've
ran a similar bill and now
you're focusing more on the
Lowing
But I still have the same
concerns.
Mr. Chair, Senator, do we know?
How many New Mexico counties
have private schools.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, um, no, I, I
don't have any idea how many
counties have them.
Um
I
I, I've never, I don't even know
if there's a Rolodex with all
the private schools on it, um,
to be quite honest.
I, I don't know. I'm, I'm sure
that uh there may be some
smaller areas like.
where Senator Boone was talking
about that that may not even
have access to private schools.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Um, Mister Chair, Senator, I I
I've heard and I've even spoke
today and we've talked about
public schools and we've talked
about private schools. I do sort
of wanna open everyone's mind
up, um, around this legislation,
what it actually could
encompass, which are things
called micros schools or pods.
These became very, very
successful and very popular, um,
through COVID, um, and after
COVID, particularly among
underserved populations. This is
where
came together and they decided
to open microschools or pots
where they would serve a small
a small group of students and
the the broadness of the
language in this proposed
legislation would um account for
that type of, um, opportunity.
And so a private school doesn't
necessarily have to exist. There
has to be parent involvement,
and there has to be a community
desire. But I think you all
probably heard from many
constituents that are calling
for better educational
opportunities for their
children.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator. Thank you expert.
And, and that brings up
Concerns that were brought up
about
The family involvement, you
know, we've had discussions in
here on the prior bill about
business.
And we should run it like a
business.
In some cases, yes.
But there's a reason why we also
have that moral contract we
made.
sure that
Everyone's getting an education.
And, and what I fear from here
from this is, even though it is
helping the lower income
students.
You know, things like that was
things that were even brought
up.
Um, senator expert, Mr. Chair.
How are folks can get access.
And in most cases, these private
schools do not provide
transportation.
And, and please very short
answers, we are due on the
floor. Yes, Mr. Chairman, I
appreciate that. Um.
I think you know you have the
same concerns or or questions
when it comes to our charter
schools, but they've been very
successful.
Um, I think most parents, um,
You know, make sacrifices for
their children.
Um, you're right, not all, not
all parents are willing to do
that. Not all parents are
involved.
But right now we're making it
where even the ones that are
having.
Right now, you know, you said
our constitution guarantees kids
a right to an education.
Well right now they're not
getting it.
We even have a a court order
that says they're not getting
it.
So
I, I think we're failing on that
now. I think this is a way we
can actually help to get there.
Just to make sure that these
families have another choice.
Thank you, Mr. Chance.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator. Um.
You know, you brought up some
points and while this doesn't
take from
The funding of
Our schools right now, it's a
separate appropriation.
I'd argue, what could we do?
I'll try to end here and I know
we're short on time.
I'm just really concerned with
this path.
I want to commend you folks,
making sure they have an
opportunity.
We see this going on in other
states.
In Arizona, we see what's going
on in Texas and Tennessee. It's
a big fight. This is really a
Nonpartisan and there's concerns
with these types of voucher
programs or things that
I personally, I just can't
support because of those issues
we have folks who need special
education, 504 plans, IEPs and
These are things that
private schools or whatever we
would set up.
would not be able to provide
support for.
We're talking about the access
to them.
And so for me, this isn't really
school choice once again.
It's only gonna be
You know, some of our students
that have access to this.
Type of education.
I would argue you're right.
We, we haven't done enough here.
But it is our job to, how can we
fix this public education
system.
I just don't agree with this
path.
Thank you, Senator. Thank you,
Mr.
Thank you, Senator
Ehor
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I know
we're short on time. I just
wanted to make a point, um.
I looked up the data just to get
a quick, the question was asked,
how many private schools are
there in New Mexico.
Um, according to our greatest
AI, um, we have about 194
private schools serving 23,800
students.
And um, and this includes
everything from pre-kindergarten
to high school. They're
apparently only 47 private high
schools in the state right now.
Um
So
And the data varies, says
there's, you know, some others.
Of the publications say we about
134 private schools, but it's
about 150 or so, let's just say
normally, in the state of New
Mexico.
Um, I personally think that this
is a good idea.
Um, we keep saying that we're
gonna hurt public schools or
public schools are hurting us.
At this point
And we need to give options to
our parents to make the
decisions. It's their
responsibility to make those
decisions, and it's their kids
that we are trying to educate
and if parents choose not to, to
take on that responsibility.
There's not much we can do about
that.
But if, but if there are parents
who are looking for options,
there are parents that want
those choices, we should allow
them that opportunity.
So I will be supporting this
effort as we go forward.
Hopefully it will go forward out
of this committee. And so with
that chair, Mr. Chair.
Let's get back.
Thank you.
You know.
Jeramo a dour motion for a pass.
Mr. Chair, I moved the table.
Motion for table takes precedent
is non-debatable. If you'll
please take the role on a
tabling motion.
Sinner Boone
Yes
Sinriel
No to table.
Senator Figueroa.
Yes to table.
Hickey. Nova, yes.
Ramos.
Center Thornton
No to table.
Siner Pope, yes.
Senator souls.
Yes.
So thank you, Senator, but your
bill is tabled here in
education.
Uh, we are due on the floor and
so the other three bills that
are on there, we will roll over,
um, and probably will be the
first ones on Wednesday. I have
to look at my list. Um, I'm
really gonna try and work on any
bills in education coming over
from the house that we try and
move those up and get those
moving fairly quickly, but
Yes, sir, I, I understand, and
yeah, I think all of those that
are on there are not super long
large ones and so, um, in
committee we'll be meeting at
8:30 on Wednesday.
Thank you.
We are adjourned.
