And this bill is about making
sure that child performers are
safe when actively engaged on a
movie set or when waiting around
on location and when in Rio or a
makeshift classroom on a film
location we need to keep in mind
Senators and Mr chairman that
this can be about one top on a
horse ranch in the middle of the
desert or even inside of a
building child doctors are
required by law to attend school
for a minimum of three hours a
day now school and work go hand
in hand on a movie set and the
studio teacher is right there
with the child performer
throughout the process to
compare studio teachers job to
home schooling or standard
classroom environment is to miss
this point entirely a child
safety is always important but
on a movie set the health safety
and welfare component become
even more important and on par
for the formal education
component now the Senate house
bill for public affairs
committee substitute three fifty
seven is the same in concept and
overall languages of the
original bill that we had first
introduced it clarifies when a
child performer must be
accompanied by a studio teacher
and or a period inner courtyard
guardian and extend the date for
studio teacher to possess a
valid and current level two
license issued by the Public
Education Department and we're
giving this until July twenty
twenty six for those teachers
who might not be level two this
will allow those to obtain that
level two license now here's the
difference level one teachers
need a mentor teacher to help
them get through right because
they're just starting off the
level two means this tier can
function on their own and be in
the settings that with these
children and for the level two
tier we think is important to
the setting.
the AG's office is concerned if
the guardian the bill is not
defined and and so this would
ensure that the teacher is there
even if the guardian guardian
can't be with the level two
seventy use Espanola and as an
example in filming movies in
northern New Mexico if we have a
kid who is on a movie set and
your mom is working full time
and she's a single parent she
won't be able to take off work
to ensure that you're in the
studio this will ensure that the
teacher can step in and ensure
that the child is protected and
with that I'm gonna yield to my
expert witness who can introduce
herself and give a few comments
thank you good morning my name's
Lee Luen I a retired as an
educator after twenty three
years and I've been working for
the movie industry for the last
five.
This bill comes from the
Lack of clarity.
In the state rigs around whether
a studio teacher is required to
be on set with the child at all
times.
In there is conflicting
information in the rigs and in
some productions have exploited
the conflict to separate the
studio teachers job from the
welfare workers job which often
has resulted in leaving the
welfare worker.
On in charge of the child's
health safety and welfare but
not with any qualifications to
do so so this bill clarifies
that the two components to the
job are inseparable it clarifies
that the studio teacher slash
welfare worker is required to be
on set at all times whether in
school session or outside of
school session and further it
asks for studio teachers to
achieve require studio teachers
to achieve level two licensure
which guarantees that that
teacher will have had a minimum
of three years.
In the classroom supervised
where they learn the scope of
their job which goes way beyond
education and includes health
safety and welfare.
With that Mr chairman we can
good and entertaining.
Those in the audience in
support.
Is there anyone in opposition.
Thirty if you'd like to speak or
if you just want to be in sport
that's fine too.
Public education having Bonner
participate I have opted to
bring the very first things one
the two minute Sir please.
Keep the price of but.
Yeah.
Good good morning ladies and
gentleman my name is Daniel
Williams I have been an educator
for over thirty years I have
been a New Mexico studio teacher
working where the cabins on film
sets off for ten plus.
I'm a retired Air Force officer
former acting commander safety
officer training officer
director operations etcetera.
This in my opinion is one of the
most important opportunities you
have to help keep kiddos safe on
film sets.
Moving forward.
The state of California has
really extensive but they called
the blue book ours is three and
a half pages long here's the
biggest catch it is written in
such a way.
That teachers some sometimes is
interpreted that teachers would
only have to be there during the
hours kids are getting
education is absolutely not true
it's critical that you have a
teacher there we've got the
background the training to
classroom experience the
background checks very much
support this bill I personally
believe it's still important for
a parent to be present but we're
the ones that need to be able to
be the eyes and the most
important thing is to fly a
little over a year ago we had a
a terrible tragedy your New
Mexico in the film industry that
was one hundred percent of
voidable with existing safety
precautions you've got the
opportunity to improve enact
legislation to help you keep
kept us safe and for the fly if
I may three really quick war
stories things that I've seen
one of on a film where a
director one second please thank
you director wanted to shoot a
nine year old girl topless in a
scene studio teacher said no
years ago there was a production
that had a brought in a kid a on
a week you know thank you
investor for it could give a but
thank you.
Anyone.
Online is there any opposition.
Not questions from the
committee.
Senator Pinto thank you thank
you Mr chairman and members of
the committee do we know if any
of the school districts already
have something in place in in
within the school board policy
or started working on this Mr
chair Senator members of the
committee in the districts of my
Senate district no but I don't
know if Lee knows of any Mr
chair and committee members it
is not the purview of the school
districts to issue anything
other than a statement of a work
permit and knowledge that they
that the child is going to be
gone from school.
Mr chair members of the
committee so this is not really
a public school issue it's kind
of like a charter school or
outside and to do
Senator Mr chairman and
committee members it is an
entertainment industry standard
all the children who come to
work in the industry are
enrolled in one of many
different kinds of school
whether public school private
school online's call home school
whatever but they are all
required by the state of New
Mexico women in the
entertainment industry to have
three hours of school per day
that they are employed thank you
Mr chairman Senator and thank
you for the answer so because
we're a little bit in the no we
don't really know exactly what
the costs or as far as our
lawyers or of what might need to
be invested to to do this the my
notes New Mr chair Senator Pinto
so the negotiation of the pay of
the teacher is with the studio
company and the teacher that's
hired to be upset.
And Mister chairman Senator
shoot but we don't know
whoever's doing this
certification from the other
end.
The I guess my question Mr
chairman senators so you and I
went through the same teacher
licensure procedure it's the
exact same where they become
certified in the state of New
Mexico and so those fees then go
and obtaining your license right
here in New Mexico which is paid
by the teacher.
Thank you Senator Maestas.
Thank you Mr consider how to be
generally the thank you answer
my question but it's just that
the Norman industry from
producing a movie and I hire a
ten year old actor.
Part of that higher is to to
have a teacher there on site
Mister chairman Senator yes and
I want to give you an example of
where they could step in case
the child performers right here
in New Mexico can not work
before five AM or after ten PM
on evenings preceding the school
day so these teachers don't only
help with education would ensure
the safety and well being of the
child performer.
Thank you Mr chairman Samuel
because that
Because the example that the
gentleman gave kind of was more
of a guardian issue than a
teacher issue in my opinion but
that's but this also ensures
that a producer could not kick
off the parent or the guardian
from the set correct Mr Chairman
at center yes and so they
they're there for the safety and
well being of the child as well
and Senator Kernan could attest
to the former educator that were
often the eyes and ears to make
sure that kids are protected in
and out of the classroom and so
we become the voice for that
child and this is the same that
holds true for studio teachers.
All right thank you Mr thank you
Senate Bill.
Thank you Mr chairman
I think it's a good idea I'm not
a opposed at I'm just curious if
Ten year old actor actress is on
sept and there's another ten or
twelve year old kid on set can
the same teacher teach three
hours to this one and three
hours to this one can I if
they're not in the same track is
what I'm getting at meaning that
if I understand your question
are they on they come at the
same time or they are I don't
know they just there there is
ones of ones young ones older
and ones learning how to read
the other ones learning at a
yeah I mean what so there are
provisions if there are
different grade levels within
the grouping of miners that are
on set and production would
likely hire another studio
teacher if there's a huge gap
between their learning abilities
I guess what I'm getting at is
do we really need to have a
licensed teacher with with the
child for ten twelve hours a day
whatever I don't know what to
but the provision are how long
they can actually be there but
if they're allowed to be there
eight hours for a date is we
have to have the same person
watching them coming out of that
quote maybe Sir.
That's a good question Senator
There is a requirement that this
this is in the law that the
studio teacher monitor the
health safety and welfare of the
minor on sat so that is outside
the classroom setting as well as
inside the classroom setting and
truly the greatest risks to a
child performer are outside the
classroom during filming
conditions and I absolutely
agree I don't have a problem of
that I'm not sure I'm going
through the chair I'm sorry Mr
I'm I'm just trying to
understand Mr and Senator
If we really need to have a
certified qualified teacher with
the the youngster all day long
or can we have someone else
that's a reasonable person but
person Senator chairman the way
I would answer that is
absolutely and the reason is
that the studio teacher has with
in their scope of experience and
professionalism the ability to
monitor health safety and
welfare and the legal duty to
report if there is a yes whereas
I'm sometime at the this teacher
Mr chairman is.
work in two sets and they're not
they they want to be in two
different locations can there be
someone else watching the child
when when the teacher will need
to be somewhere else.
Chairman Senator.
That's where the parents come in
and the parent has the ultimate
authority so the parent is
required to be on set apple
times within eyesight and
earshot of their child up to the
age of sixteen okay I thank you
Mr.
The masters yet another chairman
Senator just.
I just find it peculiar that
that that the parent shall be
present in the company of the
child but the teacher shall
monitor and protect the child
and I think I just figured out
that the we can't really put a
dent in statute a duty on a
parent the parents gonna do that
on the last I don't know who the
producers going to listen to
more but it just seems weird to
you have a response to that are
you Mister chairman Senator.
The parent has can have.
A conflict of interest.
And having the studio teacher on
set the studio teacher is hired
by the production in order to
protect the child so the studio
teacher has the duty.
Does that help okay.
Thank the thing of
the motion for do passed by
Senator Kernan second so you by
Senator Brandt if you'll call
the roll please Senator Brandt
yes Senator Hickey.
Senator Kernan test center my
SSS Senator bell yes Senator
Pinto Senator pope yes Senator
yes yes yes thank you Mr
chairman thank you members of
the committee.
Senator Brandt.
Educational it licensure track.
He was chairman for **** the
committee into this bill
So that the third or fourth bill
on C. T. I've done this year and
as a promise trying to get some
some things result things
answered
And I will have just because
over here she's actually help me
write this of their some
technical questions I can't
answer
maybe she can but the bill is is
I'm not gonna say simple.
But it's it's it's a change.
that creates a new vocational
education licensure track in the
school personnel deprivations
educators who teach career
technical education and work
occasional education courses the
bill would create a preliminary
vocational license.
And professional location will
education license including
initial requirements for
pulmonary license and
requirements to progress to the
professional license
after.
One to three years depending on
whether they met the
qualifications.
With that you'll for questions
because I find it just better to
answer questions.
Thank you those in support
group.
There anyone in opposition.
Like make comments.
This is.
You need to use the might give
investors K. table where the
little ones pick up.
Mr chairman Chris bell's auto
with balls on a government the
nation's we represent Rio Rancho
public schools the net college
in Los crucis public schools all
three organizations are in
support of this piece of
legislation we expand
extensively time during interim
committee talking about CTE and
how communities are asking for
that and I think this is just
one component of the component
of all the C. T. bills and the
funding everything that is they
are available right now and what
you are working to be able to
make this law and we can
engaging start working on C. T.
so we ask you please to pass
this piece of legislation thank
you.
Thank you to anyone online.
Anyone in opposition.
Not questions maybe Senator
Kernan thank you very much Mr
chairman Senator of currently we
have instructors at our CTE
school teaching now and so I
would like for maybe your expert
to explain to me have have their
license and if this bill would
in any way affect their ability
to continue under the current
form in which they're teaching.
Mr chairman Senator and I have a
little bit of question on that
yesterday and Jessica could help
me a little bit but I think the
the head would have would
promulgate rules that would
Switch that over if needed we're
not taking away that license but
what we are doing and
conversations with Pat they have
eight hundred license right now
the their attorneys of actually
told them was not in the law and
that they're going to have to
actually stop giving out and so
we we need to have an answer to
how we're going to get the
career technical licenses to
teachers in the future I thank
you very much Mr chairman
Senator so currently we have we
have individuals that have been
hired like for instance from the
oil and gas industry that
obviously don't have a teachers
background with regard to going
to school of education secretary
Betsy.
You you're not gonna find a
school teacher that has kind of
experience from industry and so.
What they're protesting I'm just
curious I don't think it's me
either protest no I don't think
so but at bit bit.
That's just my concern so how in
the little bit haven't occurred
schools are are we going to be
more restrictive in hiring
individuals like that with this
bill and then understand we're
going to have to do something
that some of the you know I
haven't looked at it very
clearly but tell you what it's
hard enough to get individuals
leaving an industry for their
paid significantly more than
they're going to be paid here
and bring them in and if we're
going to do something that's
going to create more of a
roadblock to hire those people
I'm concerned some I I really do
want to hear from the PED and
see what you have in mind
because in rulemaking we can do
a lot of damage so can you all
help me out.
What you sent somebody.
D. or L. E. S. C. I think
they're both years okay.
So.
Good morning Mr chair in Senator
Kernan so the public education
department currently does have
rule that allows for folks
without it and I'm not sure I
understand specifically what
you're questioning if it's about
individuals that don't have a
bachelor's degree being able to
be licensed and then Mr chair I
don't think necessarily that
it's more I mean that may have a
degree in engineering and many
of them you know you talk about
the different technical aspects
of the CD school they're going
to be highly educated in some
form or fashion but maybe not
within that framework of being
prepared is a school teacher in
there somehow managing to do
that now and I don't know quite
what we're doing here that might
change that.
Mister chairman Senator Kernan
so in statute the alternate the
there is the alternative pathway
in that most of them go are are
okay are you suggesting that
there would be a separate way
for a degreed individual to not
necessarily no not just I just
want to make sure what's in
place now that is allowing
districts to hire people that
have the experience in that
field to continue is this going
to change or make it more
difficult in any way for them to
perhaps though the alternative
pathway if that's working for
them now would they be able to
continue to do that pathway if
this bill passes Mr chair
Senator Kernan yet this this
bill as the PED read it does not
change the current system what
what is interesting is that it
sets up an alternative system
another another system so there
would be two system for someone
to our faith to get through it
to get into vocational teaching
without without an education to
go in and thank you I think that
was the only thing I was
concerned about Mr chair was
just making sure that you know
this maybe even a something they
like better and that would be
fine but I don't want to rock
the boat just yet we're just
getting started in we've got
people in place and I don't do
anything it's going to hamper
their ability to continue in any
way thank you for and senator I
know just because over here
trying to okay that the bit and
has something to add if that's
okay not that yes thank you Mr
chair.
Good morning Mr chairman and and
Senator Kernan the only
clarification I would add is
that the eight hundred level
license which is it's just the
administrative code number in
the licensure would remain in
place what this would do is
create a separate system outside
of that and so it would not
affect what is currently
happening but would allow for an
additional pathway I would also
add the current eight hundred
level licensure pathway does put
them into that three tiered
licensure system and the way
this is crafted with not to put
them into that just adding that
for technical class well and I
think I think Mr chair that's a
positive thing because by being
put in that three tiered system
of being able to fund them
because they're paying a more
anyway this way they would get
funded to pay that higher level
correct at some point if they go
to use this this other path firm
Senator this would the the
funding is in the bill right
here on the floor today and
that's the the point two five
differential this this doesn't
deal with the funding of that
what it does is allows that to
be a conversation between the
district and the CD TFA makers
they don't have the traditional
bachelor's degree or they'll
have to they can like what you
were talking about they could
have that the going into CTE
instructor instruction that's
actually easier pathway through
the US I think in the
alternative licensure which my
wife actually did I think this
is friends get out at appreciate
the clarification thank you when
you're you're a superintendent
and looked over this bill.
He was part of right yes.
Senate Bill.
Thank you Mr chairman my I have
no problem in the building I'm
just curious I've got thousands
of welders that are extremely
talented and fifty one of one of
the come a teacher none of that
degrees
and and teach vocational and if
we could teach some as high
school kids to become highly
qualified welders we could hire
on that fifteen hundred thousand
dollars today they graduate so
can this welder guy that wants
to kind of retired teach school
can he do that Mr Chairman
senator bill that's exactly what
this bill for a pair this bill
opens a pathway for that Wilder
who has at least five years of
experience.
To be able to come in and teach
students how to weld and get a
certificate in welding that's
what I was hoping is exactly
what why we did this bill very
good thank you Mr thank you
other questions.
I have twenty just one question
on the three tier preliminary
one says yep can just be
eighteen years and five years of
experience do they started
thirteen Mr chairman Sir we
actually took that language from
the current eight hundred
license and so we were just
using language that was already
in rural but you're right
eighteen doesn't really make
sense.
Because I think it at least have
to be twenty three.
I think.
Hi and other senior oldest out
working welding and yes got five
years experience by the time
they turned eighteen as I I know
some farm kids it can do that
that probably could do that but
I'm not sure we could count that
as formal experience at that
point okay we have a motion for
it to pass.
The second.
Madam secretary Powell second
the renewable that's fine to
call the roll please Senator
Brandt yes ma'am Senator Hickey
Senator Kernan center my SS.
Well yes you do but does it why
not Senator Pinto.
Senator pope yes etcetera so
yes.
Yes yes.
Representative Hernandez please
come join us.
Has your I sorry.
Much better today.
My ribs are a little too.
Senator.
He really did the he should not
have jumped.
All over you Sir.
Yeah that would was a little
late and.
We're or ask him about it and
it's a whole different story
that is not what was happening
right it's it's it's all in the
perception correct my experts
will be here in a minute these
are school expenditure plans.
Mr chair this committee will
though but many outside of here
will not know that two percent
of charter school operational
dollars go to the charter school
authorizers for accountability
and support house bill three
seventy five does two things
regarding this these two percent
first to clarify statutory
language to give charter school
authorizers flexibility and how
much they charge for their
authorizing fees and second
provides for transparency
between authorizers and the
charter schools the off they
authorized by providing a plan
and budget for the authorizers
withholding and a report on how
the dollars were spent in the
past fiscal year and with that I
would like to introduce my
expert this is Matt Paul with
the charter school association
of New Mexico.
Mr chair members of the
committee as you heard from the
sponsor if you look on your bill
it's really at the opening there
that we have to statements that
one kind of leave some opening
on the two percent and that it
could be lower the next
statement is very rigid and says
so I just ran in here.
the the other ones very rigid in
state and notes that two percent
and so we're just trying to make
some adjustment here to allow
the possibility it's up to the
authorizer to charge less than
two percent and we just know
that some have considered it in
that in the past and we think
that aligning those two
statements to provide that
ability makes sense
secondly just note on the
transparency piece this is
something that some authorizers
do already this money is SCG
dollars it's meant for kids and
to serve them and so we don't
think there's a problem with it
going to authorizers for
accountability and support but
we'd like to have new
conversations about how it's
being spent because our schools
are served by our authorizers
sometimes we get served in a way
that is harsh we get closed
we've close thirteen charter
schools in the last twelve years
for more authorizers but they're
also there to find a support
structure and infrastructure
that gives us parameters to know
what's okay and what's not in
the structure that we operate
and so thank you for that and
all have that covers Sanchez
that Mister chair we stand for
questions thank you in the
audience those in support.
Anyone in opposition.
Supporters like to come down and
speaker up to two minutes each
had the same thing up to two
percent of its.
Yes Representative I don't have
to take the they don't have to
take the full two minutes that's
right to the point and I want.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is JD
Bullington speaking on behalf of
the greater Albuquerque chamber
of commerce this bill is an
important transparency measure
for our chartering Office risers
and for education system are
charter schools and families
they serve have a right to know
how all funding is being used to
serve their charter community we
also appreciate the flexibility
the bill contains in changing
the charter authorizes
collection of that two percent
the program cost if the district
for the PC doesn't need to
collect every dollar of that two
percent and whatever it doesn't
need to stay with the charter
school where can be used to
serve those students we hope
these two provisions will work
together to increase
accountability in a way that
translate to our state's
taxpayer dollars being used a
little more optimally and the
service of our charter school
students thank you thank you
Judy.
Yes ma'am.
Good morning committee Mr chair
members of the committee that
the hold button there we go
my name is sue Griffith I
represent many charter schools
across the state of New Mexico
and we have been waiting for
this bill for a couple years and
we think that Sanchez so much
for coming forward with that of
the transparency is a big issue
for charter schools and another
big issue is when we meet with
them they always ask where is
our two percent going we really
need to know where and what
direction the two percent is
being used are for our
authorizers and again we do
support this bill we hope that
you will supported as well thank
you so much thank you there
anyone online.
Okay and is there anyone in
opposition.
No that questions.
Yes Representative this moment
to pull the of how much money we
talking about in particular
schools how much is two percent.
Mr chair and senator my Estes
you'll see on the FIR it's it's
about three million dollars
every year.
Statewide Mr chairman statewide
the.
So we've put a screen it might
be ten twenty thousand thirty
thousand yeah thank you Mr.
Thank you any other questions.
Motion from the committee for
the two thousand for the past a
second second by Senator pope
you'll call the roll please
center for area as well Senator
Hickey.
Senator Kernan yes Sir my
Estes said Novell yes Senator
Pinto Senator pope yes Senator
souls yes.
Do you have a do pass.
Thank you Mr chairman committee
thank you for thank you goes.
The shortest meaning we never.
It might be pretty close.
Yes thirty pre-filled thirty
five minutes yeah at this do we
have any bills we have no built
in the committee right now
because my analyst typically
aren't working over the weekend
we're not planning on meeting on
Monday stay tuned out try let
you know as soon as I know if
there any that are coming over
that we kind of need to but
we're a little bit fluid and
flexible at this time but at
this point we are not planning
on having a meeting Monday
morning almost certainly we will
have one on Wednesday and maybe
Friday as we see other bills
coming through.
Thank you Mr.
The site it's most likely would
be if we have one on Monday it
would be at nine thirty because
I don't for see having a slew of
bills.
Wednesday again depend on how
many bills we have the if it's
like the list has been we're
probably planning on nine thirty
but again that's where things
are kind of fluid this time
here.
