In here soon, uh, tended the,
the playbook today is
Senate Bill 64 with Senator
Brant, Senate Bill 16 with
Senator Brant, so he doesn't
have to wait around for it. The
other one, if it's all right
with you center, you don't mind
doing 3 in a row, we'll switch
down then to Senate Bill 130.
And then uh Senator Padilla has
two bills.
So
We see if there's anything else,
um, I would like to introduce
my.
The reason I'm wearing a mask,
I've got a little bit of that
sniffles and cold that's going
around, so I'm trying to protect
the rest of the world from, from
that so that others don't get.
I have a guest today, uh, Nick
Tingley.
is here is a graduate student in
social work at New Mexico State
University, doing a, an
internship in Macropolicy, and
so invited him to come and
shadow me today, so he came to
see what's going on and how
things function and act.
And so uh
You'll, you'll kind of be
advising me through the day or
whatever, but it kind of
explaining to him how things
were going on. Any other little
announcements or anything before
we get started today?
It is a
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much. If anybody will look
outside you'll see a sea of blue
jackets out there.
Today is going to be FFA day. I
have, uh, let me think, 123456
FFA chapters from my area.
That I've already met with them
this morning and some of them
are expressing an interest in
coming into our education
committee to see what we're
gonna be do.
So I just wanted to point that
out if you're wondering who
these students are.
future.
Thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you, Senator.
Um, I think with that.
Brent, uh, if you will, uh,
school career development
success project.
Thank you Mr. Chairman. I
appreciate the opportunity to
present these bills. I'm sorry I
wasn't able to be here Monday,
but when you get a VA
appointment, you go.
Um, so.
First, uh
Of we'll do Senate Bill 64, um,
you've seen this bill before.
Um, we, we got it through the
Senate chambers and the.
House. Let me just run through
what it does. It, it creates a.
Career development success pilot
project that will run for 3
years.
Um
It's, it's to really incentivize
career technical education to
focus more on.
Certificates that will have
students when they graduate,
ready to go into the labor
force.
Um, and so, you know what we're
asking is that the department
would develop.
And what certificates would
qualify, um, through with.
consultation with Workforce
Solutions for what we need.
And that those programs, those
certificates would be uh given
an award, uh, from $250 to $750
kind of depending on, you know,
where, how, how much is involved
in getting the certificate and,
and, you know, looking at how
much our need is.
Uh, career technical has kind of
been all over the place, right?
We, we count sometimes
everything from home economics
to uh getting a, a
First level of nursing degree as
CTE.
Um, what this bill is is trying
to do is narrow that focus.
To really let young young men
and young women who want to go
straight into the workforce.
Go straight into the workforce.
Um, what we know for a fact.
Is that 65% of our students in
New Mexico who graduate.
Have
Uh, never go to college.
Out of the 35% that do.
Only about half of them
graduate.
So about 17% of our students
will ever get a bachelor's
degree.
Um, and, and
So what, what type of training
do they have then to fall back
on if they don't make it through
college or if they just aren't
ready for college. I, I didn't
go to college for 10 years after
graduating from high school.
Um, so what training do they
have? What?
Skills do they have that they
can go get a job that will
support them and their family
when they have a family, so we,
we want these to be good paying
jobs, jobs like going into
plumbing, heating and air
conditioning, uh, electrical,
um.
Welding, auto mechanics, you
know, I, I think the best
example is that first level of
auto mechanics. I've talked to
several auto dealerships.
And they said, you know, the one
in my district, well, not in my
district, but in my town, Rancho
called Don Chalmers Ford.
They said we would love to
expand.
But we don't have enough
mechanics.
To to expand to take care of the
service needs that would be
there.
He said if you can get me
students leaving high school.
With that first level.
He said if there were good
Employee if they do a good job,
I'll pay for all the others.
There's 8 levels in auto
mechanics. He's like, I will
send them to school and pay for
their training and all the
others. I just need entry level.
And so that's what we're trying
to do, get that entry level
certificate so they can get that
job right out of high school,
make it $50,000 a year.
And
Show her that their good good
worker.
And the industries will pay for
the higher.
Training that they need.
It's really what the bill does.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I hope that wasn't too long.
Senator, that was very good and
this is an LESC endorsed bill.
You know, and I think that's an
important thing that this is
something the LASC has been
studying, has worked on, it
continues to work on in the CTE
realm and all of those those
areas, so.
Thank you.
Um just quickly show of hands,
those in support.
anyone in opposition.
If a couple would like to come
and make comments and support.
Please come up to the
microphone.
have up to 2 minutes each.
Mr. Chairman Chris Balzano, I'm
the register lobbyist for Rancho
Public Schools. uh, we stand in
support of this piece of
legislation for the reasons that
Senator Brand stated, uh, we
work really hard with the
legislative education study
committee and LFC throughout the
years on this heavily push
initiative on CTE and that's the
way to go, so please support
this piece of legislation. Thank
you.
Thank you, Chris.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee. My
name is Bonnie Lightfoot. I'm
president of the New Mexico
Coalition of Educational Leaders
retired superintendent on behalf
of the Superintendents
Association and MML, and as a
former ag teacher myself, it's
ironic that we have CTE on FFA
Day, we urge you to pass on this
bill. Thank you.
Thank you, Lily May School
Boards Association. Good
morning, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee, Lily May Ortiz
representing the New Mexico
School Board Association. um,
Mr. Chairman, as you know, this
association has over 70 items on
their platform, career
development, technical pathways
has been one of the top
priorities we have had for
multiple years, and we support
it. We thank the the sponsor,
the senator for introducing this
legislation, and we continue to
support, uh, this great program,
this pilot program for our
students. Thank you.
Thank you, Louis May.
Good morning, chair members of
the committee. My name is Alison
Riley, public policy director
with the New Mexico Chamber of
Commerce. From a chamber
perspective, this legislation
and pilot project is a win-win.
It not only enhances the quality
and relevance of education in
our public schools, but also
directly benefits local
businesses by reducing the
skills gap that so many of them
face.
When these students successfully
complete these programs, they
are prepared to join the
workforce driving economic
growth. We appreciate the
structured approach, including
annual reporting and a dedicated
project fund. This ensures
accountability and
sustainability. The clear
guidelines and requirements for
collaboration with Workforce
Solution and post-secondary
institutions, guarantee this
initiative will continuously
evolve to meet the needs of both
students and employers. For
these reasons, we urge you to
support this legislation. Thank
you.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, members of the committee.
Kelly Faha, I'm here
representing the mechanical
Contract Association of New
Mexico. We believe that this is
a home run for New Mexico, not
only for our young people on a
pathway to success who aren't,
who aren't ready to go to
college, but it's also a home
run for our industry, who
desperately need people coming
out of school ready and willing
to work. And so, thank you, um,
members of the committee.
Thank you. Anyone else in the
room?
Uh, we do have 3 people online
uh speaking support so Ian
Williams, your first followed by
Enrique and now and then times
pass.
This is Jen Williams. I'm a
retired engineer, fellow of the
Society of Women Engineers, and
I'm speaking in favor of SB 864.
This bill recognizes the
importance of students being
able to see potential.
Prior to graduating from high
school, the bill is going to
provide a financial incentive
for the students to explore
career options, many of which
are STEM related and in high
demand in the workplace as
you've just heard, especially
helpful for students who may not
see themselves as college bound
but could thrive in technical
jobs that require certification.
SB 64 dovetails with SB 107 to
establish the STEM Innovation
Network for New Mexico, which
also has the goal of introducing
students to STEM career pathways
and passed this committee on
Monday.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, senators,
thank you.
Thank you Enrique now.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Enrique Nel, and I am here today
on behalf of the Greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce.
The chamber advocates for
policies that support teachers
and raise student academic
performance, career technical
education programs throughout
the state allow students to
graduate high school.
With industry recognized
certificates in a wide range of
professions. These programs have
proven very effective in getting
students through high school and
into the workforce. For example,
in 2023, the overall statewide
graduation rate was 77%. That
very same year of the 64,000
high schoolers who were part of
a CTE program, 96% of those
students graduated. This bill
creates an incentive to
get more kids into these
programs, and that will only
help more of our students
succeed. Therefore, the chamber
respectfully, respectfully asks
for a do pass vote on Senate
Bill 64. Thank you.
Thank you. And now Jack
Jakowski, yeah.
Good morning, uh, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee.
My name is Jack Schakowski. I'm
retired out of the contractor
community supporting the
Department of Energy and
National Labs.
After 57 years.
I also co-chair with Amanda
Aragon from New Mexico. Kids can
The New Mexico Chamber of
Commerce, Education and
Workforce Committee.
As Alison Riley indicated
earlier, we stand in support of
this bill and in particular,
we'd like to thank
Senator Brent
For being the champion for a
career education
in the legislature.
Thank you very much.
Thank you. Um, is that, and
again, let me check, there are
any opposition in the room or
online.
There's one in opposition
online.
If you will please promote them.
Amy Taylor.
You have up to 2 minutes.
Hi, first of all, I'd like to
say that I 100% support Senator
Brant, and this is a wonderful
bill, but unless we also fund
dedicated funding to CTE. This
bill will not produce the
results that we would like
because the sad reality is we
can promote certifications, but
without funding to actually
create the programs to get the
kids to the certification, we
can't get to the certification.
Our
A shops are dying are wood shops
are dying. Um, we have no
dedicated funding to train
teachers to do these, um,
High skilled trades jobs and
there's no funding on.
You know, coming for these
unless you provide it because
it's just not something that all
local school districts are
interested in providing. So I
would say 100% this bill would
be amazing. I want to see more
kids with certifications in high
skilled areas, but it simply
will not happen without more
dedicated funding for CTE.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Senator for bringing this
bill. I, I think this is a great
bill.
Um, and I like the fact of what
you brought up on.
Um, folks graduating. I like
you, uh, college later after the
military.
Uh
Unfortunately, I'm still going,
started again this semester, but
um I think we've done a great
job and
Removing some barriers and
access, and I think this goes to
giving more opportunities for
folks that don't do.
Learn a trade, learn a career.
Take care, take care of them
families. Thank you for doing
this. The one question I have,
um, just on the education there
was concerns about PED maybe
needing an FTA to do this. Once
again, I'm going to support the
bill with just
Get your insight on that.
Is that concern.
Uh thank you Mr. Chairman and
um.
Yeah, PEDs actually asked for a
pretty big increase in their, in
their budget, um, this year, uh,
but I can.
You know this goes to the
finance committee next and and I
can talk with Senator Munoz and.
Really Adrian, if you get
Adrian.
Agree, then that's, that's the
gold right there.
But uh we, we can look at doing
that. I think workforce
solutions also said they might
need some funding to help with
it.
Um, I don't have a problem with
either one of those, um.
We can try to get that in the
budget this year. If we don't,
then we'll try. Great. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator. I, I, like I said, I
just think this is uh
Great, Paula. Thank you, Mr.
Thank you. Thank you, Senator.
Other question, Senator is out.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much. Senator Brand, I love the
as you said earlier.
Not every student is cut out to
go to college. Some of them do
have to go to work, and this is
going to be an example of what
they can go into the work.
Or since I here, here's my
certificate. I have earned this,
I'm ready to go to work. I think
that's wonderful.
One of the questions that was
brought forward in some of our
analysis I read was what
existing CTE program does New
Mexico operate?
Mr. Chairman Senator, you know,
there's been a lot of, of
programs just kind of thrown in.
Um, we, we, we've been funding
CTE, you know, sometimes at 15
million a year or sometimes at
40 right now in the budget
recommendation, it's at 40
million, um, and you know, pet's
kind of been just
Read it, put together whatever
they wanted as far as programs.
There's some pilot programs
called NextGen, uh, pilot
program, um, that, uh, I haven't
heard any reports about as far
as how it's been going.
Um,
So I'm really not, not sure
what's happening. I know they
they brought uh at one of the
LESC meetings, they brought a
report about innovation.
Zones, is that what it's called
innovation zones, um, and they
were calling them CTE but
they're not necessarily CTE.
But they were using CTE funding
to fund them.
Um, and so
You know, I, I just feel like we
need to as a as a legislature
that that we really need to
tighten.
The reins of what CTE is and why
we're doing it. And I just don't
feel like we've been doing this
and my last bill today will
address Amy's concerns. Thank
you very much. I know that right
now.
Uh, in my particular district,
which is.
In Rossville
Uh, we have a program started
that involves high different.
steps that are part of the
workforce where they can
continue it after they do
graduate, and what we have seen
in that particular area, these
students that are very mediocre
maybe below standard in the high
school.
Whenever they are introduced to
some of these.
Elec electrician plumbing HVAC,
uh, the list goes on and on what
they can take.
As a credit.
These kids are starting to
excel. What a concept.
They're wanting to go ahead and
get their graduation.
Diploma, so they can finish up
this and be able to get a good
pay.
So I'm in.
Thank you. Other questions. So
boom.
Chairman and members of the
committee senator, uh, no
questions, just wanna quickly uh
express my support for this, and
I, I want to commend you and
thank you for for your
perseverance for continuing to
bring it forward and, and I
think it's a much needed pathway
for some students to get into
the workforce and.
And, uh, make a difference. So
thank you for bringing this
forward. That's all.
Let me
make a couple of questions and
I'll be ready. I, I suspect
you're, I read mine sometimes. I
suspect you're ready.
Um,
Senator, again, I think very
strong support. We've talked
about this for a while in the
LESC and trying to get more, and
I think there's still some
sorting out as to what CTE and
what he is.
Um, other things that keep kids
in school, the, the May, which
is the association of Pure
Technical Education group, uh,
very good data and results that
when kids take the, I think it's
the 2nd or 3rd course in a
career cluster area, their
graduation rate goes up over
90%.
Um, you know, we need lots more
of it. We know the need for
those, just looking forward and
I'm not sure this is really a
question, but as we look at how
AI is transforming the world and
workplace.
And now quantum computing and
the things it looks like are
coming to New Mexico, we're
gonna have a huge need for
Uh, CTE all around those new
fields and uh starting with
people coming straight out of
high school to community college
to college level technicians and
kind of a continuum of skills.
And so I hope our schools are
looking forward to that. The
center is asked about what kinds
of things most of the CTE
programs around the state are
tailored towards what that local
community needs, and where the
interests are out in the more
rural areas, there's a lot more
around mechanics and
farm equipment maintenance, um,
Las Cruces, we've got, it's,
it's a pilot program to train
pilots.
I mean, it truly, and that's a
CTE one as well. And so, you
know, that's one of the nice
things about this is it really
is set up for the local
community, the local board, the
local schools to meet local
needs. Um, and so again, very
much appreciate you bringing
that forward. I think, uh, New
Mexico's got a huge upside on
what we can do in career
technical education with some of
the, the new industries and
things that are projected to be
coming our way.
So, again, thank you, Senator,
and you've been a champion for
this and we've worked on it very
hard over the last several years
in LESC and just continuing the,
the doggedness to get it done.
You, if you'd like to respond,
otherwise, uh, Senator Pope, I'm
ready for emotion or.
Oh, there you just gonna move
for a pass. Du pass with Senator
Thornton, uh, seconded by
Senator Ramos. Mary Anne, if
you'll call the roll, please.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes, you have a unanimous DuP
pass senator.
And
And so thank you committee, uh,
again, this is Brent Padilla
day, so Senator Brandt, uh,
Senate Bill 116, the math lab
pilot project.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and,
and
This, this bill actually comes
out of my growth funding last
year.
Um, I called my
District and said
You know, I always like to put
some of my growth funding into
education.
I said, what's something that I
can fund that will make a big
difference in math.
Because you and I, Mr. Chairman,
have talked a lot over the years
about we put a lot of focus into
reading, but we kind of ignore
math and you and I are math
people.
Um, and so they said, well, we
really want to start this
program called Math Labs.
Uh
Uh, would you be willing to fund
it at two of the schools. The
district funded it too and I
funded it too. So we have it at
4 schools.
Um
When I went to, uh, I was
invited to go tour the class,
see the class. I was shocked.
Um, at how, uh, the, the kids
were really enjoying math.
And so I, I asked the kids how
many of you really like math.
Every kid in the class, 100%.
Now this is 4th graders that I'm
talking to 100% raise their hand
that they like math.
I've never seen that.
In any school
And so this program is, is a K
through 5 or K through 6
depending on what you do for
elementary school, right, some
districts do K through 6, they
go in for the math lab once a
week, so it's like a rotation
thing.
Um, and they still have their
regular math with the regular
teacher.
Uh, like they always do.
Um
Because of kind of the way we
put legislation together. I
couldn't put in legislation must
follow rear Rancho's, you know,
math lab program, but I'm really
hoping that Ped hears me.
Instead of reinventing the wheel
goes to Riar Rancho and says,
what are you doing and what do
we need to do to replicate that
across the state.
In fact, I even set it up where
a couple of people from LESC
went and looked at this program,
and they came back and said this
is awesome.
So we funded this. It cost about
$100,000 per.
teacher
And that's just teachers'
benefits and and a little bit
of, of the product.
That they use because they're in
there measuring things and
actually using water and I mean
it it's crazy, right? I mean
it's, it's it I was like, yeah,
I would have enjoyed this too.
They're playing games and
learning math.
Because all the games are built
around math.
And, and it was just
There's a really neat program,
um.
But I'd like us to really.
Track it for a few years and see
what kind of results we're
getting from it.
Because it, it doesn't do any
good for me to go in and say,
well, all the kids like it.
What we need to know is, are the
kids learning it?
And are they able to then repeat
it and grow in math.
We want
Our adults to quit being afraid
of math. I think that's one of
the things you and I share,
Senator Souls, my wife.
Has math.
Liter she hates it
And then I don't, you know, tell
on her much. I don't bring her
up much, but she just, man, it's
like, honey what's one plus one
again? Not, not really that bad,
but, but, you know.
What's a fraction? How do we,
you know, she can't, I mean, and
it's not her fault, it's just
that early on she decided she
couldn't learn math.
So she developed this mental
block to it that we've never
been able to overcome this
program.
Make sure our kids don't develop
that mental block in the first
place because we're hitting them
right off the bat. So that's
what it does, it provides $3
million to be able to do that uh
we, we'd be able to get 30
classes.
Around the state so that we can
then track.
How those students are doing
through that progression and
possibly come back and fund this
for the entire state in 3 years.
And I'll let someone else carry
that.
That's it.
Thank you. Uh, the audience,
those in support.
anyone in opposition?
People in support would like to
come and speak if you'd like.
Just jokingly, you'd be a great
politician because you always
are ready if someone will hand
you a microphone.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Chris Balzano
register lobbyist for ran to
public schools, you know, I was
one of those kids, uh, scared of
math and programs like that
helped me, um, when I approached
Mr. Cherman's office, I'm always
afraid of which math logic game
he's gonna ask me before I can
sit down with him, but it's fun,
and I appreciate the senator
bringing this up and the only
thing we ask as a school
district is that PD uh do come
and visit and work with us,
gathering this data, um, so that
Soon we can implement that over
the state. Um, thank you very
much, Mr. Chairman.
Thank
Thank you, Chris. Bonney. Good
morning, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee again, Bonnie
Lightfoot, school superintendent
Association, president of the
Coalition of Educational Leaders
and also speaking for the school
board Association this time may
had to run back to the other
committee, so we stand in full
support of this project. Thank
you.
Thank you. Anyone else in the
room and support?
Online, we have two Jen Williams
and Enria Nell. So Jan, whenever
you're ready.
Uh, good morning, Mr. Chair,
Senators, I'm Jan Williams,
retired engineer and fellow of
the Society of Women Engineers,
and I'm speaking in
116. Bill recognizes the
importance of students engaging
in experiential math learning
beginning in the elementary
years to get them comfortable
with math concepts and the
applications of math to science
and technology learning. Math
fluency is fundamental for
students to see themselves in
STEM careers in the future, and
this will encourage students to
explore career options in STEM
from certifications all the way
to graduate degrees.
This bill again dovetails with
SB 107 to established the STEM
Innovation Network of New Mexico
and, um, I urge you to pass this
bill. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Jan, and we can now,
you have up to 2 minutes.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. Again,
my name is Enriqueel on behalf
of the Greater Albuquerque
Chamber of Commerce, we are
supporting Senate Bill 116, and
we thank Senator Brandt for
bringing this bill forward. The
chamber advocates for policies
that support teachers and raise
student academic performance.
The goal is for New Mexico to be
more competitive, um, at the end
of this 60 day session, and this
bill is another good and
positive step towards that goal.
We support efforts to improve
how we teach math.
And to therefore improve
outcomes for our students. So we
respectfully ask for a yes vote
on Senate Bill 116. Thank you.
Thank you Enrique.
Um, I didn't see anyone in
opposition in the room. Is there
any?
Yeah.
Is this Groundhog Day? It seems
the same, uh, please, if you go,
go ahead. Thank you.
Hi, I'm actually 100% for it,
that there was some confusion.
Um, my name is Amy Trailer, and
to give background, I am the
only currently computer science
education specialist employed
across the state of New Mexico.
I work in Albuquerque Public
schools, though my opinions are
my own, um, I am also finishing
my PhD in STEAM and computer
science education and all of
this is near and dear to my
heart. I wanted to speak on
behalf of Senator Brandt, and
that one
One of the things that I love
about this bill is that it
integrates and braids really
beautifully with other
initiatives and pedagogical
pushes that we're trying to do
right now in schools. It
promotes project-based learning.
It promotes positive STEM and
math identity, which is super
important. Um, it will work
really well with a lot of our
elementary school pushes for
genius Hour. Um, it'll work
really well with uh Senator
Padilla's push for out of school
time.
Um, so it's really a win-win
also because it, it breeds
together with what we're already
doing and whenever that happens,
we have exponential growth and
not siloed results. Thank you,
Senator Brandt.
Thank you. Um, any comments,
then we'll go to the committee
questions.
Questions from the committee,
Senator Ramos, I really don't
have a question, but I thank you
for bringing this bill. You
know, I myself uh loved math. My
son loves, loved math, and he,
he was really fortunate to have
good math teachers. And that was
a, a civil engineer.
So, I'm really looking forward
to see how our students develop
in math after something like
this, I would really be
interested to see how many of
those 4th graders become
mathematicians and engineers in
the future because when they
learn math at a young age.
They're not scared to do a lot
of different uh uh different
things in their life and, and
becoming an engineer, sometimes
people say, well, there's too
much math. Well, this might take
care of that problem. So I thank
you so much for bringing this
forward and I'm looking forward
to uh see what results we get.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator, uh, Senator
Nava.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you very much, uh, Senator
Brandt, for bringing this bill
forward. I also want to commend
you for it, um, and I will have
to mildly disagree with Senator
Ramos, whereas I was not a math
lover senator. I, um, I learned
quickly how important math is,
and coming from a low income
family, being first generation
college graduate, all of those
things play into this. I didn't
have parents who sat down with
me being able to do those tough
math problems and I.
understand the importance of
teaching at an early age, um,
and of exposing students to
access and, um, an opportunity,
so I think this is fantastic. I
just have a few clarification uh
uh clarifying questions, um,
which schools already have it,
have the program senator?
Mr. Chairman, you're gonna get
me lying, um, because I.
Um, it's, it's, there's 4
schools in rear Rancho out of
our.
12 elementary and we put them in
the highest risk ones. Um, so,
uh, Martin Luther, uh,
Elementary, um,
I know that one,
Weta uh.
The soul
I remember, yeah, the, the
district paid for two of them on
the.
Um, yeah, we, we, we wanted this
to put it and we don't have a
trust of Del Sols are are.
Our highest at-risk school.
Um, and, uh, we tried to put
them at those Mr. Chairman
Senator, I greatly appreciate
that and the intentionality
behind it because I can
certainly see it. Um, so moving
forward for the 10 school
districts who will qualify, um,
and the pet analysis, it gives a
little bit of a breakdown in
terms of, um, this is gonna be
sort of a selection process,
right, and an application
process, but are there specific
districts or areas across the
state that will be prioritized.
I don't.
like to overdirect.
In law, so I really wanted to
leave that open for Ped.
To develop their own product go
to.
Um, obviously, I hope that
they'll.
You know, I got one more year of
growth funding for rear end,
keeping it going at those four
schools because we're, we'll be
2 years ahead.
Uh, and we can, you know.
Get some more longitudinal study
through those.
Um, but
I think the only requirement we
put in here is, is no more than
10% of the funding can go to 11
district.
And that was half of it.
We really want it to spread
around the the state in
different areas, maybe even look
at different demographics.
You know, I would recommend
somewhere like Demming or
Gadsden, um, you know, things
like that to where.
Um,
different population group than
we have in a diverse.
pool that we can see if this
works with everyone.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Senator. Appreciate it.
Thank you, Senator. Senator
Thornton.
Mr. Chair,
Senator Brandt, uh, thank you
for bringing this forward. I, I
too appreciate this. I do love
math.
And I love science.
So, uh, I'm glad that you
brought this forward. Don't,
don't.
The key thing that I like about
this more than anything is that
you're having some
accountability in this that it
says here that you are going to
uh put the school districts
through standardized assessments
before and after, essentially,
to evaluate the
Um
That the
Criteria by which this is going
to be. I'm, I'm assuming it's
going to allow us to see
progress. So I appreciate the
fact that you're having.
Some uh
Some accountability associated
with that.
Uh, I, I'm going to support this
bill, and I just want to tell
you thank you for bringing it
forward. I, I hope we can get
more.
Or scientists and engineers out
of this process. So I'm looking
forward to that. And I wanna,
you know, make sure we
understand that we're not adding
another test.
Um, we'll use the, the same one
they're using now, which almost
every school uses NAEP.
Further testing before, during,
and, and at the end of the year.
Uh, for teachers to evaluate how
their students are progressing.
So that, that will be what
information will be taken.
Thank you. That's all, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you.
This warms my heart. This has
got to be the most math-friendly
committee in the certainly
better judiciary, I would think
with lots of people recognize,
understand and like math. That's
great. By the way, well welcome
it looks like all of our uh FFA
students coming in. Welcome to
Senate Education. We're talking
about a bill to put in math labs
in elementary schools around the
state to, to enhance math
achievement.
Uh.
So, because, you know, we're on
Zoom, we have Dexter and Roswell
High.
So students from Roswell Early
College High School.
The
So welcome and, and welcome to
watching your New Mexican
legislature in action. I think
Senator Pope.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator. Thank you for bringing
Other great villain. I have to
confirm with you, I
Substitute teach in elementary
school and usually at the end of
the day, I just get on, have the
kids come up and they just love
it.
Um, they are just interested,
have to find ways to.
Not have them have that fear of
even trying them.
I think.
Uh, the question I have is, I
know you mentioned that you
already funded some of this with
prior grow money.
So I know this is a pilot, but
was that a pilot?
During the difference.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, um.
I think you could call it a
pilot with rear Rancho.
They wanted to try these out,
see how they would work so they
funded too they had enough in
their budget to fund two of them
and I fund, so I gave him
400,000, 200,000 last year
200,000 this year.
Um, and
I, I'm just with PE, they can
take that information and gives
us a couple year head start.
So we can actually have 5 years
when you add the 3-year pilot.
To that to make sure that, you
know, we're, we're getting good
data. I mean that's one of the
things when I was on the school
board, it was always, OK,
where's the data?
The back up why we're doing
this, um, this will give us good
data.
Uh, to, to see if it's something
that.
Our math scores continue to go
down.
Is this something we can do that
will reverse that?
That's the main point is, is how
can we interject? how can we get
involved early.
And Charlotte I I think English
and math are the most important
things in that K through 3
range.
Um, and this does it through
throughout elementary.
No, I think this is great.
Talk about
I was
the math part, yes.
talk about
Um, looking at this amount, um.
This questioning is this enough,
and I, and I'm asking this
because I'm not trying to
Um, sabotage that.
But just wondering
You know, why we're not asking
the budget right now.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, I'm working
with the, uh, Adrian and the
finance committee on we think
we've identified where we can
put it in the budget, um, to
make sure that both of these get
funded, um, so.
It should be
Um, but we'll, we'll, that, you
know, take care of that in the
finance committee, but um,
The reason I didn't ask for more
is because I didn't want to get
too greedy.
Um
I want a reasonable small amount
to get started.
Um, I don't think you want to
make a pilot program that's, I
mean, I'd love to do 50 million
and just go ahead and fund it
everywhere, but we want to have
a proof of concept first.
Yeah, so it sounds like
statewide.
So I was supportive and I would
push for more.
Put that out there.
supportive
supportive of you, but it is
what it is.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Um, and some, I'm kind of the
same way. I hate pilot programs
because most of the time we
already know pilots have been
done all over the place. We know
we need more funding in math. We
know we need hands-on.
Um, types of math project type
of things, you've been funding
the last year and at least uh.
The, the initial things look
incredibly positive and we ought
to be doing this. We are a
wealthy state and we ought to be
able to fund this for every
district that wants to take part
in it, um, I'm hoping that the
10 or 3 million that next year
it's 10 and the year after that,
it's 50, so that everybody can
participate in it. I'm a retired
math teacher, and it's a lot of
how I always taught math. I
would tease my students cause
partway through they do things
like, ah, this is easy, mistress
like sorry.
You know, you're gonna ruin my
job if people start thinking
math is easy. You know, we need
to get, get over the stigma
that.
That math is genetically, uh,
you might have people it's like,
well, my mom's not good at math
either, like it was genetically
passed on or something like
that. Uh, and we've got to get
over that, that it's all right
to not be good at math.
But nobody would admit to not
being good at reading. You know,
they're embarrassed by that, and
we ought to be have people as
equally embarrassed by not being
good at math and help students
so that they are good at math
because
Poor math skills are limiting
for the rest of your life.
So with that, I, I'll end and uh
motion from the committee.
This chair I move to pass
pass by Senator Boone, seconded
by Senator Nava. You'll call the
roll, please.
Yes.
Yes, you have a unanimous DuPass
senator and uh if you can
convince finance to up that
amount of
Because they've got extra money
lying around because we do have
lots of extra money lying
around, you know, I think you
get a strong support from this
committee, uh, against our
colleagues in judiciary that
joke about going into law
because they weren't good at
math. Yeah, we, we need to
counter that, so
thank you. You have a pass.
And so now continuing with the
Craig Brant, Senator Craig Brant
Day. Uh, we're gonna skip down
on the agenda down to Senate
Bill 130, the school career tech
ed program units bill, uh, for
those watching the two center
Padilla bills, Senate Bill 136
on firearm detection software
and school building system
innovation projects, uh, we'll
be doing at the end of this one.
we do have a hard stop at
approximately 10. How can you
have a hard stop at
approximately? We have a hard
stop.
at 10:50, uh, so we can get to
the.
I love these new mics.
They're very hot.
Um, anyway, I, I, I think you,
you, you know,
of YCTE is important. Don't,
don't really need to go through
that again. Um, as Amy Trainer
said on on.
Zoom
The problem is the funding is
not going specifically to CTE.
It's, it's not getting to the
classroom.
Um, in, in talking with Amy, uh,
we, we did a, a town hall
meeting and then talking with
her, you know, she said that
most of the CTE classes.
At least in her district.
Don't even have the supplies.
So you can't really teach
welding without the rods.
And they don't have rods to
weld.
Because they're not buying the
supplies for the CTE classrooms,
right? Uh, you can't really do
auto mechanics if you don't have
the tools and the scopes and all
that kind of stuff that you need
nowadays to do that.
Um, and they're not getting
those supplies.
They're not getting to the
classroom.
So this, this would provide the
funding mechanism.
That would add a 0.25.
Every student that's enrolled in
CTE. Now,
The there there's there's two
different things. There's,
there's the general CTE and I
may end up having to amend this
a little bit more just to kind
of focus it because I really
want it to be on those
concentrators.
Right, what we know is the
concentrators they graduate at
97.7%.
That's what we really wanna
focus on and that's where you
were talking about, Mr.
Chairman, they get to that 2nd
and 3rd class in that same area.
That's a concentrator.
Right, and that's the ones we
really want to be funding is at
this extra because that's where
it's costing more.
Right? There's, there's some CTE
that it doesn't cost extra.
There's a lot that it does.
If you have an auto mechanic
who's who's a who's certified at
the 8th level.
They were master certified auto
mechanic. They're not going to
come teach in the classroom for
55,000 a year.
You're gonna have to pay them
more to get them there. It costs
more. They're also not gonna be
able to teach high school a lot
of times teaches 30 students at
a time.
You can't do that in auto
mechanics.
It's too hands-on. It's not
safe, so you've got to keep
those classes a little bit
smaller, so it costs more.
We've never done anything in our
SCG to account for it costing
more even though this is where
we claim.
You want to focus.
Now I'm with Dave Ramsey guy.
Right, and Dave Ramsey said, if
you want to see what your
priorities are, look in your
checkbook.
Now we don't use checkbooks
anymore. We all do it online.
But look at your, look at your
journal, look online. What are
you spending your money on?
That's your priorities.
We spend money on education.
When we talk about CTE.
But we don't focus the money on
CTE.
And so I, I started this pill a
couple of years ago.
Um, I actually got it all the
way to the house.
Um, and I held the bill because
we were doing this big SCG
overhaul.
Guess what they didn't do in the
SCG overhaul.
They didn't put anything in for
CTE.
Even though I was promised they
would.
So
We need to address this. We need
to make sure we have the
funding.
We've got to quit ignoring 65%
of our students.
Thank you Mr. Chairman. That's
all it does at 0.25.
The students in CT.
Thank you, Senator. I share some
of your frustrations when I
promised that something's gonna
show up and then it somehow
disappears sometimes just before
the final budget comes out. Uh,
after the audience, those in
support of
Senate bill, where are we on?
1:30 on school career technical
program units.
support, raise your hand.
Anyone in opposition?
Those in support would like to
come and make some comments.
I think most of you know the
drill. Come on over.
I should have just recorded it,
right, Mr. Chairman, members of
the committee, once again,
Bonnie Lightfoot, we all stand
in support of this bill on
behalf of school superintendent
Association as well as NEMS so.
Thank you. Thank you, Senator
Brantford continuing your
efforts.
Thank you, Bonnie. Anyone else
you'd like to come up and speak
on behalf of CTE.
And if the students, you guys
are FAA is a CTE type of
program, anybody like to come up
and speak for 2 minutes.
About how this program has been
helpful.
Don't all light up, please,
panic me.
no letting her out. No, but, but
you have up to 2 minutes.
Please go ahead. Good morning,
everybody. So I am in the
welding class and also in a
small animal science class and
as he was talking about,
sometimes we don't get enough
funding. I definitely do see
that shining through.
Um, in some of our courses and
some of our projects that we are
trying to build, um, there is a
Waldolf series going on.
That are
One of our A teachers is helping
with and um I think a lot more
funding would.
Be a lot helpful. Sometimes it
just doesn't shine through
enough, so I completely agree
with what he's saying. Thank
you.
Thank you.
Use your name and So good
morning. My name is Mohammed
Abdelaziz, and I'm the president
of the Rossville Early College
High School FFA chapter. So like
my adviser explained, our early
college program is a little
different and that usually
causes our school to be, I don't
know, a kind of shadow. I mean,
we don't have enough, uh, we
don't have as much students as
the other regular high schools
in our area. So, uh, we usually
don't get as much funding, um,
but we would definitely like to
make our program bigger and the
NMU Roswell, so that, uh, the
college that we take our college
classes at once we do get our
associate's degree, they do have
a lot of CTE programs, but like
the colleague before me said
that not a lot of it is shining
through. A lot of our FFA
members are actually uh
attendees of the welding program
and once they come on events and
trips with us, they always share
these kind of concerns that they
see this funding, but it's not
being followed through. So,
thank you.
Thank you. Appreciate the
comments. Anyone else?
But I talked with young people,
you all have no idea the power
of your voice to influence
legislators, and so I appreciate
you being here, the couple that
stood up and spoke on your
behalf because your voices are
very much heard by legislators.
And so thank you again for being
here, Yo, and hurry up and, and,
and grow up and get out there.
We need you to help build New
Mexico.
Uh, we do have a couple of, uh,
people online, so Enrique Nel,
you're on, please.
Thank you once again, Mr. Chair.
That's a, that's a hard show to
follow there, these uh fine
students who are literally the
future of New Mexico. Um, again,
my name is Enriqueel. I'm here
today on behalf of the Greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce,
and we do support Senate Bill
130, uh, students in the CTE
programs have an amazing success
rate as we have discussed this
morning. So the chamber supports
efforts to help schools get more
students into these programs. As
I've said before, our overall
goal for this session.
is to make New Mexico more
competitive. We respectfully ask
for a due pass on Cenel 1:30.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Dell. Uh, Jack
Jakowski.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee.
And also congratulations to all
the students that are there.
Certainly some of our future
leaders in New Mexico.
are representing their uh
schools very well.
Uh, we stand in support of this
general concept.
As I mentioned earlier, uh,
Senator Brandt.
Has championed the CTE
initiative.
In New Mexico and this is a very
important aspect.
Of making sure that CET
CTE is a sustainable and funded
across uh New Mexico schools.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Jack, and Amy
Trailer.
Hi, again, my name is Amy
Trailer. I work in CTE and
connected learning across the
state of New Mexico. Um, I
wanted to talk a little bit
about the possibilities for
oversight when you direct
funding.
Directly to CTE, then you also
have the ability to watch where
those dollars go and by funding
CTE directly, you were funding
organizations, you were funding
schools that by law, by Perkins
law, have to work with industry
and post-secondary to build
those programs. So we have to
have advisory boards. We have to
know what's happening with all
of those, um, so there's built
in oversight, the PED already.
um, has tremendous oversight
over CTE programs, and by
directly funding the CTE
programs, everyone in the state
can see what kind of workforce
development we're doing at the
K-12 level. I also wanted to say
that there's tremendous
possibility across K-12 with
dedicated CTE dollars to make
sure that kids in elementary
school are getting hands on math
to make sure that our steam labs
and our technology labs are also
supported in districts, because
we
have to start early. We can't
wait until high school or can't
wait until they, you know, go
off to CNN for the first time um
to fund these programs. Um, I
also wanted to say that we have
done a tremendous amount of work
without funding to connect our
programs to post-secondary and
industry. I sit on the committee
for Elevate Quantum. I work with
New Space Nexus. I show up for
every meeting to say our
teachers are ready to go, our
students are ready to go, but we
cannot.
Meet the needs of those
industries without dedicated
funding.
Thank you.
Um, is there anyone else?
Online, um, I've been getting
text messages from Michael Ogas,
who is the past president for
the New Mexmaki, the New Mexico
CTE I can't get the acronym to
work right in my head.
Association for Career and
Technical Education, um, and
he's 100% in support of doing.
of increasing the funding and,
and in this particular area, he
was trying to log on and said,
yeah, you can give, you can
mention my support as the, the
president of that association.
He, uh, teaches in the Josa
program down in the Las Cruces
schools.
I don't believe there wasn't any
opposition.
No opposition, in which case we
are headed questions from the
committee.
Senator
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much, Senator Brandt, uh.
I think what we're doing here is
the way that we're.
Need to be heading
Whenever I look at out here at
these young people that came in
here to our committee room,
gives me great hope that we are
doing. They want to work, they
want to be leaders in our
community, they want to do
what's best for our communities
too and what we're teaching what
they are learning while they're
in this FFA program as
leadership skills as well.
We saw that we had the
representatives, the young lady
and the young gentleman that
stood up to voice what the rest
of the students are thinking.
I'm glad that y'all kept it to
your time limit. You did a very
good job out there.
It's important to me that
In my particular area, this is a
young group, this group of young
people right over here several
years ago, I went to the ENMUR.
There was a lady that located in
Albuquerque who wanted industry
to get involved with what was
going on there.
And through the
Efforts of
He and the EMU are staff.
We got that going.
And
The people that came down from
Albuquerque to do the meeting
with the teachers and the
principal of the school and
everything, that industry is now
preparing for these young
students whenever they complete
that program, they're ready to
go to work.
And that's nothing but a plus
for that industry.
That's where we have to go with
this and
All I want to say is I do fully
support this, I'm concerned
about.
Getting funding for it.
Can you tell me where this bill
is going next, Mr. Chairman and
Senator Brandt, chairman,
Senator, it goes to the finance
committee I thought that's
probably where it was going.
Whenever you say that there was
no money put in place for this
program last was it last year?
Try to find it now.
Will that change in the efforts
this year?
Well, Mr. Chairman, um, right
now we're, we're.
You, you'll see a bill probably
in the next couple of weeks that
is changing the funding formula
completely, um, and so I, I felt
like as that's being done, it,
it's time to get this in here,
in there.
Chairman and Senator Brown, I
fully agree with that. Uh, I do
want to make one comment, Mr.
Chairman and Senator Brant
whenever you were talking about.
Your prior bill.
And that was, let me read the
number on that real fast. Senate
Bill 116, I did not have my
glasses on whenever I was first
reading of our agenda.
From
reading yesterday.
And I thought it said meth lab
pilot project. Well, you know,
we, we did have the, uh, you
know, that Breaking Bad was in
New Mexico, so you know
was involved in chemistry was
good chemistry science.
But let's don't go down that
one, OK? But, uh,
These young people out there,
they're getting their minds put
right right now, uh, they learn
at an early age.
I do happen to teach my uh.
Nephews and all my bonus kids
that I have, nephews and nieces
and bonus kids I have a card
game. It's called 99, and if
you've ever played it, that gets
their minds stimulated on math
because they do have to do
addition and subtraction all the
time, but I do support this. I
hope the funding does come
through because we have seen the
success right out here, Mr.
Chairman, Senator Brett, thank
you very much.
I think Senator, other questions
from committee, Senator Ramos.
Again, uh, uh.
He
Uh, senator, thank you very much
for bringing this bill in front
of us. I, I think it is just, I
just want to make a comment and
thank.
The people or the students that
participated in today's process.
I think that is just so
important and I just, I'm just
thrilled to death to see you all
participating in that, that is
just so awesome to me. I, um,
I, I'm really excited to, to,
uh, see if this goes through the
uh
Really
Through finance and I suggest
that you invite these students
to come in and, and make their
comments for uh.
For for that committee, but
thank you very much, Mr. Chair
and, and Senator.
Thank you. Other questions.
Senator Thornton.
To jail, Senator Brandt.
You mentioned that the SCG is
they're coming out with a new
SCG formula, we'll probably be
seeing that bill fairly soon.
And they did not include this
additional number for CTE. Are
you working with them now to try
to include that prior to the
bill coming forward. I sat down
with them.
First week I was here just to
understand what the formula was
like and
And they are completely revising
it. So, and I actually agree
with the formulations even
though I think it's going to
impact negatively two of the
schools in my district.
Um
So I may still vote against it,
even though, even though I, I
think the formulation that
they've come up with is good.
Because I'm new, I wasn't aware
that the CTE formula that you're
now advocating for wasn't
introduced. So, I guess I'm
gonna ask is, is that something
you are trying to get
incorporated prior to them
coming forward with that bill,
Mr. Chairman, Senator and, and
so there's a little bit of a
disagreement between the LESC
endorsed.
Uh, SCG, uh,
Formula revamp and LFC.
Um, LESC has added a 0.05.
To uh the.
Formula for 6th grade through
12th grade
Um, and, and.
The claim was that that's for
CTE and other things, but
there's no specification.
There's no, there's there's no
requirement. There's no target.
Right, um, they just adding
that.
Um
I, I
Wholeheartedly disagree with
that.
direction.
Uh, LFC didn't provide any
extra.
Not even the 0.05.
Um, they did move the 6th
graders up to being funded at
the same level as all high
schoolers, mid, mid high and
high school because most
districts.
have taken 6th grade out of out
of elementary, not all, Santa Fe
actually has several that are
still K through 6.
But most districts have taken
6th grade out and put them in.
But um that's, that's kind of a
disagreement right now that's
going on. Um, uh.
However, that gets to finance is
probably if this goes through,
we'll
Be negotiated in finance and
figured out how that's going to
be put in.
Thank you.
That's all, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. And Senator, I want
to thank you for being on
finance that you're standing up
for schools and the SCG and the
LESC proposals because many of
those in order to, to do and
move things forward in education
require the money and finance
behind. So I was thrilled when I
saw that you were appointed on
to finance.
We miss you too, Senator.
Uh, other questions from the
committee.
Motion for a due pass by Senator
Zel.
Seconded by Senator Nava, if
you'll call the roll, please.
And
Yes. Yes, you have another
unanimous due pass. You go buy a
lottery ticket today, Senator.
You're, you're doing great,
thank you and the committee and
thank you for your championing
education and over in the
finance committee on behalf of,
uh, kids in New Mexico. So thank
you, Senator.
And now we switch over to the
Senator Padilla part of our uh
agenda today, and Senator
Padilla, if it's all right,
we're gonna do your two in order
unless you would like to do them
otherwise, uh, we'll start with,
I would like to do 136 1st if
that's people watching, we're
going to jump down to
I, oh, those are in order then
on our agenda. So we're doing
136.
The Firearm detection software
and then we're gonna move to
Senate Bill 125, the school
building System innovation
projects. So Senator, please
take us to 136. Thank you very
much, uh, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee, I am
happy.
Today, thank you for
entertaining uh members of
Senate Finance's bills today,
um, tagged with Senator Brandt.
He's on his way over there. I
was there all morning, um,
essentially 136 aims to enhance
our public school security by
establishing the firearm
detection software fund. Uh,
this fund is designed to provide
grants to school districts and
charter schools for the
procurement of advanced firearm
detection software.
Um, essentially, the key
provisions are that um the
creation of this fund will
establish a non-reverting fund
that the state in the state
treasury sourced from
appropriations, gifts, grants,
donations, or other investments,
um, essentially, there will be
grants that would be issued to
district school districts, or
charter schools, uh, based on a
couple of requirements. One is
they need to be capable of
detecting visible unholstered
firearms on school premises and
alerting personnel and law
enforcement.
in the area
I integrates, uh, they need to
be able to integrate with the
existing surveillance or
security systems, uh, they need
to be able to be designated as
qualified anti-terrorism
technology by the US Department
of Homeland Security, uh, the
cabinet secretary there, and
they need to be managed by um a
contracted vendor connected to a
continuously staffed operation
center.
Uh, the software and the package
or the technology needs to be
developed in the United States
using proprietary data.
Not accessible by third parties,
and it needs to be
evidence-based or previously
used by public schools, state
agencies, or federal entities. I
do have an appropriation here,
uh, Mr. Chairman, of $5 million
from the general fund to the
firearm detection software fund
that we'd be establishing in
fiscal year 26 and subsequent
years ensuring that the
availability of grants would be
made to those school districts.
Uh, some of the pros on on why
I'm wanting to do this, Mr.
Chairman and members of the
committee is, you know, enhanced
school safety. I, I don't have
to tell this committee of all of
the horrendous, awful, terrible.
Just heinous things that have
happened recently on our school
grounds. This is a giant step
forward to help bring that
security and that safety to our
school districts.
To enhance school safety, uh, it
would integrate with existing uh
uh software and systems that
already exist within school
districts and investments that
have already been made, Mr.
Chairman. We're not at all with
this type of technology, uh,
suggesting that school districts
throughout any of the capital
investment that either this
legislature or the local school
districts have made, um, and
then again that it be
evidence-based. We, we know that
this works very well, uh, this
financial support would make
this possible. We do have a 50
or so million dollar fund.
out there for school safety that
this legislature when I was a
member of this committee myself
made made available to districts
this actually takes it to the
next level as, as a testing
ground if you will, and then
that would get rolled into the
$50 million that's currently
available over time. I will tell
you, Mr. Chairman, that 12
districts within New Mexico
school districts and schools
have already implemented this
type of software, uh, that is
Aztec Bolin, uh, those are the
school districts there, City of
Hobbs, uh, Clovis Municipal
School.
Eunice municipal schools, Hobbs
Public schools, Jo Public
Schools, Lovington Public
municipal schools, the New
Mexico Junior College or Taus
Municipal schools and Roswell
Independent Schools. So you can
see, Mr. Chairman and members of
the committee that there is a
geographic adoption of this
technology and this software
already and it seems to be
working very well in those
districts. So I just wanted to
open up with those comments, Mr.
Chairman and members of the
committee, and I'm, I'm able to
stand for questions. Thank you,
Senator.
In the room, do we have any
supporters of Senate Bill 136.
If you could raise your hand.
Or if I could have a few of you
come up.
you have
2 minutes. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Stan rounds for the
full list of educational leaders
in the school superintendents,
we stand in favor of this
legislation. One of our major
planks and our legislative
initiative this year is school
safety, uh, this is proven it's
in a number of our districts who
believe the opportunity to
spread that far and wide is
something we have to look at,
uh, so Mr. Chairman, we stand in
support.
Thank you. Um, my name is
Barbara. I'm a youth in
Albuquerque, and though I
believe the consequences for
being found with a firearm in a
school are harsh, especially on
students who didn't have motives
to um commit domestic terrorism.
I do believe it is helpful to be
more safe than sorry.
Thanks
I, uh, Burgess Nichols, um, work
at Zero Eyes. We provide this
type of technology as well, and
we heard that Senator Bazil was,
uh, sponsoring this bill. We
want to come out and show our
support. Um, one thing I want to
hit on is the importance of the
standards in this bill of the
Department of Homeland Security
Safety Act designation. That is
a designation that verifies and
it actually proves that the
technology does what it says
it's going to do. Um, I want to
quickly just read a couple of
the items of what's needed to be
a designated.
uh, for the Safety Act, proven
successful testing in real-world
environments, past internal
external audits, favorable
customer feedback, uh,
technologies repeatedly proven
to perform as intended with a
high level of reliability. Um, I
think that's a really important
part of this, um, we can, I can
tell you is what we've seen in
the last year with our
technology, we had over 1300
live detections of firearms
leading to 31 arrests, um, like
Senator Patilla said, we are in
12 New Mexico districts.
um,
I strongly urge you for your
support in this bill. Thank you
very much.
Thank you. Do we have any
opposition in
Or you know they supporter.
Mr.
is there any opposition?
Show your hands.
And go and go, sir.
Mr.
I, if I have to lean somewhere,
Mr. Chairman, I'll lean a post.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, my name is Mark
Duran. I represent Motorola
Solutions Company.
Uh
Actually, we support the
senator's bill in we should all
be supporting school safety and
Motorola Solutions has many
products and offerings that does
exactly that.
I've spoke to uh Senator Padilla
and I've worked with Senator
Padil on many, many things. Uh,
we have some concerns that are
outlined in the substantive
issues of your FIR, uh, that we
hope to bring some amendments to
the senator on and as I said, I
worked with a senator for a
long, long time, and I believe
he'll be amenable to at least
looking at those amendments and
so we look forward to working
with the senator on those
amendments. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, um, and just because
there was in the middle leaning
opposed. Senator, I'll give you
a
Chance to respond on it if you'd
like.
I thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman
and Mr. Vice Chair and and the
ranking member. So essentially
what you just heard are
It is overwhelming support for
this new type of technology to
be proliferated across New
Mexico with what Mr. Duran spoke
of, uh, I just want to say that
there are specific standards for
this type of
There are specific standards for
this type of technology
implementation and the um folks
that Mr. Duran represents, um,
are more than welcome to, this
isn't for one particular agency
company or whatever, if they
meet those standards which are
called out by the Federal
Department of Homeland Security,
and they are more than welcome
to participate in this type of
uh
Of procurement at some point. So
I just want to say one more
time, make sure that the
committee heard me on this one,
that if, if any vendor out there
can meet these standards, which
are some of the highest in, in,
in the school safety, and they
are eligible for this 5 million
to apply to this $5 million fund
for those types of grants.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator, uh,
questions from the committee of
Senator Eel first.
Excuse me, Mister Chairman,
thank you very much, Senator
Padilla.
I, I too want safety in our
school. I think it's imperative
that our
Young people do get to go to
school and they're not having to
worry about any sort of uh
terrorism plot going on there. I
do get that, Mister Chairman.
Synaripi, whenever we're talking
about uh the the safety aspects
of what you're.
Bill is promoting right here.
At the detection software and
everything. Well, all of these
students, anybody that enters
his school have to be, have to
enter the school through one
certain portal.
Um, Mr. Chairman and Senator
Ezel, uh, no, but, but what they
will do is have the existing
apparatus of of cameras, things
that have already been invested
in that school is what will be
tied into the software and into
the command center operating and
watching and it will
automatically be able to use uh
essentially AI technology to
spot a firearm that would
immediately trigger alarms to
local law enforcement, the
operation center, as I
mentioned, and then any other
area folks that can come in to
help resolve the situation.
before it turns it into
something we don't want it to
be.
And Mr. Chairman, I appreciate
that explanation there. Where's
the command center for this
going to be located, is it on
the school proper, is it in the
district office? Is it straight
into law enforcement. And so Mr.
Chairman and Senator Eel, uh,
it'll be inside of the United
States of America. Um, I, I
would, I'm not being, I'm not
being facetious, but, but
whatever company would be
selected to provide these
services for a district like the
the 12 I I pointed out for you
earlier and I think somewhere in
your neck of the woods.
Um, Senator Rezel, um, they'll
go into a centralized, they'll
have to have that established
domestic operation center that
will immediately have a set of
eyes on what the technology
pointed out or called out. OK.
And Mr. Chairman and Senator
Padilla, whenever you're talking
about AI I understand the
importance of that being part of
this package.
And yes, it is the Roswell
Independent School District
right now. Uh, my next concern
though, Mister Chairman, let me
see, this is going to finance
next, um, I think I read that
somewhere, is that correct, Mr.
Chairman?
Yes, yes.
Um
You
Asking for $5 million to get
this done for this.
Firearm detection software.
But
Just for 26th and subsequent
years.
But my question here is.
As fast as technology is
changing in the course of just a
very short time and we've seen
what that has encompassed,
Mister Chairman Senator Padilla,
what about any maintenance or
upkeep on any of the software
programs that these schools are
using for the safety of their
young kids.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair and the
Senator, all of the existing um
RFP award award requirements
would stand for things that
already exist in the schools,
um, the maintenance, I can't
tell you specifically, but our
procurement laws do require us
that when these things are
awarded that that those be built
into those those contractual
agreements before they're signed
and so I think we're in very
good hands that our procurement
law would help us to ensure what
you're, what your concern is and
we have that in pretty much
every space in government, so.
OK, well, Mr. Chairman and
Senator Padilla was reading the
report from the LESC. I think
that's it's from, yes, it is.
And uh I don't know if you have
that. I do analysis with you
starting on the bottom of page 2
going up to page 3.
Uh, said, uh.
In
Yeah
Senate Bill 239 set aside $10
million annually for FY 19
through 2022 for school security
initiative.
They awarded uh system grants
under this program later to be
phased out due to low demand.
2022 Senate Bill 22112.
At an appropriation of 75
million for maintenance and
repair.
And a lot of the schools use
that money for security
infrastructure, how was that?
Uh, Mr. Chairman and senators, I
think that'd be a question for
the public education department.
I don't know that I could answer
that for you, but what I will
say is I want to underscore what
is highlighted in the report,
which is maintenance and repair
that suggests that it's
technologies and things that
already exist. This is something
that is is new to the New Mexico
landscape on school safety, and
I firmly believe that this is
going to swallow up a lot of
the, and I would have come here,
uh, Mr. Chairman and Senator and
asked you for $50 million which
I think is totally appropriate
for the safety of our children.
But I wanted to bite this, uh,
take a bite at this, you know,
slowly and to make sure that
it's working for us before we
just jump into the other end of
the swimming pool.
And Mr. Chairman Senator
Padilla, I appreciate what
you're saying there. And like I
said earlier, as fast as
technology is changing more or
less on a daily basis, with all
the, everything that's going on
with it right now.
Um
My I I hope that.
I would like for you to have the
$50 million too. I want all of
our students throughout,
throughout our state to be safe
in schools.
As I stated before, that, that
is of most importance these kids
need to go to school without
being fearful.
And
I
Can't remember if you addressed
this in your opening or not.
You were talking about the
unsheathed fire un unholstered
firearms.
Would this be applicable to
knives as well.
Mr. Chairman, I, I did invite um
an expert in this area to join
me I didn't ask him to sit at
the table with me, but let me
ask him that question if that's
all right with you Mr. Chairman.
Senator
Yes,
thank you.
Did you hear the question? Come
on up here.
Just push it until it's green.
your name and then Burgess
Nichols, uh, zero-wise. Uh, so
currently our technology does
not detect uh knifes, takes a
lot of additional processing
power for the AI. The focus is a
brandish firearm, not a
concealed firearm, not a holster
firearm. It's one that has been
pulled out. We've seen
statistically this is uh happens
a large portion of school
shootings, you get an individual
brandish a firearm ahead of time
in a preparation phase, and
that's where we look to
essentially uh make the
detection.
OK.
Uh, appreciate that, Mr.
Chairman, Senator Padilla, Mr.
Nichols.
What about, I don't know what
they're called, somebody may
have to help me out here.
I
The plastic guns that can be
made at home. Well, what about
the detection on that? Has, has
AA reached the stage where those
are gonna be detectable.
Absolutely. So the AI looks for
the uh form factor of a firearm,
it's right it's it's not an
actual material it's a shape of
a viro.
And, and when that is detected,
then a human reviews that to
determine if that is a that is a
airsoft gun with a orange tip on
the end, if it's a true firearm,
that's why the human is in there
reviewing the detection before
they dispatched to local law
enforcement. OK, so Mr. Chairman
and Senator Padilla, Mr.
Nichols, what I'm hearing is.
Technology hasn't caught up with
any other lethal weapon that
might do harm to our students is
basically focused on firearms.
Is that correct?
this particular
Right this
measure is and and that that is
where the most damaging.
And danger comes from, and
that's why the focus is on the
firearm. OK
And Chairman and Senator
Padilla.
Mr. Nichols, oh.
What is the name of your company
again? Zero.
00. OK.
All right.
And
Mr. Chairman Trepidia whenever
we had.
Um
to uh, I'm sorry, I used your
first name. I shouldn't have
done that. Oh.
Mr. Durrant stood up, and he is
here representing Motorola to
each.
Does every district have the
option of being able to come in
and
So I get bids from everybody,
put out a.
Well, Mr. Chairman and
Mr. Chairman and the Senator, so
uh it would be.
You could have a district by
district um RFP put out, you
could have, as we all know, a
statewide pricing agreement and
then others could camp on to it
if they wanted to participate in
this type of technology. I, I
can't answer like from district
to district who is or who isn't,
but I mean they would have the
option though, Mr. Chairman,
send ribute to you. Is that what
you're saying they would if they
meet the uh the certification
requirements that in the, in
the, how that would be laid out,
yes. And those are laid out.
We laid out in my introduction
and are laid out in the
legislation.
OK, well, I appreciate hearing
that.
Mr. Chairman, uh, Senator
Padilla.
Like I said, I wish that we did
have the money where all, all,
all schools could.
I want our kids to be safe.
Uh
One thing that we do have to
work on is.
The mental health issues of our
state.
Mr. Chairman Senator Padilla,
thank you very much. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator. Next up,
uh,
senator.
I think most of my questions
were already answered by Senator
Isa, um.
No, that's OK. Um, cause my, my
initial, my initial question was
with regards to, was this a
portal that people had to walk
through, and it sounds based on
what I'd heard.
Was that this is more of an
optically based system, so
there'd be cameras set up across
the school, and they would all
feed into the system in the in
the system would then detect
based on form factor whether or
not uh someone was carrying a
firearm. So am I understanding
this correctly now? Um, Mr.
Chairman and Senator Thornton,
you're right, it'll it'll, um,
integrate um with existing uh
technology already on the school
ground and investments that have
already been made by districts
and what have you and
If, if an agreement is is put in
place with, say, you know,
Motorola or Zero Lies, they
would give you um feedback and
direction on what areas might
not be necessarily, you know,
viewable by your current, you
might need 3 more cameras versus
the 19 that you already have to
ensure full coverage of, of as
someone is approaching the
school building.
Very good. Um,
So the only question I have with
with regards to having this sort
of technology involved. It's
what is the
percentage of false alarms that
uh this sort of system because
obviously you don't want to
engage.
Law enforcement and everything
else in the event, uh, I need an
expert for that one.
I mean, based on, I'm assuming
based on some
Real life studies. So uh Mr.
Chair and Senator Thornton, to
answer that question, uh, that's
where that human in the loop,
human factor comes in. Uh, if
there's a false positive that AI
thinks is a firearm that's not.
That's what an individual deems
it a false positive and does not
dispatch it to local law
enforcement. So that's where
marrying up the human, the
artificial intelligence to get
the best possible results.
So, so the
Operations center then gets the
order first and they do another
evaluation before it would then
go out to law enforcement. Yes,
and then speaking on behalf of
our company, um, then did that
alert is in dispatch within
approximately 3 to 5 seconds on
the time.
Receiving it. So it's, it's all
happens in very quick
succession.
Thank you, that answers my
questions.
Thank you, Senator.
Thank you, uh, Senator Nova.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Senator Padilla for
bringing this bill forward. Um,
as someone who grew up at a time
where all of these risks became
very prevalent. I know the
importance of it. Um, I do have
some questions just to clarify,
uh, I am wondering because the
Senate Bill 136 describes the
software pretty specifically.
I'm wondering how many actual
suppliers would actually
qualify.
Uh, thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman
and uh and Senator Nava. I am
not aware of how many, but I,
I'm, I'm aware of at least 3.
You've heard from 2 in the room
right now. There is one other
that I'm aware of that is um
primarily
Larger cities based, if you
will, but I know that they're
trying to work into other
communities as well.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman Senator
Padilla, and additionally, in
public school capital outlay
council, uh, funded the
subscription based software.
Uh, for security systems at all,
and Senator Nava, they could,
that is possible. Um, this is an
additional like I said, I would
have come and try to double that
from 50 to 100 million, but I
came in thinking, why don't we
start off with $5 million and
see where it goes from there.
We've already had some adoption
here in New Mexico, as I
mentioned, the 1212 government
entities that I mentioned, um,
and I think that we'll see more
of this once we see the success
of it.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Senator. Thank you,
Senator.
Senator Ramos.
Mr. Chairman, thank you, uh,
senator, thank you for bringing
this bill in for us today. I
think this is probably one of
the most important bills and
porn subjects that we've got in
front of us in, in this world
that we live in today.
Um, the thing that I don't like
is it's not covering every
school.
And I think every school is
important in the state of New
Mexico, not just a certain few,
not just the ones that qualify
for, for these funds. I really
would like to see a bipartisan
bill that's going to supply
every single school in the state
of New Mexico. And uh that's the
only problem I have with this
bill. I like everything else,
um, I do have a problem that it
only detects holstered.
Uh, guns.
Um, that holstered unholstered
guns
and uh uh because if if somebody
comes in and puts some kind of
holster with and has a gun with
him, then it's not going to
detect it and we're going to
have a big problem, right? So
that, that is a problem.
Hopefully, we get some better
technology in the future and we
can uh and carry on, but uh.
That's the biggest problem I
have with this bill is it's not
covering every school in the
state of New Mexico, which this
is one of the most important
things the protection of our
children.
protecting of our children
should be the top priority of
every legislator out here and I
think it really is, but
We've got to prioritize our
funding and I think we ought to.
Take all the funding that we can
to to provide that for our
schools. We owe it to our
students. We owe it to uh the
protection of our kids.
So that's the only comment I
have and again thank you for
bringing this bill.
Thank you and thank you to the
ranking member. I think I found
my co-sponsor.
Senator Souls
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I find
myself sitting here, I, I think
it's important that we have to
be having this discussion in the
education committee because of
the proliferation of guns and
firearms and how prevalent they
are in our society and we never
seem willing to actually deal
with that side of the problem.
So we always deal with the
problem after the fact when guns
are being brought into the
schools.
Um, sure wish we would, would
actually take on the real root
of the problem instead of
afterwards. Um, now, having said
that,
We currently have lots of money
in school safety.
Could those monies be used for
this program, or why do we need
to have a separate fund or a
specific technology rather than
a school safety fund that allows
districts to make the choice as
to what works best for their
particular school and district.
Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
They still have that.
That uh that choice, they still
have the ability to do. They
don't have to apply to this
fund. This is money that would
be set aside specifically for
this particular um technology
and that's why I wanted to bring
it to you if um if, if at some
point we find that it's
something that works for our
state, which I believe we're
going to find that out. I'm I'm,
I'm now a believer in this
technology, and you know that I
have a technology background,
you know, I chaired the Science
and Tech Committee for 10 years,
um, and, and I think that's why
folks come to me and approach me
with this.
kind of new to as, as well as
you have, Mr. Chairman. You and
I came to this legislature on
the same day, um but I I think
that eventually this gets rolled
into those dollars and then
that's where we start seeing the
expansion that the ranking
members spoke of and things of
that nature.
And, and thank you and uh Mr.
Chair and Senator, again, I
I'm nervous when we put money in
for a specific technology under
the broad umbrella.
Of safety where the money we
ought to just, if we, if there
isn't enough money in safety, we
ought to just put the money in
safety and let the decisions be
made at a local level rather
than specifically saying a
certain amount is for a specific
technology. That's my concern,
and that's probably why I'm
going to be voting against this.
It's not that I'm against school
safety. I think we need to make
sure there's enough money in
there, but that we're doing
things and I'm not saying this
doesn't, but to keep kids safe,
but it's different for every
school.
And I think the money ought to
be in there for the local
decisions to be made, not that
we are supporting a specific
technology. So, thank you. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you
Um, I don't think you have
anyone else on the list. I'll go
ahead and finish up. Uh,
Senator, I appreciate you, uh,
bringing this bill forward.
On an issue that
It is so relevant with what our
kids are facing something that
we didn't have to deal with.
Going to school.
Let me rephrase that something I
never had.
I mean, back in the 80s, in some
areas and
Um, my, my concern on this is
just
In essence, um, from what I'm
seeing.
Analysis is.
There's probably one company or
or few that can really actually.
requirements. I love the
requirements, you know.
State
Federal and
Um, we're putting in quality.
Uh, system for schools.
But in essence, this is really
kind of money going.
a sole source company.
And I'm not saying that.
Thing that's what this.
This bill is trying to achieve,
not saying that at all.
But I just have concerns with
that.
Um, as a person.
Working for DOD and satellite
programs, sometimes that was the
case.
Um, but just
With what I've seen and some of
the technology that's out there.
Bernalillo County, right? We
walk into the building.
Is that
You know, if that's a company
that would qualify. chairman and
Mr. Vice Chairman, thank you for
your comments and your
questions. Uh, I'm with you when
I was in school, we, the, you
know, the toughest or the
weirdest thing happening to this
kid that brought a pack of
smokes with them to the school,
you know, and it was like, whoa,
you know, um, now it's, you
know, guns and knives running
through the weeds and trying to
get in the building, but to your
more succinctly to your point,
you had 2.
Companies here today that would
be that are able to, you know,
get him so I wanna make sure
this isn't at all a sole source
or anything like that. The
procurement laws would, would be
that we have in the RFP
processes and all of that would
stand. I do believe that the
company that provides services
to Burnleyo County, um, as I
understand it, are the visual as
well and I believe that when you
walk through that corridor to go
into the building, um, and when
you're on the other near the
other doors to that new
courthouse that we put together
for Bern County that they are
similar to.
technologies. I don't know what
company that is. I, I couldn't
quote the name for you, but
there's 3 options right there
based on what we've just talked
about today. Yeah, I, I just
wanna make sure and thank you,
Senator for that answer. Um, and
I'm assuming and, and I don't
want to speak for your company,
sir that.
I know in Burnco when you walk
in the building, something on
them.
So I'm sure it's something
similar.
proprietary.
Um
I just want to make sure that
Oh
It looks like.
We're doing things on the up and
up. And number 2, we're giving
us a state.
That's kind of where I have
concerns. I liked a lot of the
comments from folks on.
Um, providing more funding.
Schools have access to this, but
I also understand and sit on
finance, I'm on the outside. I
mean, sometimes just getting
what you can.
So
I understand that as well.
Um, I'm gonna still be
considering.
At vote on this.
I just have concerns.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Vice
Chairman.
All right.
Uh, I'll go back with Senator
Thornton.
Mr. Chair, I have to admit I'm
struggling with this one, this
being.
And Senator, uh, I'm struggling
because I think we all support
school safety. We all believe
that we have a technology that
you've indicated here that
Can lend it support, I mean,
lend some.
Some, some probability of, of
offering safety to our kids. The
problem that I think most of us
are struggling with is that
it's, it's not a full solution.
It's in the fact that it's a
limited solution.
And so we're paying for them
this solution when in fact we
would be willing to pay almost
anything to save our kids. And
so, so the concern here is that
we have a partial solution that
does not even identify knives.
Doesn't identify a holstered
gun.
So anything concealed carry
would not be identified by this
technology.
And yet, we could also back it
up with metal detection, so we
could, we could make our schools
safer if we were to look at a
whole holistic solution as
opposed to just a partial
solution. And I think that's
what we're all struggling with.
And that's kind of what I'm
hearing amongst the, the group
here. So I'm not quite sure how
I'm gonna vote on this either
because none of us want to seem
like we're not interested in in
school safety. We just don't
feel like this may not, this may
be a partial solution to what we
feel is needed solution that
would make all of our kids
secure.
That's just where I'm coming
from.
Thank you. Thank you, Senator.
Thank you, just, uh, for folks I
know.
gonna be here for a little
while, but let's make sure our
mics are on and we're speaking
but of course, I don't want
everyone to have the mics close
to them. What happens in that
situation as well.
So we don't have any other
questions or comments, so we'll
go ahead and take the role.
Oh, I'm sorry. What is, what is
the will of the committee?
On this bill, Senate Bill 136.
Mr. Chair, I'd move a no wreck.
Do we have a second?
Yeah, a second or no rep.
So we have a no wreck motion.
From Senator Souls in a second,
Senator Thornton.
All the.
Sorry, I jumped.
No pun in.
Yes.
Yes, so like no, and I've
already explained my vote.
I know there were folks wanted
to explain their vote, Senator
Riel.
Mr. Chairman with no
recommendation.
I, I do have a problem on.
Some of the issues that were
brought up, especially regarding
the knives uh any any weapon.
Other than a gun is not going to
be detected. There are other
ways of doing harm.
At the rate of our problem is
the mental health issue that's
facing lots of New Mexicans
today until we address that.
If we get that addressed and
under control, we won't need
things like that.
But I am going to let it move
forward with no recommendation.
Thank you, Senator.
And uh, you know, I voted yes
more on the no re talk about my
concerns but really wanted more
of a holistic than just.
Software the concerns on
limited. I'm also hoping as you
take this forward.
that you find out there are
companies that can do this.
Thank you, Vice Chair.
Uh, and what
Uh
of count.
You'll be your bill passes,
senator?
Thank you, members of the
committee.
At your bill, I'm sorry, it's a
no recommendation.
But keeps moving live to fight
another day. All right.
um and, and I'll let you start.
We have a hard stop at 10:50.
So I will, if you'd like to
start, you start or we.
If you would be willing to put
this um at or near the top of
your carryover list, I would
prefer that. Um, I also want to
make sure that you have a full
complement of committee when we
go through this one. So this
one's gonna be another, you know
how I love to show up here with
like
the most
Well, thank you, Senator, um,
and with that, I will turn it
back over to the chair.
Thank you and Senator, yes, uh,
you will be first on Friday,
Senator Hickey will not be here
on Friday.
Um, he is off at, uh, family
funeral or something of that
sort and just let me know ahead
of time. Uh, and the bills that
we have on Friday, I'm working
with the ranking member of bills
that'll, that'll have good
discussion but are not overly
controversial, at least on a
partisan basis. So and then
again, I appreciate this
committee so much. I think we're
working well together. We're
getting good issues out, very
respectful, moving things along
in appropriate pace. So thank
you to my committee. I regularly
get to brag that in education.
Yeah, we get stuff done and you
know, we, we are, we're keeping
uh the kids in New Mexico first
in mind, uh, with that, uh, this
committee is adjourned until 9
o'clock on Friday.
