2 student water safety guidance
and then probably the 524, but
that may depend on when the, the
sponsor is able to, to get over
here. Um,
first kind of a point of
personal privilege is today is
pie day.
Um, and for math teachers, this
is a big day. Uh, lots of people
in the legislature when we've
talked about it before, they
thought it really was about.
Apple pie and cherry pie and pie
town and, and all of that and
have to remind them that no pie
is one of the most important
numbers in the world and seems
to show up in all kinds of map
outside of just the map around
circles. And so it's ie with a
PI and it's always on March 14th
because the 1st 3 digits of pi
are 3.14 March 3, 14th.
Um
That
Pardon?
It's too cute. That's right.
The, um,
you know, and around the world,
there are competitions on Pi Day
for reciting the digits of pi,
and I think the world record is
something like 70,000 digits of
pi, and it, and at least so far
nobody has found that it ever
repeats a mathematicians have
actually tried to prove that it
never repeats, but that's been
rather elusive also. So,
Just for little facts about
highway. Uh, there were actually
were some legislatures in the
past that tried to legislate
that pie was officially just
3.14, not all of the other
digits. You can't legislate
something that is in the natural
world and, and say that it's not
what it actually is, um.
But
I always remember when I was in
high school, one of the easiest
ways is a good approximation of
pi is 22/7, which gets you to
about 3 or 4 decimal points out,
which is good enough in most
cases, but it is not officially
high, 3.14.
And ought into infinity of
additional digits, so my little
bit of personal privilege of
being a former math teacher
about Pie
senator is out. I owe you that
cookie back. I almost, I started
to mess up.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much. I did love the
explanation. A lot of people
don't understand what you just
taught, taught the rest of the
people here.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, I do have a
concern. I know it's getting
late in the session and
everything, there's lots of
stuff going on, but I'm very
concerned that we are not
getting our FIRs until right
whenever we come in the
committee room.
How can we get people
Spurred up so where we can get
these where we can make a good,
good decision on the bills that
we are talking about.
And Senator, I, I don't know and
I will mention that through
channels back over to the
finance committee, uh.
It's not an excuse that we're
all a bit overworked at this
point, you know, they're online,
but I hear from my analysts and
staff as well that they're not
getting them in as timely as we
would all like. Exactly right,
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much and, and, uh, senator, it
likely is going to get worse as
you know, that things get very
fluid as far as timing and
things of that sort. I've talked
with the ranking member in here
that I will try to avoid having
meetings that don't have enough.
notice and things of that sort,
but things are fairly fluid and
so I'll try and work through the
ranking number if we have to
have, if we have a bill that
comes over on short notice or
have to have a, a quick, uh,
during one of the breaks in the,
the floor session and to bring
our committee together, but I, I
tried to avoid that when
possible. And Mr. Chairman, in
light of what you just said, I
also want to point out to the
audience that
Our stress level has gone from
here to.
Hi, OK.
Thank you, Mister Chairman.
Thank you, and that's part of
having a little levity about Pie
day today and they, I think
we've got some pie over there
and so members, please go and
make sure you have a, a little
bit of pie so you remember the
importance of March 14th.
Mr. Chair, I, I just want to
know how a signature hickey and
the Figueroa always looks so
calm.
Mr. Cha, it's because the pie is
in my line of sight.
The little thing when I was
teaching geometry and stuff and
some of my bilingual students
would always call the symbol for
pie, the little casita.
But
OK, uh, back to the, the
business at hand, um, house Bill
65 instructional days in the
school year, um,
Armstrong and now I don't see
either one here, but it looks
like you're filling in for them,
senators. So if you would
please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for the opportunity to come to
education today, you know, this
is where I started with you,
sir, and uh said in this
committee several years, and,
and heard all about the schools
and we're still trying to fix
them.
Here we are today with House
Bill 65 with emergency clauses.
That will amend the existing
school.
Callender requirements to
provide that local school boards
and charter schools governing
bodies have the authority to
determine the number of
instructional days per year.
Days per week students are
required to spend in school
programs.
And it would be applicable to
the 2025, 26 school year and
subsequent school years after it
it also contains an emergency
clause and would become
effectively upon the signature
of the governor.
Mr. Chair and committee.
Um
For you that may or may not know
we had a
A lawsuit this last year that
the governor tried by rule to
change the days attendance of
the school system and uh
The lawsuit was successful that
said that.
The, the long.
The law does not support the
rule this further.
Codifies that particular.
lawsuit
And um
I've got um
In English
final passage out of the House
of Representatives.
It was unanimous.
With 5 excuses and one absent.
pass this bill.
So I want to, I can.
talked much more of them.
Uh, Bonny Lightfoot that is well
known in the education community
as my expert witness today.
If you don't mind, I'll let her
say just a little about the
bill.
And introduce herself and her
how she
How I chose her as an expert
witness.
why she is an expert witness.
here
Honey, please go ahead.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee. Thank you,
Senator, for that introduction.
My name is Bonnie Lightfoot. I'm
the current president of the
Coalition of Educational
Leaders, um, on behalf of school
superintendents, there's uh
nearly 1000 administrators part
of NEMO, 250,000 students and 89
school districts that I'm
representing and all of the
facts that Senator Woods just
pointed out to you about the
unanimous vote passage the
lawsuit, the rule of the law,
the hours and days, all that is
true, and I'm happy to be here,
answer questions you may have.
Anything else with that, Mr.
Chair, I'm ready for questions.
Thank you. I to the audience,
those in support of this
legislation.
OK, and in opposition.
Supporters would like to come
up. You have up to 2 minutes.
Mr. Chair, committee members, my
name is Tom Patterson. I'm a
Catron County cattle rancher. My
headquarters is at Luna, New
Mexico. I have the privilege of
serving as President-elect of
the New Mexico Cattle Growers
Association.
Cattle growers, absolutely
supports HB 65.
Our educational objective.
is to provide an environment
where our children and our
grandchildren can thrive
academically as well as
physically, emotionally, and
socially.
That means knowing their
circumstances and that of their
families.
Our local school boards do.
But respectfully
Agency officials in Santa Fe
don't.
Nor can they be expected to.
That's why it's important to us
at the local level for school
boards to make the decisions on
instructional days and hours.
Please.
Help our local school boards
with the authority to let our
children thrive. We urge you to
support House Bill 65.
Thank you, Lily May.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee, Lily
Mayortis, uh, legislative
liaison for the New Mexico
School Board Association, and
Mr. Chairman, this is one of our
top priorities for this
legislative session and for all
legislative sessions it deals
with local control. It's one of
our guiding principles that we
promote and we support
legislation that allows
flexibility and and local
control and school districts to
make their own decisions. One of
the most important components of
a successful public education
system is that local control and
flexibility. We believe that it
must be preserved.
and when possible expanded, we
oppose any legislation that
attempts to diminish or take
away local control, and we
support legislation that
maintains or expands it in our
districts. This bill does that
for districts, and we totally
support it and we ask your
approval to move it forward.
Thank you.
Thank you, John.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, John Dis with AFT
New Mexico. Um, we're also here
in support of House Bill 65, um,
the, the lawsuit that was
previously mentioned, we did
sign on with an amicus brief,
um, at the behest of our some 30
locals we represent. Many of
those locals are on 4-day
calendar weeks, and this was
really important for rural
schools. It's, it's, it is about
local control, but it is about
legislative intent from House
Bill 130 from a couple of years
ago, which was the result of a
long interim study process where
a lot of stakeholders involved,
and we fully agree with the,
with the lens that was uh used
when presenting this bill. This
is about, um, local control and
ensuring that the state statute
is followed and not um overruled
through administrative
lawmaking. So we do urge your
yes vote today.
Thank you. We have one online,
Matt Paul.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I won't belabor the
point. I think everybody else
has covered it quite well, uh,
we support this bill, um, and
are hopeful for a due pass today
and they're thankful for the
sponsors. Thank you.
Thank you. In the audience.
Position
No one in opposition, they were
in opposition online, no, then
questions from the committee,
please.
centers out.
Mr. Chairman, I move a do pass.
Motion for a due pass in a
second.
Other questions?
Only, only comment that I have
is I believe that the
administration has appealed that
ruling as of a week or so ago,
um,
This bill, I think, continues to
show legislative intent.
That we've already have in
statute the number of hours,
it's up to the district on how
they spend and put those hours
in place, uh, and
The days
Our, uh, really up up to the
district. We've had many
districts that for many, many
years have been on 4 day
calendars and the students seem
to be doing reasonably well, um,
and with other things we're
putting in place, I think this
just reinforces legislative
intent that
The law indicates ours, not
days.
So
With that, and again, comments.
Mr. Chair, thank you. I would
just add anything we can do in
law.
To clarify that intent and avoid
future lawsuits is useful.
Um, and if anybody's interested,
I just looked up.
16 states legislate days.
10 states
Legislate days or hours and let
schools qualify by one or the
other 11, said days, and we are
one of the 13 that sets ours,
which is just to say, Mister
Chair, states do this
differently all over the
country. What's important for us
is
that we are clear and law about
what our intent is as
legislators, and then allow
schools and school districts to
do what they need to do to
follow that law. Um, confusion
up here between the legislative
and executive branch serves no
one.
Thanks, Mister Chair.
Thank you. We are on a Du pass
motion. Marianne, if you'll call
the roll, please. Sender Boone.
Century cell.
Yes, ma'am.
Figueroa.
Yes, Cinder Hickey.
Yes
No. Yes, Senator Ramos, yes.
Thorn. Yes. Senator Pope, yes,
tender souls, yes, you have a
due pass.
very much wasie enjoyed the time
with you.
Thank you. It's nice having you
back, sir. Um, next, HB 67,
reasonable assurance of for
higher education employees and I
believe Senator Figueroa, you're
going to put this on for uh
Representative Garrett.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
committee and on behalf of
Representative Garrett, I'm
happy to be before you this
morning. Uh, this bill makes it
simple but important technical
fix to our unemployment system
for contingent and adjunct
faculty at institutions of
higher ed.
Generally, as required by
federal law, adjunct faculty are
entitled to unemployment unless
they are given a quote
reasonable assurance, close
quote, that they will be
retained for the next term, and
reasonable assurance is just not
clear enough. So this bill
clarifies what that means with 5
specific questions.
So those are listed in the bill.
They're listed in the FIR, but I
can give them to you.
If the educational institution
has made a written, oral, or
implied offer of employment for
the following academic year.
That's reasonable assurance. If
the offer of employment was made
by an individual who actually
has the authority to make an
offer of employment, and the
employment offered is
substantially the same position
or a higher position than the
previous.
Um, the consideration for the
offer deployment is at least 90%
of what the claimant earned in
the current then current
academic year.
And the offer of employment is
not contingent on factors within
the institution's control.
So those are the 5.
Test points.
To determine what reasonable
reasonable assurance is, and
this is in line with federal
law. So it clarifies that the
state level and aligns us with
federal law, and I will let Rep
Garrett's exit witness introduce
herself and add anything that I
missed.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
committee. I am Grace Road House
Baberena. I'm a labor lawyer in
Albuquerque. We represent uh
educators and unions across the
state of New Mexico.
With that will stand for
questions, OK, uh, in the room,
those in support.
Is there anyone in opposition?
like to come up and, and speak.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee, John Diarch
again with the American
Federation of Teachers in New
Mexico. This is a bill that we
um first worked on in 2023 to
remove the ambiguity and current
state statute on how we evaluate
um eligibility um through
reasonable insurance for adjunct
and contingent faculty and made
it through the House in 2023,
uh, and made it to this
committee, thankfully
unanimously in 2023 and just
timed out at the end of the
session. We're back again, um,
and hope that you will.
Support this bill, um, the
sponsor did a great job in, in
mentioning that this does align
us with federal law in this
area, and so it's a win for the
employees, so they know going
into their application process,
the criteria that need to be
met. It's a win for the
institution and it's a win for
those at Workforce solutions
that have to evaluate those
claims. Everyone would be
working under those same 5
criteria should this bill be put
into law. So we urge your
support again on this uh piece
of legislation. Thank you.
Thank you, and any opposition,
there's no support or opposition
online, so.
Anything else?
Not questions from the
committee.
Mr. Cherimodu Pasa Bill 6 Mo for
Duin and result.
Mr. Chairman, thank you. I do
have a couple of questions here
and reading over the FIR that we
just received.
As we came in here, OK? I'm
trying to read this and hurry
under significant issues it is
stating that the University of
New Mexico.
Reports and I'm reading this.
As it's typed out here.
As written, it's not clear how
the workforce solutions
department will interpret the
contingency factors within the
institution's control as
outlined in section 5115.
At UNM our temporary part-time
faculty letters of understanding
include the following, then it
goes into that language there.
Then they are also stating the
legislation is not clear to the
extent that class cancellation
due to insufficient enrollment.
Significant budget reductions or
other schedule changes are
considered to be.
A factor within the educational
institutions grow.
Control. I'm just wondering, Mr.
Chairman.
Uh, Senator, have you had a
chance to read this FRR yet like
I said, we all just got it and
I'm just, OK, I'm trying to read
this in a hurry.
Tell me what your thoughts are
in regard to what I've just
read.
Mr. Chair and senator, whenever
we change um unemployment
statute.
Workers, um, the department is
gonna have to interpret the new
statute and promulgate rules and
figure out how to do it. So
there's always a little
uncertainty about how that's
gonna happen. But what this bill
does is give them clear
guidelines, so the university
sees going in and the department
and the employees all see those
same criteria. I'll let the
expert witness add to that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
Senator, uh, so, yeah, certainly
there's concerns about uh
exactly what could be defined
as, uh, within the university's
control, there is some things
that are clearly within the
university's control and some
things that would be clearly
without outside of the
university's control and um as
senator had mentioned earlier,
what this does is it takes a
significant amount of
subjectivity in the evaluation
of whether an employees eligible
for unemployment and benefits.
And it makes it so all parties
are looking at the same criteria
evaluating them similarly and
applying them objectively, more
objectively across the board for
every claim that comes through
the door of the um workforce
solution and really related to
these types of employees.
OK.
All right.
Well, in also reading further
into this uh the uh analysis
from UNM.
Uh, New Mexico Highland
University in New Mexico
Institute of Tech
mining and technology, I said
that backwards, I didn't mean to
do that.
Their concern is on every one of
these.
It is dying.
Uh, state university state
employment insurance costs may
increase or these universe and
they're going to be unable to
provide an estimate of the cost
currently, but do you see that
being a problem as far as the
Universities are concerned with
the cost in.
The insurance
And in their unemployment
eligibility and corresponding
claims, OK?
Oh, that is my question.
Mr. Cheer and Senator, then at
the universities have spoken in
opposition to the bill as it
made its way through the
committees and across the floor.
So while, um, it's clear in the
analysis they've noted, it's
going to change some of their
costs likely their concern isn't
great enough to oppose the bill,
so I have to go by that, Mr.
Chair.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much, uh, Senator I almost did
it, OK, sorry about that.
The ate them all already.
I.
Mr. Chairman and the senator.
I know that there's no
appropriation in this particular
bill that we're
discussing today.
That H N MHED does say, does it,
does it not contain an
appropriation, it could affect
the numbers of workers eligible
for unemployment benefits and
we'll have administrative
implications for the
unemployment division of the New
Mexico Department of Workforce
Solutions.
So if they're bringing that up,
I would like.
If you're able to.
A recount of Senator,
I'll take a stab at it, um,
because we're talking about
employment, uh, between
semesters, so it would not come
into effect.
This year, 2025, it would affect
their procedures and processes
next summer, which gives them
time to adjust for it in their
budget request, so they don't
need an appropriation now with
the passage of this bill,
they'll have time to absorb it.
And that's what I needed to
hear, Mister Chairman.
Senator, thank you very much.
Thank you. Other questions.
Just one.
To start. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
So what's this, what's the
current procedure for adjunct
professors?
It typically work for semester
or 2 semesters, and then they're
on for the summer.
They can claim unemployment
while they're off because
they're on your contract. Is
this the way that works? I'm
just trying to understand what
the current system is like.
Um, the current system uses that
term reasonable assurance, so
that is the criteria whether
it's to determine whether they
qualify for unemployment
insurance, but go ahead and
explain in more detail.
So it, excuse me, Mr. Chairman
and Senator, uh, so each
position is slightly different.
Some of the faculty or the
adjunct staff are teaching one
class a semester or they'll
teach every fall or every spring
or in the fall and the spring,
it varies by each individual
course and position and
university as well. It's a
variety of ways that that is
seen in the employment sector
for these type of staff at
universities and
What this does is it makes it
very clear if the employee has
reasonable assurance that they
will continue to teach that
course or a similar course in
the following upcoming term,
whether that be fall and spring
or just one of each term, then
they will not be eligible for
unemployment benefits, but if
they, um,
Cannot have that reasonable
assurance that they will
continue in their um history of
teaching these courses and they
would then be eligible, and it
makes it very clear, it takes a
lot of the subjectivity out of
the evaluation that for that
question currently and makes it
5 clear factors that we can say
yes or no to.
Thank you for that. That's on
the share. Appreciate the
explanation.
Thank you, Senator Ramos, Mr.
Chair, Senator.
Um,
In the definition.
Using this bill, is this going
to extend to all teachers?
Mr. Chair.
And Senator, the teachers and
the sons of K-12, absolutely
not, um, professors tenure
professors on contract,
absolutely not. It's adjunct and
contingent teaching one or two
classes one semester or one
semester off, those are the
variety of folks that we're
hiring to teach at higher ed
institutions now, a lot of them,
and this bill would apply just
to that group.
OK, and Mr. Chair, Senator.
Um, how about operating costs?
How are they gonna
Other than you.
Operating costs is going to uh
Be involved with this bill.
When it comes to training agency
employees and administrative law
judges.
So
Mr. Chasen, so you're talking
about the workforce solutions.
This is part of their job. So
it's in a sense in their budget,
they have to do it for all of
the laws we change and 50,000 is
within their realm of
flexibility.
It's all good. Thank you.
Thank you. Anything else?
We have
Motion from center poke.
Taking it by Senator Naba if
you'll call the roll, please.
Center boom.
And
Senator Figueroa.
Yes.
Tender Hickey. Yes,
no, yes, into Ramos.
No.
Thornton
Yes.
Pope, tender souls, yes, you
have a do pass on a 62 with 1.
With one
Excuse.
Uh, next up we have House Bill
487 Protection of Hispanic
Education.
Representative
come up.
Velasquez, please go ahead
whenever you're ready.
Represents
Hun. Welcome.
Good morning, Mr. Chair.
All members of the committee.
Um, we're here to present the
Hispanic education Act, um,
revisions, um, first past in
2010.
This bill aims to improve the uh
services provided by the
Hispanic Education Act includes
protection and preservation of
New Mexico's heritage Spanish
language and culture and other
elements in the purpose of the
Hispanic Education Act, um, it
requires the Hispanic education
advisory council to meet at
biannual Hispanic Education
summits and it allows per diem
and mileage for council members.
I would like to, uh, introduce
my expert witnesses, and then I
would like to stand for
questions.
I would like to introduce Deputy
Secretary Canices Castillo, and
she, uh, oversees uh student
service supports, um, our
co-chair of the Hispanic
Education Advisory Council,
Doctor Jennifer Gomez Chavez,
the current liaison of the
Hispanic Education Bureau, um,
Doctor Julia Rosa Emsley and my
colleague Representative Tara
Luhan.
And we stand for questions.
Thank you, uh, out to the
audience, those in support.
Anyone in opposition?
If supporters would like to come
up and speak, you have up to 2
minutes.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair, and
senators. My name is Giorgio
Royal. I
have a background in bilingual
special ed, and I spent 20 years
working with Roberto Montalon,
developing bilingual educational
materials based on New Mexico.
And I'm gonna support this bill
with an anecdote. I was
co-teaching in a special ed
resource room in Santa Fe.
And
I, I, my co-teacher dealt with
the 4 to 6 grade people and I
did case of 3.
Well, he had a student that was
a 6th grader who didn't really
speak English. She was a limited
proficiency speaker and had
never really gotten much
instruction in Spanish. They
went to take their
Dreaded
tests, spring tests, and um
In the essay part, the student
wrote random letters.
And he wrote one word, he wrote
Mexico.
Everything else was random. It
made no sense whatsoever. And
after that test, uh, my
co-teacher and I decided to
switch him to, to me, even
though he was a 6th grader.
Because he needed instruction in
Spanish.
So I started him reading in the
2nd grade level book and writing
reactions to the stories in a
little one of those college
essay books.
Well, he would, you know, he'd
read the story and then he'd
write a short essay, but one day
he read a story about Chareria,
and he wrote a 3-page essay
about why he didn't like.
Charea and the gist of that.
reaction was he didn't like
animals being used and abused
seconds please. OK, and you
know, I'm pretty, pretty much
finished, but this is in honor
of that student and others like
him.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, my name is Julia Rosa
Lopez Emsley, and I'm a former
chair and member of the Hispanic
Advisory Council and
to support House Bill 487
because it has included other
items that are very important
for our students and proposes to
protect the Spanish heritage
language of the students, and is
able to give some per diem and
mileage to the members to
encourage them to attend,
although they do attend because
they're very dedicated. Thank
you.
Good morning, everyone. Good
morning, Mr. Chair and committee
members.
Um
My name is Antonio de Herrera,
and I'm the former president of
the La Mercer de Pueblo de
Manzano.
Uh, I'm also last year's uh
lifetime achievement award
winner for the same um group of
people, which are the land
grants.
Um, back in the
Who when
Monzano was its own entity, and
we had our own school in our own
school.
We learned English.
But we did not want to let go
our le.
which was Spanish.
And it wasn't until the
consolidation movement.
Of the 50s and 60s that we had
to leave our schools and go to
Mountaineer.
Speak our native language.
was punishable.
Thank you.
Thank you. And online we have 2
people, Lawrence Royal.
Please go ahead.
Good morning, Chairman Souls and
members of the committee. I'm
grateful to be with you all
today. I served on the Hispanic
Education Advisory Council for
over a decade.
I'm representing in Laa, New
Mexico. Our mission to increase
access and success in education
is aligned with the Hispanic
Education Act, the Black
Education Act, and the Indian
Education Act.
We serve all students from all
backgrounds from throughout New
Mexico, and I want to thank uh
Representative Torres Velasquez
representative Lujan, the
leadership of the New Mexico
Public Education Department,
Doctor Jennifer Gomez Chavez for
her leadership to advance the
Hispanic education advisory
Council and our community
partners for standing with this
important initiative.
Throughout the past 15 years,
all of the amendments are very
important and will continue to
advance the Hispanic Education
Act. I thank you all for your
leadership and for your support
of this important legislation.
Thank you. And also online,
Doctor Adam, I'm a daughter.
Um, good morning, everybody. Uh,
To our souls the committee
distinguished guest. Um, I'm
speaking in support of a House
Bill 487, um, having worked all
over the state and traveled all
over the state to see what the
Hispanic Education Bureau has
done uh through the NMPED is
amazing. I'm just talking with
students and leaders and
community members to see how
important it is, uh, to have
students validated in those
communities and to see them
grow, we cannot put a number on
growth and engagement and, and
engagement, um, but when you see
the support, the parents and
students get and give to the
schools, it's um paramount to
their success, um, in, in the
K-12 setting and beyond and so
this bill will further support
Hispanic students in Hispanic
education, and when the tide
rises, all the vessels will
float. Thank you.
Thank you. Is anyone in
opposition in the room?
We went online in opposition,
no.
questions from the committee,
Senator Thorn.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
As I go through and look at the
act, you didn't make very many
changes to the to the original
act. I do have a question with
regards to you crossed out um
The achievement gap
And then added insure lifelong
success. So I
like a little bit of
explanation.
Why you did that and how is that
going to change how the
education advisory council works
based on those changes.
Mr. Chair and Representative,
um, achievement gap is a term
that was used back when this law
was created in 2010, and it's
not a um um
It's not a term that is used as
much anymore.
Um, the idea about achievement
gap is deficit based and so
we're looking more at um
Assets-based approach and um and
that is uh at the request of
some of our students as well.
And so certainly we want our
students to achieve in schools,
absolutely, and that was the
intent of this bill to begin
with, um, with the academic
success and the achievement, but
at the same time as we
As I have been participating
with the committee and the
council.
One thing that's very clear is
that we, we want a full success
for students, not just test
scores, um, but we want children
to know their culture, their
language, their, and, and have
choices in their lives. And so,
like, we felt that by taking out
the word achievement gap and and
looking at it in a different
angle, um, that we were looking
at something more realistic.
Um, for, for our students, and
I'm going to ask and see if
there are any other, any other
feedback, is that OK?
Thank, thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh,
Mr. Chair and senators
representatives, um.
So
do have, you kept increased
graduation rates and ensure
lifelong success. So,
And I'm assuming you are
tracking these things on a, on a
Annual basis
And how, how has since this act
has been in place, how, how
would we, how have we been doing
relative to increasing
graduation rates.
Then I'll ask a little bit more
about that i thought success
after this.
I, I, I will just start, um,
just so you have a little bit
more context around that
question come through the chair
Mr. Chair, I'm sorry, I
apologize, Mister Chair, and
Representative, um, senator,
you're senator.
I know, and, and miss uh Mr. Jar
and Senator, we came in the same
class and so in my head like
we're all representatives.
But, um, and, and
congratulations, Senator. Um,
So, so just to give this a
little context when the bill was
first funded, the funding that
came in the first year came from
our funds, um, if you remember
the RF funds way back and under
President Obama, um.
And, and so, um, a report was
written and some of the work was
done and then we changed
administrations and that we have
um each year.
had to ask for funding and
sometimes we get it, sometimes
we don't.
Um, this year, um,
representative Lujan, who is on
the um allocations committee,
um,
Advocated and others advocated
for each of the acts to receive
some such type of funding so
that we can do the work exactly
as you're saying, so.
Um, it's a little bit in terms
of working with the LESC, Mr.
Chair, and Senator, um,
It's something that the LESC
would like to look into and like
to discuss in terms of how do we
evaluate some of these things
because simply looking at the
achievement of our students
simply looking at graduation
rates, especially with COVID and
other things that have happened
and, and lack of funding.
Um, it's not, it's not a
consistent way to really track
the effectiveness.
Of what was intended to happen
with this bill. And so I can
pass this to um
Our liaison and if you would add
more in terms of what you do
know and what has happened.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair and Senator Thornton.
So we have a report that's
required statutorily. It's our
data report. I'm happy to share
that with you. We have those
posted on the website all the
way back to 2010 or 2011 and um
it ebbs and flows depending on
what mechanisms the agency is
using to measure, um, what
programs are out there currently
we have seen an increase in
graduation rates for English
learners who are part of the
English learner group are.
Hispanic, so we have seen an
increase there, but I'm happy to
share all of that data with you
as needed.
And anyone else who's
interested.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
I actually would like to get
that data.
I'm, I'm new here and I'm gonna
start tracking how we do over
the next, hopefully.
At least 4 years I'm
So I, I want to see improvement
each and every year if possible.
Um
So this begs the question then
with regards to uh Mr. Chair,
with regards to the last one
then.
to cause you want to do this
lifelong, you want to see how
they're doing lifelong success,
right? I guess you want to
follow on it when they graduate
and how well they're doing. And
when I read the term.
Um, lifelong success.
Assuring that that means there's
gonna have to be a tracking
mechanism.
And my question is, do you all
have funding to support that,
and if not,
That's something that you've
requested for future activities
so you can practice lifelong
success and track your students
after.
Um, Mr. Chair and Senator, um,
one of the things that we're
working on passing in the house
as a memorial that was drafted
by Representative Garrola and
I'm a co-sponsor and um we are
hoping to work with the LESC and
um the LFC and look and of
course the PED and the bureau to
look and see what would be the
funds that would be necessary to
complete all of the goals,
including that goal.
And what would be the ask that
we need to make.
And also working with the
allocations committee and, and
looking at what would be
realistic, um, and in terms of
meeting all the goals, so that
we can make that progress that,
that you are discussing. In
terms of the lifelong success,
it's important to note that when
the bill was first created, it
was created around Article 12,
which was all of education,
including, um,
or pre-K12 and uh post-secondary
administer chair and senator.
And so, um, at the time, the
decision was made to house the
liaison and the PED because with
our funds, the decision was made
that we would hire one liaison
and um so I, I was one of the
liaisons that was hired and when
I left, then that position was
just somewhat blended into some
other positions in the next
administration.
and added on to the
responsibilities of someone in
their other role, and we'd like
to see adequate funding to
continue having a really
powerful and sharp and stellar
liaison like we have now and
hopefully keep her with you're
doing an incredible job and,
and, and we've been blessed
with, with having, um,
Having her and having a deputy
secretary that support Hispanic
education.
And so we do want to continue
that. I have had conversations
with the secretary, Mr. Chair,
and Senator. I have had
conversations with the secretary
of Early Childhood and um that
is in conversation stage and
looking at
What it would what it would look
like.
Since this was based on Article
12, how do we look at that
lifelong success and include
early childhood as well. And,
and those discussions, what I do
know is that early childhood
takes um a very significant
approach with looking at
language and culture in many
communities and has many
projects funded where or
provides funding for many
projects where that lifelong
success starting at early
childhood is recognized in that
language and culture is
recognized as as.
part of that.
Thank you, Representative. uh,
thank you, Mr. Chair, and, and
I, I agree with you like.
Um
Because I saw that the changes
in the words in this act work um
weren't that dramatic, but I
think
things that you're adding are
gonna require additional support
and and so
Uh
It's not just a matter of just
changing words if you're going
to share a lifelong success I
would think that we need to
track what that means.
And follow on and our follow on
efforts to to see what happens
to our students from
3K all the way through
graduation through college and
That's a lot of tracking. That's
what I'm saying, and so that
does require sources.
Um
You need to turn on your mic,
please.
Sorry.
Mr. Cha and Senator, you are
absolutely right, and, and there
are staff that are very
interested in creating that
support.
Thank you. That's all, Mr.
Thank you. Other questions?
General Ros.
Mr. Chair, um,
Representatives, thank you for
coming in front of us today.
So
Is
Is the uh moneys.
Included in the PD budget
already or?
them
chair, uh, Senator, uh, Mr.
Chair, sorry, I was just in
another situation,
Mr. Chair. Senator, yes, um,
And I'd just like to give a
little background, uh, so there
was a, there was no funding in
the budget initially, um, for
the, for this uh act or for the
Black Education Act either, and
we got 500,000 in each.
Recommended was a million, but
we got 500,000 in each of those
acts. So yes.
And, and Mr. Chair, um,
representatives, I know it's
already written in the law
currently.
On the member board, how does a
23 member board work.
I must be tough.
OK
Mr. Chair and Senator Ramos.
So it is a large advisory
council.
And our uh the way we operate is
we have two co-chairs, myself
and Doctor Amador, who you just
heard from.
Our goal is to represent from
across the state leaders,
educators, community members to
bring issues regarding Hispanic
education. So you can imagine,
um, that we have to meet.
Often in person, virtual to come
together to discuss and our
main.
I want to say goal, which is
part of uh our responsibilities
is to provide advisement to the
Secretary of PED.
On Hispanic education.
These are committed leaders, so
again when we look at, we're
asking for a per diem, we have
been a council for, I think it's
been 1515 years and we've never
we've in that time, we've met in
person, we've met virtually and
we've done so much work because
we're committed and passionate.
Um, to maintain and prioritize
Hispanic education throughout
the state.
Mr. Chair, a representatives of
Doctor Malo is involved, I know
there's passion. I know him very
well. He's from my hometown.
I'm glad to see he's heavily
involved in this group.
Thank you very much.
Thank you. Turn this up.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much. I have a couple of
questions I have. You have
changed language in here on page
2.
And I'm kind of concerned about
what you are.
Asking PED to do whenever you're
saying and insure lifelong
success.
And that's a big step in my
opinion.
Mr. Chairman and Representatives
of I thought that PED was
To insure student success, I.
Try to tell me where you're
going with this cause that is a
big step for PED in my opinion.
Mr. Chair, uh, re, uh, senator.
Oh my God, we're cursed over
here. um, thank you for that
question. So, I think some of
the intent is to think about
when we graduate students that
they walk across that stage or
receive their their diploma
ready for life, that we graduate
them with the tools that they
need, that they graduate knowing
what they want, who they are,
who their community is.
Hopefully thinking about how
they want to get back to their
community.
etc. for lifelong success is, I
think one of the ways that we
were thinking about that.
OK, Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much for that response, but I,
what I'm hearing you say what I
think your intent might be. We
want that for all students.
But I think it's
Not really what we need to be
telling PED they have to do.
Yes, we do. It will help them in
their future.
But we can't insure.
that is gonna be a lifelong
success story. Things happen in
a person's life.
Their job is for their.
Student success.
I'm just saying there that,
that's the problem I have with
this insure lifelong success is.
A little bit over the edge. I
want everybody to be successful
whenever they graduate from our
schools. Don't get me wrong.
I was really glad that Senator
Ramos asked about the makeup
because, man, that is a
Big committee and now thank you.
Can everybody agree on 11
particular thing. OK, that's
good to know. That's, that's
enough right there.
Oh, again, it's.
I was here whenever the Hispanic
Education Act was, was signed.
And the tin of it was to prove
that educational success and
post-secondary attainment of
Hispanic students in New Mexico,
and I'm assuming that still is
what the goal is of.
23 member board, man, that just
blows my mind.
But I'm also seeing it does not
contain an appropriation.
And one year you all got
$500,000 in the next year you've
got a million dollars and then
they drop back down to. Can you
tell me why that took place.
share, um, Senator.
I think it's really important to
understand that these are
non-recurring funds, so
therefore, um, one, it will
fluctuate and last year
actually, again, as um
Representative Luhan said, we
make the request and it might be
times that they just do not
approve it when they're
approving budgets in general, so
we have to keep coming back. I
think it's also important um for
senators to understand that part
of those $500,000.
Um, 300,000 plus goes to fund to
positions that help this work
and that you don't have to be
right up at the mic. They're
very directional. They pick up
very well from, you know, from a
few feet away. Um, thank you. So
Mr. Sheriff Senator, I think
it's important just to keep in
mind that that caught um
significantly the amount of then
funds that is available for
programming.
and support the ad as a whole.
Thank you very much for that
explanation, Mr. Chairman.
And
Representatives.
After hearing that explanation.
There's no funding in this
anywhere that I have found that
it's gonna pay for.
He dear mamma reimbursements. Is
that correct?
Mr. Sheriff Senator, that is
correct. This is the first time
that we are requesting, um, and
that's why the, the update to
the act to be able to offer that
perm and there is an amount that
has been calculated, estimated
to be added to that, but since
we have not paid that um before
because our council has been
provided on, on their own to be
able to meet the requirements of
the add and support the work um
that will be, that will also
impact the.
For an amount of budget uh
budgeted funding that we have
requested. OK, thank you very
much for that.
I guess my last one that I have
here, Mister Chairman.
We are
Right now discussing House Bill
487. How does this relate to
House Bill 488?
And also I see that it is
similar.
Senate Bill 396.
Is there a possibility that all
three of these could possibly be
put into one.
Could it be better served to the
students that were trying to
make successful if it's all put
together.
Instead of a piecemeal type
thing, I'd, I'd just like to
hear y'all's thoughts on that.
Mr. Chair
And Senator.
Um
We were instructed to separate
the bills so that we um would
not be in danger of, and I'm
still learning the term, it's
either roll logging or log
rolling log rolling, yes, log
rolling, so better than frog
rolling, I guess.
So we, uh, we wanted to be very
careful that we had um in, you
know, that that wasn't ever an
issue.
On, on the House bill, um, on
the Senate bill was that the
Hispanic Education Act bill. I'm
wondering, I, I don't remember.
I
Which bill that was.
Bill 396 will amend the Hispanic
Education Act in some similar
but not identical ways.
So I don't know what the
difference is right there. I
can't remember Mr. Chair, a
senator, we're just not familiar
with that Senate bill. This is,
yeah, constructed differently.
Thank you.
I didn't know if they were very
closely related, Mr. Chairman,
if an amendment on one or the
other would make them.
That.
So anyway
Ladies, I appreciate y'all being
here today. I appreciate what
you're trying to do. I want
every, every student to be
successful. I really do.
And like I said, uh,
The educational success.
is what we're after.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much.
Thank you send or not.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Representatives for
bringing this bill forward and
experts, um, Mr. Chairman and uh
representatives. I think this is
a very important uh piece uh
that's before us here, um, for
many reasons.
As an English language learner,
I know the importance of
understanding and respecting and
acknowledging your culture and
where you come from.
And having grown up in New
Mexico, coming in here as a 2nd
grader, English language
learner.
It's not necessarily the easiest
thing.
And acknowledging your culture
and being proud. It doesn't just
come at him automatically. And I
think investing in these things
is are critical to ensure that
we provide that opportunity for
students for instructors and for
institutions to acknowledge the
rich culture that we have in our
state. And a majority minority
state where the vast, the vast
majority of our communities are
Latino and Hispanic, uh, but
yeah, we are not as invested as
we should be and could be. I
think it's important to look at
this and even as I'm reading
through the bill.
And some of the commended
portions on page 2, line 4 where
it says a section B where it
says to protect and preserve New
Mexico's heritage Spanish
language and culture that speaks
loudly, and I think it says a
whole lot for for our
communities for who we are as
New Mexico, for who we are at
this present time, at a time
where we absolutely need to own
our value and our culture and
ensure that we uplift it high
and proud, but also hold
accountability and investments.
So I'm happy to see Patty here
with you all today. Um,
And as senator as I mentioned, I
think it's important to note the
funding, um, sort of uh layout
and ensuring that we have
invested funding moving forward,
um, and
I think it just, and I think
this is a great first step, but
I think ensuring that we do have
the funding necessary it's so
critical, um, and as someone who
has been engaged and involved in
the advisory council because of
my mentors who
Doctor Gomez Chavez right before
you. She's my UNM university mom
and I did not know she was going
to be here, Mr. President. um,
but
Folks like them who open
gateways and opportunities for
other, other students, other
community members, first
generation college graduates. I
think those folks and those
things matter and in order to do
that, we need to be honest about
the lack of investment and such
as they noted on page 3 in terms
of providing per diem. I recall
having these conversations
because as a younger person and
a working professional, I
couldn't go to any of the
meeting.
And that was an issue. So I
think this also uplifts access
and the importance of
representation of folks from
across the state, so I just want
to commend the sponsors for
bringing the bill forward, and I
stand in full support.
Thank you. Other questions? The
Pope.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representatives.
Uh, thank you, expert witnesses.
great, great scene.
Doctor Gomez Travis here as
well. Um, and thank you for
stepping up. I know during FSC
we
We're kind of battling to make
sure
hispanic education education.
was funded.
These are so important.
Um, and we need to continue to
do that. Um, I actually love
this discussion.
Talking about
How, how do I actually make this
act better.
We're actually going to reach
students how we're gonna better
outcomes.
Um
You know, you know, Doctor Gomez
Chavez, a lot of people don't
know I mean.
It's always, you know, about me,
the first black state senator,
but also mixed.
And so for me, understanding
that Hispanic side.
Well,
And students shouldn't have to
wait.
Go to college.
Learn about
Their culture, their history.
I think that's what's so
important here.
About
Setting them up for success in
the long term.
That's part of this. That's
something that we do, whether we
tell folks preparing them for
college, preparing them first.
for years.
And so I don't have as much of
the concerns about the role in
PD but just making sure they
have the tools to where they
don't have to leave.
Like I did go in the Air Force
to get that mentorship, get
those skills.
To come back
the best person.
So I appreciate the work that
you're.
I know it's a huge committee.
But I would argue that.
I think it's big for a good
reason.
We have a huge stake.
And I, and even a diverse state
when it comes to the Hispanic.
Having those that
representation.
There
Voice those concerns and to
really make sure that it's
reflective of their local
community is what needs to be
happening. So thank you for what
you're doing.
Um
I'm gonna support the bill, of
course, you know, we're gonna
probably have to need to work
on.
improvements. I also want to
thank you all for the work
you're doing to try to help on
the black education.
Well
And the Indian education.
It's important.
Um, that we're reaching all of
our students.
While we are a majority.
Hispanic state that's important
that of those students and make
sure we reach out to.
We all matter.
History.
what we contribute to the state.
I just want to thank you for
doing and uh let me know when
the next summit summit is gonna
happen. I, I had a great time
last time.
you
Great.
to the students and the programs
that you're doing, and I would
suggest to the committee
members, look out for that as
well.
really see
Um
What's going on in our schools
and with our students.
how this act is really helping.
Thank you, Mr.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Figueroa.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I
have to speak up as well and
support. Thank you for bringing
the bill and thank you for the
work that you are doing in
publicly thank all the folks who
are serving and have been
serving without per diem serving
on their own time serving on
their own dollar. Our student
population in our culture in New
Mexico, um, and I really want to
emphasize the additional
language that you put on page 2
to predict and preserve New
Mexico's heritage Spanish
language.
and culture.
That
Changes fundamentally. I mean
that, that is a proud and
necessary addition to this act
and to the mission and purpose.
AAC.
That wasn't there before. It was
kind of implied, kind of
understood, but now we are
literally stating that
preservation of language and
culture.
His priority
And we are putting um we are
prioritizing and
professionalizing this effort
when we get the funds behind it,
which is always an ongoing
effort, um, but I
Well let
The other senator's words stand
with respect to.
The value of that what I think
we're glossing over sometimes is
New Mexico's advantage as a
state in terms of
multilingualism.
And how we need to invest in
that to propel us forward.
We are coming as a nation to the
realization that multilingualism
is a good thing.
It's
Physically a good thing for the
brain for building elasticity
for building competence in our
first or second language for
adding a third language. It's
physically good for our brains.
It's socially good.
In the recognition of our
culture and our ability to step
in and out of multiple cultures
because we are not one thing.
But what we gloss over often is
the economic advantage that New
Mexico could have.
If we build on our
multilingualism.
It's we start with a head start.
And we need to take that head
start.
And propel it forward, um, for
our students, for our citizens.
So it's not just cultural
recognition. This is an economic
lever we can pull as a state, if
we choose to do it. And this is
a step in a line of steps we
have as a legislature created
the state seal of bilingualism
and illiteracy. We have
recognized our 520 teachers in
our indigenous languages and
professionalize their work. So
we've taken steps to build on
this, and this is the next one,
and we need to keep going.
So, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. I have a, anyone
else, I think we got buddy, I
have a couple of questions and
very substantive of what's on
the bill.
First and similar to what
Senator Thornton was asking
about. I'm concerned about close
the achievement gap, and the
reason being the Martinez Yazi
lawsuit.
was based on the achievement gap
in math and reading.
And the Hispanic Education Act
and advocates for that often
point out that we're not doing
enough through the Hispanic
Education Act to meet the needs
of the Martinez Yazi lawsuit,
and yet taking out the very
measure that showed that there
was a problem, out of the
Hispanic Education Act.
Doesn't make sense to me. How
are we going to know that we're
meeting the needs of the
Martinez Yazi lawsuit if we take
out the measure for doing so.
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, that is an excellent
question. The Martinez lawsuit
is actually um
Involves a number of issues, 174
allegations in the Hispanic
Education Act was one of those.
The major emphasis of the
Martinez and Yazi Martinez
lawsuit. I can speak to
Martinez, um.
was um a sufficient education.
And uh school finance.
And so when we look at a
sufficient education, we
actually actually do look at
student achievement, absolutely.
But we no longer call it the
achievement gap in terms of the
research circles that we are
looking into when we are
comparing and when we're looking
at that data. Some people call
it an opportunity gap in that
language can change, but the
issue of achievement will always
be one that we look at with our
students graduation rates.
How well our students are doing
in school, but it's not just
about a scripted curriculum to,
to bring scores up when it
doesn't affect deeper learning.
It's about teaching students the
skills and the knowledge they
need in order to succeed in the,
in the careers that they choose.
And so yes, it is absolutely um
one of the issues with the
Martinez lawsuit.
Um, it's Martinez that brought
the Hispanic Education Act into
play in the Martinez lawsuit,
along with Indian education and
bilingual education.
And many other things.
And so we absolutely continue to
prioritize how our students are
doing, um, I believe we're 63,
64% of the student population.
And because um Hispanic students
are not a protected category by
law.
are the pri the plaintiffs that
we had were Native American and
protected category, English
language learners are protected
category.
Students in poverty, a protected
category, and with Martinez we
brought in students with
disabilities that protected
category.
Because they were not one of
those 4 groups, we felt it very
important to bring in the
Hispanic Education Act for
looking at achievement.
And so the Hispanic Education
Act is the component of Martinez
that addresses Hispanic
achievement.
And so even though we don't use
the term achievement gap.
We do continue to address
achievement in in the Hispanic
Education Act and in the
Martinez versus state of New
Mexico lawsuit.
I know some districts are not
including Latino or Hispanic
students in their goals.
And that just doesn't make sense
because it's the majority
population and as was written in
the FIR.
As the that's gonna be very
important for the success of the
whole.
Thank you. I, I appreciate all
that. I understand all of that,
um.
The findings afterwards, but
they were all based on the
difference in achievement
between the, the plaintiff
groups and the population in a
hole.
Uh, one of the things I always
ask is how do we know when we
get there? What is the goal, uh,
and I always get kind of, well,
we'll tell you when it looks
right.
Um, and when we take out an
actual achievement gap.
Type of thing.
Then we're taking out what we
know it looks like in they're
replacing it with insure
lifelong success, which is a
fuzzy term that's not
measurable. I want to know and
I'll
almost anything, what is the
measurable goal that we know
we've met the, the requirements
for Martinez Yazi lawsuit.
Excellent question, Mr. Chair.
Thank you for that. I so
appreciate that question.
Um
As you know, Martinez and Yasi
are still too active lawsuits,
so there's confusion, lots of
misinformation.
They are still two separate
lawsuits. They are both still
active in the courts. It's the
trial that was consolidated, not
the lawsuits.
So, so I can speak for Martinez.
Um
One of the things that the judge
felt was very important.
was not to create the remedies
herself.
And the reason was that she
didn't know if the case would be
appealed or not. It could have
gone all the way to the Supreme
Court.
And we were so shocked and happy
when it was much faster than
that. We expected this to go on
for 1020 years, and it happened,
the decision came very quickly.
As such, since she didn't create
the remedies, she asked
legislators to create the
remedies, and I know you all
have been working on many things
in terms of remedies for the
Martinez lawsuit. What is
currently requested in the
court.
Is that the LESC be charged with
answering that question among
many other questions in terms of
what will be the measures, what
will be the remedies, how much
will this cost? All the
questions that are necessary.
We're looking at the plaintive
groups of the two lawsuits.
Since Hispanic education is part
of the Martinez lawsuit, that
will be another important piece
that will be one of the many.
Allegation pieces.
That, um
That we are asked that not,
well, not we, I'm not a
plaintiff, but that the Martinez
case is asking them the Maldiff
attorneys are asking.
Um, the court.
To, um,
You have the legislators, um,
the LESC, uh, oversee that
process.
Thank you. And, and I understand
that the remedies don't fix the
problem, you know, we, we could
put remedies there and if they
don't.
You'll actually make a change or
a difference and so again, I
worry when we take out the
measure that was used to
determine there was a problem
without putting in some other
measure of what's there and in
the Hispanic Education Act, and
I think there's a similar in the
Indian Education Act, we need to
know what the goalpost is, not
just keep doing remedies until
we tell you you've done enough,
that's, that's difficult. But
this is not about Martin Yazi,
so that's why it just was
questioning.
Taking that out of here. Let me
go on to a different and this
may be more for drafters and
English majors and such, but on
page 3 line 17, to me by end you
always means 2 years.
Not, it's semiannual is usually
twice a year.
But I've had people that do it
both directions. Is that a
problem or a concern because the
other part says at least twice a
year at the biennial by it like
twice a year at the every other
year that, that seems confusing.
Mr. Chair, another excellent
point. Thank you. Um, I think
that should be semi-annual
instead of biannual, but people
confuse that regularly I'm
getting a nod from Senator
Thornton who I, I'll call you an
expert on this. And so, you
know, with, with the committee's
approval and the sponsors.
You know, and, and maybe the
drafters will argue with me that
it's wrong, but that we modify
and change that word to
semiannual.
6
Mr. Chairman.
If it's going to be.
semi-annual, that would mean
twice a year.
So does the language before it
need to be stricken.
At least twice a year at the
semi-annual cause I think it's
called more the semiannual.
Education summit.
But it should be semiannual
instead of biannual. Biannual
means every
2 years at least in my if you
put in semiannual, it will read,
but at least twice a year at the
semi-annual.
We're saying the same thing
twice, yeah, it's the department
of redundancy department, but
yeah.
So jeez.
Yeah, I'm not sure that you
would need it twice, at least
twice a year at the Hispanic
Education summit or summits, I
don't know, but
That's a
If they care about it or should
we just leave it and everybody
knows what we mean. I just went
to the Webster's uh site. So I
think we're safe with biannual,
biennial with the letter E is
every 2 years, biannual.
Works for twice per year,
semiannual suggests every 6
months. It's more precise and
specific.
biannual, it says it's twice a
year, but could be closer
together than 6 months. So I, I
think they're safe, lots of
people know I fly an airplane. I
have to have abi-annual flight
review with the instructor,
which means every 2 years I have
to go with an instructor and
it's biannual, but whatever.
It's technicalities on things,
so I, I'm good with leaving it
if people want to leave it, but
I think it's incorrect. Um,
The last question is down on the
per diem.
Section, uh, I have no problem
with paying people per diem, but
a couple of questions would they
get per diem if they were on
Zoom.
Uh, Mr. Chair. Yes, I think that
per diem law that is in our New
Mexico statutes, uh, does not
give you, of course, mileage,
but you do get the per diem for
being on Zoom.
And there's a calculation in
there, but I can double check
that and let you know. We will
follow the procurement code to
the letter. Thank you. You know,
I always have a little bit of a
problem that per diem really
means because you traveled and
you have to pay for meals in a
hotel and things. And if you're
sitting at home on zoom.
You shouldn't be getting per
diem, but, you know, I realized
that's probably in the, the coat
there says the non-salary is
this at the federal rate or is
this the state rape?
Because I believe they're
different. Mr. Chair, this is
the state rate.
OK, thank you, and I believe
that also requires you have to
participate for a minimum of 4
hours in order to qualify for
the per diem.
OK.
Um, I think those were my
questions.
Thank you.
I'll move. Motion for a seconded
by Senator Ramos. If you'll call
the roll, please.
Cinder boom
Sin
He slip your mic on quickly so
they pick it up. Yes, sir. Thank
you.
Sender Figueroa, yes.
Cinder Hickey, yes.
Center Nova. See.
Senator Ramos. Sarah Thornton,
Pope, yes,
in her soul, yes, you have a new
pass.
OK.
OK, OK, uh, I think that there
he is, Representative Sanchez,
come on down.
to
Yeah.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, my
experts on Zoom, if that's OK.
That should work OK, pretty
bizarre, Mr. Chair, uh, Casey
McGovern.
My Zoom operators say yes, he is
on,
so thank you.
Whenever you're ready, please
go, go ahead and make sure
you got my, yeah, OK.
Thank you, Mr. Chair of
committee. Uh, what this bill
does is, uh, it requires schools
to develop or adopt guidance for
student water safety.
Uh, this bill got the nickname
the Eonabil in the house, um.
those of you who are familiar
with like on a, uh, basically in
the Hispanic culture and other
cultures, uh, they would tell
stories about a woman, uh, to
scare off kids from uh around
ditches around secas, uh, due to
the, the drowning concerns, uh,
Mr. Chair.
Um, I'd also like to uh
introduce my, uh, expert, uh,
Casey McGovern, uh, if you would
allow her to say a few words,
Mr. Chairman.
Is that who we have on?
Yes, that probably is.
Good morning.
Good morning.
Can I, can I, am I heard? Yes?
Yes.
OK. Yes, please go ahead. Good
morning, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee. Thank you so
much for um hearing, hearing us
on this bill. Um, my name is
Casey McGovern, and I am a
mother of a drowning victim, um,
and I'm also the executive
director of the Every Child a
swimmer program and how my
journey started was, my daughter
was 19 months of age. Um, she
was the 3rd child and
We didn't hear about water
safety information. Nobody
talked about water safety
information, and I thought she
was much too young to learn how
to swim. Um, our, our family
spent the day in the pool. Um,
we got out staggered and
unfortunately, that afternoon,
the perfect storm occurred, so
that she was taken um from us.
We went from one hospital, um,
to another hospital where we
spent the last week of her life
together, um, learning how big
of a problem this truly is.
Drowning is the number one cause
of death for children.
1 to 4, and it's the number 2
cause of death for children 5 to
14 and it's 100% preventable.
And so throughout this journey
over the last 15.5 years, I got
involved in a lot of different
community, um,
programs and task force
throughout, throughout the state
and throughout the country and
um ended up working for the
Department of Health for 8 years
running the drowning prevention
program where I identified
really how we can move the
needle. And I think the first
step is education and allowing
parents to understand the hazard
associated with drownings. And
so this is where the legislation
comes into play um after I left
the Department of Health, I
decided I wanna spread my wings
and I was recruited to run the
every child to swimmer program
and
one of our first initiatives or
priorities was to pass
legislation, which mandates all
schools to share water safety
resources for parents and
caregivers, and then also where
to go for local swim lessons if
that's what they choose to do.
We passed it successfully with
no problem in Florida, Georgia,
and Arkansas, and we're hoping
to do the same thing throughout
every country um throughout
every state in the country
because
In October, everybody talks
about um fire safety and stop,
drop and roll. You have to have
fire extinguishers. You have to
have a meeting place, you have
to um replace your batteries and
your smoke detectors annually,
but nobody anywhere is talking
about water safety, and yet it
continues to claim over 4000
lives every year in the United
States, and then when you think
about that, CDC reports that for
one fatality, 8 people are
impacted by a non-fatal injury.
And so I feel like this piece of
legislation is so cru crucial at
such a pivotal point and it's a
touch point in a parent's life
to be able to educate them on
what to look for, what resources
are available to them and what
they could do to be
preventative, um, so that this
tragedy doesn't happen, and upon
leaving her on August 11, 2009,
and made her promise that I
would commit my life to doing
this work. Um, so,
I would be really thankful for
you guys to consider this. I am
absolutely open to any questions
that you may have as far as the
cost factor. Um, it's
bipartisan. There's no cost
associated with it. We provide
the Department of Education, um,
resources and a tool kit to be
able to share whatever resources
that they feel is appropriate,
what they, what they, that they
would wanna share within their
schools, um, and that's it, but
I'm open to questions if you
have any.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and uh in
New Mexico, you don't think
about water safety a lot just
because uh there's not a lot of
lakes, so we do have lakes, we
have Arroyos, we have our
ditches, we have a sacks, uh, I
know even though I'm from a
rural area, we would go swimming
in elementary. um, they take us
to a
A full 20 minutes away, but uh
we were frequently around.
all the time, uh.
Unfortunately, I, I learned that
my father turned, he taught us
how to swim at an early age, but
uh a lot of kids aren't
fortunate enough to have, have
that resource, so Mr. Chair, we
now stop for questions.
Thank you in the audience, those
in support.
in opposition.
You'd like to come up and
But then let me.
I want to speak questions from
the committee.
There
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Pie day again eating pie.
Um,
I have
I'm struggling with this for
only one reason only. I, I
think.
Water safety
Just as important as a lot of
other safety issues that we.
It's
Um
And I, I, let me ask my first
question. I, I heard from this,
from the, your expert that that
there's no cost associated with
it. There's no appropriation in
this bill.
So how will this be handled by
public education.
Mr. Chairman, uh, they could
satisfy the requirement by
merely posting the guidance on
their website or Facebook.
Again, this information is
widely available and free, um,
the American Red Cross also
provides information that they
could take from this, so, uh,
The, the effort should be
minimal, but the impact could be
huge.
Mister Turnment.
Thank you for that, Mr. Chair.
So,
So this is something that it's
gonna be posted either on their
websites or made available at
school through brochures or
something like that.
Uh, and the parents would get
access to that information just
to it's more of an awareness
kind of like a public safety
announcement type of thing that
this is what you need to be
aware of.
children at a certain age.
Um
And, and the reason I'm asking
all this is because
I think we put a lot on PED. We
have a lot of other things that
we put on there.
And we know that we're not
succeeding on the basic thing,
eating.
science.
And so I, that the only my
biggest concern is we're adding
another thing for for them to do
and I keep asking how is this
going to improve?
Basic thing.
Reading, science and math. So,
um,
So while I support the effort,
I'm not
Convinced that this is the place
to put it in.
There may be other opportunities
outside of school, um.
So I, I struggle because I, I
feel we, we've got enough.
On their plate and we haven't
done well on that.
So, uh, I'm not asking for a
response. I just wanted to.
Thank you very much.
Thank you. Other questions?
Pope.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Representative for bringing
this forward uh.
I
Learning about
Our eyes
all the way up in Pueblo,
Colorado, folks and.
And
We kind of handle this a little
different kind of where I grew
up, and I'm not.
Try to ask for this or say we we
do in our state where I grew up
in Pueblo.
We were all basically every high
school student had to learn how
to.
Every high school had a.
I guess it developed that way
because initially they did it.
During World War II, they wanted
to make sure everyone builder.
But I say that to say I think
it's just important.
how to swim Florida or
So with much accent.
right
But we have folks even in
Albuquerque.
issue where folks have
Becky is in bitches where they
fill up, jumped in, so I think
this.
Information is important.
To save some lives and the way
you're talking about it, it
seems like
see no appropriation or very
minimal as far as putting this
right.
Thank you
Other questions?
I have a couple of questions
and, and really a fairly big
concern.
A little bit of background. I
grew up swimming. I, my job
through college was I was a
lifeguard, you know, I've been
out at Elephant Butte and
actually helped rescue. There
were people very cold water
early in the spring, a boat of 6
large adults in a small rowboat
with two children, luckily, the
two babies had life jackets on,
but my buddy and I, we just, uh,
Turning around to pick up the
water skier we had in a wetsuit
when we saw this boat.
Way out, nobody from shore could
see and you very carefully and
to rescue them and got them in
our boat without overloading
that. Um, and I
Served as a water safety
instructor, you know, I was WSI
certified lifeguard all through
my life. So by no means do I
want to minimize the importance
of what you're doing.
Putting it on the public schools
is the wrong place.
For a couple of reasons.
First
We don't have pools in all of
our public schools. We don't
have an opportunity to actually
meet requirements and teaching
them how to be water safe when
there aren't swimming pools and
things. The other end, as your
expert indicated, her tragedy
occurred long before they get to
public schools.
We don't get the information out
when it's most important.
This bill belongs not in the
public schools, but in the
health councils in every county.
We have a health council in
every single county that has
access to, uh, young families,
the uh home visiting people, the
health people.
I think that's where this
belongs, not another thing on
public education to hand out a
flyer, I think is not gonna be
nearly as effective as we would
like it to be.
And have it getting the
information to parents when the
children are youngest as far as
how they can keep them safe.
And continue on is a better
place rather than on an
overloaded public ed department
where they're required to have a
policy and hand out some fliers,
it's not gonna have the effect
that it ought to have.
Certainly any comments that you
might have, but as it is, I
can't vote to support this
because I think it's the wrong
place and they're much more
effective places, Mr. Chair, I
agree with you, uh, I think it
needs to be in all the areas you
mentioned, but I think it needs
to be in a lot more areas I
think we need to uh attack this
from all sides. This is the
first, uh, effort to bring
awareness that's the main
purpose of this bill.
Uh, we have to start somewhere.
Uh,
Similar to the silver Alert,
I've been working on the silver
alert for the last 6 years.
I've, I've modified it twice to
improve it.
That's a very important piece of
legislation that uh helps.
Find our seniors that have
Alzheimer's and these issues,
uh, like I mentioned, this is,
this is the base layer and my,
my hope is over the years, we
continue to build on this and
expand it and improve it or it
does save lives and uh.
Uh, a lot my expert, Mr. Chair,
if you don't mind to, to add to
that.
Yes, thank you. uh, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee. Thank
you so much for the amazing
questions because I know that
that really is having you think
three steps ahead and my, my
first
Respons. This is not to add more
work to any one of the schools
um in the education kind of
realm. It's to have about the
broadest net and the touch point
with their parents's life when
it's very crucial. And again,
you're receiving information,
the goal of this legislation is
to receive this information it's
so vital every single year at
their child's life. So depending
on that point where we're
missing the age group of 1 to 4,
there's older siblings, there's
neighbors, and again, it's a
touch point where after 7
touches people really
reignate this information being
heard and they understand that
it's a factor. And so it's just
the broadest net. It's a touch
point and a very important time
in the parent's life, and we're
hoping that being consistent
with this information being
shared throughout every state in
the country, no matter where you
live, no matter where you
vacation, you're gonna hear this
information. You're gonna hear
that it only takes 2 inches of
water that you should always
assign a water watcher. You
should always have your children
swim in the buddy that swim
lessons can start at a very
early age. We just
Simple, simple steps and whether
it's shared in the beginning of
the school year and the
registration packets or the end
of the school year as they
prepare for summer, it's a touch
point in a very important stage
in a parent's life. Um, and I
understand that it's bogging
down and that, you know, that
your concerns are bogging it
down, but our goal is to be able
to have a touch point and, and
multiple areas for parents to be
able to be educated because this
is 1,000% or 100% preventable,
and yet it continues to
happen. So, is this a one fix
and we're gonna be done and feel
like this is gonna solve the
problem. No, but it'll meet the
parents where they're at. It
will educate them and allow them
to just see the tools, see the
resources that are available,
and we help with every child
swimmer. We help all of the
different school districts.
Getting this information and
then into the hands of the
parents and also helping the
implementation be very easy
because we wanna see this be a
success. We wanna be able to see
this doing the work it needs to
do to educate the parents on the
risk factors because me being in
this realm for 15.5 years,
nobody thinks it will happen to
them until it does.
And again, when we lose 4000
individuals in our state every
year and have another.
20,000 impacted by by a
non-fatal injury, which again,
they're impaired for the rest of
their life. We need to all work
together to have one voice and,
and have this be shared in
everywhere a parent may be.
Pediatricians is a huge step.
Hospitals is another step, but
those are phase 2, phase 3,
phase 4. This is just the first
net to be able to have that
touch point that's so important.
And
I fully understand. Like I said,
I'm not in opposition to the
intent. I think this is the
wrong place. It misses too many
of the children and the parents
and having it just in the
handbook on the first day of
school, I've been a parent most
other parents, you do not read
through all that stuff
carefully. You look for the one
or two things and the rest is
just tossed to the side. I think
it'd be much more effective
other places and
The
The mechanism, it's full of the
districts shall, the local board
must type of things, um.
I don't disagree that, you know,
that's where a lot of the kids
are, but I don't think this is
the right place for it. I think
it should be in the
The local public health, and
what is it called the
The county health advisory and
there's a name for it but every
county is required to have it
much more likely to get out to
all of the parents. Thank you.
No.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Representative for bringing
the bill forward.
I have a few concerns with it as
well. Um,
I'm reading page. I well I think
it's page, it's section B, um,
sort of on online 6 where it
just says the guidance may
conspicuous conspicuously
incorporated into the district
wider school specific handbook,
so the handbook is, I think
perhaps the location where you
are all
Intending to put this
information.
But my concerns rise from the
place of
The reality that not all of our
schools have pools, um,
additionally, the capacity of PE
and it almost sounds to me like
a promotional ad for swimming
lessons. And we live in a state
where
Not everyone can do that. Not
everyone has the opportunity to
do that, and I think as a
former, as a low income student
who came in through our school
systems.
Um
I think this is just being
placed in the incorrect uh
location as well, and I, and I
would agree with Senator Souls,
um, I think the information is
extremely vital. I think it's
important for our communities to
have access and to know, but I
just don't see it working
together in this specific piece
of legislation. Thank you.
Senator Ramos.
Mr. Chair, uh, representative.
You know, coming from an area of
southwest New Mexico where
there's not very many areas to
swim besides the
besides in the, in the pools
there at Hurley or back then it
was be and we'd go all the way
to Silver City, but, but we
couldn't find a, a swimming pool
to swim in. We found the
donkeys.
Loan.
He, uh,
beamosa render.
At all.
The reason I, I really uh think
it's a super important is
because there was times where
We got in trouble in these
tanks.
We're trying to get out and we
couldn't get out.
We have to sit there and float
for a long time and this was uh
this was in the rural area, the
most rural that you can get.
But how about
Um, how about ECCD? I mean, have
we got of plenty of them. I'm
sure this is gonna be a future
project for
For the uh early childhood
education and care department.
I, I, although I, I, I do see
where, where uh this would be
beneficial.
I do feel that uh
You know, are outlaying areas or
Our res the delur.
You know, I mean, I, I was one
of those kids.
We, we go visit our cousins over
across the border in in Arizona
and we go down the Gila and
there was times where, hey,
lucky that log was there to
catch us cause we could have
been down under, you know,
that'll.
I do see the, I, I do see this
being beneficial.
But I think you're right. I
think this just needs to spread
out and uh thank you for
bringing this here in front of
us today representative. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Other questions?
If not a motion
A motion for a due pass.
I'll do a second.
Seed by Senator Pope, if you'll
call the roll, please.
Sender boom
Sinies.
Figueroa, yes.
Hickey
Yes.
Senator novel.
No.
In Ramos, yes, Sarah Thornton.
No
Sen Pope.
Yes, explained my both.
souls.
No
You do have a do pass on a 43
vote with two excused.
Senator Pope to explain his
Representative, um, I think this
is important, but, um, I hope
you consider some of the
conversation here on where this
should be.
Because I, I
Thinking about that as well. How
do we reach students in earlier
on.
In their life, so just, I would
wanna think about considering
that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
committee. Uh.
And they had a closing
statement, Mr. Chair.
You're welcome to. We're done
for the day, so you got all the
time as long as you keep us
interested enough to sit and
listen. I'll just be real brief,
uh, you know what I grew up in
Espanola Valley, or Ribo, one of
the poorest counties in the
state, uh, our schools don't
have swimming pools either, uh.
We have one swimming pond in the
whole valley that all the
schools would take their kids
to, so it's not a matter of the
schools having pools. I think uh
it's a matter of education. This
is a start, like I said, we have
to start somewhere and I, I
agree you guys that have, have
great suggestions and uh I hope
to improve this over the years
and uh I just thank you for, for
your comments. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you. Uh, Senator Stewart
is tied up over in house
education and so um
Senate Bill 524, we will roll
over to Monday. I don't foresee
that we're gonna be meeting over
the weekend. I know there was
one I heard last night got moved
into our committee, so we may
have 2 or 3 at this point, we'll
plan on 9 o'clock on Monday.
Um, but at the call of the chair
and I'll try and work with the
ranking member if, if things are
changing or as things are, are
fluid. And so with that, thank
you all for a good day.
I was a good rest of the day.
And there is more pie over
there, and please, whenever
people talk about pie, it's not
just about eating pie today,
make sure they understand the
reason for Pie.
