The.
Madam chair here we have a
quorum.
We have a quorum so before we
get to our regular gender we do
have a consent agenda.
And this is my first one so bear
with me
there are four items on our
concern consent calendar are
there any objections to having
these on consent.
I see no objections so it's my
understanding we hope then
individually on each bill so.
I.
And second
okay
okay all right.
Okay.
Good so I need a motion that
would
approve the four bills thank you
Representative Rehm.
We made a motion madam chair
motion to approve house memorial
forty house bill's Fortuyn house
memorial seventy four Senate
bill one sixty eight as amended
thank you an American
a motion made by Representative
Rehm second by Representative
Nibert.
To call the roll please
Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane Mr speaker
Representative McLean yes.
Representative Nibert here on
yes.
I'm here no no.
Representative green yes.
Representative is a Penske yes
madam vice chair just.
Madam chair yes I vote of nine
to zero we have a due pass on
house memorial forty house bill
for ten House memorial set for
and Senate bill one sixty eight
as amended great thank you so we
have to have a little bit of a
cleanup items that we have to
address at our last meeting we
considered house joint
resolution fourteen and there
was a motion to table and there
was a vote of course on the
motion to table but there was an
inaccurate count so we thought
it had been table but it had not
been table in fact the opposite
the table motion failed so we
are going to need another motion
on that bill that's the bill
that that's the joint resolution
that would create forty five
days sessions Representative
Montoya presented it just to
give you some context as I'm
sure you have all the numbers
memorized.
There was a motion or do you
pass before the motion yes the
but I think we shouldn't make
the motion or whatever motion we
wish to make a at this point so
would.
Representative Rehm madam chair
I move it to pass on house
joint.
Resolution fourteen point forty
second.
Thank you.
Any well let's just call the
roll and have no further
discussion.
Discussion okay we all remember
what bill that was did you have
a question
Representative.
I.
If they fail.
We're back on the original
motion right.
We have.
We just have to Representative
of rain just made a do pass
motion okay.
Representative al cone is
questioning whether
I guess the past month that
tabling motion failed last time.
Madam chair the only question.
Yes you do.
We are the we had a.
On the.
The last bill that we go to
moves in the state.
But the.
The
correct.
Yes.
Thank you correct correct or.
If we do eight eight eight.
The fast now.
But at the from the roses to
table.
The motion detector the motion
that to table on Monday I failed
but we reported it as having
passed because there is an error
in our account so in fact the
motion to table on Monday failed
that's what I'm trying to you
know that's what I'm trying to
emphasize the feminine figures
were getting that we're gonna
have a different peoples
different members that we're not
here or work here.
Loading at this time that we're
not here on.
So Monday or whatever you.
You remember.
But last time we met we're gonna
have different people that are
present now that we're not
present there yeah we're going
to proceed the I think we're
gonna have to proceed other food
so there's there's a pending
matter it wasn't tabled we have
now a motion for do pass we can
say it occurred either Monday or
we can say it occurred today
because we just heard it
repeated so we have a due pass
in front of us.
All right though.
Called would you call the roll
please Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane yes.
Mr speaker Representative
McQueen the.
Representative Nibert yes.
Representative re yes.
Representative rain yes ma'am.
Representative Sapan ski no
ma'am.
Madam vice chair.
Yes.
Madam chair no.
We have of the vote of five to
five.
So okay.
The
table at this time.
Okay well I think so the matter.
Okay I think we.
Okay would you call the roll
please.
Thank you can have a tabling
motion after failing no all
right.
I think it's just.
Yes just.
The Washington Street station.
I would stay with the same stage
because that was the last.
So the question of whether with
the second stage.
Nine point one two.
The same matter that's pending
before the committee up to the.
It has the same effect as yet I
think
I think.
I'm gonna rule that motion
improper the it has the same
affected.
Thank you thank appreciate that
it has the same effect in that
it will not leave the committee
with a on a fund of five five of
yes.
This is proper but could I make
a motion to do pass without
recommendation.
Good you can shoot that make
that much okay all right is
there a second.
We have a motion for do pass.
Without recommendation made by
Representative reeve and
seconded by Representative lane
we have to have our figure had
at the table all right very
good.
One is that a members save money
here.
Thank you we do call the roll
please Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane yes.
Mr speaker Representative
McQueen no.
Representative nightmare yes.
Representative re yes.
Representative Rehm yes ma'am.
Representative Sapolsky no.
Representative madam vice chair
now.
Madam chair no.
I both of four to six weeks
Just for.
That would if you no
recommendations motions.
Entails.
Okay so that very brief
discussion of of very simple
motion will move on to our next
item.
house bill two sixty three
overdose prevention programs.
Good afternoon madam chair and
committee members welcome
Representative thank you so
today
Representative house bill two
sixty three
To saving lives and improving
the health of New Mexicans are
our highest priorities.
And as we know we are moving
towards more common sense and
and holistic approaches to the
issues that we face.
Mexicans family New Mexican
families have been struggling
struggling excuse me.
With substance use disorder
trauma for decades.
With new adulterants widely
available we continue to see the
rate of overdoses increase as we
work with our family selling
with substance use disorder we
have to meet our communities.
Needs by offering wraparound
services that not only save
money but more importantly save
lives.
Is the intent of house bill two
sixty three to prevent fatal and
nonfatal drug overdoses provided
a pathway to substance use
disorder treatment for those who
desire it.
Improve access to medical and
social services.
And the transmission of
infectious disease reduce public
use of controlled substances and
reduce emergency room use and
hospital utilization related to
drive it over to drug use.
To communities throughout the
United states are seeking to
establish overdose prevention
programs or have already
authorized their use are two
sites operating in New York City
since November twenty twenty one
have demonstrated that such
programs are highly effective in
saving lives.
In less than one year of
operation the site's reverse
nearly seven hundred overdoses
with no deaths.
HB two sixty three amends in New
Mexico.
Harm reduction act to one create
a program called the overdose
prevention programs.
And the bill authorizes the New
Mexico department of health to
establish and administer the new
program in order to reduce death
disease and injury associated
with drug use.
HB two sixty three is not a
solution but part of the
solution.
It is a tool in the tool chest
that will allow communities to
determine the appropriate
methodology to use in their
areas.
And with that madam chair I will
defer to money expert witness to
introduce yourself and have
COVID.
Madam chair excuse me members of
the committee Emily Kaltenbach
with the drug policy alliance a
pleasure to be here I just want
to highlight that this bill is
really about public safety it's
about public health
many of us are you know as a
parent how many parents are
afraid that their children go
play in the park and they're
discarded syringes I've talked
to business leaders who are so
upset about public drug use or
their staff or just continually
traumatized by finding people in
their bathrooms with overdose
and how many of us have lost
loved ones because of overdose
so this is another tool as a
sponsor mentioned in our tool
chest to do that
most importantly it's a bridge
to treatment and it's so
important that a program like
this can find those wraparound
services
it's going potentially can
reduce public nuisance and
improve public safety because it
creates a regulated and a safe
space that's not available to
the general public so this bill
is about saving lives we want we
all want to see people in
treatment and get the treatment
but you have to be alive to get
well so madam chair members the
committee happy to answer
questions thank you thank you
family now we'll go to the
audience those wishing to speak
in opposition to the bill please
raise your hand.
Those online wishing to speak in
opposition please raise your
hand.
Right going back to the audience
those in favor of the bills
please please raise your hand
okay we're gonna keep to ninety
seconds per person fifteen
minutes for the entire
presentation so
Mr had a meal.
It's thank you madam chair
members of the committee David
Hotmail I'm registered lobbyists
for the drug policy alliance but
I just wanted to add just bought
a personal experience with
having gone to Seattle in August
to retrieve our daughter who has
some issues there on pike street
for the some of your are aware
of one of the most popular
tourist attractions in the
Pacific Northwest we could find
in you could see folks using up
crack folks using heroin right
on pike street and write down
the alleyways
just blocks away from the pike
street market and blocks away
from Nordstrom this is not an
Albuquerque problem this is a
societal problem we talk about
evidence based medicine this is
reality based policy of these
this program has been derisively
called opium dens and things
like that that's not what this
is these are for folks who are
in desperate need of safe a safe
environment to manage their
addiction state from being
exploited state from being
infected state from overdosing
for safer being assaulted men
and women and again this is just
a reality based a program that
does place people and and and
not harms way but Safeway where
there are resources to at least
have a chance to get them on the
path of recovery so thank you.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee and Kim Chavez
Cook with the law offices of the
public defender and we do stand
in strong support of this
legislation certainly that
bridge to treatment
function of this bill is a big
factor for Elapidae clients who
are system involved as they
struggle with substance use
disorder and I think the
proponents at the table have
already said everything else I
would want to say about the bill
but I do ask you to support this
legislation thank you.
good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Barron Jones I'm with the
ACLU of New Mexico the ACLU New
Mexico is a proud member of the
New Mexico safe coalition we
created this bill and gave it a
because we recognize it as a
effort to save New Mexico lives
here in New Mexico and pride in
my work at the ACLU I was a
newspaper reporter at the Rio
Grande some and every year they
did an annual like overdose
story to humanize individuals
who were would lost their lives
and and I was always really
bummed out about this those
stories because I myself have
woken up several times after
accidentally overdosing right we
recognize that this is here is
an effort that will stop New
Mexico Family will reduce the
number of New Mexico families
who have to deal with the tragic
loss of their loved ones through
accidental overdoses thank you.
Good afternoon a tearing
Committee Diane cash on you know
sometimes I feel a little bit
that sharing my son's story over
and over again but I do want you
to know that he does he's proud
of my advocacy so and it's my
story to in some many senses
No you know if you would use if
not what he's doing okay now he
swears he won't go back we've
heard that a lot.
If he does I hope that it would
use.
A facility a place like this
he's been there were lots of his
friends have died he's been
there he shared drugs with
people people fund home and died
I mean there's it's horrible and
I would hope this is something
it's used by people.
Madam chair members of the
committee Karen Canaday with the
national association of social
workers New Mexico chapter and I
think everyone has said it hear
that but we stand in strong
support of this legislation you
know what we're doing is not
working.
And this is something that has
been shown to work throughout
Europe and in New York thank you
very much.
Hello madam chair members of the
committee my name is Andreas are
to lead a.
really are our drug policy is
been proven not to work the
opioid crisis has as proven
this.
Our harm reduction is a
fundamental rethinking of
how we can consult this this
issue
through care and compassion we
can really save lives it's
really something as simple as
this this is not economic
naloxone can reverse an overdose
and just like you all to see how
easy and accessible this can be
thank you very much.
Thank you only that there.
Anyone else in the audience
wishing to come speak in support
of the bill.
We'll go online those wishing to
speak in support of bill please
raise your hand.
We have Wendy Johnson.
So we can hear you speak up
though.
Okay
my name is Dr Wendy Johnson hi
family physician here at.
They are a taking time out.
Seeing patients because this is
such a you need to speak up
Wendy please sorry how is that
is that it's better this better
okay sorry I was just saying I'm
a family dog here in Santa Fe
for the past ten years I was the
former medical director of lost
million Medical Center here in
Santa Fe and taking time out
hopefully my patients Leger
stand there waiting right now of
seeing patients today because
this is such a very very
critical issue I started what is
probably the biggest outpatient
from the.
medication assisted treatment
program we started that your
love million about years ago
we've treated hundreds and
hundreds and hundreds of people
in addition here very very
successfully with medication
assisted.
Following that it is not a
straight line the path to
recovery and most of my patients
if not all of my patients have
had relapses had times where
they've they've gone back into
drug use and then come back to
the one
of the most important thing to
them and getting to recovery
know that there.
There are people out there
whether that's medical community
or their families there are
people out there that will not
give up on them what is what
this is.
Prevention centers we a
community of care and compassion
to show folks who are.
Prime substances that there are
people who care about them even
if they're not ready for
recovery yet.
Is to continue on with the
pathway that after action.
Thank you doctor thank you
doctor Johnson thank you.
Underneath it needs.
your time has concluded Dr
Johnson so we need to get to the
next person Nathan Birnbaum.
Yes can you hear me yes.
My name is Nathan Birnbaum I'm
also a family physician I mean
based in Albuquerque New Mexico
and I want to speak in strong
support of this bill as many
have said the rates of substance
abuse and fatal overdose in the
U. S. have skyrocketed in New
Mexico remains
disproportionately impacted by
this and the uncomfortable
reality is that no matter how
much we wish this weren't the
case people who are using
substances will continue to use
them even if we say they
shouldn't or even if we enact
more and more draconian
policies.
If your stated goal is to give
people a pathway to recovery
then I want to emphasize what
has already been said people
cannot stop using substances and
rejoin their communities if
they're dead of an overdose you
find no chance of recovery if
you force people with substance
use to use and overdose along
the spread of infectious
diseases will not abate if
people are forced to use a long
so if we as a state or combating
substance use disorder we have
to care about the people who are
suffering from those disorders
in the first place.
And that is why these programs
are such a key.
Art of this approach and it's
also why I am along with top
medical and public health
associations including the
American medical association and
the American society of
addiction medicine strongly
endorse overdose prevention
programs such as those outlined
in this bill in short these
programs are social good and I
urge the committee to it today
to vote in support of HB to
sixty three thank you doctor
brown bonds actually chose to
child services.
Ashley.
Thank you my name is Ashley
chars like and the executive
director for New Mexico harm
reduction collaborative and my
organization would be moving
forward if this were to fully
passed to possibly become the
first overdose prevention site
in New Mexico so I want to speak
in strong support of this bill
we are out on the streets
reversing overdoses regularly
and one thing that we do know is
that people's outcomes are not
as good when you know they're
out in public and we're trying
to reverse you know over that
way if we were able to have
something like an overdose
prevention center we would
actually have access to be able
to help multiple people at one
time we already have a fully
trained staff we already have
case managers and anybody that
would undertake this kind of a
opening this kind of a center
knows that this is a community
building lifesaving efforts and
drug users deserve to have a
place where they can come in
they can safely administer drugs
because they're going to be
doing it either way whether we
are asking for them to do it you
know out on the street like we
see on Central Avenue every day
you know coming up and down I
probably twenty thirty people
using drugs openly I'm cert is
seeing that we would be able to
have people in the center with
social workers and nurses and
medical staff thank you thank
you.
So that concludes our public
comment period Representative
Lujan to to want to add anything
before we go to the committee.
manager think everybody is
really set everything and how
important how.
Critical it is for us to move
forward with with this piece of
legislation for what good it
will do for communities for the
livelihood and better outcomes
for New Mexicans in New Mexico
is being hit hard by over it
with the overdose overdose
crisis excuse me.
And according to the CDC.
There are about fifty overdose
deaths per one hundred thousand
residents and that's from twenty
twenty one this place is our
state among the most impacted
with more fatalities than any
other neighboring states and so
I I just can't over state how
important this is thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative I have
Representative read.
And thank you madam chair
representative and first I would
like to thank you for approach
me and talking to me about this
I think a lot about at six since
we had our conversation so I
just want to kind of talk
through some areas that we
discussed that we can discuss in
front of the committee and then
some new things I thought of I'm
so madam chair representative
I want to first talk about the
age limit I know we briefly
discuss this but I didn't know
that I saw anywhere and and you
can correct me if I'm wrong
because it's been a long morning
already in a society where in
the bill that addressed how old
you would have to be to use the
center like this.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and thank you Representative for
taking the time to speak with me
about this
I did a talk with the O. H. and
was told that for the harm
reduction program that we have
in place it we have to be
eighteen years of age okay and
madam chair and representative
sits not in this bill but it's
in Harvard it's a number
programmed and so madam chair
representative a mother or
father or somebody with the
child were to come into the area
with adults
Madam chair representative how
that situation behandelt thank
you madam chair and.
This is this this is part of the
community building rights
important to have these
questions in the conversation
having not visited in your it
got too many of the sites but I
have asked questions but I'm
going to defer to my experts on.
madam chair and representative
that a lot is left up to rules
and regulations and department
of health has very clear
protocols and regulations for
the harm reduction programs that
currently exist in New Mexico
and so this would fall under the
harm reduction program a
department of health and those
specifics of how you know it
just like with the cannabis
legalization the question of
what happens can you bring a
child into the space or into a
dispensary or not so that would
be decided that for department
level okay and and madam chair
representative going.
So it's it and kind of along the
line of questions page six
section C..
And all kind of first begin with
what if it does this extend to
the parking lot.
Madam chair representative of us
center like this madam chair
Representative I mean.
It depends on the the the the
parking lot I mean the
regulations and laws in place
and again it's going to go back
to the the rules and guidance
and and that those regulations
are going to be created through
the
through do you H..
Okay and so madam chair
representative so if there was
let's say a parent who came in
and and to the center and they
got high and then went back out
there's a child in the car let's
say in the parking lot is anyone
monitoring the parking lot and
if so Madam chair representative
what is our duty to call law
enforcement under this bill
thank you madam chair I mean
it's everybody's duty to have
eyes and and understand what's
going on but again I'm gonna
differs to.
Madam chair and representative
the the section see that you're
referring to it's really
contained within the center and
within the boundaries of the
center and so I think that's
just really clear that the
current laws exist outside of
the boundaries of the summer or
of the program that currently
exist so you know it's it's not
legal for someone to drive while
they're intoxicated and even
more so if there's a child in
the car so this this bill does
not address or even change any
of the existing laws that exist
outside of the boundaries of the
summer so then madam chair
representative you would have a
duty as an employee if you saw
that occur to call the police.
Madam chair representative yeah
I mean just like any other
situation occurs today yes if if
someone has a responsibility
they would have that same
responsibility under this This
act does not change what would
occur outside of this okay and
so madam chair representative
what if I I know that it says
controlled substance shall not
be sold purchased I'm assuming
this is in the center under
section see what if you have
Madam chair representative a
drug dealer out you know which I
think would be a prime place be
a drug deal out front of one of
the centers distributing
controlled substances and you
see that thank you madam chair
thank you Representative for
that question again what we know
and the evidence that is and
again it's been given to us that
that is not occurring the action
actually the opposite effect is
happening and we're giving us a
place for taking those
The situations off the street
Madam okay so Madam chair
representative but if you were
to see that happen as an
employee at that center or do
you were you were given
information that there was a
drug dealer in the parking lot
selling methamphetamine and
people were coming in and using
it with the center have a duty
to call the police Madam chair
representative those are those
are things in situations where
we are looking to provide
community inputs and have a cent
and having a center like this is
to provide a space where we're
not looking at criminalizing
folks but if it is within
the space where that needs to be
responded upon and and addresses
it would be
and I have some more to absent
and madam chair representative
this bill does not define any of
those three duties of staff so
it's not addressed in in the
bill in front of you and and
madam chair representative I
appreciate honesty in that
because that is a big problem I
have that a lot could be
happening outside the center and
I feel that under this bill
there really isn't anything that
requires like in this bill staff
to do anything about illegal
activity for children you know
coming in our building in the
parking lot with their family
members getting high so I I'm
concerned about that and then I
just want to jump to the last
page the civil liability
and the last paragraphs page a
second line seven see any civil
light civil or administrative
penalty or liability for conduct
related to the operation
inspection licensing or
administration of a harm
reduction program or overdose
prevention program unless the
conduct is negligent or reckless
so madam chair representative
Negligent or reckless is two
different terms to me legally
could you kind of describe what
that standard would be thank you
madam chair and representative
I'm gonna ask David.
Who is also an expert witness to
comment on thank you for all
madam chair I think you can hear
me Representative read as you
know both of those terms are
defined in the uniformed jury
instructions
so negligence would be ordinary
care under the circumstances and
reckless would be defined in the
under the jury instruction that
above the plus directly set also
includes conscious disregard or
disregard those are terms are
defined in the jury instructions
so on the civil liability would
be predicated on the fact that
are presented with those facts
us I believe the jury
instruction definitions for it
so Madam chair and
representative but expert it
could be either negligent or
with me negligent is actually a
more of a civil standard of the
reckless tends to be more of a
criminal standard.
Madam chair representative of re
not in this context because this
deals with civil and
administrative penalties both of
those terms have
I assume you're a prosecutor on
the civil litigator I've never
been a prosecutor I assume there
are things like reckless
homicide or.
I think you know a lot about
that right now but I'm not a
civil but in in in the civil
context reckless is typically
what would give rise to a claim
for punitive damages and it's
often order disregard reckless
indifference and it's it's
specifically and defined in the
uniformed jury of a civil jury
instructions medic of course
negligence is purely civil in is
defined as ordinary care of the
circumstances madam chair and
representative expert thank you
for explaining that to me and
just one last question on page
six kind of goes back to what I
was talking about before under
the money twenty three a the
arrest charge prosecution or any
other criminal liability related
to the controlled substance act
for any action or conduct that
occurs on the site of a harm
reduction program again back to
on the site and what exactly on
the site means I just want to be
clear Madam chair representative
on the site is only inside the
facility.
Madam chair representative that
would be the jurisdiction.
Right now madam chair
Representative is there any
reason why you wouldn't want to
define what on the site means in
this bill Madam chair
representative I don't think
it's necessary.
Thank you and thank you madam
chair and thank you for
Representative.
Thank you Representative Romero.
Thank you madam chair our
community has been hit
particularly hard by the opioid
epidemic and
Certainly access to being able
to have safe uses been a
priority and there have been
incredible strides made
in in the regional community to
do that but then that the need
and the demand is always higher
than the availability of access
this program as proposed would
help so many families and we're
in our community and I think
throughout the state and I don't
want to speak for anyone else
but we're a degree of separation
if not directly impacted by the
need
For support for
all hands on deck when it comes
to reducing harm in our
community can you just talk a
little bit about where this is
been tried before I know we have
some analysis but mostly in
regards to
You know we were not the first I
know that much and we're not it
and many different communities
are trying this around the
country can we just talk about.
Who's doing this and what the
impact has been so far over what
time frame are we looking at
thank you madam chair thank you
madam vice chair there over a
hundred eighty.
Overdose prevention centers in
fourteen countries around the
world
PC's have been in operation for
over three decades with hundreds
of thousands of sites that are
visited in thousands of lives
have been saved.
And I think my expert would like
to expand on that she's done
national work.
Madam chair and and madam vice
chair yet as as the funds are
mentioned you know fourteen
countries and and close to two
hundred sites in North America
there have been sites opened in
Canada and most recently in two
thousand and one two sites
opened up in New York they're
the first sanctioned the
overdose prevention centers in
the United States Rhode Island
has passed authorization
authorization law just what is
similar to what's in front of
you and they're slated to open
their first job pilot site in
the next six months in New York
there have been over seven
hundred now overdoses reversed
no one has died in the site
they have been able to find
emergency services right there
find the individual they have
they also provide a lot of
wraparound services and so when
we talk about success it's not
just saving lives but it's also
providing access to food and
shelter it's providing access to
medical care to treatment in
fact the program in Vancouver
the bottom floors and overdose
prevention center the next floor
is a detox center and the top
floors of residential treatment
center and so there's ability to
have sort of a continuum of care
but there you know there's
hundreds of of studies done on
these sites over the thirty deck
three decades and I can you know
go into all kinds of outcomes
but that it really is about
reduce it overdose deaths
improving health outcomes in
access to treatment and
significant cost savings thank
you madam chair thank you for
that because I think the
wraparound piece of that is so
critical we look at the expense
we're doing desperate.
disconnects with what we might
be able to control in that space
I think really grateful to to
understand that that's what's
intended for this just going to
the bill there was a
recommendation made by the
department of health on page two
section a for
and I don't know if you had a
chance to see it
I think it is an important one
and strengthens the bill part of
it
It just talks about the fact
that the the the language
On page two that is added.
This is the department shall not
collect and then it goes on the
recommendation is to strike out
that current line current.
Of remainder and then enter full
name or address the participants
except as required by law for
testing treatment of infectious
disease or other medical
treatment.
Madam chair minister that that
would be a a friendly amendment
if you're offering.
Can I would like to make the
motion we can.
Okay
We have a motion so let's take a
look at the bill and figure out
where we're going to add it and
yes I know it will be a point
four thank.
So we're gonna page three after
the word collect online one.
Strike at the remaining
underlined words.
An ad in full name comma.
Our address of participants
except as required by law
for testing comma treatment of
infectious disease.
Or other medical treatment.
Okay and then some in the sheet
that's right we have we and I
think in the I.
Okay and we're gonna strike the
online to date of birth address
and so on that's correct after
the word collect
everything after that okay and
we leave the semi colon yes
okay.
Money to okay.
So we have a motion to amend.
That would strike out line one
on page three and
The right line to up to the
semi.
And adding full name comma or
address of participants except
as required by law for testing
treatment of infectious disease
or other medical treatment.
Period.
But actually cynical semicon
okay.
We have a second second.
We have a motion by
Representative Romero seconded
by Representative
semansky and we have a
discussion on on the motion to
amend Representative Lane thank
you madam chair
So do we know.
I don't really know enough about
treatment of infectious diseases
or other medical treatment.
so and I don't have the analysis
that is being referenced so
what's what's the thought
process behind.
Collecting full name and
address.
Just to be able to find to do
testing or treatment of Texas
does is it is it follow up is
there some other rationale.
Madam chair Representative my
understanding is that because in
many to many circumstances the
use of these substances are
illicit
and on basically illegal having
collecting the name and address
of a person without their
without the necessity for follow
up as required by law for
treatment of infectious disease
or other medical treatment be
necessary.
Madam chair.
So the way I understand what's
being struck as we're saying
we're not collecting personal
data because it is a listens
what I'm assuming but it seems
like we're taking that standard
way and saying well Wirth we're
still going to collect
information it's if it's for
the.
Testing your treatment of
infectious disease.
And so I'm just wondering why
they.
Because it is it is an inhibitor
to build treat.
Or yes Mr Mr I mean Madam chair
Representative Lane that that
that would be something to be
considered in these cases we're
we're dealing with the a listed
drugs or substances and
providing a safe space for for
these individuals to use.
And to add madam chair and
representative what I believe
the intent behind this is that
there the department of health
currently has to collect
certain.
personal identifying information
for their effective disease
programs and the way that this
bill read would wouldn't allow
them to collect what was
required for tracking and
tracing for infectious disease
however I think the intent is
still to not collect personal
identifying information for
individuals who come in just for
an overdose prevention center
for example because as you
mentioned which is correct that
could inhibit someone from
coming in if it's still illicit
use outside of the center the
manager I'd so it I think one of
the online
I'm just wondering if.
If I'm a user I mean I I'm not.
I'm not drug addicts but I'm
just thinking if I if I'm in
that place.
And the government's trying to
collect information from me does
that not encourage me I would
find that troubling that maybe
law enforcement might might
become aware something else I'm
just wondering.
And and maybe let me just
question this way is that is
that a federal requirement
that's going to.
Inhibit funding to the state in
which case I think it makes
sense but if it's a state law
that it seems like this would be
creating an exception at the
state level.
So madam chair and
representative I think I
understand I think what we need
to make sure this amendment does
is
carves out the overdose
prevention center from the
collection of personal
identifying information for that
exact reason but allowing all
the other harm reduction
programs that require that
personal identifying information
to be able to still collected so
I'm not sure if what was read
maybe we should look at it again
to make sure that it read that
way I'm here Representative
that's that's my read on it and
we have some other addicts in my
experience with other harm
reduction programs such as a
needle exchange they know they
have identifying information for
those to be able to deliver
services and to know that they
can access them when when the
services are available or get in
touch with them for follow up or
whatever it may be but but the
point of this is to basically
make sure that they are
anonymous you know when it comes
to the collection of information
on the compilation of data if
that precedes
that that change that ensures
that the negative
health outcomes that for the
that health outcomes that are
part of this program are are
concealed.
The gentleman I mean the.
The needle exchange I I can
understand because I'm going to
get clean needles and and you
don't know whether I have any
illicit substances on the but
here you're actually fully
disclosing that you have an
illegal substance.
And so I think the rationale is
different if if the thought
process behind this is we want
to encourage people to come to a
safe and healthy environment.
I'm just afraid that if we start
gathering data on them that
that's going to have the
opposite effect and so I don't
you know with with the experts
said I don't know if there's a
way to.
To draw that distinction.
Madam chair
Representative
Then by your I think we need
more time to look at this
But.
I have representatives of pants
you want to weigh in if you do
are you still wanting to speak
to the side she might have some
Madam I yeah I mean I I think
I've kind of just express what
my concern is so I'm happy to
have read into our
Representative jumping skews me.
Madam chair of the in
representative and and literally
having actually worked very
closely and and worked on our
production surge exchange site
as a previous department of
health and play a long time ago
the I think this ammendment
achieves but the the dual
concerns because.
For example in a harm reduction
side as it exists now people
come in they can access the
state they are there for syringe
exchange or
here to yes Representative check
out the service they don't have
to provide their personal
information however on site at
the same facility there may be
HIV testing there might be
hepatitis C. testing there may
be
STI services or other kinds of
services that would require
someone to provide some contact
information so that they can
receive their test results at a
later date because not all tasks
can be done in a rapid test as
with instant results and then
the other piece of this is there
are mandatory reporting for
infectious disease surveillance
that
Those and those are typically
geographically located so you're
pinpointing the geography of
where an infectious disease
might be having outbreak or
significant occurrence so
I think the language issues that
however Anderson and
Representative me want to take a
little time to look at that.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative legislation
legislation again I think that.
I would I would like to see a
little bit more this but as I'm
reading it it's addresses as
part.
Except as required by law I
think that that gives the
exception out either that if
it's it's not mandatory it's not
is not made to happen except for
the other functionalities the of
collecting information and it's
still of.
Doesn't have to be disclosed
information have to be
disclosed.
Representative Rehm yes ma'am
madam chair and Representative
and Representative.
Part of my question is I think
you want to collect the names.
The reason why state that is.
In your opening you're speaking
about moving them or trying to
encourage them to go to
treatment the other thing that I
think that you have a problem
with is someone who leaves the
facility in amendment dies and
there's an allegation that you
didn't over you didn't you know
watch them properly and
consequently we want to sue you
but you have no records where
they were there or not anyway
that's my comment forty.
New next representative Nibert
on the amendment yes thank you
madam chair one of the things
that I applaud on the bill was.
It seems to me that the date of
birth or the person's age would
be an important factor if you're
trying to deal with with these
types of this.
Page would be an important
factor and so I like I like the
amendment
for those purposes
because I think.
We need to collect that data if
we're ever going to.
Figure out how to best treat
various age groups.
And give them these.
As a support but at least give
them the
Information that they may need
at that stage in their life to
deal with with the issues so
I think I this ammendment we
allow them to say you know this
is a forty seven year old
person that's that's.
Some have these issues and
that's that to me would be a
very important critical matter
side I'd I like the amendment I
I do see.
Some of the concerns about the
government collected data but
but I mean we we have to collect
some data or we won't be able to
do some of the other things
you're talking about I thank you
madam.
Right so we have a motion to
amend the bill.
The manager discussion it is it
is it a friendly amend is a
family member okay so I think
we're through I don't see any to
comment on the amendment would
you call the roll on the
amendment please Representative
Alcon.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane no.
Mr speaker.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert yes.
Representative read.
Representative green.
Yes.
Representative semansky yes.
Madam vice chair yes madam chair
yes.
The.
On
I don't.
The they would just love to
understand more about how
communities might be involved in
planning
and what the.
Locating these facilities
That thank you madam chair thank
you by by your I think that that
goes back again to the planning
and and the.
Of the function of the the
programs are yet to H. and
getting that information looking
at best sites and and areas
we're going to we're going to
locate those I think that still
remains to be decided.
Yes yes and madam chair
representative I do want to flag
that this bill says overdose
prevention programs and not
overdose prevention centers and
the reason is that there are
some really successful mobile
units that operate and so I
think what's so great about this
bill that gives some flexibility
I'll also just mentioned there
are some multi literally phone
based overdose prevention
programs where someone calls
when they're going to use and
they're supervised and then if
they don't respond within a
certain amount of time they can
call EMS so I there's a lot of
creativity that can happen and I
do think that communities need
to be involved the only other
thing I'll add is that in more
urban models a lot of drug use
is open and on the street in
downtown areas so if you take
Albuquerque for example you want
to locate a program where a lot
of that open drug use is
occurring and those are the
individuals that we might be
more likely to use again not
every community needs this or it
may not be appropriate for every
community and that's also the
beauty of this bill is that it
leaves up a lot to be decided at
a community level of where they
should be located what the
models thank you thank you for
that you see thank you madam
chair.
Representative Nancy thank you
madam chair and Representative
experts
I just wanted to share with the
committee that I've actually
visited one of these as well was
actually physical center
probably fifteen years ago my
understanding is that center is
actually still operating and and
there are additional sites now
but I really did not know what
to expect when I visited that
location and I was blown away by
the it was professional it was
warm it was welcoming it was
hygienic it was controlled it
was calm
and it was also you know one of
the beautiful things I saw was
the other services that were co
located at the facility so in
addition to the here that that
major goal of of this program
there are also.
Opportunities for people to sit
with the counselor opportunities
for people to enroll in various
health services opportunities
for people to seek treatment if
they chose to do that there was
food there was clothing there
were things and there was a very
strong peer support
that element to the program
which you know when you're
talking about.
On street drug use is probably
about as marginalized and
separated from communities you
probably possibly could be
really
and so the idea that at the you
know the space has been created
and then you have people
accessing services being seeded
being listened to and also
having an opportunity to seek
those basic necessities of life
in addition to seeking other
health services was really are
just DO I don't think I think
any of us visited that whatever
forget that this is really bring
people from a place where they
felt
Alone and isolated abandoned
into a network and into a place
where people really could
seek felt that they needed to
not to not be so isolated so
I you know I just I am strongly
in support of this and I think
some of the new.
Processes that you were
describing are just fascinating
to me that new permutations with
technology and things like that
are very interesting set and and
that it doesn't have to be a
physical site also I think is is
really worth noting so I just
wanted to share that with the
committee madam chair thank you
Representative.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative Lujan so we we
spoke about I think the need for
keeping the names and then on
page four line seven private
providers so I assume that
medical providers.
I'm madam chair and
representative so current this
is actually current language in
the harm reduction act so
private providers so for example
the mountain center in Santa Fe
is a syringe exchange program so
they actually operate the
program under the oversight of
department of health so these
programs would be similar and
could even be some of the same
programs that are currently
operating around the state to
provide harm reduction services.
Of madam chair and expert what
I'm guess I'm getting at is the
level of training that would be
at the facility that's what I'm
trying to figure out thank you
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative as as you
mentioned before during
testimony that they would they
would be providers are
professional providers nurses
and and others involved and
putting these together thank you
thank you madam chair and
Representative Lujan when we get
over to page five four we're
talking about the mobile of line
for a mobile overdose prevention
so what is that.
Thank you again thank madam
chair and thank you again for
the question if anything that
we've learned from from the
The COVID crisis that we've been
pandemic that we went through is
that we have to rely more on
technology flexibility in
getting to
our public in our communities
through
through telehealth another and
other
Medical providers ships and in
that round and what was just
mentioned by my expert here is
that we need that flexibility
because what may be needed in an
urban area may not be the same
thing that's needed into in a
rural area and that the question
of access is also at hand and we
knew that we have medical mobile
units that go out to our
communities we have better
outcomes Madam.
Madam chair and Representative
Lujan when we get to page six
one six we go with the hear the
overdose prevention programs
she'll provide participants with
a safe and I need to make space
to administer and consume
previously obtained controlled
substances so when we talk about
space.
I'm trying to make a connection
between the mobile and space and
what that definition is I guess
thank you thank you madam chair
and thank you for that I'm gonna
to for to my experts on that
madam chair and representative
so currently we have mobile
units that go out to do syringe
exchange in other countries they
use the same mobile units and
they actually set up space
inside like an RV that have
these safe spaces that are
monitor and they have the
clinical staff on board.
And I think you answered the
next question there let's go
madam chair and representative
we go down to to page six line
twenty three so.
While.
While we're it eventually going
to exempt them from state
prosecution.
The problem is the private
prosecutor I being the of
federal prosecution.
So you're using narcotics that
are federally controlled and we
just should be aware that when
we're contracting with private
providers as well it's a state
the feds can still come in and
one of their.
Tools I use is a seal the state
they they go ahead and sees the
pro the property where it's
occurring.
Thank you madam chair thank you
for that we're we're not seen
that happen in New York
and I will defer again to my
experts on the madam chair and
representative department of
justice is actually visited the
New York sites and they have not
indicated that they are going to
cracked down on those sites and
in fact there are ongoing
negotiations right now between a
site Pennsylvania in
Philadelphia and department of
justice and so there had been
indications that department of
justice may come out in full
support of overdose prevention
site are so that's under
mediation as as were right thank
you yeah and madam chair and
Representative Lujan I
understand the need for this so
you know when I talk to my law
enforcement friends they're
describing use and are can kinda
like candy so you know I
understand it if we go to page
seven million we're on line ten
the negligence
I get worried about how we're
gonna end up defending some of
the lawsuit you could have you
know we have a person and
overdose will you to closely
monitor them there were too
many.
The there were too many
participants there
and then I think that we have a
real problem with.
How are we going to monitor
these people and say okay you
are cleared now to leave either
that you won't go outside no
overdose for worse in that year
drug driving in the end up in a
traffic crash so I think there's
I think we need to do some more
work in this area on the bill.
And I don't know if you have any
comments on that.
Madam chair Representative I
think that you know we we had a
little bit of that discussion
earlier on the bill and I'm not
a lawyer.
And so we we went over some of
the this in there the.
The Civil N..
is administrative penalties for
you know federal verses
criminal versus civil and I
think that that goes back to
what we were talking about
earlier and I think that this is
not an adjuster we need to to
make right now and I would I can
defer to my other expert who is
a lawyer now you try to keep its
pre operative of the Madam chair
representative read
we we try to carefully craft
this to acknowledge the
existence of tort law that that
is here and you all remember me
from my prior role would come
here if if the bills contained
in unity provision you probably
see the folks who are
organizations speaking out
against it for the purpose of
community not being part of our
system of laws so there will be
a standard of care that will be
applicable to the centers just
like it would be to any other
behavioral health center
hospital on.
Triage center outpatient
inpatient service.
That that would require expert
witnesses to say that they're
ordinary care of the for the
standard of care applicable to
that circumstance was breached
and there's really no way around
around that issue that's why
this to sort of careful balance.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you madam chair.
What are.
Look at this bill madam chair
representative of.
The mandates relate to us that
we can administer the program
but when you look at the details
it's really requires more than
just establishment I guess
ultimately it requires some
reckon Water and and I real
staffing and M. program.
Am I saying that correctly Mr
chair madam chair Representative
is a possibility yes that there
that it would go to the brick
and mortar need but under the
protection act a lot of cases is
covered in a lot of those for
the the regulations and rules
would be under the D. O. H. is
supervision.
I might understand that but when
we talk about.
Mexico locating having mobile
services I see.
The ultimate goal is I mean I
realize at the beginning of to
establish a program.
But alternately that program to
be effective has got to
include some locations via
Google for permanent locations
to fulfill the purposes and so
ultimately we have.
The program established but that
necessarily requires the brick
and mortar or the I think you
said R. V.'s that that could be
transformed into the into
providing the services so I just
wanted to.
Maybe not this fiscal year for
next but ultimately were moving
in that direction and I see the
legislation correctly.
Okay and so.
That the leads me to a question
of of Costa maybe this is
premature but do we have any
estimation of.
For fighting the services
statewide and.
My second question would be.
What.
What types of communities are we
looking at locating these types
of facilities thank you thank
you madam chair thank you
Representative again it's going
to go back to answer your last
question first is gonna go back
to the communities themselves to
see what what their needs are
and they're going to work with
the department of health to the
the programming to see where
those needs are and where the
best fit is for the types of
programs whether you prefer
morning whether it be a mobile
unit or what is the desire with
the needs of those communities
impact to the cost of things we
know that right now we're saving
we could be saving on money.
in regards to that with the
There's an estimate to of the
cost of New Mexico right now at
three point eight billion
dollars and this was taken in
two thousand seventeen with the
health costs of criminal legal
costs and loss of productivity
and lives and everything
included so we would really be
saving money when we're looking
at implementing these programs
this program.
And what I love when I look at
the legislative legislation of
Madam chair representative.
I suppose it'd be the department
of health that would determine
where to locate the services and
whether that the mobile in
nature or more permanent in
nature.
Chair representative they have
the most knowledge they have had
the the program
harm reduction from harm
reduction act have the harm
reduction program in place and
they have been one of the most
notable harm reduction programs
in the nation so yes they would
be that they would be the agency
that would come up with those
answers.
And then of.
You mentioned a keeper answers a
little pre for we have a for the
log jam the.
And I'll try to I'll try to be
short as well madam chair
you mentioned that they have
been opened in New York and and
Canada so let's talk about New
York first are we talk about New
York state or New York City.
Madam chair representative
Representative New York City
okay and then in Canada I
believe you mentioned Vancouver
and so my my concern is that.
You know obviously Miller New
York City has many times the
population of our state and
thank you for.
I don't know that is two million
people but it's certainly a a
large metropolitan area and so
I'm I'm a little bit concerned
if we do this whether we have
the the population base to
sustain such programs and maybe
if maybe we could do it in
Albuquerque.
Would we anticipate that.
Middle size communities are
smaller communities would would
likewise be candidates for this
because I see that as really
increasing the cost even though
we have small communities in our
state that have tremendous
tremendous drug problems
at the some may lead the nation
per capita so I I'm I'm just
grappling at what what do you
envision in that regards as to
how.
Hello a state of two million
people's going to do something
that New York City or Vancouver
Canada doing Madam chair
representative just as briefly
as I can say we have the on the
highest needs in the entire
United States if we do nothing
then we need lives are going to
be lost.
Madam chair representative I
think you're absolutely right
this could be a program that so
successful in downtown
Albuquerque and just make that
up because there are numbers so
there may be you know this maybe
an appropriate model for
Albuquerque and Santa Fe of
Farmington at Los crucis and
there could be some mobile units
that are less costly for some of
the more semi rural semi urban
areas.
Of you madam chair a I too would
be concerned with the
liability portion last page
section C..
Of because we're dealing with a
high risk population to begin
with and if we're looking at
negligence and I believe your
expert mentioned hospitals.
You need not go very far from
this building to to ask what the
malpractice premiums are for
that hospital and the and it's
huge and yet the citizens of New
Mexico would be.
Responsible for.
Those types of events if you
have a simple negligence
standard and I'm I'm really
concerned about the negligence
standard we're dealing with a
high risk populations.
You're dealing with with people
who come to it with the.
With.
A.
A lot of issues that.
I thank the people that may be
staffing that would be.
Maybe feel prepared to deal with
all of the baggage that they
bring and so I would encourage
you to look at the at the
standard the negligence.
And see if that's really the
proper standard that should be
applied when you're dealing with
a high risk populations because
again
the trial lawyers with would
force against us but.
You're dealing with high risk
population the citizens of New
Mexico should not be of the ones
having to to
pay for what will ultimately be
some of that occurrences that
that would be experienced at
these locations so I think it
ought to be a higher standard
with that they're all.
But my question any questions
have a will yep sorry
Representative Eli.
I get the head manager I'll be
brief.
The madam chair so what what
type of staffing do you
anticipate being required to
accomplish this program thank
you madam chair thank you
Representative as again as
mentioned during the testimony
they would be licensed health
providers that would be at the
sites.
I'm sure I I guess on what that
means that a nurse.
manager a new there would be
nurses and other licensed health
providers and I can defer to.
my effort if you want to add
anything madam chair and and Mr
leader yes.
A district that also would be
left up to the Department of
Health under rules and
regulations to decide what level
of care needed to
the appropriate in New in New
York one of them is staffed by
our reserve by registered nurses
the others appear based model.
Ventured you sip your based.
Martin Madam chair
representative that's in New
York.
Madam chair so if.
If we're talking about.
Someone who's at risk of
overdosing I guess some
parameters and who would have
the confidence to.
Prevent that from happening if
it's not a registered nurse
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative as you can tell
and as mentioned by others that.
R. cannon and those that are.
Is ready readily available
information for for those that
need to administer likes it is
saving expertise would be
trained to do so and be part of
these
Part of the centers if that's
what we went with.
Madam chair so I I look at the
FIR and it says a.
It says a financial impact of
about a hundred grand a year.
I think if we're gonna have a
nurse come on I'm trying to
figure out this seems like the
F. fires is very low and am I
missing something here.
Madam chair representative
there's there's also funding
already to the harm
The home program that's alright
this RT at U. H. there's already
funding within the budget and as
it if you see also there for our
LESC says and mentions that
there are other opportunities
for financial assistance.
So madam chair I then I guess we
don't know what the cost to the
taxpayers going to be is that
fair.
Madam chair over I'm not sure
what you're asking.
Well.
Madam chair I I guess.
How big do you anticipate this
program to be Madam chair
representative right now it's it
would just be one staff person
for the program at U. H. but as
mentioned before the.
And harm reduction program works
with with centers all over the
state and those are the you know
this provider ships and making
sure that they're administering
their integrating that the harm
reduction program within those
sites I'm sure.
Okay madam chair so I I'm
concerned about the.
The cost to the taxpayer yes
this if I go to one of these
facilities.
Am I required to obtain
treatment in exchange for at the
time.
I'm sure Representative no.
Madam chair.
This program would allow me if
I.
Have an illegal drugs in my
possession.
No intention of have receiving
treatment or have any desire to
receive treatment.
To use that illegal drugs at
this facility is that correct
Madam chair representative yes.
Madam chair of.
I'm a little puzzled by I can
understand sort of the rationale
behind.
People needing help with
overdose and and a concern about
that.
I don't understand.
Why we would use taxpayer
dollars.
And in exchange not try to.
Require that the person actually
work to resolve the underlying
issue.
And so madam chair I I'm
concerned about you know I think
of like a hard working New
Mexicans who work sixty hours a
week pays taxes.
And then we extract that
taxpayer dollars in reserves to
Phil's facilitate what's gonna
be a program of people to use
illegal drugs openly.
Without requiring them to obtain
any kind of treatment or
anything in exchange.
without triage in them or
putting them towards housing or
any other kind of health.
so I.
I have heartburn with that I
think probably the average
Mexican what as well and so.
With that and I guess natural
reserve their mentor my
questions for for the floor
debate thank you madam chair
thank you madam chair.
The I would just add that we
don't save state estate tax
payer dollars as I mentioned
before chair thank you okay
right anyone else happy to
entertain a motion madam chair
and like to move it to pass on
house bill two sixty three as
amended.
We have a motion to for to pass
on house bill two sixty three as
amended made by Representative
Romero seconded by
Representative some pants to
call the roll please
Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey.
Representative.
No.
Mr speaker.
Representative McQueen yes
Representative Nibert no
Representative we.
Representative ring no ma'am.
Representative Penske.
Yes.
Madam vice chair.
Yes.
Madam chair yes.
By a vote of five to four we
have a two passed as amended.
Yeah we do pass in requests.
Thank you for the.
If.
We now have House Bill to ninety
one life and health insurance
guarantee.
Which I believe will be short.
Romero thank you madam chair I'm
stepping in for our illustrious
chairwoman Thompson who's how
today
Scenting basically amending the
life and and and health
insurance guaranty association
act to include health
maintenance organizations as
members of the life and health
insurance guaranty association
this is my experts.
Please introduce yourself madam
chairman miss Mike that the
executive director of the New
Mexico life insurance guaranty
association where the
association this task about that
guarantee act to fulfill the
responsibilities care of under
the act
House Bill to ninety one does
makes two major changes to the
guaranty association act the
first one is
the vice chair is indicated to
you includes expanding
membership to health maintenance
organizations which would
include coverage for their
contract holders and for the
providers who contract with them
we provide a protection for
policyholders in the event of
the insolvency of insurance
companies the second major thing
This act does is it attempts to
reduce the cost on our health
insurance industry for
assessments related to long term
care insurance
insolvencies it in recent years
we've had a large long term care
insolvency and it brought forth
the fact that the coverage was
the burden of the coverage was
on the health insurance industry
and not spread broadly.
So typically health insurance is
covered by health insurance
industry in life insurance is
covered by life insurance
industry and this bill splits
that it takes for long term care
insurance policies it splits the
cost of those insolvencies
between both the life insurance
industry and health insurance
industry thereby actually
reducing the costs to our health
insurance industry.
Of the it's sixty one pages long
but that's basically what it
does there are when we add the
H. M. O.'s we have to add a lot
of single words in a lot of
phrases to make clear talking
about health insurance companies
and and HM this.
Thank you Representative
anything else before I go to the
audience madam chair I just want
to say that this by not enacting
this our HMO policy holders will
continue to be left out of the
protection so that's why we with
this critical for this you thank
you madam chair okay those in
the audience wishing to propose
speak in opposition to the bill
please raise your hand.
Those online wishing to speak in
opposition please raise him.
Those in the audience wishing to
speak in support of the bill
please raise your hand.
Okay
go head Brandt and we'll just go
from there.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Roy Moore
I'm a registered lobbyist for
the American council of life
insurers a CLI has worked on
this bill in multiple states and
they are part of the the that
negotiation and the the
agreement that was reached in
multiple states of life insurers
stand in support of this bill
thank you very much.
So.
Madam chair members of the
committee on mark Duran I
represent United healthcare we
stand in support of the bill
thank you Representative for
care in the bill for
representative Thompson we
appreciate it we're an HMO this
is going to cost us more money
to participate in the fund none
the less it's the right thing to
do because it guarantees those
insolvency so we support the
legislation thank you madam
chair thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee marshes registered
lobbyists for Blue Cross blue
shield of New Mexico and we
stand and support for the same
reasons expressed by Mr Duran
and Mister Moore.
Thank you anyone else in the
audience wishing to speak in
support.
Anyone online wishing to speak
in support please raise your
hand.
Right so back to sponsor.
Senator questions and J. back to
the committee questions.
On a few ready for motion
Representative madam chair I
move up to pass or if do not
pass on house bill two ninety
one and I.
Right that's there I move a do
pass on on hello house health
and Human Services subcommittee
substitute for House Bill to
ninety one.
Sorry.
But my part.
Alright okay the agency a word
for.
Okay do we have a second.
All right so we have a motion
made by Representative month
late night for its second by
Representative.
El Cajon
Four do pass of health health
and Human Services Committee
substitute.
Two ninety one to call the roll.
Representative Alcon yeah.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane.
Mr speaker.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert this.
Representative read yes.
Representative Rehm.
Representative said Penske yes.
Madam vice chair yes madam chair
yes by a vote of.
The.
Bill.
Which is resource testing and
fines and audits.
Madam.
Much members I do have an
amendment excuse me.
The house bill three ninety.
It was delivered to you all on
Saturday the number at the
bottom is two two five nine six
six point one and this is in
regards to the issues that
Representative McQueen some of
the amendment for this okay.
Endorsed okay thank you madam
chair of these the amendments
which do take place on page two
of the bill are in line with
what Representative McQueen As
suggested whenever I was here in
committee the other day on page
two line seventeen and eighteen.
Right the financial not.
And insert in lieu thereof no
single find shell.
On page two line eighteen before
the period insert per violation.
On page two line nineteen strike
each.
Insert in lieu there of a
violation related to a.
On page two line twenty one
after one hundred thousand
dollars strike the remainder of
the line and strike line twenty
two in its entirety and it's
certainly there of for each
violation in addition one
hundred percent of the purse
related to the violation shall
be forfeited madam chair and
that is that is the amendment.
Thank you Representative.
So we're on the amendment
questions on the amendment.
I understand representative of
you worked with Representative
McQueen on this madam chair I
did I worked with Representative
McQueen I worked with
Representative night bird I
worked with the attorney
general's office I worked with
counsel from the race tracks I
work right.
Sorry I am.
Representative of the.
I get it don't miss Johnson back
there of yes we covered our
bases out.
Okay very good questions on the
amendment.
The move that we adopt the
amendment second we have a
motion to adopt the amendment.
There any let's call the roll so
we can record Representative
Alcon.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Rehm.
Mr speaker Representative and
please yes.
Representative night yes.
Representative Reese yes.
The sentencing.
Representative.
Yes madam chair yes we have an
optimum so now back on the bill.
We does disk Representative
McQueen.
Thank you madam chair Madam
chair representative result
I like this bill.
Because I think it is a good
thing for the resources because
we don't want to see the movies.
What I don't understand is why
we can also do a good thing for
the free roaming horses.
But that another Representative
is a totally different bills
it is that we are presenting
today.
It and I understand your concern
thank you madam chair.
We have a motion I see
Representative O. con way over
the question okay way over there
Representative upon.
Here but I do have a question
because I'm just going back to
the amendment and I know that's
part of the amendment but the
first in itself if you're going
to do to basically a.
Your for you not for fifteen to
perch the person's going to go
down to the second place for
done over to whatever was that
whatever is going to be the new
first place is going to get the
money that would that is the
first that would be the first
please we would or wouldn't take
it right Madam chair
representative Falcone you're
exactly right school force that
has been disqualified for fits
first and then it goes down to
the horse that does move up into
first place.
That's why isn't this hit me
that the madam chair.
Why are we even add in the one
hundred percent of the first of
the amendment because we're
really not that we're not the
it's not part of the fine.
Madam chair representative
outcome the reason we did at
that in there is because.
Whenever this test does take
place of the positive comes back
they do not award these purses
until the status trees excuse me
results do come back.
Whenever the horse has.
Been proven to be.
Tested positive with the.
Excuse me the tracks split for
the horsemen split in both of
those tests come back positive
then it is verified that that
our has been disqualified and
receives no amount of the purse
that has been awarded for that
particular race.
Take the measurements of the
lower wage but I believe that.
I'm chairman of the to pass on
House Bill three ninety is
amended.
So we have a motion for do pass
on house bill three ninety as
amended made by Representative
Romero seconded by
Representative read would you
call the roll please
Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey
Representative lame Mr speaker
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert yes
Representative read yes.
Representative green
Representative seconds king yes
madam vice chair yes madam chair
yes.
By a vote of seven to zero we
have a two passes amended on
house bill three nineteen madam
chair members thank you all very
much thank you.
K. next up we have employee free
speech act house bill two forty
five.
Representative Tevis.
Madam chair members of the
committee we have a committee
set up.
Yes.
Two of my records show we have
to amendments.
All.
Right.
The government plans
I think we have.
It will be able to see
institutional Austin.
Okay.
Thank you madam chair I
apologize can I get a copy I
used to amend yes of course.
This
rules.
This one to.
Yeah no two forty five.
madam chair members of the
committee is so I have the
committee if I mean the
amendment in front of me and it
looks like.
The amendment.
Of the two two five eight seven
seven point two is the amendment
that we want to use the other
amendment is the same but it
only contains number three.
So I think we just need one
amendment okay so the amendment
if it's move for discussion is
two two five eight seven seven
point two got that right and the
other one we can discard yes
okay for discussion.
Right so the floor is yours
Representative Travis right
thank you madam chair members of
the committee
House Bill well you only talk
about the amendment first well
maybe it would help us to know a
little bit about the bill and
then I understand why you're
amending it okay thank you madam
chair so health bill two forty
five prohibits compulsory
attendance the cap is captive
audience meetings continue
political matters held by the
employer the bill also protects
employees from retaliation by
the employer for refusing to
attend such meetings I have with
me one of the co sponsors of the
bill Representative in the north
and in our new.
And I also have an expert
witness she needs.
So I'm going to ask you to
explain the amendment madam
chair members of the committee
that the amendments are not very
substantial or significant
effectively they take out excess
verbiage the first series of
amendments relates to that the
F. phrase that was in the
original bill this is the
employer's opinion concerning
excess verbiage and we removed
it the second amendment also
takes out excess verbiage
relating to.
Remedy other remedies the non
exclusive and it non exclusivity
of other remedies the final
amendment removes at a
definition that relates to the
federal Civil Rights Act which
upon reflection we determined
was unnecessary so that the
amendments don't change the bill
in substance in any respect but
simply refine and simplify the
the proposed legislation.
with that madam chair we stand
for questions.
Thank you let's go to the
audience those wishing to speak
in opposition to the bill please
raise your hand.
Okay
Grace.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee and grace Phillips
general counsel for New Mexico
counties
We.
Thank you we oppose this
legislation because it applies
to all employers with one or
more employees including
governmental entities and
governmental employees already
have substantial free speech
protections we
Widget amid even desirable
workplace conversations and so
in terms of existing protections
we have the constitution state
and federal first amendment we
have the whistleblower
protection act we have the hatch
act we have the New Mexico Civil
Rights Act again public
employees that that the public
employee bargaining Act have
substantial existing protections
in terms of the scope political
activities are politically
political matters is so broadly
defined that it would include
staff meetings that touched on
legislation or regulations or
whether the United Way should
come and you know get some
support or you know in terms of
I I see girl scouts in the
building you know suggesting
that an employee might support
of the boys and girls club it's
very verily broadly defined and
and what an employer could do to
get in trouble isn't limited to
termination of an employee or
suspension or demotion it's any
level of discipline and so I
appreciate the dialogue that I
had with the Sanchez about this
the the amendments that they've
come with today don't don't
address any of the concerns that
we have and we respectfully
request that you get do not
approve the bill.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Chelsea
Canada and I'm the director of
public policy at the New Mexico
chamber of commerce we
respectfully oppose H. B. two
forty five we have any questions
and concerns that come out of
this simple proposal including
scenarios of unintended
consequences.
For example we're concerned with
the definition of political
matters which includes labor
organizations we're concerned
with how this will affect the
work force they're currently
federal laws set up to creative
create a balance in labor
discussions and we believe we
should not intervene on these
federal rules this would also
create a one sided conversation
and labor discussions we have
some additional examples that
would be prohibited in in the
workplace under the current
proposal and employees would be
allowed to take action against
their employers in these
circumstances nonpartisan voter
registration companies to
require employees to be invested
in the area the businesses and
through community participation
through volunteering and
participation on boards
government affairs teams to not
take action on proposals they
don't agree with and community
communications affairs
professionals promoting
something like a nonprofit
fundraiser for example these are
just some of the scenarios that
employees would be able to take
action against their employer
which we believe is far reaching
and could be unintended thank
you.
Q. anyone else in the audience
wishing to speak in opposition.
Anyone online wishing to speak
in opposition.
Those in the audience wishing to
speak in support please raise
your hand.
Okay have three back here.
Whitney.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Andrew
Holland president of AFT New
Mexico I stand in strong support
of this bill because of the
stories told me by workers
across the state who have been
forced to attend meetings are in
direct conflict with their views
I've heard about hospital
workers considering forming a
union having to attend a
mandatory staff meeting to hear
why you would harm them I've
also heard about you PS workers
being forced to attend campaign
events for political candidates
because their supervisor has
directed them to this would not
take away the right of their
supervisor to do those things
that would safeguard their
employment they choose not to
attend this is a critical piece
of legislation and a naturalist
extension of the work that has
already been done in the state
to solidify and strengthen the
rate of workers thank you.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Josh Anderson with
us Council eighteen we represent
state city county higher
education please I think
president from from our teachers
you Whitney laid out the basis
but I just want I just want
folks can remember one thing
again this doesn't prohibit the
employer from having these
meetings but when we talk about
forming a union that
relationship is really between
the workers and the union and we
need to respect that if the
employer wants to bring folks
and to discuss their side of it
there's no reason why any
employees should be penalized or
of terminated or disciplined for
not wanting to to attend that
meeting so I know there's other
parts of this bill and and the
representatives in the expert
can can address those other
concerns but we think this is a
good bill this is a good bill
for workers and we urge your
support.
Thank you.
Done thank you madam chair
members the committee channel
acute with the New Mexico
federation of labor
for all the reasons stated we
also support the bill just to be
clear though this is to ensure
that workers are not retaliated
against if they are forced to
attend meetings of a political
nature and I know that that's
all brought
bites you know.
There are it's clearly laid out
in this bill that if there is a
meeting that involves all
workers job then they have to go
to that meeting but to to be
perfectly honest about what this
bill you know why a labour is so
involved in this bill is there
is a huge effort going on as we
speak to for employers to try to
break up you Torrez care workers
from unionizing and one of the
ways that they do that is by
forcing their workers to attend
meetings at the work place in
which they bring in out of state
attorneys to threaten and New
Mexico worse these workers and
these workers have no choice
they have to attend those
meetings that's just not right
they should not be penalized if
they don't want to hear this
kind of rhetoric in the
workplace so we really to
encourage you and hope that you
will support this measure thank
you thank you anyone else in the
audience wishing to speak in
support of the bill.
Anyone online wishing to speak
in support of the bill.
I don't see anyone hand raised
come back to sponsor anything
you wish to say before we go to
the committee.
No madam chair we're ready for
questions.
Okay
Representative McQueen.
Thank you madam chair and then
chair representative.
So what whenever the short title
this bill I was expecting
something else and I don't it
doesn't really seem like the
employee free speech text me it
seems like the employee freedom
from speech packed.
Because it's not about them
exercising their rights it's
about them.
Having other people in impose
that on them but
my my question was I the in my
past I've attended a number of
classes and seminars at for for
for the state this came up when
I was in school dealing with
harassment we we as legislators
have a mandatory mandatory anti
harassment training in could
someone argue that.
You know training about
workplace sensitivity
you know not saying offensive
things not touching your co
worker stuff like that could
someone argue that that is
political speech that they're
being forced to attend Madam
chair representative no and I
will ask my expert witness to
expand on that Madam chair
representative McQueen I think
that that is not possible if you
look carefully the definition of
political matters political
matters means matters relating
to elections for political
office political parties
legislative proposals rule or
regulation change proposals and
the decision whether or not to
join the union I don't think by
any stretch that that could be
covered in terms of the question
that you just so madam chair
Mister it's we certainly have
legislative proposals topics you
know.
Madam chair representative
knocking about those topics are
necessarily directly tied is it.
Is that they're on the same
subject matter is is that.
The POK Madam chair
representative McQueen that
would make those topics illegal
under that under the act if
there were discussions in the
workplace about legislation
because legislation is
specifically called out in the
definition of political matters.
that that was my concern in I
hate reading the definition of
political matters
it seems more limited and we
started we had a discussion
similar to this when under the
of the corrupt conduct act
amendments that we're looking at
our state ethics Act amendment
whether something was political
or whether something was in fact
partition or campaign related
and I I think your
I think you're definition rains
in and and so I appreciate that
thank you madam chair thank you
representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair representative.
Hello with the governor.
Require further communications
director to.
Make.
Speeches the.
What her political stance on.
In the issue.
The Madam chair representative I
will defer to my experts this
Madam chair representative
Nibert I think there are a
couple of exceptions set out in
the proposed legislation which
cover that issue item section
three a one.
Makes at the three one makes an
exemption for at the
communications that are
necessary
I'm sorry it's D. one sections.
Yes section three D. one makes
an exception for any information
that the employer is required by
law to communicate so if it's if
if there is a requirement by law
that it communicated then it
would be an exemption under
there the second exemption item
two is that it the
communications which are
necessary for the employer to
communicate to the employees are
also exempt and also I would say
if you look at exemption number
six exemption number six limits
this legislation only to line
managers only two regular
workers and so managers are not
that they're not allowed to
refuse to attend these meetings
anybody who operates in that
capacity isn't subject to this
law and they don't have the
right to under this law.
Of Madam chair representative if
we look at those examples.
You have.
An employee whose job it is to
disseminate information.
And it looks to me like they can
refuse to perform their job.
And none of those exemptions
would would apply to.
The governor's press secretary.
Madam chair representative
Nibert I would respectfully
disagree I I if that's
information that is necessary to
communicate to those employees
are then exemption number two
explicitly apply and I believe
that this the person that you've
identified that the secretary
would be exempt.
Under number six because as I
understand that person's role
responsibilities that they would
be managerial or supervisory
employees so it none of the
communication that you've
outlined is as I read the bill
would be prohibited and I would
also just keep in mind that the
bill doesn't prohibit any
meeting all meetings will still
a lot be allowed to be held and
no speech is prohibited it just
allows employees to say Hey I
don't want to go listen to this
political speech because it
doesn't conform with my values
and the the it just simply give
people the right to refuse to
attend.
Well.
Let's let's assume that that the
communications person is not a
manager.
Okay.
Employee.
That employer in mind sample to
governor.
She's not speaking to employees
through for communications
person she's speaking to the
public about a political matter
so one does not apply.
I don't believe members to
applies.
And number six if that person's
just an employee not deemed to
be a manager or supervisor.
That person could tell the
governor I don't want to I don't
want to deliver that message yep
that's part of that person's
job.
And so whether the governor
whether it's the county
commission whether it's.
Provided
people and in our offices.
This.
Bill would prohibit.
Those entities from having their
employee perform the very task
for which they were hired.
And they would not be able to be
retaliated against if you don't
want to go give that speech then
then submit your resignation
that would not be a possibility
if this were statute.
So.
The governor or the county
commission or the mayor or
whoever would have to go down
the hall to see who who in the
building is willing to give that
speech or or to make those
statements and and so to me of
the breadth of this.
Is well beyond I think what
you're trying to do.
At and.
You know we talk about the
political matters
you know there's.
People on various staffs
employees who come up here
to.
Talk about how things affect
their employer.
M. basically this says a the if
they refuse to
do that then there will be no
retaliation and and maybe that's
what we're trying to do but but
it seems to me that.
There are positions.
That are.
In private business in
government and elsewhere.
That require those employees to
advocate.
On a political nature.
The positions of that entity
whether it be governmental or
nongovernmental.
And if this bill.
Provides no exceptions for or if
it does please point me to the
language because I don't see
those.
I see of.
Paragraph do but I don't see.
Exceptions would cover of things
that I'm talking about so if you
have some answer for that I I
would appreciate it.
Madam chair representative
Nibert a I guess we maybe see
the the language of the
exemptions differently but if
it's necessary to be
communicated entities exempt I
and what we're talking about
here primarily at least in
hypotheticals that I understand
you've raised our our managers
supervisors supervisors and and
that communication is exempt
from this legislation I I guess
I don't know that I understand
or maybe completely realize what
your hypothetical is but the the
the exemptions pro prevent every
kind of thing that you've
identified except for example if
my employer wanted me to come to
the legislature and and speak on
abortion for instance and I
didn't agree with that the bill
would prevent me from being
terminated for telling my
employer I don't want to go to
the legislator legislature to
speak about abortion.
Well that's.
That's exactly the situation if
you have.
Just to get around the
The manager of supervisory
exception if you have a group of
people.
You have a communications
department.
You have a supervisor but then
you have a staff of employees.
Not supervisors not managers our
employees.
And their job function is to
advocate for that entity.
That's their job description.
This bill.
This bill.
Basically allows them to say I'm
not going to do the very job for
which I was hired to do.
If they don't want to be the
messenger for that particular
issue.
And I think that's a that's a
real problem for for a lot of
lot of entities including the
for floor
because it just seems to me that
there are people employed to
carry out these tasks and what
this bill says is they don't
have to do it if I don't want
to.
And.
That puts you in a very
Well if you're puts those
entities in a very bad position
because they can't rely on their
communications staff to deliver
the messages that they need
deliver.
I just don't the don't I see how
we we can do that
Over on page three sections the.
Even with the amendment.
We created a one way street but
not a two way street madam chair
and representative there's no
provision in here for the
winning party to recover
attorneys fees and costs only
the employees if they succeed is
that correct.
Madam chair representative
Nibert that is absolutely
correct and it's consistent with
most of New Mexicos other labor
laws as I'm sure you know it
reflects the fact that the
employees often don't have any
money to pursue their rights
under the law and that's the
policy under our we can our laws
and the other laws that were
mentioned here it was a blower
Act those sorts of things it's
consistent with the policy of
the laws of New Mexico.
That and madam chair and
representative it does
allow the employee to recover
those things if they prevail but
it does not allow the employer
to recover those things of if
they if they are willing forty
Madam chair representative of I
just think of this
I think if this were precisely
limited to some of the things
that the were mentioned
maybe maybe we get some support
for that I can't support.
The breadth of it because it
seems to me that you're
prohibiting.
Action on the part of employees.
Who were hired to to do that
very work so for that I I can't
support the legislation thank
you madam chair thank you
Representative Representative
leave them laying and then I'll
call.
Thank you madam chair
presented as an expert and I
think we talked gonna try to
follow up with a little bit of a
Representative I said because I
think I talked about this in
labor and and the only way I can
like think of it is from my
perspective for what I did and
madam chair we in Representative
expert we talked about this I
think it's a clear example might
be as what I did as a district
attorney I I had a whole staff
of employees including attorneys
that were not supervisors and
they were hired for certain
mission which is to hold
criminals accountable help crime
victims you know find justice
and part of that job as an
attorney Madam chair
representative expert was to go
out to different organizations
and talk about legislation that
we thought would be beneficial
to the office come up here and
testify on bills that would be
beneficial to crime victims into
holding defendants accountable
and I think that example that
Representative Nibert again
madam chair representative of
experts is I think this Taylor's
it down a little bit more
because from what I'm
understanding under this bill
those attorneys would not be
required because they're not
supervisors to go do what I
would tell them to do for
example Hey I need you to go to
this this group that's involving
a J. PO a probation officer you
know corrections person a public
defender and I need you to
support you know our mission our
view our legislative views on
certain things and in New York
bill it sounds like that would
be a problem for me to do that
and ask them to do that is that
correct.
Madam chair representative brief
yes it is indeed the bill
essentially says you can't force
people to go and support
legislation as part of their job
as a public defender or is it is
a district attorney if there any
communications or they work for
the so you that's necessary for
their job but if third there any
tourney and that's not the
primary function of their job
the law the the legislation
would prohibit a it would just
allow employees to say as
somebody else I don't feel
comfortable going to do that and
madam chair representative of
expert I understand that with my
secretarial staff maybe an
investigator but the attorneys
part of their job when they're
hired is to perform public
service is to promote the
mission of our office to go
speak to organizations about the
mission of our office to come
testify legislation and and I
personally never had a problem
Madam chair Rick you know
Representative with anybody
telling me know they were going
to do it because we all share
the same goals generally they
were working for me but I I I
have a concern the same concern
that Representative Nibert has
the AG's office probably would
have that very same concern and
it concerns me that there could
be some issues there because if
I did have an employee who is
actually at will and attorneys
as well truthfully in the DA's
office.
And would not go out and promote
what I needed them to promote to
as far as why they were hired
Madam chair representative as
and expedite it I see that as a
big problem in this legislation
so I just wanted to make that
point thank you for.
Representative Lane.
You madam chair.
Madam chair.
So I'm furious.
How am I supposed to run a
political campaign if this bill
passes.
Madam chair Representative Lane
though the we've always done it
before I guess is the best
answer the people that you hire
in a supervisory capacity are
exempt from this law the regular
workers that you hire to help
run your campaign would
necessarily have to have this
information and it would be
encompassed in the second
exemption.
Madam can I understand why the
rights of supervisors don't
matter.
Madam chair representative
Nibert date they do matter but
and so Representative Lane I
apologize
at.
They it will the I think the
bill recognizes that supervisors
have an expanded responsibility
over the mission of a the
business sort of a corporation
and so we've exempted.
Madam chair so my simple running
campaign let's say I.
And I can do to avoid CENIC so
it's been propose so maybe
that'll be the case next to.
This spans on my comments on
this bill and how are the units
go after me maybe but
Madam.
So let's say I higher.
Ten door knockers.
Their entry level employees that
correct.
Madam chair representative lane
short.
The madam chair I tell okay
we're gonna go hit this
neighborhood I want everybody to
huddle before we go.
And I distribute.
Talking points and I say when
this question comes up I want to
say exactly this and this only.
Madam chair as is permitted
under the bill.
Madam chair representative lane
at I would say yes that would
encompass the second exemption
the necessary functions of that
job or to advocate for you it is
a different type of job then
what we're primarily concerned
with in this legislation they
would be exact madam chair
except it doesn't say necessary
functions of your job does it.
Madam chair representative I
know it says any information
that is necessary for such
employee to perform those tasks
so madam chair for example.
I said when you go to do some
door knocking.
There's an app that you got to
use on your phone.
And here's how to use the phone
and the app and every door the
knock on use the app that's
information that's necessary
right.
If I then say if they ask you
question a.
Madam chair and this is what you
shall say without exception are
we not now talking about the
speech of the employee.
Madam chair Representative Lane
just to be clear this
legislation does not prohibit
any type of speech whatsoever it
only prohibits employers from
holding what we call captive
audience meetings meetings in
which employees are forced to
attend those meetings against
their will and so with all due
respect I and I I think we're a
bit far field on a hypothetical
in terms of how I understand the
legislation madam chair I wish
we were look at the language in
the bill so this in our is we
hold the meeting is that not the
type of forced meeting that this
covers Madam chair
representative right
misrepresented lane absolutely
yes okay so I don't think we're
far afield now.
I am prohibited from
communicating information.
To the employees of this bill
that's political is that
correct.
Madam chair representative lane
in the scenario that you
identified you are not because
it is necessary to communicate
that information to that
employee so that they may
perform their job duties as such
that communication would be
exempt under the bill and madam
chair but what you're really
saying is that it depends on the
job description of the employee
that's really what you're saying
Madam chair representative and I
think that's a fair
characterization and madam chair
but that's not what the bill
says right so if you want to
argue that it depends on the
type of job description you have
that's fine some of the bill
sets the bill says in what your
argues that information that's
necessary for such employees to
perform their job duties again I
take that to this is how you run
the machine right this is how
you do the app this is that data
entry that's required of you but
if I didn't say that you don't
have freedom of speech even
though so even though you're
trying to say sort of famous
speech bill this is all about
speech right this is my speech
as the employer.
If I say to my door knocker if
you get this response at the
door this is what you will say
and if you don't say that you
can't work for me and I do that
at a meeting madam chair I don't
see that as necessary for them
to perform their duties I'm now
telling what they can and cannot
say in response to that type of
question.
Madam chair representative Lente
the meeting that you've
identified would be the only
part of the scenario that I
believe would be subject to the
legislation and that meeting
would be necessary for them
employees to perform their job
duties and would as such be
exempt from this legislation.
Madam chair I it's we're going
around circles here so.
As I understand it this
prohibits.
Me from it forcing someone to
attend a political meeting.
Madam chair representative lane
I would agree.
Okay.
And madam chair there's nothing
the bill that says if you are of
such a certain job description
then your exemption from
attending is that correct.
Madam chair representative lane
it does not say anything exactly
like that now.
Madam chair I the breadth of
this Sir or how vaguely it's
drafted I find to be.
Particularly disturbing in and
let me explain why let's take a
look on page three paragraphs
State.
The student paragraph be.
B. as in boy B. as in Bravo
thank you Sir.
So madam chair if.
If I then.
This plan employee.
And I'm found in violation of
this bill.
Is the employer entitled to
punitive damages.
Madam chair representative lane
that would depend upon as the
elements of the damages but
punitive damages may be
available under this
legislation.
Madam chair can you show me this
program for it says may.
Madam chair representative
ninety doesn't seem may.
So again Madam my question is.
If I'm found to violate this
action is the employee entitled
to punitive damages.
Madam chair representative lane
no it would depend upon the
severity of the violation and
whether or not a civil court
determined whether civil what
whether punitive damages were
appropriate I I understand your
question in your reading of the
provisions but those provisions
would be subject to existing law
which allows for punitive
damages only when the elements
of punitive damages have been
established so madam chair does
this bill create law.
Madam chair representative lane
I'm I'm not sure I understand
your question yes it it creates
law Madam let's take a look at
one four on page three.
Employee free speech at shell is
that ability Tory madam chair.
Madam chair representative Lente
yes.
Shall be liable to employee for
actual damages so I Matt actual
down is that correct.
If Madam chair representative
line if there are actual damages
again you would have to prove
that actual damages just as you
would have to prove the
preconditions for punitive
damages but if there are actual
damages the employee would be
eligible for such Madam have to
do reinstatement same student
seniority status is that
correct.
Madam chair representative lane
yes after the total sum of gross
rages that correct.
Madam chair representative lane
if there are lost wages and the
employee proves the loss of
those wages and that employee
would be eligible to recover
those wages and then line eight
there's the word end of damage
is that correct Madam chair
representative lane yes again
all tied into the word shall so
I'm trying to understand when
this is enacting a new law.
This is the language in the new
law and we're saying well.
Other laws that are tied into
this new law are going to apply
not the language in the bill so
again I'm trying or stand how is
it that you damages our ability
tore into this bill.
Madam chair Representative Lane
the law of community damages
determines when an employee or a
plaintiff would be eligible for
such any law that identifies
punitive damages is eligible
would be subject to the rest of
the the laws of New Mexico which
require an offer of proof
subject to the rules of punitive
damages.
it Madam well.
Apparently I I didn't understand
English apparently all move off
of this but I'm learning today
that shall means may.
On the issue of the labor
organizations.
Madam chair is there existing
statute that already prohibits.
Public employers.
From forcing folks to attend you
the meetings or any kind of
pressure along those lines Madam
chair representative lane the
public employee bargaining Act
would have the provisions which
which would probably prohibit
that in some respects.
So madam chair.
It's it's frustrating me as a
legislator when.
I read the plain language of the
bill.
It doesn't do on number of
fronts the things that I'm being
told that it does
you know frankly if I'm a
lobbyist including labor law
this everyone you should be sent
up in opposition this bill
frankly because I think this is
the type of conduct is going to
prohibit I think this gonna
affect our ability to run
campaigns
I I see this as a very overly
vague and overly broad statute.
so with that Madam I don't have
any further questions thank you
Representative Alcon.
Thank you a thank you madam
chair and listening to the
debate day occur that confused
this bill.
Madam chair and correct me if
I'm wrong this is not about the
messenger right this is about
the person that is going to hear
the message of my correct is
that what I had the way I
understand that that's that's
the way I redid my non legal by.
Am I right Madam chair
representative of phone yes that
that president a lot of the
Kurdish just now.
And it's kind of scared me
because a.
I'm glad they're not on the
Supreme Court.
Number one the big problem is.
I am a.
The government of supervisor.
If I am a person who hires
somebody that works for the in
the state position.
Would I be allowed to hire
somebody to go tell.
The people what my political
stances.
May be allowed to do that.
Madam chair representative all
cone I don't know the answer to
that question but I don't think
the answer to that question is
contained in this dress the the
statement madam chair and legal
understand that but that's what
I heard from one I heard on the
previous debate basically
somebody stating that they hired
somebody had sent them out to
promote legislation and so forth
Hey and I don't think that to
allow drug just bringing that
up.
Number two is the other question
that I have is that.
If I hire somebody working late
can pay.
And that person doesn't want to
do
what I ask him to do as far as
my campaign is concerned as far
as like at the rules that
conservative nothing to do with
this bill that's it Madam chair
representative about Khan I
would agree with that statement
okay so that's my other problem
I mean you know have you
honestly of running again rate
in a higher.
A dozen are not encouraging I'm
hiring them to vote on Monday
March.
I'm not hiring them to listen to
my speech right Madam chair
representative outcome correct
okay so that's one other
question which worries me about
public to pre record justices in
the future going to look like.
Representative sorry yes I'll go
ahead never mind.
Then that my question though of
course is all this does madam
chair all this does is say.
I double what did that meeting
if you are going to ask me to
hear about somebody's political
views or religious views or
anything like that that I am not
in favor of present that all
this is Madam chair
representative on yes okay thank
you madam chair I have nothing
else to say.
Thank you I am.
Representative McQueen had a
tiny little questions.
Mentors for the clarified
madam chair just heard this bill
doesn't present prevent you from
having the meeting.
It only his the employee an opt
out is that correct madam chair
Representative McQueen precisely
thank you madam chair.
Representative Romero thank you
madam chair I just have one
question just because the.
I've been looking at alternative
definitions of political matters
and the legislative proposals
one is the only one that I'm.
Having some
Just reckoning with in other
definitions in for outside of
legislative proposals there's an
attempt to influence legislation
so the broad idea that we
wouldn't be able to attend a
meeting or objective meeting
about a proposal to me seems
very very broad
and I don't know if this would
be friendly or not but just the
idea that at ten to influence
legislation perhaps like there's
a way for the role to be
connected to
Influencing legislation or
advocating for it or becoming
part of that sort of advocacy
verses just any matter of
legislative proposal and I think
that's the part where I'm just
want to give pause for what we
do here every day and
for how it might affect this not
just state government but local
government and some of those
things that are very commonly
perhaps affecting the everyday
work and life so that was that
was the one area and I don't
know if if you have it.
An interest in why that language
is chosen.
Madam chair at and
Representative Romero that the
bill is modeled on a couple
couple of other states statutes
statutes in Connecticut and in
Korean the.
The language legislative
proposals is what I gather you
have a question about and.
I'm not sure what you're asking
us to do with that particular
phrase expanded or.
I think it's too broad madam
chair I I on.
In the understanding of how
legislative proposals might
affect the workplace and how
folks might need to attend to
understand the affectation
whether they're they're not
being asked how influence
legislation that's different in
my mind because that role you
know for me the influencing is
the part that is may be
objecting objected to where as
understanding what that
legislative proposal is to me
seems very very broad says the
other another definition would
be an attempt to influence
legislation rather than
legislative proposals.
Madam chair representative
Romero will we think it's that
sounds good okay if we want to
modify the legislation in that
madam chair online to I'm sorry
page two line I would recommend
striking out line five and six
legislative proposals.
and in lieu of that language
enter and attempt to influence
legislation.
As long as we can that friendly
it Madam yes it is okay you know
I just want to speak in support
of this when I worked at the
laboratory Los Alamos national
lab we would often look at
legislation and have a meeting
about whether it affected our
operations or what was going on
in the federal government and.
You know that would be a
legislative proposal potentially
so that we those are all and I
guess you could argue that was
part of our job to do that but
you know I I think this is a is
a bit better so
Thank you on their discussion on
the proposed amendment
Representative but not in it and
would you call the roll please
whenever data the other we never
voted on the other amendment
thank you so why don't we do
this why don't we have a motion
to adopt well I'm I'm happy to
entertain a motion to adopt the
first amendment.
Which is what
is two two five eight seven
seven point two.
And.
When we want as we had no
discussion on that so why don't
we take a role on that amendment
first so we're talking about the
written amendments that we got
earlier in our meeting
Representative Alcon yes
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane yes on
amendment.
Mr speaker Representative
McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert the.
Representative we've yes.
Representative Rehm this spans.
Representative so Penske yes.
Madam vice chair yes.
Madam chair yes.
Representative Chasey.
It just.
Located by a vote of ten to zero
we haven't stopped it
first amendment now.
Now we have an amendment I
believe that was made by
Representative Romero was it
seconded by anyone.
Second seconded by.
Representative Sapan ski.
And it is to strike legislative
proposals so that's in line five
and six on page two an ad
instead an attempt to influence
legislation.
Representative Alcon yes.
Representative Chasey.
France.
Representative Lane no.
Mr speaker.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert yes on the
second amendment.
Representative right yes on the
amendment Representative Rehm
yes ma'am.
Representative semansky yes.
Madam vice chair yes madam
chair.
Yes.
By a vote of eight to one we
have the second adopt adopted.
I'm sorry to repel
Representative Chasey.
The past.
Representative.
Yes okay.
Representative Chasey is a yes
concept I voted nine to one.
After the second.
So just to be clear the way this
will happen is that this will
become a house Judiciary subset.
For this bill and send out a
clean clean copy okay with these
amendments include.
No Madam chair I don't think
that's accurate okay I think we
can amend another committee as a
okay okay all right okay thank.
Is there for the discussion on
the bill Representative ring.
Madam chair and Mr experts so I
was I think that I agree that
there's a lot of the Sen here
and out like all the shells but
when we go to page two and we go
to wind ten through fifteen so
in particular we look at on
forty on line fourteen the
reduction of ours so the boss
goes ahead and calls an employee
meeting and we will have to
reduce everyone's hours due to
the passage of house bill twenty
five.
This whatever.
Madam chair representative
everyman not sure quite
understand your question please
okay so the question is if I go
ahead and I'm an employer and I
call them for the meeting I have
everybody there and I go ahead
and say we are we will reduce
everyone's hours or maybe half
of the staff's hours because of
the passage of house bill twenty
five or thirty two or whatever
it is.
That sounds like it's gonna fall
right into this Madam chair
representative reminder stand
your question now.
In this area that you've
identified that there would be
no action pursuant to this rule
and less an employee said to
you.
I understand you're having a
meeting about house bill twenty
five it's a political matter I
would.
Spectrally declined to attend
and you terminated that employee
then there would be a cause of
action but otherwise this bill
would not interact with that
relationship in anyway.
Madam chair lifts the expert was
take that scenario and I said no
this is a mandatory meeting and
you must appear in you must be
there.
Madam chair representative
remove your they're forcing
employees to discuss political
matters it would violate that
legislation.
Thank you madam chair.
You any further discussion.
Madam chair elect would do best
I'm not.
A lot.
Of the house bill I wrote all
over my.
House bill two forty five is
amended well it's internet
substitutes for yes House labor
veterans it's Committee
substitute for House Bill to
forty five as amended.
We have a motion to have a
second second.
We have a motion for do pass on
house labor veterans and
military affairs committee
substitute for house bill two
forty five made by
Representative about comments
second by Representative Romero
I I just want to say I think
the what's the issue that we are
trying to achieve I think that
this bill is employers have
become very politicized
themselves unfortunately and
they often have employee
meetings where they're
encouraging.
Employees to support certain
presidential candidates attend
rallies at their facilities
where the presidential candidate
helicopters in and it's expected
that these folks attend and you
know it's just that is I think
the abuse that we're this bill
is attempting to get a and I
understand some of the concerns
but that's a reality
unfortunately in our world and
so I'm going to support the bill
for that reason call the roll
Representative Alcon yes
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane.
Nope.
Mr speaker Representative McLean
yes.
Representative Nibert.
Representative right now
Representative green no ma'am
Representative.
Yes.
Vice chair yes Madam chair yes
those states that for.
The.
I thank you thank you madam
chair committee.
Thank you we were now on house
bill.
Senate Bill.
Forty four.
The prohibit firearms at polling
places.
Admission of Bill.
Yes.
We are the letter
says the problem.
In a research.
The representative
Representative Romero Baxter.
The.
Thank you thank you madam chair
thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I am
here Representative Senate bill
forty four Senate bill forty
four does a few things first and
prohibits the carrying of
firearms within one hundred feet
of a polling location while
early voting is in process are
on election day during during an
election.
It creates an exemption for a
peace officer other security
personnel with written
authorization to the station
within one hundred feet of the
polling place it does not apply
to a peace officer who carries a
firearm in the performance of
the officers official duties and
it establishes a penalty for
carrying a firearm in a polling
location
which would be a petty
misdemeanor and madam chair and
members this was brought forward
by constituents of Senator Wirth
and I who work as poll workers
during some elections and you
know was brought out of a
concern
The.
That initiative here insurers
that the rules at polling places
that are not schools are the
same as polling places that are
at schools so currently as as
you all know madam chair and
members
at many polling places are
located at schools
which currently do not allow for
the carrying of firearms under
state law within those polling
places because they are schools
and so what this does is just
breaking that rule into
alignment for all polling places
and with me I have my expert
witness Lynsey Bachman who is
director of legislative and
executive affairs at the
secretary of state's office is
back when I don't know if you
want to add anything madam chair
members of the committee I I
really don't have anything to
add that's a really great
overview of oil we think the
Sanchez for bringing.
Let's go to the audience those
wishing to speak in opposition
to the bill please raise your
hands okay if two people here.
Gentleman and then.
The person's name is terra.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Joe
Culbertson.
Rancher from Harding County.
Population six and ten people
and thirty five thousand head of
cattle.
Anyway today I'm representing
the New Mexico cattle growers
association vice president at
large.
And we're stand in opposition to
this bill first place I'm not
sure where we come up with a
hundred feet but.
Even within a hundred feet that
can include a business next
door.
Or.
The place where the.
Polling places being held luck
in Harding County one of the
polling places a senior citizens
building.
And right next door is a
business.
So.
This would have a negative
effect on both the thing and
Also notice that the.
There's no exception here and I
know there's no exception for
concealed carry in schools
understand that but we don't
need to add another.
Sewn for concealed carry is
prohibited.
Concealed carry weapons are
carried by some of the the most
law abiding citizens that we
have in the state of New Mexico.
And to my knowledge there's
never been a negative incident
with a concealed carry weapon if
the if that's correct incorrect
then I'd like to somebody to
tell me that there has been but
I believe that there are being
exception here.
And it's not in this bill.
Another point I just would like
to make is that you know.
When the people walking down the
street how many of those people
are felons.
Karen fire arms when they walk
right by a polling place or even
the school keep that in mind.
Not not low it's not law abiding
citizens we need to be worrying
about thank you.
I madam chair Committee members
Tara match of state director for
the national rifle association
here in New Mexico generally we
propose the creation of gun free
zones which only disarm law
abiding citizens and which
criminals will ignore what we
learned in the previous
committee on this bill is that
there is no definition of
polling places in statute so
we're banning firearms from
undefined locations in this bill
we were also told that it would
probably be up to the individual
county clerks to determine what
a polling place consists of in
some cases the county clerk
might consider the portion of
the premises where voting
machines are located as the
polling place in other counties
it might be the entire building
or complex where voting is
occurring that could be off
limits half of the early and
election day voting centers in
Bernalillo county for example
are in shopping malls.
So in those cases it would
affect not just people that are
voting but customers of stores
next door we were even told in
the in the previous committee
that the prohibition the one
hundred feet exclusion zone
would apply to parking lots that
are adjacent to areas or
buildings where voting is
occurring.
We also learned in the previous
committee that ballot drop boxes
would be considered polling
locations
there's no notification process
in the bill so there would be no
signage requirements within a
hundred feet of drop boxes or
actual polling locations
I think the the author stated
that this bill aims to level the
playing field
schools that service polling
places banned firearms so this
would be on firearms and all
other polling places I'd like
the committee to note that the
federal gun free school zone Act
has exemptions for concealed
carry permit holders and for the
possession of firearms in motor
vehicles wrap it up because I
think you've been be under
ninety seconds yes ma'am thank
you all for happened up there
thank you.
So those online wishing to speak
in opposition could you raise
your hand please.
I see Nate eski.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I'll expand
briefly on a few points in
previous committee Karen
personal vehicles perfectly
legal in New Mexico including
and school parking lots when you
get out of this car that's when
you can carry the weapon the
school parking lot lotteries the
vehicle as an extension of your
home when it comes to carry a
firearm.
There's no exception for
carrying vehicles in the bill
within a hundred feet so driving
past that polling place perhaps
aware of supermarket parking lot
the crime state.
As a the lady from the IRS said
the gentleman from the secretary
of state's office informed us
that ballot drop boxes cans
point places so driving or
walking within a hundred feet of
those will carry would likewise
be across I have no idea where
those drop boxes in my daily
travel might be I don't like to
think that we're I'd be pulled
over will carry a firearm in my
car within a hundred feet of one
that I could be arrested and
charged statute.
Thank you.
John Thompson.
Of Tosun sorry Fosun.
I
mean Madam.
Yes John.
Thank you madam chair committee
my name is John thousand from
Roswell New Mexico I agree with
what's been said previously so I
won't re iterated I would point
out Chavis county for example I
don't think we have a single
polling places that never wrote
a sidewalk the business
something within a hundred feet
of the polling place of this
bill focuses again on law
abiding citizens does nothing to
prevent crime for stop criminal
activity in any way whatsoever
first let's uh focus on on the
criminals and lets the quit
doing a law abiding citizens
bill is not going to do anything
to prevent crime thank you.
Thank you.
There's a person named John Q..
John.
To a new John John Q..
John okay I'm gonna move on
then.
Right now John Q. okay so we're
back to the.
those wishing to speak in
support of the bill please raise
your hand.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Mason Graham from
common cause New Mexico we run
an election protection program
during election day here in New
Mexico actually throughout other
states where we have common
cause chapters in this previous
election we did actually get a
report of an individual carrying
a firearm within a polling place
what happened was that
individual went into the polling
place saw that a individual
carrying a firearm and turned
around and walked out and told
one of our election protection
workers are lecture protection
workers are a hundred feet away
from the polling place now I
don't believe this bill will
affect any law abiding citizens
who do decide to carry a firearm
but it's against the law to
intimidate voters which we could
consider that happen in this
instance that voter could be to
decide to go to a different
point place or not vote at all
based off that interaction so we
do support this bonus for two
passed thank you thank you.
Anyone else in the audience
wishing to speak in support of
the bill.
Anyone online wishing to speak
in support of the bill June P..
Yes my name is June Parsons
sorry I was born in my name is
June part yes.
I was born and raised on a
ranch.
And although.
I am a second amendment
supporter generally and the gun
owner I strongly support this
bill.
A perfectly law abiding citizen.
Is often willing to intimidate
other people indirectly for.
Maybe with no intent at all
intimidate other people I have
voted every election since I
turned nineteen because when I
was eighteen I still couldn't
vote during Vietnam.
K..
M. I do not want to walk into a
polling place where I see a guy
even though I'm a gun owner and
support the second amendment it
is intimidating it is
frightening for many people we
live in a society of good
citizens that are basically
urban that have never handled a
gun and they're inundated daily
with gun violence and there is
no need to have a gun in a
polling place I stand in strong
support of SB forty four thank
you thank you.
Meredith nation.
Meredith madam chair members of
the committee on Meredith nation
I'm speaking on behalf of the
American Association of
university women and most
importantly for the league of
women voters of New Mexico this
is a priority bill we have to
feel safe in our polling places
we need to protect election
workers and citizens who are
trying to vote we what common
sense laws and I think we can
define later what polling places
are and making sure that
everybody is very clear proper
signage is round
wherever your guns are not
allowed and and I really
appreciate the work that has
gone into this committee and
urge you to pass is common sense
legislation thank you very much
thank you Paul Gibson.
Paul Gibson.
Yes good afternoon thank you R.
J. chairman and committee
members my name is Paul Gibson
co founder retake Our Democracy
of four one C. for nonprofit
organization with over forty
five hundred members statewide
I'm happy to speak in support of
SB forty four
while we may may not have had
any incidents New Mexico polling
places in the last election
there certainly were in other
parts of the country and the
amount of anger and divisiveness
in this country right now I
don't think we want to wait
until we have an incident before
we take action I applaud
Billsponsored for bringing this
bill and we take our democracy
strongly supports and current
need to pass thank you very much
for your patience thank you and
Janet Williams.
Hello madam chair and members of
the committee I represent
national organization for women
and we strongly strongly urge
you to support this bill thank
you.
Thank you Janet and I a there's
a person in the audience I think
didn't hear the answer quick
question ma'am if you'd like to.
To to weigh in.
Well for.
Madam chair and vice chair and
thank you all for paying
attention to this I'm totally in
support of this what's your
name's Elizabeth west I live in
Santa Fe I'm a grandmother and
I'm not terrified about going to
vote but I do think with due
respect to ranchers and others
I'm part of a ranching family
myself I I don't think we need
to carry a gun when we go to
vote and it's it's a it makes a
statement about our own
integrity as gun owners and is
non gun owners to say this time
this place is no guns and if
this were if if the polling
place required us to have no
guns for a whole week around the
time of owning that would be
another issue is for one brief
time.
I am support of this bill thank
you thank you
so what we've concluded our cut
public comment the floor has not
started I keeping track of
what's going on down there so we
can continue on this bill
Representative any further
comments no madam chair I stand
for questions okay great thank
you Representative read.
Thank you madam chair
representative and I'll be brief
because I know it's getting late
but I I just want to explain
what curry counties whole place
looks like it is the clerk's
office the curry county
commission room and the district
attorney's office all right
there together all within a
hundred feet of each other so
madam chair representative every
single day most of the district
attorney's office where I worked
did have a concealed carry
permit and would walk right by
the front door of the clerk's
office obviously are
investigators did but they would
be in the lawful discharge of
their duties also the
commissioners would have there
county commission meetings there
which would bring in a lot of
law enforcement from the
sheriff's office which were in
the lawful discharge of their
duties are just attending a
meeting so under this bill Madam
chair representative all of
these individuals walking into
work every single day from these
different agencies in this
building would be possibly chart
is that correct Madam chair
representative.
Madam chair representative would
be similar to their.
For example polling places that
are in a
at charter school right now
we're firearms are prohibited
from being carried into that
polling place because it is a
charter school in that may exist
in like a shopping mall or
shopping plaza so yes it would
be similar although the
intention of this is to be in
the polling place and so I don't
know who would be complaining
about.
you regular staff going in and
out of the building is the
course of their duties and madam
chair and representative I don't
know but that that is just
concerning because they are
right next door to having the
door to their office of the door
to the DA's office was right
there next to each other and
then the clerk's office was
right across from the
commissioner's office where they
have all kinds of meetings with
law enforcement that are in the
lawful discharge of their duties
Madam chair representative I'm
I'm concerned also about the we
don't hold elections anymore in
schools and I understand the
reasoning of what you're trying
to do.
I think is it in Madam chair
representative is the whole
intent behind this is you don't
want people feeling threatened
by a fireman there voting.
Madam chair yes and also make
that consistent across all of
the polling places okay and
chair representative
it sounds like there haven't
been a lot of instances of this
and and I'm personally not aware
and all the years I've
prosecuted of any instances of
this type of situation and and
madam chair representative
couldn't you just file criminal
charges that happened it would
be assault with the you know
with the fire basically it would
be it would be a felony so what
would be the purpose of this
when you really could charge
somebody also under the lection
code I believe there's there's
crimes that could be charged
without violating so many
people's rights that don't even
know that they're violating you
know are you know the polling
place hundred feet distance
thing so madam chair
representative I just not seen
really the point of this bill it
seems like it's going to cause a
lot more issues and it's going
to solve because we can actually
deal with any type of threat
through criminal prosecution so
Madam chair representative I
just wanted to make that point
thank you.
The.
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair
I'd like to go through the bill
and and get some idea of what
we're we're saying so.
Beginning on page one line
twenty the word caring.
If.
I just wanted your reaction is
carrying those that mean it's on
your person or does that mean
it's it's.
Close at hand.
Madam chair representative I
think this is on the person and
I'm not sure what you mean by
close at hand well let's say you
were in your vehicle and you
have a firearm in the glove box
or maybe on a gun rack in the
back window or something with
that be carrying as of this is
that carrying of a firearm.
Madam chair representative no
and and the reason that the
hundred feet was chosen was
because it ties to
electioneering not not to skip
ahead madam chair representative
but I I just wanted to make that
parallel because you know you
may have campaign on per sticker
or signs or that kind of thing
in your car when you go to vote
but no one is fine you know that
it's it's not considered a
violation because you are not
bringing it into the public
place you're not giving out
stickers and in the following
place with your name on it or my
name on it so that so so that so
that was the parallel and that
was the reason that the hundred
feet was chosen.
And I want to discuss a hundred
and one of the but I just wanna
make sure we the intent was for
Kerry in the the the weapon
needs to be on on the person so
if I'm within the hundred feet
of the polling place in the
parking lot.
If it's all my person I'm
violating the the bill the terms
of the bill but if it's in the
glovebox are sitting on their
dash border the console or in a
gun rack I am not this chair
representative that's correct
okay.
So.
We have a lot of polling places
in fact I can't think of one.
That is not within one hundred
feet of a road.
And there are a lot of people
that that have concealed carry
permits and would have a weapon
on their person driving by the
polling place or even parked in
the parking lot
But that would be violative of
of this bill would not.
Madam chair and representative
I don't I don't know exactly how
to address that question because
I'm not sure what scenario which
should be driving past the date
that you would be found in
violation of this
Thank you it Madam chair
representative very in motion.
I don't know if you're
envisioning.
Some kind of traffic stop that
occurred or it's a hard
hypothetical for me to answer I
don't know if if our
representatives from the
secretary of state's office has
any thought on how that might
work.
Madam chair representative Saiki
I can't speak to the carrying of
a firearm specifically but
certainly the one hundred foot
boundary for electioneering
right that we currently in force
and utilize is is something that
would would have someone who
would come in there and and
create that activity in the
presiding judge would go out and
address that activity so in the
sense that someone's driving by
I I don't think that meets the
current standard for how that
process takes place.
Well of.
There's two different concepts
one is is the the reporter for
getting caught so to speak but
the other is being a violation
of the of the terms of the
statute and and try to turn the
statute if it's on their person
walking on the sidewalk by the
polling place if they are
driving by the polling place.
The they are in violation of the
terms of of this bill by simply
having the weapon on their
person.
Regardless of whether they're
intending to go into the polling
place regardless of of where
they're headed they would be in
violation of the terms of of
your bill one and I think that's
a concern because again we're
dealing with with these types of
issues it has to be narrowly
tailored to promote.
A substantial public interest
and and certainly voting is a
substantial public interest but
it has to be narrowly tailored
so that you don't capture people
who are.
Really even thinking about it so
the person driving by the
parking lot or driving by the
polling place.
Which in Roswell would be
virtually every poll.
The the second thing would be a
person walking down the sidewalk
that's our main street we have a
polling place at the Civic
Center so there's a big side
walk down main street that's
certainly within a hundred feet
of it no matter which side of
the street there on in Russell
and those folks would be a
violation of of it and so I'm
wondering why we didn't I
understand the election hearing
issue.
But if.
If I heard the testimony right
it seems to me that you could
just say.
Do not carry the weapon within
the polling place.
Not with the hundred feet
because within the future
capturing a lot of people who
are.
Not the.
Not in.
Not intending to make any
statements or anything and and
yet the they would be a
violation of of this site I
think you could tighten that up
a little bit
And then the.
As was mentioned with
representative from curry
Many of our polling places in in
Travis county our purpose we
moved out of the schools at this
point there and churches there
and community type buildings.
Because of the security
surrounding the schools and
things we would purposely moved
away from that and so I'd like
to focus a minute on on those
polling places that would be and
in the various churches.
Unfortunately many churches of
had to
Arm themselves so to speak that
have security teams of and they
may even have
place where our weapons would be
found and they may even be on
the premises during the Tuesday
when the election occurs and so
it seems like those folks would
be prohibited from.
Doing their tasks.
Unless they get written
authorization even if the.
Fall under the other security
personnel.
Sure whether they would or not
but the and with with a church
security team with a polling
place within the church which
was very fall within that and
and then they have to have
written authorization to even be
present in their own place that
they're supposed to be
protecting
I'm I'm concerned about that
because that the would be
something that would.
I think the important for
several polling places in my
community Madam chair
representative so I can just
this box and to answer sure
Madam chair representative there
already exists a process in
which a
Exchange between the county
clerk's office at a polling
location occurs that exchanges
for inspection and an often lose
authorization documents like it
schools to use certain parts of
the the facility so that that
could be part of that process it
likely would be should this
pass.
And so.
I don't know whether security
personnel or elsewhere to find
but
I don't know peace officer seems
to be a term that we see quite
frequently I think that means
and receive in paragraphs one
and two
but.
Security personnel.
I didn't know whether that would
be
whether that would cover.
An official.
The group of people within that
the church in my example who
perform those security type
functions I don't know that they
would have a title but would you
are with those people be covered
or do you think that would be
covered under under this
provision where they could
continue to do their duties that
they would normally do on every
day of the week.
Madam chair representative I
think that would depend on the
new negotiated agreement an
authorization the agency back
then just discussed.
Madam chair and representative
We have several
We have several polling places
in fire stations and
Hi.
Legislation I can't.
Certify spect that in some of
those fire stations we would
have a person that would be our.
And they don't fit the
definition of peace officer for
security personnel and I'm
wondering how we would deal with
with those situations.
madam madam chair representative
I would like to ask Miss Bachman
to answer but I would also say
that this is just limited to
those days of voting so it is it
can find a period of time but
this box and I don't know if
you've encountered that
situation.
madam chair representatives you
know at I think that the
assignment of polling locations
is a process that occurs within
a community and if they were
community concerns associated
with fire station specifically
that conversation would play out
when the clerk Madam chair
representative goes before the
board to designate the polling
locations number two years.
So so madam chair and
Representative Representative if
I understand the the answer
there may be there may need to
be a relocation of.
All in places that may include
fire stations and in one
instance in Travis county it's
volunteer fire station that's
quite remote I'm not sure you
could find an alternative
location for that and certainly
most ranchers and drive up to
that location.
I'd venture to guess ninety nine
percent of them are going to
have some sort of weapon in
their in their vehicle but
anyway.
I will of.
Let's talk a little bit about
the.
Page two lines.
One two and three when when I
when I read this sentence
services will not apply to a
peace officer for other security
personnel within rich.
Have.
Person with written
authorization of the appropriate
municipal or county election
official to be stationed within
one hundred feet of a polling
place.
So State election official to be
stationed with them or I I I
didn't understand.
The sentence and how that
applies.
Representative the way and that
that was crafted was to indicate
that the.
Please officer other security
personnel had written
authorization to be stationed
within one hundred feet of the
polling place so
Madam chair representative it
would not allow someone who
consider themselves sick you
know to be in a security role
but did not have that written
authorization to be within one
hundred feet.
Okay if if that's how I'm
supposed to read this sentence
them live far examples of
security team.
Would really not apply at all
because they're not there to be
stationed within a hundred feet.
They're they're generally
they're just to control the
church and take.
Keep it the
You know free from some of the
events we've seen on national TV
and so it wouldn't apply to them
and and so even with the written
authorization that that would
apply to them either there's no
mechanism for those folks to to
apply so I appreciate that
clarification and so I think
that's a.
Problem there and then my last
the questions madam chair is
down further on page two lines
twelfth and thirteenth.
We have several of things here
firearm muffler or firearm
silencer.
So the mere possession of the
silencer or muffler.
The catch from the economic.
Is a violation of this bill
would be.
Madam chair representative so
the that definition of firearm
comes from uniformed jury
instruction for criminal trials.
As well as at least three other
places in statute so that's
where that's where that
definition came from well and I
suspect that where we see that
word.
For the this definition.
We're trying to get something
else but but here we're worried
about.
Care in a firearm.
In or near a polling place but
that.
Muffler or silencer in and of
itself poses no threat to
anyone.
And so on I was wondering why we
would include that within that
definition if we're just simply
trying to prevent the
intimidation or the potential of
that picture trying to preclude
and so I just.
Thought that that.
That line was probably
superfluous and and not really
advancing the purposes of your
bill
Again at some other bill that I
think
Probably needs be him down quite
a bit because I can understand
the public purpose I think it's
significant it's just that I
don't think you have narrowly
tailored your bill to withstand
scrutiny thank you to thank you
for thank you Representative
Representative Rehm.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative some of these
questions I ask in a prior
committee and so
when we go to page one and we go
through the lines twenty three
twenty.
We're talking about this hundred
feet space
So if the select a polling place
next to a gun store they have
now closed down that gun store.
And I was hoping that we would
see an amendment so that they
you know that they wouldn't
select that location for they
would exempt the gun store they
would do something and has or
been any discussion on that.
And madam chair and
representative I I think the
best description would be
witness Bachman described on the
selection of polling places that
that's done in a public meeting
where those types of concerts
could be brought forward in
addition to other community
concerns and I'm not aware of
any current polling places that
would
that poses a risk to the to that
kind of business Madam chair
representative.
madam chair and representative
whether intentional or not by a
county clerk they could place at
their and madam chair and
secretary of expert it's the
county clerk who will choose the
polling place for the alternate
polling places within that
county correct.
Madam chair representative
with the way it works is the
clerk will compose a list a
resolution to put forth with the
board of county commissioners
and then they of actually
approved the following locations
for an election.
And madam chair and
Representative again you know
going on this hundred foot.
Radius so we have a polling
place that behind is is backed
up to homes you now prevent the
homeowner from possessing a
firearm.
Madam chair representative are I
would contemplate enforcement of
that kind because certainly
those homeowners could it you
know.
Have can be materials in their
homes and and at that are they
would be on their own private
property so I don't I think that
would be outside of the scope of
this.
Madam chair and expert help me
understand.
So we go from the bottom of page
one to the top of page two we've
got to have written
authorization.
For either law enforcement for
Security to be within this
hundred firsts
So let me give me a scenario
there's been.
Some type of incident within the
hundred foot zone and law
enforcement has been called and
the sergeant says I want you to
go and stand over there within
the hundred foot zone.
But he doesn't have the written
authorization now to be there.
Madam chair representative I
think that would fall under
lines four and five to face
followed that scenario
because it would be a peace
officer carrying firearms in
the.
Performance of their official
duties.
Madam chair and representative
let me read from one a peace
officer.
Or other security.
Person with written
authorization of the appropriate
municipal or county election
officials to be stationed within
the one hundred feet.
So even though he's a police
officer he's if he's gonna be
placed there he's going to have
to have.
The written authorization.
Madam chair representative reams
so that the next section is or.
A peace officer who carries a
firearm in the performance of
the officers official duties so
that officer.
If they were performing their
official duties they could be
doing whatever they needed to be
doing in that parking lot or in
that facility and they would not
need the written authorization.
And madam chair and
representative that brings me to
the next question when you look
at that piece officer and it
says official duties is silent
on whether it's on duty or off
duty.
So I don't know if you have a
comment on that.
That
meant madam chair and
representative I I and I don't
know I'd not sure of response
for that.
Madam chair of I just think the
vagueness of this is been
brought out and I think that's
problematic I think it needs to
be tightened up quite a bit and
I can't supported equipment
current form thank you madam
chair.
Any other questions or comments.
Happy to entertain a motion
madam chair and move the U. pass
on Senate bill forty four as it
is with them and no.
The second.
Do we have a second second
thank.
We have a motion of a do pass
for Senate bill forty four.
B. by Representative Romero
seconded by Representative
McQueen for your color I just
want to say
you know the a lot of these
issues about well if you drive a
or if you're me all those things
come up in the area schools owns
and we all seem to be able to
function in a rational way
you're driving by you're not
going to be the team to be
brandishing their gun or caring
in a way that's ever going to
bring you into harm's way it
happens all across the state in
every community it just means
people have to be conscious of
not bringing a gun within a
hundred feet just like we do
when we're wearing our T. shirts
into the polling place or not
wearing your tier into the
polling place or having your you
know buttons and you know all
those things that we were asked
not to do so this is way
overblown in terms of
implementation issues that in
terms of some of my colleagues
here so one thank you for.
Acting on behalf of senator
Wirth and so if we could call
the roll have a great
Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Gleim no.
Mr speaker Representative McLean
yes.
Representative night no
Representative read.
Representative Rehm.
Representative the Penske yes
madam vice chair yes madam
chair.
Yes by a vote of five to four we
have a two passed.
Senate bill forty four thank
you.
I'm ready to adjourn at this
point unfair Madam can I make a
plea my experts of all later
from crucis and I can be so
ridiculously fast on this
present.
well that's since you were
asking me about whether we
should be hearing that we have
you haven't even started well
yeah I know I'm happy to
accommodate you with I had
thought you wanted to get to the
floor so.
Okay.
just for everyone else's
edification who's in the
audience this is gonna be our
last bill so sorry to keep you
thanks for.
Thank you.
Okay.
We could settle down if you're
exiting we need to try to focus
folks if you're exiting could
you exit.
So we can have some quiet
please.
Thank you we're now on House
Bill three oh six Representative
Lane and Representative reeve
thank you madam chair we do have
a committee so based on the
feedback received and
Health consumer public affairs
committee okay somebody move for
discussion Pascal.
And
so what the committee sub does
there is a good point brought
actually by vice chair amero
that the bills previously
written was for purchase which
is great but what about transfer
so this adds and purchase or
transfer of a firearm.
Thank.
And madam chair just to I just
finished a presentation so the
supplies if you knowingly
purchase or transfer fireman
someone whose a felon or someone
that you know is going to commit
a crime using the farm.
With that we stand for questions
to to five numbers two two five
nine zero zero point two that's
correct chair.
Any other comments from
the presenters I know mentor.
Anyone in the audience wishing
to oppose this bill pre please
raise your hand.
Online wishing to oppose this
bill please raise your hand.
Anyone in the audience wishing
to support the bill please raise
your hand.
Anyone online wishing to support
the bill please raise your hand.
Nate eski.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee somewhere in the
middle on this bill personally
but supports more accurate than
propose straw purchasers of
number two way that criminals
get access to firearms distance
Act and theft the federal
government has laws on the books
that criminalize drug purchases
but rarely enforces them for
example in two thousand thirteen
the ATF and that the knowing of
forty eight thousand three
hundred twenty one cases
involving tempted straw
purchases the justice department
have prosecuted forty four yes
the federal government won't
enforce the law it also states
to do so so as much as I'm not a
fan of duplicating federal lot
still federal government
practically refuses to enforce
this law.
I've got some concerns on that
mainly about enforcement if it
falls to local gun stores and
police report investigate these
our police are already pretty
overwhelmed in the state we see
staffing levels going down and
the amount of stuff they need to
deal with as far as crime going
up that's all thank you madam
chair thank you.
Barbara the chatter G..
No I'm sorry Oscar Simpson.
Oscar.
Yes I had a new thank you very
much Oscar Simpson in
Albuquerque New Mexico as a long
time sportsman and and need to
control time I support this bill
please pass this bill thank you
thank you.
I don't see any other hands race
will go back to the Sanchez
anything else you wish to add
before we go to the committee
chair and we
Chasey.
Thank you madam chair
Representative manager
Representative Lane what we're
is this fit in with the
background check process did do
we at me I.
Do we get the universal
background check of the bill
across the finish line couple
years ago.
Madam chair I I can't comment on
the universal background check
bill.
In the men chair Representative
Lane anyone we're doing this
violate that law.
Madam chair so I I believe for
you're talking about is is well.
More let my experts because I
understand is the federal
chairman of federal background
check madam chair is Elaine I'm
talking about the state law that
that I see I see Representative
ring chicken is a.
Are you on that point
Representative right now.
Yes yes and so what we.
Madam chair what we passed a
couple years ago it's all
firearm transfers must go
through of a federally licensed
firearm dealer to do the
background check so far they've
only prosecuted one person last
four years criminals get guns
see each other.
That's how the traffic guns.
The.
Madam chair representative lane
I I guess my question is like is
there penalty it may not be
being used but is there what
what is the county under that
for for fans for.
Essentially engaging in the same
behavior Madam chair
representative understand the
the previous law you're you're
describing it sounds like if I
were to transform someone else I
need to run that someone else
through a background check is
that correct that's correct and
so madam chair even if I ran the
background check
if I may be the background check
didn't show whatever that is or
maybe they are not a felon.
But I know that they're going to
commit a crime with a firearm
and I go ahead and transfer
anyways that's what this would
for and so mentor resembling
that I think if if you know that
there the fund and you know that
they're gonna or you know that
they can use for crime you're
not gonna run the background
check my question is have you
have you violate both plus.
madam chair I I don't know if
you I guess said I can't comment
on the other law as to whether
you violate both I know a
prosecutor all the time you've
chargeable to crimes and then
when it gets to trial it depends
on what you prove up.
And Madam chair representative
lane and Representative Rehm do
we know what the penalty is
under the other all.
madam chair.
I think the question was to
Representative I'm sure if my
experts for co sponsors know
what the specific panel is under
that prior all.
Representative Rehm.
Madam chair it's a misdemeanor
to transfer of farm without
going to the of federal licensed
firearms dealers.
So
so mentors and Lane I I I have a
problem with this like I I think
you're making this film is a
good thing what.
What just ran through my head is
during the debate on the
universal background check law.
We were repeatedly told.
By gunners they could not be
enforced because.
You would know where the can
came from and I always thought
him.
In the.
Process of investigating and
prosecuting you would ask the
person where to get the gun.
And maybe they would tell you
maybe they would and that's how
you with a force and I I believe
that's how you wouldn't force
this is is that about right
madam chair Mr I would since
some of the turn state's
evidence or you could find it
through a text message thread
that kind of thing is what I
went to Spain or third party
witnesses even I thank you so
madam chair urgently thank you
for your answers thank you for
your call.
Thank you Representative Chasey
and then we.
It is.
Welcome to the frontier is
available to us to use.
If.
There by.
Madam chair so that would be
under the second provision so if
you intend to to transfer it to
someone that's prohibited from
possessing a firearm.
And and what about somebody who
might be.
like the.
I.
Temporary yes Madam accents.
Really great glad you asked that
question because when I crafter
the language I was concerned
about what happens if you're
under let's say for example of a
domestic temporary order and
that prohibits possession of a
of a firearm so if if we do this
loans are we covering that base
and the answer is yes so there's
a specific statute that says if
you possess a firearm underneath
the per protective order you're
guilty of a misdemeanor and so
this second paragraph of loop in
that scenario.
Thank you Representative Rehm.
You're unable to pass.
This year the service for us.
Tax.
Okay so you yeah I think you
mean a do not pass
House Bill three oh six thousand
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House consumer
and public affairs committee
substitute for House Bill of
six.
Please yes all right and we have
a second Representative Rehm
Representative Romero is the
second to call the roll
Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane yes Mr
speaker Representative McQueen
yes Representative night for yes
Representative Reeves.
Representative green yes.
Representative.
Madam vice chair just.
Madam chair yes.
Thank you madam chair.
This is.
Thank you.
Positions.
