Madam chair and vice chair being
heard in the attendees list I
don't know if she's logged in
under somebody else's name.
Representative Lopez looks like
to log and on their shared could
engagement
raising her.
I think they may be together no
there.
There we go.
I'll let me.
Let me explain to everyone how
we're going to do this because
without a minor change we've
actually heard this bill when we
get house bill seven and Senator
Lopez could explain that change
I'm I will allow public comment
but it will not be as likely as
the last time we will go no more
than thirty minutes per side and
wanted it each.
I think that what we will do is.
When we conclude the opening
remarks we will take a call and
we will go to their opponents
and then we will go to the
proponents and then to the
committee.
So with that I would turn this
over to Senator Lopez and vice
chair Representative Pendennis
and welcome to the house side
Senator.
Thank you madam chair I I keep
hoping I'm gonna get faster at
doing that the on mute but I
haven't gotten to that point yet
so.
We'll get there I guess at some
point.
But first of all thank you very
much madam chair members of the
committee I appreciate of.
Excuse me being in front of you
is Senate bill ten as amended in
the Senate.
And these are just a couple of
my open remarks madam chair
members of the committee
you know every single pregnancy
is complex and every single
pregnant person circumstances
are different and the bill that
we are that we have here in
front of your committee again is
making sure that a woman on a
person in our community in the
state of New Mexico has access
to reproductive health.
So
And one more comment settlement
of president excuse me madam
chair you know second amendment
but also is only going complex
all the mother this is you know
twenty what it wanted but SO is
with the PC this is youngest
that the money is there so that
it must respect that yep we are
keenest unique at the mod that
this is Yanni second level you
think that a.
I think what Elaine in the
noticing this is something we
think there is that there about
our.
So madam chair without.
I I know that my our.
sponsor and sponsor here in the
house I know will also
Have an opening for.
Madam chair.
Committee good afternoon I'm
grateful to be with you all on
this conversation again and
especially appreciating the
respectful tone and tenor we've
had throughout our time in the
house Judiciary Committee over
this twenty twenty one session
as I shared previously and again
this is in your bill to house
bill seven that we've already
heard presented an H. Stacy but
as I said that in for me I am
grateful to be part of this
effort that is a straightforward
repeal of a nineteen sixty nine
statute that was designed to
keep people from the health care
in abortion care that they may
need in their lives madam chair
and committee I did want to
share that Senate bill ten was
amended on the floor simply to
add as a moment of transparency
and clarity the names of the
sections that we are repealing
so this otherwise looks like H.
B. seven except that we've
further articulated and
clarified through the title
which now includes the language
after the repeal of the sections
which provide definitions
exemptions and criminal
penalties for certain abortions
us so with that madam chair and
representative I look forward to
our presentation today and our
time with this committee.
I wanted to know if you have any
expert witnesses for you that we
need to put at the panelists
status yes madam chair thank you
for that today we have with us
Crystal curly from strong
families New Mexico and Ellie
rush forth with the ACLU of New
Mexico.
Okay just give us a minute for
those two individuals.
This currently go ahead.
Madam chair today since we've
done introductions previously it
should have clarified their with
should we have any questions but
otherwise since this is the same
bill there with us in that
capacity should we need to turn
to them but otherwise I say okay
so we don't need a presentation
from this currently on this rush
for okay very good.
With that let's.
Let's go to the audience and
we'll put the call out first
those in favor of Senate bill
one these Munoz and those in
opposition the ex mark now and
what's that for twenty seconds.
I think I need to be elevated to
a co host because I'm not seeing
anything here except.
The blank.
So did we finish with the call
because I haven't hoping to set.
Maybe you cost okay can we put
the poll results back up then.
Maintenance state so I can
announce the.
We had.
About fifty fifty with fifty one
in support and forty nine in
opposition.
So we can close that now and I'm
going to start with comment from
the opponents I am going to go
strictly for thirty minutes no
longer and at one minute you
will will be
We will move to the next speaker
so let's go ahead here.
First on my list is grace.
Grace on yourself and begin.
Okay can you hear me yes.
Okay yes hello my name is grace
all the best and I live in
Albuquerque New Mexico and
I'm actually a post abortive
women I experienced an abortion
several years ago after the
abortion experience I suffer
from severe mental health
problems severe depression
severe anxiety and thoughts of
suicide I'm if we're considering
expanding abortion in New Mexico
I want everyone to know the
severe consequences many women
such as myself have suffered
long term mental health problems
and you know that we need to be
expanding more more resources
for adoption more resources for
life instead of expanding more
access to abortion we already
have full access to portion up
to nine months in New Mexico
let's give our New Mexico women
better options.
Thank you thank you dimana risk.
Hello can you hear me we can
okay wonderful thank you so much
for this opportunity I just
wanted to express that in my
mind and hearing all that's
going on it'd be better to have
doctors deciding like on the
board and and doctors as
witnesses I explaining more
because our first of all if
there's no accountability of all
of that.
if the bill straits down all the
protections for women that are
state currently has now which
are very few there's no
accountability for the clinics
that are actually performing
these procedures and there have
been deaths I think that's
something that needs to be
discussed that there are high
risks involved in abortion and
women need to be protected women
need to be educated and
education should start with our
you know how to respect our
bodies in the first place and
stead of having it lead to the
consequence of of a baby being
of the abating kids as a result
there's a lot of different
things that are not being
discussed and I think that it.
Next is Molly Chavez.
Molly and yourself please go
ahead.
Thank you madam chairman in a
small in a single working mother
and the land us the committee
today to recognize.
We need in the state to continue
with this bill you are at a
fifty fifty in past and your
constituents are fifty fifty
affects your constituents are
simply asking that instead of
passing this this wide repeal
without any other protections in
place for women we just asking
for compromise we're asking for
the compromise we saw on the
Senate floor yesterday from our
representatives we can
compromise we can figure this
out and repealing this stands
without any protections for
women and doctors is not the
answer today we can do this but
this is not the answer thank
you.
Thank you Patrick are.
Please and you can talk.
I thank you this is Patrick can
hear me.
We can.
Great thank you.
I am a an adoptive father of two
children in Albuquerque my son
was conceived in rape.
And I just urging the committee
to vote no on this particular
bill
very concerned about the late
breaking nature of scheduling
this hearing on a holiday with
very short notice and that quite
frankly I I'm the folks are on
the hearing that are voted on
the poll I'm struggling to
believe that it was even close
to fifty fifty because the state
of New Mexico is showing that
it's a pro life state and that
most folks would be opposed to
this bill with no protections
for women no protections for
babies no protections for
doctors so I ask you to vote no
on this bill and I thank you for
your time.
Thank you next Anthony hill.
And you yourself and you can.
You haven't I needed yet.
Hello this is Dr Anthony Miss
Vigil Albuquerque.
Would like
good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee.
Like to urge you to vote no on.
In no universe is it okay to
kill innocent lives to improve
the lives of the other.
What was mentioned before this
bill has no protection for the
baby no protection for women and
no protection for you all.
The medical providers thank you
for your attention.
Thank you I'm next I have John
John at.
John.
Not sure you can introduce
yourself yes yes I'm here okay
go ahead.
Thank you madam chair and
representative my name is John
block and native New Mexicans
not opposed Senate bill ten
which is owned Sanchez Senator
Lopez refuse to defend on the
Senate floor I know why she
refused to defend it thanks John
excuse me would yeah we're not
going to talk about the
sponsored please talk about the
bill yes ma'am the bill would
allow abortion up to birth
infanticide let under age girls
many being victims of human
trafficking be forced in into
unwanted abortions by predators
with no questions asked and
mandated health care workers to
refers to continue to refer to
abortions as we tend does
nothing but reward late term
abortionists child rapists said
traffickers and putting
vulnerable women and babies in
impossible situations I urge the
committee to vote no on this
antiquated and staunchly anti
woman bill thank you so much and
have a great day bye.
Martinez.
Go ahead and do it yourself
okay.
Madam chair members of the
committee stand in opposition to
this bill on behalf of the
majority of New Mexicans who not
only oppose late term abortions
but the removal of explicit
conscience provisions in this
bill in twenty nineteen twenty
four agencies and municipalities
to the trump administration's
against the federal conscience
protection rule including at
exit your best that a I like the
myriad of groups in support of
removing conscience protections
they public we refer to them as
a form of discrimination I in
they were referred to these
religious refusals as an
impediment to access of health
care and we need to have an
honest discussion the sponsors
of the experts behind these
bills at and they are not
disclosing this fact they often
refer to the uniformed care
decision acts as a providing
some kind of conscience
protections but in fact the
uniformed health care decisions
act would require number one
physicians healthcare providers
to arrange a transfer and to
provide continuing care until
transfer can be effected we need
to have an honest conversation
and I urge you to vote now.
Well hard.
Please you and you may begin.
You hear me.
We can.
We can.
Yes chair members of the
committee thank you for having
me I also as the G. star we
oppose this bill my biggest
concern although the fact that
children are killed every day
ninety one to die every single
week and then doctors are not
you're protected against on not
being able to object to this
also our children are going to
be taken by by by predators that
will take them to clinics
without the parents knowledge
and consent but I think the
thing that is the most troubling
to me at this point in time is
the fact that tens of thousands
of New Mexicans are pleading
with you and you are not
listening to them many many have
called in the lines are not
being answered the emails are
being cut off and New Mexicans
and you Representative so based
on this information really you
should consider voting no for
this because you're not allowing
the public comment thank you
very much.
It's.
It's going.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee my name is gyro.
I live through this and I would
like to ask you to please both
now SB ten.
This bill will make up New
Mexico more underserved it then
it's it really is New Mexico hat
is having underserved of
doctors.
And now this will make the
doctors go eat up the doctors
believe and we still have a more
problems than we have before.
Many counties don't have as many
doctors as at people in Los
crucis Albuquerque and Santa Fe.
Please vote now I'm just the
seven but the tax thank you.
Thank you the Santo.
Can you hear me.
You madam chair and members of
the committee meetings Rebecca
is that and I'm representing the
New Mexico conference of
Catholic bishops as always the
Catholic Church is consistent
and steadfast in the
preservation of life for
conception to natural death of
bishop Wester has penned a
letter to you all asking you to
open your heart and take a look
at the human dignity of the
developing child asking you to
put politics aside and to hear
the needs of our most vulnerable
children we also ask that you
create support to walk of life
and support New Mexico's
pregnant women.
The bishops asked that just that
the constant guard is held me
assisted suicide bill we ask
that you keep the conscience
clause in order to protect and
respect the decisions of our
doctors and healthcare workers.
Not forcing them to perform the
very dangerous procedure along
with that that you only a
certified medical doctor perform
the procedure this is a critical
decision and we're asking you to
vote no and to vote your
conscience today and not.
Hold read.
Please send it and you begin
speaking.
Representative are you there.
Okay can you.
I'll make it simple I just am
calling to ask for a no vote on
this bill and I'm speaking for
the and sent child that's not
born as of yet so that's it
thank you very much thank you.
Next Christina Freeman.
Hello can you hear me we can
thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Christina Freeman I'm a
critical care registered nurse
serving New Mexico I do not
believe women should be
criminalized for abortion and as
a nurse I believe more strides
are needed to improve women's
health care however repealing
this abortion ban in its
entirety will only limit women
even more as it will drive away
many great health care providers
as previously stated statute
thirty dash I dash to offers a
much clearer definition and
parameter for conscience
protection the need New Mexico
informed health care decisions
act and it.
This are uniformed health care
decisions act does not protect
practitioners from adverse
employment action or
discrimination based upon their
refusal to comply as previously
stated with transferring
patients by replacing the
statute you're making the
conscience protections worsen
our state and you're not
bolstering confidence of
thousands of people working in
health care we do see that our
employment is not safe and I ask
that you please oppose this bill
thank you so much.
Thank you Christina Tina Mundy
Garza.
Hi can you hear me.
Yes.
Hi there yes I am ma'am of the
board and also everyone has this
name I ask that you please vote
no A. N. M. S. B. ten as a
counselor and also as opposed to
board a woman at some point I'm
sorry
I have witnessed so many women
and also years go into these
abortion clinics and I can
honestly say that.
This B. ten is not support these
women at all women's health and
women deserve better yes
specially are are born children
inside the wall of these letters
and and I wasn't SB ten is not
support our musician positions
that propose doing abortions and
also it would take away and a
lot more danger it will put on a
lot more dangers when it comes
to these women thank you for
your time.
Stephen.
Yes can you hear me.
Yes just want to comment today I
am a survivor of abortion
just you know thank my mom for
choosing life and really do.
Depreciate all she did for me
was supposed to just find a best
a and
you know survived my mom chose
life.
been healthy didn't have that
you know what didn't have spent
of the set up and I just prayed
you know for all those who maybe
senior differently or opposite
I was even there to time where I
had to have a conversion of my
own heart and I just I pray for
the sanctity of life.
And I pray for you to make the
right decision god bless.
Thank you.
Yes thank you madam chair and
committee members for your time
I used to be staunchly pro
choice I supported abortion
through all out nine months of
pregnancy I no longer do it in
my own abortion experience
really opened my eyes to it.
there is.
Women do feel the effects of
abortion money was to the point
where I tried to commit suicide
twice so the fact that we don't
even have protections for
teenagers making such a decision
that I made as a woman that led
to such mental heartache is on
call for and also with this bill
just the conscience protections
removed from our doctors is is
Dale unconscionable to
Women need protections doctors
need protections and I hope that
you look not only to the pole
but the numerous emails and
phone calls from constituents
are against this bill as well
thank you.
Senator.
Yourself.
I had.
Thank you may speak now.
We are not hearing you.
I am going to move to the next
person can then die.
Hi my name is Kim Van **** I
have been RN's for thirty seven
years I have worked in neonatal
I maintain money on analyst I'm
looking I have worked in mother
baby for years and like Tatian
consultants I am very opposed to
this deal I am very pro women's
health pro and family pro and
life and the last two and these
has started before leaving
leaving my particular area of
expertise was on twenty four
week twins and and that just
shows you these babies are very
much alive the only difference
between an abortion and murder
is the length of the John act
and I think that and whenever we
look at the reality of how an
unsavory that history is and
that should cause us all to have
pause I pray for your right
decisions and I pray for your
conscience and I pray for your
lives as well as the unborn.
Marcos not just.
yes hello and chair and members
of the committee I am a student
in New Mexico State University
I'm majoring in genetics and
biotechnology and eventually I
want to become an obstetrician
gynecologists I strongly want
you to vote against this bill
not only that because I want to
be in the medical field and I.
This offers no protections for
people like me for people who
don't grow up wanting to kill
children and help women
this does nothing to protect
women's health it doesn't even
do anything to expand it not
only that we're forced to pay
for it by by our taxpayer
dollars so I strongly strongly
urge you to vote against this
bill just because we need health
care workers out there in the
field right now we're in the
middle of the pandemic and doing
this and going against our our
believe is just absurd and
appalling and I urge you to vote
no on this thank you.
Present yourself and you may
begin.
Are you there okay yes.
Can you hear me.
Yes.
Okay
so I'm Corinne issue then and I
definitely am opposed to this
bill.
One main reason is.
We are not see in these beating
hearts as human beings how in
the world can anyone.
Expose themselves to.
Killing these babies think about
it there is a leak of beating
heart inside of a woman.
This is absurd another thing to
is this is being promoted to
sell body parts.
There's a lot to be gained by
those with greed.
Want to sell these body parts.
These are.
Michael sizeable.
Present yourself and you may
begin.
Madam chair Representative says
malpractice attorney licensed in
New Mexico I'm for you to stop
misrepresenting that doctors are
protected by the constitution
presence of a health care
decisions act twenty four seven
a seven still requires health
care workers to be an active
participant in the abortion
process it's specifically
requires health care workers
find to find continuing care
towards transfer can be made and
make all reasonable efforts to
assist in France for your
patience but health care
provider will apply with the
instructions.
Health care provider refuses to
be an active participant I E.
refuses or referring to point
you toward abortion provider
health care professionals face a
five thousand dollar fine
attorney's fees possible civil
criminal and disciplinary
sanction assisting people in
getting abortions bill violates
individual conscience and makes
us an active participants please
protect our conscience claim and
have a reasonable discussion
about a conscience clause.
More.
President mute.
My name is Marsha Sturman I live
in Alamogordo I am staunchly pro
life.
I am anti death the only death I
think it's necessary is in war
we are in war right now and save
lives of these children are
being tossed about is that
they're not going they are
something and there are
alternatives to get when is that
a good thing in the nation it's
not it causes the downfall of
the nation to kill our own
children our own generations are
being slaughtered why we don't
need to do that when there are
other ways that we can process a
trial.
Give it life give it another
family there are ways to do this
there are so many people who
don't have children who want
them and they can't get them so
I ask you to vote no on SB ten
please thank you.
Next I have merry and Jack you
said yourself.
Hello.
Yes go ahead.
Yes this is merry I'm speaking
as a mother of I'm from Los
crucis I'm speaking as the
mother of a teenage daughter
with down syndrome and I know
that these are this is a very
vulnerable population as a
matter of fact we would call
this group of people individuals
with down syndrome minority a
very specific minority they
deserve full protection just
like any other minority and we
know full well that many of the
late term abortions are due to
the discovery that an infant has
an issue but my daughter has
lived to age sixteen she's a joy
to our family many of these
children would be a blessing to
another family I would urge
women to do the healthy natural
thing carry to term do your body
a favor it's healthy for you
have that baby I understand some
women it's a health issue but
that's very rare very rare for
the vast majority it's better to
go to term and bear the tile so
I urge you please a special
special needs children give them
up for adoption someone else be
blessed thank you very much.
Thank you Margaret Ridley.
Just yourself and again.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members my name is
Margaret like I'm extremely hard
of hearing the for each of the
clear I doctors gave me a tiny
child being born normal to one
approach in her fifties was for
normal and healthy is also a
teen mother who was pressured to
have an abortion but refuse my
daughter is now the executive
director of a nonprofit for at
risk at risk you.
Not slavery we heard other
situations where a single more
calling for American owned the
right to destroy another
supposedly lesser humans life
merely because they were
property or their dependents
which all children are
temporarily please don't deny
The Life preservation in state
three born babies or given all
of their rights to life liberty
and the pursuit of happiness why
to their mothers or questions to
a finance report from their data
please vote no on just three
times thank you for your time.
Thank you next I have Debbie.
Just yourself please thank you
oh I'm so happy to be here.
Thank you very much I appreciate
being able to talk to this
committee this topic is a
passion to me first of all I
want to let all of you know I am
an adult who was born with a
disability and it has affected
many aspects of my life.
But I want to speak from that of
a person with a disability that
all life and I do mean all life
is precious.
This house bill.
It's really not about women's
health care truly it isn't think
about it health care care care.
No this isn't about care care
would offer options to women
besides murder murders what a
barbaric society forms.
And I wonder is this what we've
now become because to me this
house.
Ten so the citadel.
Present yourself.
Yes ma'am thank you very much
ma'am members of the committee.
My name is Tim settle I'm a
pastor I'm a minister and I'm a
chaplain.
faith based I'm always going to
go towards life.
And.
I am opposed of this Senate bill
ten.
cause us specifically for me.
As a minister I've had to deal
with the ramifications for the
aftermath for the weight left
from human trafficking.
We are the ones that are dealing
with.
We're the ones in the trenches.
We're the ones that have to look
into the little faces.
And help them pick up the pieces
that once was their lives.
And I want to encourage you.
Did not vote for this Senate
Bill.
Specifically because it removes
any parent involvement.
Protecting the miners.
You see.
Usurping parental leadership.
We will have two more comments
in the thirty minute time tab
it's your turn we present
yourself.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee we
heard a lot of impassioned
please for folks to up right and
remember their conscience but I
just want to remind everybody
that there is a separation of
church and state and that in New
Mexico we value science.
And we value individuals rights
to choose nobody here in support
of SB ten is forcing.
Anyone to make any medical
decisions.
Rather this repeal is allowing
individuals and allowing women
to make their own decision.
With their own support teams
some of those may include.
Those religious leaders that we
keep hearing from so I would
just like to remind everybody
about the separation of church
and state and ask for support of
SB ten thank you.
Okay comment was
Actually.
In favor of the bill I'll all
still through our friend Hotmail
and Steve over it and that will
be at thank you many to go.
The Senate yourself.
You need yourself and begin
speaking.
And it is get to the next person
Steve over.
State and yourself and you
begin.
Is and I would urge you please
to vote against as you can from
personal experience we have
relatives who handed to children
and they thought your finances
were not up to going and
supporting the third child child
and I can see
the steep and we decided that we
would support this child
including there's food there
says he's alive your schooling
at a special school at eight
years old now this young lady is
a great inspiration everyone is
very bright she is very
enthusiastic she's a beautiful
arts and we're so glad that her
parents shows that order I also
would mention that for people of
faith you could think of the
songs where it says you created
my inmost being you knit me
together in my mother's womb
thank you for listening.
Thank you.
Virginia Gonzalez you're the
last one please send it
yourself.
Thank you can you hear me.
Thank you so much my name's
Virginia Gonzales and first of
all I would like to say the
separation of church and state
has nothing to do with this the
separation of church and state
was created so that the
government would stay out of
religious
dealings out of the church
specifically.
But secondarily I want to say
that aibo no please do not pass
this bill I am a post abortive
woman I can tell you that the
damage that is done from an
abortion not only affects.
The child which torments the
child and reduce it to pieces
out of its mother's womb the
woman deals with that the rest
of her life.
We need protection for children
we need the conscience clause
not to go through we should have
a right in this country to
choose whether we want to
participate or not I ask I plead
I beg I pray please vote no
thank you.
Thank you I'm now going to go to
proponents of the bill so for
those of you who wish to speak
in favor of the bill please
raise your hands.
Are we ready okay look are you
ready with the timer let's go
Connie New.
My name is Connie Lee I'm a
rural OBGYN especially in a mom
of two who works in western New
Mexico serving Navajo community
I'd previously been an abortion
provider and though I do not
currently provide direct
abortion care caring for my
patients means being able to
counselor for patients for
abortion.
Abortion is a safe procedure in
my ten years of practice here in
Boston my fellow students
trainees and colleagues are
never for choir to perform more
system an abortion if they do
not use to those who provide
abortion care do so out of a
deep calling to reproductive
justice what attracts my fellow
OBGYN myself to work in rural
areas is knowing that we are
supported with resources and
that we have the ability to
provide care cream of
criminalization and with trust
in our judgment as physicians
this bill supports that in my
own experience shows that people
from various political spectrums
ethnicities and religions
believe in self determination
when it comes to reproductive
choices the primary private
informal conversations between
clinicians and patients are
important to protect
politicians.
Willis.
Actually this is Diana Koster my
my zoom does strange things with
my name thank you very much
okay.
Foster I am a retired physician
who's lived here in New Mexico
for over forty years and most of
my practice for forty five years
was in women's reproductive
health helping helping women
time pregnancies helping women
avoid pregnancies until it was
the proper time and sometimes
helping women and on on wanted
and on fortunate pregnancies.
I'm it is known that abortion
helps preserve the health of
women it does not damage them
overall I am speaking in favor
of Senate bill ten because of
what I have seen in my practice
I'm also speaking in favor of it
because I'm a Quaker and one of
the the foundational Quaker
believes is inequality and that
means women are equal we can
make our own decisions we do not
need to be watched over by
politicians.
This bill was written when we
weren't even allowed to have
credit cards we now know that
women are a lot smarter than
people thought we were back then
please support Senate bill ten.
Thank you.
Marshall Martinez.
Madam chair and members of the
committee my name is Marshall
Martinez and executive director
of equality New Mexico LGBTQ
people have been on a long
journey toward full liberation
and that journey is always first
and foremost centered on
autonomy whether changing laws
that allow us to be our
authentic selves without a rest
in the sixties or fighting for
marriage equality in the two
thousands LGBTQ people have
always asked more than anything
else that our government allow
us to make decisions for
ourselves about the lives we
live the families we create and
the roles we play in society
every individual deserves access
to quality individualized health
care the respects our whole
identities and that cannot be
more true than when we're
talking about the decisions
making.
Being made regarding pregnancy
and let's be clear LGBTQ people
do get pregnant the quality New
Mexico strongly urges Senate
bill's passage of Senate bill
ten to continue to tear apart
the quota policies the for far
too long have discriminated
against people rather than
allowing us to make the best
decisions for ourselves and our
lives thank you.
Thank you Mr Deron.
Thank you madam chair committee
members and all those who
support Senate bill ten who
spoke before me my name is
Clarissa Duran I'm a
generational resident of the
tail of basin also known as the
beautiful Espanola valley like
many who have commented I
experienced an abortion and
support the right of each person
to make decisions about
themselves.
It's so important that we cast
out the patriarchy that
stigmatizes women for making
decisions about our bodies the
changes in our country are
evidence of patriarchy coming to
its desperate and with that and
we move forward into a time in
which women and pregnant people
people make decisions for
themselves without input from
the government people with
universes are the gatekeepers of
life no one can decide whether
each of us will bring life into
the world thank you for your
consideration and vote
supporting Senate bill ten thank
you Senator Lopez and all the
sponsors for your and body power
to reject patriarchy.
Jennifer how madam.
Hello my name is Genevieve medow
and I'm a leader with four
together action and a lifelong
New Mexicans as a young Latina
and sexual violence survivor I
am urging you to support this
legislation no matter our own
views on abortion I think we can
all agree that women and
families need to be up listed in
the reproductive health care
decisions and not criminally
prosecuted.
So let's not forget that that is
what this bill is about
respecting and not prosecuting
women I've heard a lot of people
today talk about how we need to
get rid of abortion.
In order to protect those that
have experienced sexual violence
but is somebody who experience
sexual violence more than one
time I was sixteen I cannot
adequately express you in this
little time how vitally
important it is to allow women
to own their own bodies and make
their own decisions please
prioritize the lives of all
women in New Mexican families
over the religious beliefs of
Sam thank you.
Thank you on around.
Good afternoon chair members of
the committee my name is ana
Moran I am a young woman
community organizer and a
Catholic in Albuquerque I
support SB ten as a person of
faith I believe in the dignity
of every person our faith
tradition calls on us to
advocate for policies that
protect the least among us like
this bill will do because of the
stigma of abortion in the
sixties and my family's faith
and their beliefs my grandma had
to go through with an unwanted
pregnancy my grandma did not get
the choice of whether or not to
keep her child she was coerced
into giving birth to my mother
my grandma how to carry out her
pregnancy and she came in
returning home and then give my
mom up for adoption my mom grew
up with foster parents who are
physically abusive and very low
income this change the course of
my mom's life for ever do
children get a say in whether
where they end up it's not
because of but in spite of that
because of my faith I support SB
one hundred SB ten.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Nancy Koehn expert and I'm
here to support SB ten it's
important to know that women
have found ways to end
pregnancies for millennia in my
family my grandmother had an
abortion within months after the
start stock markets collapsed in
nineteen twenty nine my
grandparents had two children my
father grandfather lost his
business they had no idea how
they were going to support their
family so she chose to end the
pregnancy it's really important
that abortion be safe and legal
because women will have them so
please keep support just be ten
to protect women's well being
and recognizing their ability in
right to make their own
decisions thank you.
Thank you Sanders.
Dr.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Sandra
Panama retired family physician
already a mother of two and
recently divorced I was well
aware of how society limited our
ability to manage our own lives
it was an honor to deliver the
baby Senator wanted it was also
an honor and privilege to
support women having abortions
one of my patients and had a
tubal ligation and she became
pregnant to spite it I was so
grateful to help get the
abortion she wanted there was
the young woman who had just
been accepted to college she
knew what she wanted she wanted
to follow her dreams shame and
stigma did not belong in her
health care parenthood as
punishment for sex is
unacceptable I was so grateful
to help her get a procedure in
after college somewhere in my
file save in the.
To the babies and the abortions
were both about women making
their own decisions about how
they wanted to live their lives
I'm grateful that we now have a
choice please support SB ten
thank you.
Alexander.
Miller.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name's Alexandria
Taylor and the deputy director
of the New Mexico coalition
sexual assault programs I'm also
currently serving as the chair
of the governor's Advisory
Council on racial justice at the
core of our mission is ensuring
survivors of sexual assault have
access to services justice and
healing and alignment with our
mission we believe all New
Mexicans should have access to
care including abortion care the
cornerstone of our work is
advocates a supporting victims
in regaining control of their
bodies and lives so they can
make the best choices for
themselves we should not add
hurdles or barriers to their
healing process what people need
during this time is love and
support if they make the
personal decision and reclaim
their self HSD not for the state
or any other actors in positions
of authority to continue to take
it away I ask this committee to
vote in favor of this bill so we
can continue to create a society
where survivors and all people
access to the care they need and
require.
Sure.
Go ahead and you may begin.
Madam chair I was standing in
opposition so I will not be
present okay thank you very much
Dr barber knocking any.
Hello my name is the barber
macular they I am a past
president of the American
medical association as well as
the New Mexico Medical Society
and madam chair and members of
the committee I would like to
comment that the concerns about
people being forced to
participate in procedures are
unfounded the AMA code of ethics
is very strong and making sure
that no one is forced to
participate in the procedure
that they find personally
unacceptable and the code of
medical ethics of the AMA is
embedded in our medical practice
act we want to make sure that
people have faith of legal
procedures this is a low risk
procedure and we certainly do
not want any medical procedures
to be criminalized so we please
ask you to support this US
Senate bill ten may thank you.
Nancy Oakes.
Yes madam chair and members of
the committee my name is Nancy
Oakes and I'm a retired educator
from my experiences and
following my own values and my
own face I believe women should
not face efforts to limit their
access to reproductive care.
Only the woman herself knows
what all she needs to take into
consideration and with whom she
does or does not need to
communicate.
With access to unbiased accurate
information she can make her own
reproductive health decisions
please vote yes on Senate bill
ten eight thank you.
The call Martin.
Madam chair and members of the
committee my name is Nicole more
and and and then click COVID
which is Navajo in the gonna
Pueblo a reside into a territory
which is Albuquerque and
surrounding areas
I just want to thank all of the
people.
Last testimony in support of SB
ten as an indigenous person is
led by New Mexico founder of
indigenous women rising we're
led by a core values and health
is wealth
and if you're not healthy enough
to take care of yourself how are
you expected or forced to be
take take care of another five
fingered being
This one space for all the
people you know who had to
experience making these complex
decisions and I trust that they
can and I hope that you do to
thank you.
How the resolution.
Thank you can you hear me.
Thank you madam chair committee
members my name is heather
present a primary care doctor in
Albuquerque I'm also the guy at
the American college of
physicians by state and a former
counselor for the New Mexico
Medical Society.
Speaking in favor of SB ten I
get test money very recently
here at the same committee on
the house version of the bill so
rather than repeat that I just
want to re emphasize the New
Mexico Medical Society
represents more than two
thousand doctors across New
Mexico and it recognizes several
other conscience protections
outside of this old statute not
just the one mentioned by the
opposition the medical society
holds that these are solid legal
protections for physicians who
might wish to opt out of
abortion Care we can repeal this
outdated law and at the same
time stand in support of our
vital health care workforce
practicing in line with their
own values again the New Mexico
Medical Society supports repeal
thank you.
Thank you gentlemen in Sanford.
Thank you chair Chasey and
members of the committee my name
is John Bunyan Sanford I am a
mommy Amanda and grateful for
the support of my family and
faith community when I needed an
abortion chain I'm also the
director of the New Mexico
religious coalition for
reproductive choice.
Along with our clergy advisory
board close to a hundred faith
leaders and the people of faith
and conscience who are the New
Mexico religious coalition we
support just be ten the nineteen
sixty nine abortion ban allows
not just a panel of doctors but
also any individual employed by
a hospital clinic or health care
corporation to decide for a
woman regardless of her own face
the Leafs and moral code or
conscience the respect New
Mexico women and families that
would provide protection for
those who have made a personal
decision according to their own
faith beliefs and moral code
thank you.
Thank you Janet Williams.
Hello thank you chair and
members of the committee I'm
Janet Williams of Santa Fe New
Mexico and president of Santa Fe
now I'm in favor of Senate bill
ten the respective Mexico women
and families act I was a teen
before roe versus Wade became
the law of the land and I
remember well having to search
for abortion when I was a
sophomore in college at the age
of nineteen I was fortunate to
find inexpensive but safe
abortion doctor.
Others were not so fortunate as
many illegal abortions were
performed in danger settings.
I have two daughters and a
granddaughter who I would like
to be able to make these
difficult decisions for
themselves.
I believe that politicians
should not have control over any
person's body these decisions
should be between a woman
a pregnant person their family
and their medical provider thank
you for your time.
Next I have Patricia black.
Good afternoon my name is
Patricia black and I'm an OBGYN
resident physician practicing in
Albuquerque New Mexico I fully
support Senate bill ten because
the current law as integrated
into prevent patients from
accessing evidence based and say
proportion care.
I recently took care of a
patient Representative to the
hospital after her water broke
at eighteen weeks.
And her services partially open
unfortunately we do not have the
technology ability to reverse
this process once it is started
a baby cannot survive outside
the womb at this decisional age
even if there is a heartbeat on
the ultrasound this is a highly
desired pregnancy.
The risk of doing nothing in
this situation is that the
mother could develop an
infection in her uterus that
could spread to your bloodstream
and possibly result in death.
I want to be able to provide
appropriate care to my patients
without worrying about outdated
regulations written into state
law.
I am proud to serve the women of
New Mexico and I strongly
encourage you to support Senate
bill ten thank you for your
time.
Thank you darshan Patel.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members for this
opportunity to speak in support
of SB ten I am a family medicine
resident physician in
Albuquerque New Mexico I speak
today also is a member of the
governor's Advisory Council on
racial justice.
Also the Greek to support this
access to safe abortion is a
racial justice issue we have
seen that limiting access to
comprehensive health care
including access to safe
abortion disproportionately
affect access women of color and
people with less financial means
I agree with the World Health
Organization that access to safe
abortion protects women's and
girls health and you.
Thank you for your time.
Madam you mute madam chair your
muted.
Your I do that so that the dog
barks forgive me ISIS Campos.
Good afternoon chair members of
the committee.
My name as ISIS and I am calling
from Espanola Espanola New
Mexico.
I'm sixteen years old and I am
in support of HB seven as a
young woman I want to ensure
money and all woman's right to
have a choice a choice to
whether to carry out a prime
pregnancy terminated we should
all respect women's decisions to
do what's best for them.
So in favor of H. B. H. B. ten.
Just.
Sorry.
Thank you I'm Lisa Hossler.
Thank you madam chair thank you
madam chair and committee
members my name is Li software
I'm a board certified OBGYN and
executive officer of the New
Mexico section of the American
college of obstetricians and
gynecologists I think the point
SB ten A. to get rid of this
more than fifty year old law
medicine has changed a lot in
the last fifty years and modern
abortion care is extremely
state.
And an OBGYN for more than a
decade I've never met a health
provider who's been forced to
provide any care they propose
not even a circumcision.
I do see people from all walks
of life during all stages of
pregnancy Care in all
circumstances.
The coral revival pregnancy
suddenly left her with serious
health complications.
I work in states where strangers
not the core of doctors decide
how sick she needs to be able
before allowing her
heartbreaking choice to feed her
life by ending her pregnancy.
Every pregnancy is unique please
vote yes in support and respect
New Mexico women and families
thank you.
Right.
Good afternoon madam chair of
the committee can you hear me we
can go ahead.
My name is Carolyn Massey I am a
tribal member of the Navajo
Nation I am also a new urban
native American I am a mother I
am also the executive director
of the southwest women's Law
Center I ask you to support
Senate bill ten because
individual should have the power
to choose when and if they want
a parent this choice should be
made for anyone nor should it be
taken away.
L. as in past you're free to
choose well let me be taken away
when roe is overturned as New
Mexicans we all come from
different backgrounds and
different areas of the state and
the country just be ten
recognizes that there is not one
approach.
I ask you to support SP ten and
both in favor of this bill thank
you.
So Carl Linden.
Good afternoon.
Sure madam chair and committee
members.
I truly feel that the decision
to have an abortion is a very
personal healthcare this session
that should remain between a
pregnant woman and her family
with other government
interference
women also all of the right to
for health care that did not
change her.
Or is illegal to make that
decision please respect New
Mexico women and her family's
Act today I'm for this B. ten
thank you.
Thank you currently rents she.
Madam chair and members of the
committee I'm an OBGYN physician
in rural New Mexico and in favor
of SB ten access to abortion is
a crucial component to providing
safe health care for women in
our state this is a potentially
life saving procedure for
mothers for reasons of both
physical and mental health for
every woman that had mental
health issues following an
abortion there's another woman
whose mental health is adversely
affected by an unwanted
pregnancy the data is clear that
carrying a pregnancy to term as
much more dangerous to the
health of the woman that is an
abortion the assertions that
this will drive drive to provide
here that is against our
conscience or leave the state
are absolutely absurd physicians
are never forced to provide
abortions during my nine years
of training and practices an
OBGYN never have I met or heard
from someone who has been forced
to perform an abortion against
their well this simply does not
happen continuing to care for
patients rather than at the end
of the patients regardless of
their reproductive decisions is
a completely reasonable
expectation doctor should not be
allowed to abandon their
patients to choose abortion.
Kelly.
Members of the committee and
madam chair thank you for
allowing me to speak on this
very important bill.
We as indigenous women have
always just.
Family planning through
abortion.
Years and years back.
And yet we are not allowed to do
these things and and the state
age so please.
Committee members chair vote.
Yes.
Senate bill ten thank you so
much.
Erin Armstrong.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Erin are
straight in New Mexico.
And a lifelong advocate for
health access to patients right.
I also have over a decade of
experience as an attorney
focused in constitutional law
and access to reproductive
health care including abortion.
I urge your support of this bill
today the repeal of the outdated
unconstitutional law is long
overdue.
It will ensure that New Mexico
remains the place that it is
today a place where individual
patients and families are
legally able to access the
school spectrum of pregnancy
care including state and legal
abortion.
Is to make Carroll is
complicated.
What medical decisions of my own
I value this autonomy and
security port say we support
this bill today thank you very
much.
Thank you policy years.
Go ahead.
How serious are you there.
The staff I've allowed her to
talk but I'm not seeing a
microphone okay we'll go to
could still argue are.
Hello madam chair members of the
committee my name is additional
Aguilar and I'm here as a
representative of the thank yous
United for climate crisis action
we support the repeal of the
nineteen sixty nine abortion
law.
We feel that this is and I'm
this is important in order to
keep our people safe healthy and
in control of their own lives we
need to make sure that our laws
are reflective of our current
values while respecting people
situations and this important
and complex decision a decision
that should be a safe and legal
decision we ask you today to bow
in support of SB ten thank you
for your time.
Thank you.
Sanchez.
Madam chair and members of the
committee my name is Cat Sanchez
from Las Cruces and I'm a policy
associate with both teachers I
was raised in the borderlands
with foundation of love trust
and respect for one another
within the framework of Catholic
values and like many of you on
the parents my partner and I are
raising our kids with those same
New Mexican values it remains
difficult for me as a parent to
tell our daughters but they have
less autonomy over their bodies
and in accessing health care
they need and their own brothers
I joined in support of HB seven
I'm sorry SB ten states to
ensure respect and trust of
those New Mexican values that
and they should be upheld and
that a law that was created in
the time that didn't even
recognize me and value me yes
where individual is left where
it belongs in the confines of
history thank you.
Thank you.
I'm still committed to today
will be addressed around all.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Andrea Serrano I'm the
executive director of a lady
we're an organization mostly
comprised of people of color who
are workers were in the
educators who have families who
are from immigrant communities
and what we truly believe in is
that people have the right to
make their own private decision
and the economy to say what they
can and can't do with their
bodies including abortion and we
stand in full support of this
bill and we thank the sponsors
for bringing this forward and
all of the advocates we've been
working on this issue to ensure
safe access to safe and legal
abortion in our state thank you.
Thank you very much without we
have completed thirty minutes of
testimony on each side I'm going
to go back to the sponsors and
the committee at this time.
Thank you madam chair and our
New Mexican public for weighing
in on this issue today I want
you to share madam chair before
you moved to the committee that
I'm honored to be presenting
this bill today along with the
strength of of this the New
Mexico Senate so signed on to
Senate bill ten as originals
Sanchez are of course settlement
with Lopez that we have with us
here today major we've Leader
Wirth and then twenty three
other New Mexico senators that
we're ready to show their values
here in the capital and back at
home to their constituents I
also wanted to name that signed
on to SB ten are House Bill
Sanchez as well including
speaker egolf representative
Debbie Armstrong Representative
Georgene Louis and
Representative Joanne Ferrary of
course supported by countless
champions yourself included
madam chair that believe in
abortion access is health care I
did want to share madam chair
before we started that New
Mexicans have demonstrated their
values on these issues over
years now in twenty thirteen in
the City of Albuquerque there
was a ballot measure aimed at
eliminating access to abortion
in our state's biggest city that
was overwhelmingly defeated by
voters in that city after that
madam chair and and committee
hearing that rural folks might
feel differently I and others
lead and extensive research
process to survey almost two
thousand New Mexicans people of
faith living in rural
communities and in that survey
madam chair we learned that
seventy seven percent of rural
New Mexicans surveyed agreed
that they could hold their own
moral views on abortion and
still trust a woman and her
family make this decision for
themselves including seventy
nine percent of Catholic seventy
two percent of Chris and even
fifty eight percent a majority
of evangelical Christians madam
chair I'd like to wrap with this
for me the question is important
this bill is not about deciding
that everyone.
Should have abortions or no one
should have abortions it really
is saying that we trust New
Mexicans to make these complex
decision for themselves I know
that madam chair intimately as a
person of faith I can hold my
own very moral views about
abortion and still know that
I'll never walk in another woman
shoes or or be at this point in
her life where she can determine
for herself what health care is
appropriate without madam chair
we stand for questions thank you
thank you first have
representative Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair mines just
really simple when the time's
right I want to move it to pass
thank you.
Representative go ahead and do
that because we can take
discussion afterward okay so I
move a do pass of Senate bill
ten as amended.
Second.
We have a second Representative.
First I have Representative
Townsend.
Yes thank you madam chair I have
a just a few questions
Comments
That the statute that this bill
proposed bill would repeal is
unconstitutional is that
correct.
Madam chair Representative
Townsend if I remember the COVID
you might be referring to that
came recently and the line of
folks supporting SB ten yes this
these nineteen sixty nine
statutes became unenforceable
when the roe V. Wade decision
was made in nineteen seventy
three at the Supreme Court so
yes there there has always been
concerned that the statutes
don't care what's in place today
and that's part of the reason
we're working to make sure that
were removed from New Mexico's
books for ever.
I appreciate that so madam chair
and Representative but.
Correct me if I'm wrong it has
not been found to be
unconstitutional currently it
suspected by proponents but it's
not been found is that correct.
Madam chair representative it's
my understanding that because
the statues have been an
unenforceable for so long
decades now that that we haven't
brought cases against statutes
in New Mexico that weren't that
weren't currently enforceable.
Okay I'll leave that as yes
Would the passage.
Your
House Bill to date with that.
The yes allow or continue to
allow Medicaid dollars to be
used in funding the process.
Abortion.
Madam chair representative have
as they shared when we debated
house bill seven these efforts
these more bills do not
fundamentally change any of the
foundations in which New
Mexicans access abortion care
today.
So what.
Revisions.
Yes one other thing there was a
comment made that maybe I
misunderstood you correct me.
That passage of this bill would.
allow all.
Or maybe it was require that the
family.
Was involved in the decision
making is that true.
Madam chair representative as
with healthcare decisions that
people make every day it's
important to name that we as
patients have the right to
decide who we involved in each
decision we make it is real and
and lots of demonstrated
evidence shows that people
facing a pregnancy complication
or unwanted pregnancy do turn to
people they trust potentially
including their family members
or others but again this
legislation does not change or
affect in any way that the the
foundation in which one would
access abortion care in our
state.
And one final question
With respect to the ability of.
A medical provider.
To not perform an abortion.
What that person that India
lacks he or she a lax to not
perform an abortion are they
provided any protections under
the law with the passage of this
bill.
Madam chair representative as we
discussed previously and the New
Mexico medical decisions act in
the New Mexico health care
decisions the medical practices
act in New Mexico uniform health
care decisions act there are
extensive protections in place
for providers that elect not to
be part of abortion Care or
other health care that maybe
against their moral or
religiously held beliefs.
And madam chair and
representative
Does the federal only federal
protections or would there be
state protections provided.
Madam chair and representative
protections exist both in
federal and state law.
Even with the repeal of this
bill Madam chair representative.
Mr Chairman representative
absolutely.
I think it's that's all I have
for today Representative madam
chair thank you very much.
Thank you very much
Representative next to have
Representative read.
and senator and representative
would you meet us halfway and
limit late term abortion.
Madam chair representative if
that's the policy we consider in
the future we'll get to it but
that is not within the
provisions of the repeal that
we've brought before you today.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative Eli.
Madam chair just real quickly
just on the point that
Representative Rehm is raised if
you would look at the FY are the
synopsis of the original bill on
its one paragraph describes
exactly what they're doing is
repealing an existing statute
that so far as unenforceable and
I it's just doesn't get clear
the synopsis the bill and I
think that lands for most was
questions thank you madam chair.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Mr speaker.
Madam chair at the I don't know
if you've already chosen someone
operate the program I wanted to
move it to pass.
We already have
to.
Okay having discussion after the
motion this what I'll do is that
alright do this.
Are there further questions.
Representative number.
Thank you madam chair I thought
I was on there and then why and
what we're away for some reason
I'm back up well.
Following up on a question that
Representative Townsend amassed
my question madam chair
representative is.
Yes a doctor or medical provider
Use that.
Conscientious objection our
thoughts not wanting to refer or
to perform such procedures I
believe your testimony is that
they are protected.
and my question is would that.
At.
Be considered discriminatory.
Madam chair and representative
if I understand your question
correctly is whether or not
someone that elected to not
participate in the provision of
abortion Care Services would
then face potential
discrimination at their place of
employment.
Well for if they would be deemed
to have discriminated against
that patient as a result of
exercising their conscientious
objection.
Madam chair representative from
the understandings and
conversations I've had
surrounded surrounding this
legislation over several years
now.
Madam chair and and
representative of.
You know the these issues for
the courts I think these issues
for legislative bodies are.
These issues for everyone.
Are are very difficult because
it.
It really.
When you set the size the issue
down to its essential elements.
The the question is.
When does life begin.
And I believe we all enter into
this conversation maybe with
with different answers to that
question.
And I think what's so troubling
we the most.
By.
Repealing the.
Abortion statutes on the New
Mexico barks.
We will be
potentially opening up.
And.
I think everybody realizes that
this is all potential because
existing laws not being enforced
due to a sprained for work but
We would be opening up the
possibility for what I consider
late term abortions are in New
Mexico and so my question is
Madam chair representative would
you agree that by repealing this
law that yes for some reason
the spring court decision in roe
V. Wade were overturned that
even late term abortions in New
Mexico with that are no longer
be prohibited.
Madam chair and representative I
would disagree there's nothing
in this legislation that
addresses your point question
and in turn would be impacted by
the repeal this legislation.
Madam chair and representative I
would I would dispute that
because the our existing
legislation on the books are
prohibits.
Abortions including late term
abortions does it not.
madam chair representative.
And I'm trying to understand
your question.
Madam chair and representative
the law that you are seeking to
repeal yes.
Yes procurements abortions
including late term abortions
correct.
Madam chair the unenforceable
law that's currently on New
Mexico books that I'm seeking to
repeal yes it is designed to
keep people from accessing
abortion care they need.
Using the term aboard and madam
chair Representative I. I would
suppose that that your responses
are are may be an appropriate
response that.
Yes this laws repealed and
something happens with the
spring court decision.
That the.
Maybe you have district
attorneys and courts and the
various portions of the state
maybe.
Viewing this issue of wired and
when it begins different way.
And we might be back in the same
place debating.
This issue are in the future if
that were to occur so.
I'm I'm a bit the.
I thank you your
there were up to me I'd leave
the law on the books whatever
happens in the spring for
happens and then we can deal
with that so we're dealing with
something that bear may not
occur and all it does is
potentially lead us down the
same road because some district
attorney our could bring a cause
of action are trying to protect
the rights of an unborn child
our and and secure judicial
relief are at and do so
appropriately even if those laws
are repealed and more money and
so
I'm.
I'm very concerned about that I
won't be supporting your your
measure I understand where it's
coming from
but
I I I don't think you that
dances.
The issue that ultimately needs
to get the
some resolution and that's a
very question active status
thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative.
Cook.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair I'd like to offer
the.
Alternative motion to table.
Well second.
By Representative Cook to table
the bill that's not debatable.
No by Representative night go
well the clerk please call the
roll the motion is to table yes
in the bill will be tabled now
and we will be back on our
motion for two passed.
Representative all.
Representative Armstrong.
No.
Representative Cook.
Yes.
Mr speaker no.
Representative Eli.
Representative Lewis.
Representative McLean.
Representative neighbor.
Yester table.
Representative rain yes.
Representative Townsend.
Yes the table.
No to table.
Madam chair.
You have a vote of eight now for
yes.
I think it should be.
That's right now cable that's
right that's right the new the
motion to table his belt we are
honored a motion now for two
passed and I will have the Kerr
cultural on them.
President.
Yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Cook no.
Mr speaker.
Yes.
Representative Lewis yes.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative night.
Our vote no on the bill.
Representative Rehm now.
Representative Townsend Here.
Thank.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Yes.
Yes yes for now.
You have to pass Senator Lopez
on Senate bill ten as amended
and thank you and
Representative.
For your.
Your work
on
this today.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
Thank you Mr.
Okay committee members the next
item on the agenda.
This bill one eleven right.
Okay house bill one eleven do we
have.
Representative.
Representative and or
Representative Rubio.
We have Representative rural.
Hello.
Representative Rubio.
Welcome to House Judiciary.
Everyone.
Hello.
Please proceed with the
introduction of your bill and
then we'll go to public comment.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you representative so I'm very
grateful to be presenting house
bill one eleven this is
essentially a compilation of
modernization work that we've
been working through since March
of last year when COVID nineteen
it is all we've been working to
modernize our housing statue an
update in a way that allows for
landlord and tenant relations to
be essentially non
discriminatory in the way that
currently we're we're
prohibiting folks from allowing
for vouchers to be used
discrimination is happening in
the housing market currently for
veterans you know child support
different ways for funds to be
presented unfortunately right
now there's no prohibition
against that we also want to be
able to find more ways for
people to have essentially just
a bit more time if there if the
financial strain is the only
reason as to why they cannot
stay in a safe and healthy home
so we extend that timeline from
three days to fourteen days
and more than anything madam
chair Representative what we're
looking at is to the future of
housing with this bill we
develop a housing council
through this bill to to really
look at the
the opportunity for moving
forward with industry with all
of our housing advocates
throughout state government to
to put together a strategy and a
plan for moving our state
forward we were already in a
crisis and housing prior to
COVID nineteen and so this
really looks at a broad it's
important sort of way of
modernizing our statute with
that I would love to give the
floor to Representative Rubio to
talk about what we how we've
gotten to this point.
I think you may have so experts
do you want us to put them into
the panel at this time.
I'm sure if it's easier to just
streamline that right now we
have Maria Griego and Karen
Myers with us.
I'm so sorry I didn't ask you to
do that sooner as final
introduced local put them on the
panel and then we'll that
represent and
B. L. continue.
Thank you madam chair thank you
everyone so I'm a lot of what
Representative Romero has
mentioned is of course a
culmination of a weekly bi
weekly meetings that we have had
with advocates from around the
state starting back in in April
and so when the state home order
was first issued here in the
state of New Mexico
Representative lament on myself
started to think about how this
is was going to affect
communities across the state
especially because here we were
encouraging people to stay home
meanwhile many were being
evicted and and and and all a
lot of it had to do with issues
related to people being not
being able to to go to their
their jobs or there are a lot of
transition was happening at the
time and so a lot of our
conversations in a bi weekly
with that we hosted in up on a
bi weekly basis really led to us
proposing some ideas for the
special session back in June
unfortunately that those issues
were not taken on it was not
part of the
the agenda and so we kept
pushing for specifically for
more funding to support of many
of the the families and
communities around the state who
had who are going to be facing
eviction CDBG grants were
eventually provided by by the
administration to go to the
mortgage finance authority which
eventually released a lot of
those funds the a lot of that
funding towards the end of the
year many were able both
landlords and tenants were able
to utilize that and so a lot of
what you see in terms of this
legislation has really just been
streamlined to get us closer to
where we feel it's important to
address landlord.
And issues and so we are we're
we're we're happy to entertain a
number of questions that you
might have around this
legislation and and we will
certainly open it up for
questions now so thank you.
And madam chair we do have an
amendment that I believe that
you've had for awhile so we want
to do that and we inadvertently
left out part of it which was
just a an error on our behalf
but we're striking out language
that we added in and we can
clarify that at a certain point
whenever you you think it's just
and necessary thank you madam
chair what I think is I think
the amendment is significant
we've had it in the committee
for a long time that what you
might do is to explain the
amendment and then we will act
on the amendment after public
comment.
And did you want to go to did
you want explained that now are
you want to go to this project
on this Myers
Madam chair representative all
introduce them I don't know if
they want to add anything idea
is the director of economic
equity at the New Mexico Center
for long poverty and they're
supervising attorney and then
Karen is with the director of
consumer financial protection
initiative with the City of
Albuquerque they'll be filling
in the gaps on any technical
questions that we may have and
that said madam chair
Representative we can go through
the amendment summary real
quickly it's it's actually it
looks more intense than it was I
even I had a little bit of a
heart palpitations before.
Senator not shell and then you
go through it number
carefully after that from public
sure sure madam chair
representatives this essentially
clarifies which division of the
department of workforce
solutions handles the complaints
under the Human Rights Act we
had a bit of confusion and after
first committee to clarify and
streamline where that would go
so it makes really clear that a
judge makes the finding of
discrimination in housing case
it doesn't go to the Department
the second amendment within this
is that there's
essentially of the.
No reason what what what we're
running to strike out also in
the US in the in the amendment
that is not included in front of
you it is that we want to strike
out language that we added on
page nineteen
and that's lines twelve and
thirteen.
as well as.
We make sure what twelve and
thirteen and sixteen through
nineteen we added that language
and but we realize further
confused our intent which is
that we don't want to add extra
time to evict on the eviction is
related to attendance behavior
rather we only want to be able
to find more time to pay rent so
we're going to strike that
language out so that there's no
room for opportunity for bad
behavior to be extended for time
for tenants so that madam chair
hopefully clarifies the that the
amendments that we've made so
far.
Are you ready for me to go to
the audience.
Okay so what I'm going to do is
I'm going to first of all we
will have a call and we will see
how many people are joining us
today who are in favor and how
many are in opposition and then
we'll take public comment on I
think if they have the
opposition.
If if
is someone who can summarize the
opposition I want to give at
least a little bit more time
because you've got your experts
for somebody than one minute so
there's one or two people who
could maybe have three minutes
apiece and then then I'll start
doing it one minute each I will
do maximum of twenty minutes.
Okay let's go first to the Paul.
those here in favor of Hospital
dated eleven.
Say yes in those in opposition
we say now.
Five more seconds.
Okay we have about thirty nine
percent in support in sixty one
percent opposition okay so I'm
for those who are in opposition.
First let me ask if there's
somebody who wants to come next.
Primarily for the opposition.
Somebody help me with.
All right I will give the
To the first person an
opportunity I'll give you
Three minutes the first two
people.
Jim Vance.
Go ahead and
do that go ahead.
Yes
And I'm Judy Vance and I am a
lawyer I practice of prime hello
mostly in the landlord tenant
law and.
Albuquerque actually around the
state to and.
Back in what twenty seven years
ago in the early nineties I was
on the task force it did the
last major revision to.
Of the landlord tenant act New
Mexico uniform or resident
relations act and I had the
pleasure of working with Karen
Myers as you the
expert for the other side and.
I think we all developed a great
deal of respect respect for each
other.
And we worked a long time to get
where we are with the sack now.
Prices.
That nobody that deals with
representing landlords.
Was involved in this process
until the bill was introduced
because I thought that when we
work through that for about a
hundred hours before.
We got a much much better bill
and much much better lost than
what we would have if we had
heard each other.
About our briefly our the
opposition to this bill is first
off.
the discrimination change I
think it's going to have a lot
of unintended consequences
we are taking.
Besides adding a dissipative
discrimination category based on
a source of income which isn't
just limited to
To.
Pueblo of government money but
any any source of income.
We are also putting the
discrimination cases into the
landlord tenant courts and that
is a huge huge change for thirty
five years that those cases have
gone to an agency that
investigated those and and then
to the court systems and this is
really there there's a little
there are a lot of of
ramifications of this does
discrimination cases now become
come compulsory counterclaims
and
cases filed in District Court I
mean this is something that
really needs to be thought
through we also have this act is
just punitive that we.
It in three different places
they presume that landlords have
bad intent that landlords are
acting in bad faith and and
that's not that's not really
necessary.
And finally we we have extended
the eviction process in court
the time for eviction process in
court is extended for all the
cases including the conduct
cases and.
That really I don't think it's
going to help anybody we need to
work out how we deal with people
before we get to court.
Next Mr Vance may go to.
Shelly.
Shelley you need a new.
Thank yes hi my name Shelly I'm
I'm a as a landlord here in town
and
I'm just very concerned about
the ramifications that this bill
on
independent landlords because
I think it could have far
reaching effects landlords have
been hit really hard with COVID
and not you know people not
paying their rents
you know the landlord has to pay
the mortgage whether people pay
their rents are not and so
there's really no protections
for the landlords sometimes also
tenants will make false claims
against landlords and it's very
difficult for us to.
To combat that we're just small
business people like anybody
else and I feel like everything
is we're not really heard
concerning the ramifications
that this could have on us and
how it will affect our families
and our children that we use
rents to support our families
and feed our families and so I
think it's really important that
we consider all parties and how
You know that we offer
protections to landlords who are
out there providing housing
you know making giving good
housing to people and doing our
very best to ensure that they
have good housing but also
relying on the tenants on the
agreements that are made for
them to pay their rent as well
so it's very important that
everybody involved see both
sides and and how this could
affect the New Mexico families
who are providing rent a rental
properties to people often times
you know people do a lot of
damage is to property and we are
never compensated for that it
can wipe out any income that we
use to feed our families if
somebody is destroying the
property and so I would just
thank you to please consider the
fact that the landlords are also
families here in New Mexico we
have children of our own that we
are trying to feed and house and
close and we need to be able to
be protected as well so how can
we do this where everybody
involved is protected and not
having
You know people perhaps making
false claims just to stay in a
property longer I think that we
need to be very careful how we
address this and going forward
and just please protect all New
Mexicans not you know the
landlords are people too and we
need help to.
We want to provide good housing
and we want to make it work for
everybody.
Thank you.
I've been asked to
Allow the apartment association
two to three minutes and so I'm
going to do that but I don't
know who that person is.
Madam chair I believe it maybe
Jennifer winters she's under a
and M. so I'm going to allow her
to talk.
Okay.
This is of a second I'm getting
into accidents Bobby Griffith.
If Bobby Griffith this with us
so here's what I'm gonna do I'm
gonna let Jennifer have two
minutes and then Bobby Griffith.
For the apartment association.
Please refer to speak on my
behalf okay we'll just do that
Bobby Griffith that.
If you
will get that would please.
Yeah we're we're Georgia is
doing this part I.
The person I thought this is.
Okay Bobby.
Madam chair members of the
committee I really appreciate
the time for listening
I am the president Department
association New Mexico we
represent over sixty thousand
units throughout the state both
rural and.
In Albuquerque Santa Fe as well
as any other city almost in the
in New Mexico.
We also I own a company called
jail gray that has quite a few
units and I want to just for
state that our company is in the
affordable housing industry and
we're very geared towards
helping people lowincome.
We do understand that while our
laws we need to be changed or
tweaked or amended or six.
We're very concerned as to why
the committee would be meeting
since March and never reach out
to us I believe that are social
issues is well known among
others.
It is just concerning to our
group as Jean backs stated that
this law has been dealt with
more than once and it probably
is time for a change and to look
but without landlord involvement
is very concerning to us.
We have many residents
throughout our sixty thousand
units that are on the state of
the addiction moratorium so we
can't the bikini body at the
present time anyway.
We're very concerned about the
rules as written and I
understand that the last minute
there's been amendment or at
least we haven't seen it until
just recently that we were going
to.
Make up a provision for people
who were troubled Gen is to be
able to be with the and that I
do appreciate.
We also feel like that there
ought to be a.
That that the resident have a
burden of proof to show that
they do have trouble paying many
residents who are paying are not
paying because they know that
this time that they can't be a
big deal but the the rules and
the laws are beyond just the
addiction there some other
things that are we're not
understanding we're not
understanding how this is
additional discrimination issues
are brought in
I think that we my company and
many many many companies to
embrace vouchers and I'm not
sure why about yours are not
clearly defined I believe part
of that is because
actual landlords and people who
deal with this we're not at the
table to make some of those
decisions but this small as it
stands for this bill that's
being introduced is really not
going to help either side it's
going to make problems but if we
could set down and have our
representatives at the table I
believe that we can make this
law a lot better.
Thank you.
Thank you okay now I get a few
more people here in the time
allotted red develop Verdi we're
going to go to one minute each
so based on that thank you go
ahead Randy.
Happened to Randy.
I'm not sure madam chair let me.
Okay I heard let's go
Representative Baldonado is at
the top of the list now let's
let him talk they're spending
already okay I'm here go ahead
thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Randy
about Verde I am a registered
lobbyist for the New Mexico
association of realtors and we
represent realtors all over the
state of New Mexico although we
support efforts to eliminate
housing discrimination
unfortunately we can't support
this bill we haven't seen the
amendment but the bill as
drafted is not balanced and it
amended uniform owner resident
relations act in a manner that
creates on their names for the
owners one specific issue can be
found on page twenty five lines
forty nine there's a creation of
a presumption of retaliation by
the owner or otherwise lawful
conduct.
And then if you look at one
twenty two allows the
presumption of retaliation of
the resident says that they need
an oral complaint to the owner
however there's no way to prove
that any oral complaints were
actually made also if you look
at page twenty six lines
fourteen to sixteen that allows
a presumption of retaliation
against the owner of the
resident makes a complaint to a
utility.
I'm sorry my time is up but
But for those reasons and many
others we have to stand in
opposition at this point thank
you.
Representative Baldonado.
Thank you madam chair thank you
committee I am before you today
as a property manager not as of
the state representative that
represents district eight I did
want to express my opposition to
this measure madam chair and and
Bystrica David at this bill
it the title runs twenty four
twenty five mines it's a big
bill managers a lot of content
here there are many many aspects
of this bill that are very
challenging to the property
management industry and
especially to the investor to
the the property owner I want
you to understand that most
rental homes are owned by single
individuals just like you and me
people that have been stuck with
the home because they moved in
Conseil at things of that nature
that they're still paying a
mortgage there's there's a lot
of pieces to this as as I run my
business we're not evicting
people it was ten degrees last
night we don't put anybody on
the street I would hope that the
the gentle lady's presenting the
bill would would talk to the
industry and and try and make
this work for everybody thank
you madam chair.
Thank you nice to see you.
I million Christians in.
Hello my name is Emily
Christiansen I'm a property
manager out of four talus New
Mexico and I am a professional
property manager as well as a
licensed realtor for the state
in other professional we hold a
lot of the rules regulations
insurances bonds things like
that are required and as many
people mentioned before me no
professional property managers
were consulted in drafting these
amendments it just changes do
need to be made there's always
room for improvement and
everything but there are a lot
of things that would make this
industry a lot more onerous on
the property owners and make a
lot more difficult as well as
making a lot more difficult for
tenants to gain access because
property managers are going to
want to take chances on people
because they will have no
ability to get them out should
something go awry and that's not
good for either party thank you.
Thank you.
Janet Craig.
Hi good afternoon madam chair
members of the board my name's
denigrating cook and I work for
ABC community school partnership
and I am faced with assisting
families who have been evicted
on an almost daily basis I
recognize that some of the.
measures in the proposed bill
might be difficult to hear for
property owners however there is
assistance from the federal and
state governments for property
owners currently in place and I
do want to point out that one of
the proposals in the bill is a
restructuring based on existing
inter departmental systems like
The New Mexico children's
cabinet or the behavioral health
collective which would help us
to collaborate and increase
cooperation create a venue for
these conversations to happen so
that we can create strong laws
for housing going forward that
would help both landlords and
tenants and help us line all of
our efforts I urge the committee
to pass.
Okay thank you.
I'm William lemasters.
Thank you.
what a property owner agrees to
lease property to a tenant there
extending credit to that
individual or family the rent
those residents agreed to pay
goes in large part to support
the community in which they
lease property taxes on the
property itself wages to the
staff.
Most gross receipts tax on most
everything property purchases
the property purchases local
water and sanitation regional
utilities payments to repair and
supply vendors.
And interest payments to local
banks.
And the finance properties in
the market and finally income
taxes paid by the property
owners.
This bill will hit hardest the
ability of working families to
provide quality market rate
workforce housing over time.
But forcing landlords.
To use I'm realistic measures of
income certainty credit quality
extending a place and time
frames forcing on wanted voucher
programs property owners rental
housing and mature.
Housing markets will see
increases in crime property
anticlines and educational
infrastructure and property
values and taxes there are.
Committee members can you hear
me this is down.
Yes.
Thank you
again my name is Dan Rowe I am a
I'll multiple properties all
over New Mexico I also
selfmanaged so I have a
management team for that.
I want you guys to think about
this what happens to any market
and any item.
When you at risk.
Increases the price.
You're gonna make it harder for
landlords to want to rent their
properties so supplies gonna go
down this is just gonna affect
poor people.
Do you think the housing
inventory is tight now can you
add on more restrictions for
landlords say forget it I'll
bring my business to another
state are looking to rent this
property.
The bill do owner financing
structures have not gonna rent
it when I'm forced to take
people who can't qualify and I I
can't get amount if they don't
pay.
So what you're doing you're
effectively and I think there's
some other measures going on for
transfer taxes you're really
making a tech.
Alex.
Thank you madam chair pop has a
local property manager in
Albuquerque New Mexico I
represent lots of owners that
have single family and you know
smaller complexes duplexes
triplexes
I over the course of ten years
have seen lots of people coming
from out of state invest in our
community with these proposed
changes we're gonna see that
turn right around.
These people are coming in from
California New York where they
already have a lot of these
restrictions on their books and
and they're what they're willing
to to spend their money here and
and rent out their properties I
strongly urge you guys to oppose
house bill one eleven thank you.
Thank you join.
Hello my name is part I. I'm a
California investor owned a
fifty unit apartment complex in
Albuquerque's international
district also known as the war
zone.
In the three years I've owned it
I have pushed out drug dealers
squatters prostitution and
traffic I've spent over two
hundred thousand in much needed
repairs house bill one eleven
works against affordable housing
the problem is detection and
retaliation provisions as we're
still taking months to get out
any criminal residents there are
three affects your during this
time my residents are scared to
go out or open their doors I
have to raise rents to cover all
the lost income an extra cost of
broken windows and gates fires
and other damage caused by these
criminal residents and it told
investors to stay away from New
Mexico because it's difficult to
be a landlord here investors
have poured money into Arizona
and Texas revitalizing the
housing stock and implement
local workers and businesses
give investors a reason to
invest in New Mexico and spend
the money here work of our
apartment association come of a
better deal for renters and
landlords thank you.
You learn.
Go ahead mark.
I need yourself.
Madam chair members I'm in New
Mexico property manager.
HB one eleven is labeled as
making changes to housing
discrimination law about one
percent of the bill may deal
with matters that might touch on
that issue but ninety nine
percent of it does not the bill
would make source of rent
payment funds a protected class
okay we can talk about that but
ninety nine percent of the bill
in many cases triples the amount
of time it would take to remove
a delinquent tenants from a
property adding thousands of
dollars to owners loss
increasing the amount that the
tenant would owe their former
landlord to the point where they
will never be able to pay it
back this would for some into
bankruptcy including the
property owners or at least
causing the loss of their
property or making them unable
to pay their bills this
legislation could also make it
impossible to ever raise rents
keep up with operating costs
causing a slow decline in
property condition I urge you do
not pass vote on house bill one
eleven thank you so much.
Junction.
Can you can you hear me yes.
Thank you madam chairman my name
is Chuck Sheldon.
I'm manages sixteen hundred
units Chernobyl kirke ya know we
all want to thousand units and
we read to over two hundred to
three hundred people with
vouchers so we're very familiar
with this system there's five
key issues to this bill that
affect this one vouchers and the
included pensions and pay E.
which is a stretch from vouchers
coming in from agencies and
rupee is or not a guaranteed
source as it you can see from my
use on the one that went broke
and stole people's money so that
can lead people high and dry and
people that cannot ten for
themselves.
Removal of the.
Being able to get your property
back after thirty days when the
tenants when the lease is up
this puts you in jeopardy of not
being able to sell your
property.
There's many other reasons this
bill does not fit it was not
coordinated to help each other
for this reason I asked for it
to be denied.
Thank you I appreciate are you
allowed to say madam chair and
committee of the mall property
manager I manage about fifty
property.
Last year I went through the
most stressful time for an
addiction I have a nurse who
have actually become a drug
addict and it took just over six
months in order to be able to
finally get her out I think that
sometimes what happens when ever
those are created they have not
spoken for property managers in
order to understand that we are
not all the girls that are
trying to detect people want to
it because it is necessary and
then there thank the owner have
to sell her business because of
the fact that she has gone so
far into that pain for
investment markets as well as
her personal market.
I.
Respectfully request that this
bill left the left hand I
protest the passing.
US prices.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee
I'm I'm a property manager here
in Albuquerque and I'm also a
licensed realtor in the state of
New Mexico and along with that
comes a code of ethics
with that code of ethics I you
know how they would have to
adhere to certain rules and it's
you know the way that this bill
is written I have to tell you
that you know the idea that I
may be the farthest in some way
as a property manager is
offensive.
I can tell you that the idea
that we can not discriminate
against or but we cannot ask for
proof of income from a tenants
just because they do on housing
or on a voucher does not help
that tenet and I can talk about
basic economics if I it just
because the rents for properties
rate.
If I don't see that that tenet
possibly has other income who's
going to pay the utilities who's
going to pay their grocery bill
who's going to you know who's
gonna pay all those other bills
you know it doesn't benefit
somebody for me to let them into
an apartment at.
Thank you love lady.
Yes every yes your remember the
group I I'm respectfully
requesting your both the people
of other level you're New Mexico
who with your years ago fifty
years of providing excellence
the thousand.
My opinion basically welcomes
law the landlord be forced out
of business will be deterred
becoming level with your Mexico
as a result of this bill thank
you the server will open up to
the lesser than proper there
before was Landel also budgetary
discouraging the landlord issue
while of the one hundred capital
investment New Mexico has
already for state Mexico cannot
afford to do this for our
partnership investment.
Your time.
Did you speak already.
I don't believe she did okay
Rebecca the learning.
Rebecca the lighting and the
director of policy planning for
the New Mexico mortgage money
with the forty one bill is not
on our legislative agenda that
it was adopted by our
legislative oversight committee
the ability to reach out and we
worked with them on section
fourteen of the bill which
create state housing council to
serve the state
interdisciplinary coordinating
body to integrate coordinate
online housing services we are
supportive of this state housing
council as you know how the
thing is you know a basic human
need but it is funded in many
different forces and the state
housing council will bring
everybody together to talk about
the issue to plan housing policy
and to really further the
mission of affordable housing in
New Mexico thank you so much.
Thank you this brings up the
issue that we are actually
finished with those in
opposition so I want to and I I
there may be others but we are
ten minutes past what I said I
was going to take.
I.
We are going to start with those
in favor is so if you will
please raise your hand if you
wish to speak in favor of the
legislation I'm gonna start with
Erin o'connell.
Just done it yourself and go
ahead good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee I'm
Erin o'connell the judge in the
civil division at the second
judicial District Court I speak
to you today in my capacity as
co chair of the New Mexico
access to justice commission.
The access to justice commission
as a statewide body that is
dedicated to expanding and
improving civil legal services
in New Mexico.
In my capacity as co chair of
the access to justice commission
we support the expansion of
deadlines in uniform owner
residents relation Act in house
bill one eleven which allow for
landlords and tenants to access
the federal funding that we made
available to New Mexico for
rental assistance due to the
economic consequences of COVID.
The current deadlines in the
owner resident lesions Act not
adequately allow for landlords
to be paid for tenants to access
the federal funding that is
being made available thank you
madam chair and members of the
committee.
Thank you David Hotmail.
Yes madam chair members of the
committee David economy I'm a
registered lobbyist for the City
of Albuquerque and we stand in
strong support of the bill we
think representatives of metal
and Rubio for their hard work in
attempting to update decades old
law to fit this particular
moment in time that all
municipalities all communities
are facing with respect to the
crisis that has been created by
comment specifically
displacement of individuals from
their home also known for
politely as homelessness the
modest our extension of time
frames for people to struggle to
stay at home are imperative and
important while preserving the
due process rights of the
landlords to be sure landlords
still have rights on this this
proposed legislation but it
seeks to give people some chance
to maintain their home we
applaud those efforts thank you.
Thank you.
It's.
Yep.
When you go ahead.
Thank you just please did thank
you madam chairman I work for
madam madam chair I worked for
independent living resource
center with people with
disabilities I've been doing
housing counseling for about ten
years and up until the last
three years I told people that
the chair was have an honors for
people with low income because
they could live near their
family they could have nicer
housing it was just wonderful
for that all right I hope many
of them and I saw many of them
easily find a place to live
however in the last three years
of teaching something completely
different today landlords are
refusing about holders
completely it's not thank you
jobs that is we don't take any
and because of my work I have
called many property management
companies to universally refuse
the doctor chair I've also
talked to many landlords to we
universally it even if they got
a thousand units for they are
saying no no about shares on.
I guess we're thank you please
do vote for it.
More.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
I need to earn more I'm speaking
today on behalf of the
Albuquerque affordable housing
coalition we strongly support
the passage of this bill.
I'm.
Discrimination that allows
discrimination against voucher
holders is de facto
discrimination against a range
of other factors that that
individuals may have and for
that reason we propose on that
ground with I mean we've support
passage on that on that ground
we also support passengers Bill.
Because this bill is about
giving people more time to make
I have problems and and in our
forty in their housing and the
point is to help people get
housing and to help them stay in
their housing and.
The economic issues often are
something that are of great
concern considering that amount
of affordable housing for our
residents has been going down
while the available housing has
been.
Going far far down thank you.
Jordan.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee of Bill
Jordan with New Mexico voices
for children I also want to
thank Representative Romero at
Rubio for sponsoring this we
believe it's essential that we
update our housing laws to
improve the balance between the
rights of landlords and the
rights of tenants so the family
could pay rent comply with their
at least are not evicted this is
especially timely bill given the
housing crisis that so many New
Mexico families are facing right
now New Mexico has a critical
shortage of affordable housing
crisis of homelessness that's
likely to get worse and so we
appreciate that the legislation
also creates a housing council
to coordinate housing policy and
resources we encouraging your
support thank you.
Thank you rich whiner our
winner.
Yes madam chair members of the
committee my name is rich Weiner
I am the owner of one rental
property and I support our house
bill one eleven I also speak on
behalf of indivisible not bill I
was the fair housing staff
attorney for New Mexico legal
age in two thousand two thousand
six I've been involved in
various aspects of housing or
persons including working out
legal advice telephone hotline
for many years.
H. B. one eleven would help
level the playing field for
tenants who are often outgunned
by land returns most tenants
facing eviction are unable to
obtain representation in part
because they're not enough legal
services lawyers to go around
many tenants don't even know if
there's a possibility of
representation OR competently
led by extending the various
deadlines for responding to
notices for addictions would be
tenants greater opportunity
provide representation provide
rental assistance or the very
least obtain competent legal
advice I strongly urge do pass
on page B. one eleven thank you
very much.
the.
Can you hear me.
Yes.
Okay good morning madam chair
members of the committee
Representative The New Mexico
coalition to end homelessness
member organised membership
organization of eighty homeless
service providers and urged the
support of house bill one eleven
this robust legislation is
critical to the homeless
response system with the
balancing of tenant protections
and aligns time frames and
policies to allow for effective
use of the federal and local
dollars sent to our communities
to respond to the eviction and
homelessness crisis as people
slip from housing insecurity and
homelessness it becomes
exponentially more difficult to
recover financially and
emotionally aligning these
addiction time frames is
critical to stopping the
conveyor belt of addictions and
the flow into homelessness the
source of income discrimination
protections allow for the
millions of dollars invested
into our community to be used
effectively by increasing
housing choice for people and
humanizing the process to exit
homelessness and settled into a
stable home of their own thank
you to the co sponsors for
bringing this legislation
forward.
Thank you I'm dress Rano.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Andreas of on on the
executive director of the lady
we see support house bill one
eleven for many of the reasons
that have already been stated
many of our members who are
essential workers have been
facing financial hardship even
before there was a pandemic and
now is essential workers are
having the protections of
Housing and having the
protections of stable housing
are going to benefit not just
our members but thousands of New
Mexican municipalities across
the state we thank the sponsors
for bringing this bill forward
and to the passage of house bill
one eleven.
Thank you.
Robert Nelson.
Good afternoon and thank you
madam chair and committee for
our public comment my name is
Robert one get a Nelson I am
with the renters coalition of
Albuquerque we believe firmly
and strongly believe that it
should be want to leverage the
past urge this committee to pass
it on New Mexicans need access
to housing and just because
unprecedented economic hardship
as many as forty two percent of
New Mexicans are now under
threat of eviction even before
the pandemic Mexico had the
highest increases almost as the
country between twenty eighteen
to twenty nineteen an increase
of twenty seven percent New
Mexico also had the highest
increases chronic homelessness
during the same period increases
to six fifty seven percent
before the onset of the pandemic
plus the sixteen us families
were evicted from our home and
any given day with the renters
coalition of Albuquerque
strongly urge your support of H.
B. one eleven thank you so much
to you might contact you.
Thank you.
Search Martinez.
Just yourself.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee.
Third Martinez I am a professor
of law at the university of New
Mexico School of our teaching
their property and I practice in
the.
housing is a human right but New
Mexico has not been able to make
good on that for some time we're
in the middle of a long standing
eviction crisis of housing
crisis because the system is not
set up to work for for people to
remain in a stable housing
you're hearing a lot of
discussion of we need to balance
we need to work together the
fact is this is was already in
balanced towards path towards
landlords and preserving it the
status quo is to preserve a
system that doesn't work on the
backs of tenants many of whom
are the lowest income New
Mexicans the courts what this
because of flexibility I can see
why extending the time for and
allows folks to access rental
assistance at the current time
does not allow them to do I urge
you to pass this bill.
Sorry I needed myself because.
I'm I'm sorry I have my mother
is a long term care facility and
I have my phone on and I I
didn't take the call because I
you heard but ring tone I
apologize
Yes you go ahead and thank you
madam chair members the
committee as I urged passage of
house bill one eleven for many
of the reasons already stated
particularly I'm an attorney
Representative people with
disabilities for over well over
thirty years and in many
instances in in rental
situations I want to emphasize
the the need for the extended
time frames for the reasons
stated particularly so that
people who have time to access
council often people don't know
how to do that much less where
to find that those lawyers
and particularly people with
disabilities I think have a
difficult time also rental
assistance and having access to
that is important and aligning
the time frames with people's
appeal rights I believe it is
extraordinarily important
important I I urge your support
thank you.
Yes.
I just want to come behind three
celery I to with the coalition
to end homelessness and I see
housing as a human rights issue
a social justice issue and I
know that we in New Mexico can
do better I thank you madam
chair and representatives for
bringing this bill forward.
During Kelly.
Good afternoon committee members
madam chair thank you for
bringing this up most important
bill forward.
I wish some of the opponents
would hear a little bored ten
year old saying he didn't want
to sleep outside in the wind
anymore.
This is so important to house
even at this time.
Young children that their
parents could not afford to pay
the rent there for the homeless
please pass this bill.
But evil for this spills the
care.
Thank you heard regular.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Kirk record on the director
of the advocacy ministry of New
Mexico and I'm also here today
speaking on behalf of New Mexico
on parts of churches I'm here to
date offered this yesterday
support for H. B. one eleven
housing modernization bill we
support the critical date of
improving the balance between
the rights of the landlords
tenants and that we believe the
changes proposed are quite
reasonable we also believe that
New Mexicans should be able to
use housing vouchers the other
lawful sources of income as
proof of income for the rental
finally we believe the state the
creation of the state housing
council is a critical step in
addressing the housing crisis we
have here in New Mexico well
there are a variety of avenues
that must be pursued to address
both the systemic issues and the
current emergency H. B. one
eleven we'll allow for many
positive steps taken in that
direction.
We urge your support and thank
you all stop to speak to today.
Jeff Anderson.
Hello and thank you madam chair.
Thank you madam chair committee
my name is Jeff Anderson a
member of the renters coalition
of Albuquerque I would like to
read a letter from my colleague
today who's working and unable
to make the committee hearing he
writes my name is Julian
Trujillo I'm both a social
worker and a renter of an
apartment I'm asking you to vote
yes on New Mexico house bill one
eleven in my role as a social
worker case manager I witness
firsthand situations that can be
easily remedied if a renter have
been able to pay back rent after
depiction was ordered in most
cases a serious mental health
crisis or the ending of a period
of hard won sobriety could have
been avoided if the client isn't
allowed a few extra days to get
money together to pay their rent
one of the hardest things my
career I witness a landlord
refused to lease an apartment
one of my clients because they
had a housing voucher to the
local Housing Authority landlord
stated they had a history of
working with the voucher program
and didn't exactly like the type
of tenants they sent his way
this was soul crushing my client
to overcome extraordinary
pressures to fill out the
application and the casual
refusal to lease was soul
crushing I ask an employer you
to please vote yes on house bill
one eleven thank you.
Michael body on.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Michael are you on the
executive director of the Santa
Fe housing action coalition
where we believe that housing is
a fundamental right need as well
as a critical piece of the well
being of our communities on so
threats to affordable housing or
know how are our new housing and
antiquated and connect with the
loss and we believe H. B. one
eleven is an important piece of
legislation that looks to do
some pretty simple things works
to improve the balance of rights
and responsibilities between
landlords and tenants reduce
barriers to housing for already
disadvantaged Mexicans and
creating a statewide council
that specifically address hasn't
seen Kourtney's necessary
resources across the state all
of these are important steps
forward in addressing the
housing crisis before us and we
strongly support this bill thank
you.
Thank you.
Right.
Thank you for the opportunity.
Thank you for the opportunity to
speak today my name is Randy air
flight and I am a professor in
the community and regional
planning department at UNM where
I teach about housing and
housing policy we have a housing
crisis and into addiction crisis
in New Mexico today and yet
insurance people can access
housing in it with any form of
payment to and the proposed
modest expansion for people to
stay in their houses as they
struggle financially are
reasonable and at the same time
critical steps for community
wellbeing and economic
stability.
Housing stability keeps people
healthy this is even more
important during the time of
COVID but it's always important
and housing stability also keeps
children in school and people
that work.
It underlies our state's
collective prosperity and I urge
you to pass house bill one
eleven.
W..
Madam chair I'm getting a
message that I would need to
promote home agency panelists to
speak because of his older
version of zenmate do that.
While you're doing that let's go
to that one being a ham and the
less Charlton Simmons.
Yes.
And the.
Go ahead
hello thank you everyone my
name's also number community
school coordinator
I I I support passage of this
bill because last semester
school semester we process a
hundred fifty five RL
applications within our
constituency alone and the vast
majority of those landlords when
we were dealing with were very
grateful to have us.
Our process from assistance
whether tenants so I'm I I I
have heard some landlords say
earlier about some of the issues
of their concern particularly
the financial ones when someone
even these thousand boxes that
we've got some of our parents
attain and both execute have
also inclusive laces they help
them out we utility payments and
so Irish passage of this bill
because in in spite of the the
financial concerns that were
raised by landlords I don't
believe those concerns to be
valid maybe just maybe to be
individual situations but
majority of these people have
paid.
Now who is the one we are
promoting.
K. W..
Okay go ahead.
Yes well good afternoon madam
chair and committee thank you my
name's Judy Wilson I'm the
executive director for the cat
was professional histories and
of New mobilization folks
Representative thanks who are
folks come from a tough adverse
backgrounds we support HVM one
eleven I'll let you know that.
If you want to have communities
we cannot allow people to be
barred from being part of the
communities and that if we want
to have folks be able to sort
and where can rectify the issues
with their landlords the need to
have the adequate time we look
at the aspect of economics which
is also brought up I'll have you
know that neither hearing Mexico
nor in any place in this country
has ever been a landlord who
stopped being in line with
business because the tenants
have more protections and less
vulnerable so whether it's
looking at the intersection now
these of safety health and
participation in our society we
definitely to make sure that
tenants have the same footing
that they have the same
protections in that they're able
to live their lives in the
protected so I hope that you
vote for H. B. one of the thank
you.
And I think we have one more
right now is waters.
Good afternoon my name is Ramon
Luis what inside and the
community school coordinator at
Whittier elementary school
in in addition to my role with
APS I'm also been the former
president of the neighborhood
association sells on Federal and
in both of my roles I have
worked with the number of
landlords and management
companies to help keep our
families housed and and
sheltered and while there are
some good landlords out there I
think we need to be honest that
housing is a for profit
industry and I support and I
urge this committee to support
house bill one the level as it
does work you know have
strategies to help clients
sometimes to to work with our
families and lower landlords to
come to resolution but I also do
think that it allows us to begin
to have the conversation around
housing as a human right it's
not it should not be a privilege
and it should not be based on
profit I know our families want
to stay housing there's many
issues that that families face
and and I think having having a
law that allows some
protections.
Thank you very much we're at the
end of the time for the comments
in favor of the
of house bill one eleven I want
to go to the committee now and
let you know kind of what we're
our plan is moving forward.
Get.
There we go.
I like to be able to see
everybody and not just the
person who's talking I'm so I I
been in communication with the
Sanchez and they're going to
explain the amendment now and.
If you.
Well hearing Representative
Rubio Representative Rubio I
believe say they wanted to
change something in the
amendment so what I have
suggested to them is that we go
through everything thoroughly
and have here all of the
committee questions but I would
like for them because we are
changing amendment and some of
the folks didn't see the
amendment as work feeding missed
Act frankly spoiled as far as
our notice it's in the Here file
but we had a sick staff person
today and even though we had we
had the amendment since February
second it wasn't a share file so
what we're gonna do is.
And then it's fairly substantial
they're going to do a committee
set up for us and bring it back
for us to act on Wednesday but
we'll do that first thing
Wednesday I really want to hear
all of that.
I want them to hear every
comment everyone says and we're
gonna go from there and I think
Mr speaker you have your hand up
but I think I'd like to have
them explain their amendment
first so let me have the
sponsors do that please.
You madam you Representative
so of all the agenda policies
for the amendment not arriving
to everybody on time we this was
ages ago in fact that was our
that was thank you for that now
is we have had it since February
second we have your and chair.
Thank you madam chair yeah and
then there was at for on our
side there is an inadvertent
agency basically wanted to
strike new language that we had
added and that's what you're not
seeing in this amendment that we
have that we'd like to put into
the sub and that's the
clarification I think that we
wanted to make right away is
that on page nineteen we wanted
to make sure that we weren't
adding extra time for bad actors
only those who couldn't pay
those that we've struck language
that would have given more time
for folks who are in our opinion
should be evicted if they are
not fit to be there not just for
lack of payment and that's not
included and so do you want to
point out on page nineteen what
line you're going to be striking
lines yes just one moment we're
looking at winds at twelve and
thirteen
and I think just one second
sorry.
And if you know the money at
quicker.
I'm looking at all my notes
or press three to consult your
experience thank you madam
chair.
You madam chair representative
Romero I can chime in if that
would be helpful it online on
page nineteen it's lines twelve
through thirteen and then of the
of the underlines Tax on twelve
points twelve and thirteen and
then the underlined text on
pages I'm sorry line sixteen
through nineteen.
It's a very striking those
insert that's correct in your in
the committee and law madam
chair request.
in addition to that what you
have hopefully available is
essentially to just clarify that
we're talking about source of
income discrimination explicitly
in the statute to make sure that
we remove any possibility that
source of income discrimination
would be allowed that's numbers
one through four on the
amendment and then in section
three which looks intimidating
I think sure we all have the
right to to to number I have two
one nine five one six point.
That's what I'm looking at okay
so you want to take this where
first I'm not lines one through
four numbers one through four
it's essentially the same change
we just wanted to make explicit
that the source of income where
it's coming from.
That you would.
Income under for the first four
minutes yes I'm sorry one
through three and look I'm
reading through for but it's one
three three one three three.
Madam chair of the point to
number you you cut out when you
got to the point the point I got
my connection separated yet.
Two one nine five one six point
three thank you point three.
Hey and districts.
Sure sure that point number four
is basically a clarification in
partnership with the department
of workforce solutions to
basically clarify where
complaints would be handled we
don't want to create any
administrative burden for them
through the Human Rights Act and
so we wanted to make clear that
a judge would make a finding of
discrimination in housing case
and and and basically just
making sure that we don't
exhaust the remedies under the
Human Rights Act and that
clarifies that under number four
in that amendment where you're
amending section three.
That's correct madam chair.
So that's just.
To raise a long amendment
because you're going through the
act adding language that's right
madam chair that's why it looks
more intimate and it really is
but if you do a committees of it
will be cleaner to read it
that's right now we're happy to
do that then number five is just
to remember that's right okay
I'm are there I know we have
here is up are they do I have
questions just on the amendment
itself.
I I I do it but I also have a
question about sections your.
Okay Mr speaker let's start with
you thank you madam chair I
I certainly understand I think
it's a fine idea to many in
Rights Act to you know make this
the additive protected class I
I'm curious madam chair in the
amendment why we would make
however.
This class.
the only one that does not have
to exhaust administrative
remedies rice if you if you're
charging an employer with racial
discrimination or
discrimination based on religion
color national origin gender
identity you have to exhaust
administrative remedies.
And you know that's part of the
process and you Rights Act where
an investigation is conducted
and there's either a finding of
probable cause in which the
Human Rights
Zero will proceed against the
person violating the act or you
get a right to sue letter for no
determination it.
You know I.
You it seems strange to me that
we would.
Make people charging
discrimination on the basis of
race religion color national
origin exhaust administrative
remedies but for people that
are.
Feeling discriminated against
based on the source of income
for rental payment.
If they would be the only class.
A person that doesn't have to
exhaust administrative remedies
can you madam chair explain why.
Why that's in your thank you
madam chair of like to refer to
money and can go to respond to
that.
Thank you madam chair and
representative you often Romero
Representative Egolf the reason
of for that inclusion is because
we wanted to ensure that if
there is a claim of
discrimination Brian housing
context that the case can be
resolved rather quickly rather
than
dragging this out in that this
actually is especially
beneficial to landlords because
if the if there is a claim of
discrimination and you have to
go through the Human Rights
exhaustion process that could
take years if it's not a valid
claim.
It doesn't mean it's it's it's a
three hundred day maximum.
yet to bring the claim any of a
hundred eighty days if you don't
get a determination or right to
sue letter you can bring a case
and a hundred eighty days.
So it doesn't take years madam
chair.
The action stated though when
you're going through the process
Mr speaker.
Well you know when so you know
I.
You know we've had clients that
have brought in a claims under
the Human Rights Act and you
file a claim you can see the
file with the equal employment
opportunity commission or with
the
even rights bureau so if you
follow the bureau you got to
bring a claim I believe the
students but you have to bring
claims at three hundred days and
then it got a hundred eighty
days to investigate and if you
get to the hundred eighty for
stay in there is not a
determination of probable cause
that a violation the act
occurred then the complainant
it's was called the right to sue
letter and you can go to court
at that point.
And with that.
I guess I wonder what would
happen with the whole the status
of the.
Tenet.
Is not.
Question what is it it's a good
question chair because of for
you for taking.
Yeah we got that uniform one
resident relations act eviction
track is being modified by the
bill.
You can have a clear housing
discrimination.
If they're potentially
different.
Right you can have housing
discrimination claim it is
occurring when there hasn't been
an eviction.
And in this amendment seems to
kind of be switching them
together and.
I.
Receipt it just seems to me
that.
You know.
For you know at least since the
fourteenth amendment was at its
use constitution we've but race
religion color national origin
at the highest level of
protection under the
constitution.
And people alleging those
discrimination claims we have to
go through this whole process.
But the attendant who alleges a
violation on the basis of source
of income to make a rental
payment or some other.
Discriminatory housing practice
doesn't that just you just
strikes me as one unfair and to.
It's so and I I have had maybe
three or four
landlord tenant cases in my
career as a lawyer I had many
more Human Rights Act cases and
some yeah I.
It just seems strange to mere
can be squishing the two things
together in our and in the the
inner former resident relations
act is meant to provide very
clear.
Time line for eviction that is
usually followed by both tenants
and landlords you know we have
the pro se forms that are at
magistrate courts I presume
municipal court Albuquerque so
that in these timelines are set
out there clear that.
Statutory form notices of
eviction for non payment all the
rest.
We gonna be Rights Act it it's
much more complicated area of
law it is.
Me you're triggering all of the.
all the body of the logs
Development of that are you know
still under under the practices
civil rights law.
And.
It made it are we trying to make
it so that someone can't be
evicted if they've made a claim
of discrimination in housing.
Is that madam chair one of the.
Purposes.
Representative that isn't the
purpose we still want the you
know the process to take place
Madam chair representative I'm
sorry Mister speaker.
I'm
sorry.
Madam chair representative I'm
gonna at a handed over to Karen
Myers to respond to perhaps some
of the part of the technicality
of your question.
Then proceed.
Madam chair yes please madam
chair
Mr speaker and members of the
committee I think that you have
brought up a very important
point then there is a
distinction
and perhaps I I haven't looked
at that language specifically
recently but there's a
difference between the scenario
when somebody applies to of the
considered of the tenant and is
rejected because of source of
income our and with the
situation where someone is in a
tendency.
And
perhaps applies for and gets a
voucher or their source of
income changes in that the the
landlord in that circumstance
says that they're not going to
bring the rent or they're not
that they're going to seek to a
victim because they don't want
that change source of income
even if the minimum income
requirement that the landlord
who sat is still left when we
take into consideration that
alternative source and I think
those are two different
scenarios and I think perhaps
the solution is to allow and the
continuation of the Human Rights
Act process for the situation
where they have affirmative we
have applied for new tendency
and been denied and have that go
through but when there is a
pending eviction of the tenant
would need the ability to raise
that as a defense I believe that
that is that the reason they're
being evicted is because their
source of income has changed our
and I hope that addresses your
concerned it may require some
change the language though I
concede.
Okay so madam chair that's
helpful I think if we so we.
We have so it lets.
Let's imagine a scenario where
someone is applied for
An apartment.
They are in their application is
denied.
They believe that their denial
is because the search of the
source of funds to pay the rent.
They would then file a claim.
With the.
Human Rights bureau.
I sure yet human rights bureau
at the workforce solutions
department.
Alleging that they were denied a
tendency because of the source
of the funds to pay the rent.
If they don't have to exhaust
administrative remedies says
they bring an action in a court
of competent jurisdiction so
that's not gonna be magistrate
court magistrate court does not
have jurisdiction to hear yes
that means you wanted District
Court.
and.
You know you've got.
It I think it's highly unlikely
that someone would you know
proceed pro se in District Court
on the Human Rights Act claims
are you know once you find a
lawyer your file on the complete
the complaint in District Court.
You've got it thirty day answer
process and then you're into you
know and potentially you know
year long
case right it is gonna be very
fact specific
in terms of what was the reason
that the tendency was denied.
I have had on many occasions
clients approach our firm and
want to bring a case and the
Human Rights Act and we
encourage them to file with the
Human Rights bureau in to go
through that process because you
get a lot of basically free
discovery right the state sends
out information they interview
the person that is facing a
charge of discrimination and you
really can't go through the
process without a lawyer for for
quite a bit of time.
And if you don't get a finding
of probable cause for the Human
Rights bureau at least there
will have been some.
Discovery done in this like
discovery some information will
be gathered by the Human Rights
bureau and that can then be
taken to a lawyer who might
decide that there is a case
and yet it's easier for a lawyer
so I I would urge you in that
scenario Madam chair
representative I would urge you
to reconsider the language that
lets you avoid exhausting
administrative remedies because
I think certainly it's important
that there be protections for
people based on the source of
funds to pay rent.
But I don't know that class of
it is as I'm this is you it
doesn't sort of rank up there
were the ones rejected exhaust
race religion color national
origin sex gender identity
things like that insight I thank
you for gonna do exhaustion
should be for all or none and I
and I do think the going to the
process could be helpful and I
do say that's justice again I I
have limited practice in this
area but identity not times were
you know will tell a client go
go file if you Rights Act review
rights bureau and then.
if you get a problem because
great if not bring back which
you were able to gather and
we'll see if there might be
something that we could do
there.
so that that would be.
that we my family members madam
chair.
Thank you madam chair Mister
speaker duly noted I think we do
have an opportunity to fix that
and thank you for your for your
comments and your suggestions.
Nexus Representative McQueen.
Thank you madam chair
Madam chair representative.
The.
Through the bill and there's
some things in the bill I really
like and there's some things in
the bill that hi have questions
about and
There's a lot in the bill and I
I I'm concerned about that they
were making a lot of changes all
at once
yeah I'm also concerned that.
We're hearing a lot of concerns
from
that Mr regulated area that you
landlords permits things like
that I I think the landlord
tenant relations are a.
It's a balancing act in the it's
hard to get the balance right
especially when you're trying to
draft a law to get the balance
right but still has to deal with
bad actors on either side so
it's like how do you deal with
the bad actor effectively but
still maintain that balance and
it's it's it's hard.
so I I have a few questions are
mostly on the technical side
there
I do think it's the I I do think
it's always a good thing when
when you have opposition that's
willing to talk to you and
that's not always the case to
hear the state because they they
often can you know say well we
can't do this for you know some
really specific reason and like
up here what's going to work on
a so I encourage you to stay
open to that my first question
is
I'm very concerned about where
we stand right now in the middle
of the pandemic and.
What happens when we start
providing a level of protection
but there's there's no with we
don't have an emergency clause
in here so it's we would
potentially come out of our
current level of protection for
renters before this takes a fact
that is that accurate.
Madam chair representative queen
we do have one emergency clause
in the bill and that's regarding
renewal of leases in particular
we've had a had some trouble
that we've heard from landlords
and tenants for instance they
were their lease was up you know
say in September October in that
time frame what happens as they
move forward or when the
moratorium is lifted madam chair
representative we want to make
sure that that's in place on
renewal leases during the
declared emergency which we are
currently and only during a
declared emergency.
Madam chair is everywhere I
guess I met emergency clause and
act for to take effect
immediately as opposed to coming
to of course whatever that
exactly is
and I'm concerned.
The there there might be a gap
there and that a lot of people
could case of action before it
takes effect I don't know how to
fix that but it's a concern.
On page sixteen in in this is.
There's a lot of really subset
of things in this bill which I
appreciate it and like I said so
my questions are low on the
technical side okay sixteen
there's a requirement for a
signed written receipt and I
have a tenant in a long time
Lisa residential tenant I am I
do read a law office in late two
things that occurred to me one
is I I pay my rent in my office
by an automatic bank transfer.
And I don't don't think you get
a receipt for that and I know I
clicked the mail for my office
and one of my colleagues I used
to have a rental house.
And every every month you know
like clockwork thank you with a
tight you know I I learned to
recognize the return address.
You get that rental payment
I thank you for that house for
like ten years to the same
person I mean it was a good
relationship.
but I'm I'm sure he did turn
around send them a receipt so I
I wonder what.
I can I can see where receive
would be really important
especially say you're paying
your rent in cash.
But are you are you creating a.
Sort of an underserved burden
yeah a lot of other
circumstances.
Madam chair representative I
think in exactly what you're
talking about is just that what
would receipt is not defined so
having the ability to look at
the transaction conferment and
particularly for both landlords
and tenants to cover themselves
when they're being issue there
either issuing a receipt or
having a receipt issued you know
I paid I paid my rent through
Ben moe for instance that Madam
chair representative and so that
that to me is what we're talking
about is just the transactional
relationship in particular if it
is a cash transaction to cover
both the landlord and the tenant
to have that that quote unquote
receipt and I'll defer to my
experts if there's anything to
add to that.
So that Nigerian one dependent
you you might consider a.
Restricting that's cash
transactions right the the cash
transaction will be accompanied
by a receipt
you hopefully reduction in cash
in the mail you know what I
personally have seen a drop off
and mail reliability the stuff
that I used to take for granted
I would receive a lot
but you know I tried funds
transfer or a check you know the
check should be your receipt
right so I if we addressing
landlord to to provide the
signed.
Receipt that might be that might
be overkill.
There was a comment made by the
public about an oral request to
make repairs yes you know what I
mean that again that could cut
both ways.
I know the page twenty six.
one of the well the factor which
was complaining to the utility
company about the functioning or
safety of an appliance
mechanical device for utility
service.
You know if I if I call the PNM
in complaining that my
refrigerator my washing machine
was a running they would wonder
why I was calling them.
in leases.
Leases come in different forms
sometimes the the landlords
responsible for those things and
sometimes eight they are
so I just.
I I can certainly concern that
might be I mean I I and I
totally get where you're coming
from in terms of providing
protection for retaliation
But I wonder about one so
like I said there's a lot in
this bill I like it is it is
extremely ambitious and I I
encourage you to continue to
continue working on the language
and look forward to seeing the
committee so.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative.
Alright.
Thank you madam chair up I do
have one question do you already
confined by remarks to the
amendment right now are you all
may go through all.
I think Representative McQueen
went beyond the amendment that's
that's fine but you can start
with the amendment and.
And move on but I think at the
numbers Sanchez would benefit by
hearing as much from the
committee as possible today I
didn't know if you wanted to
come back and do the the bill.
After we discuss the amendment
like we normally do are you what
it all out I'm happy to do.
One.
And then we'll go with you'll be
the first one to do the whole
bill and I'll see if anyone else
wants to.
Thank you madam chair but my
first comment regards
Representative three of the
amendment.
In reading the amendment.
In the bill all right question I
agree with to but I'm not sure
that it works in paragraph three
that the additional language
after income.
The thing.
True that paragraph.
So you might just look and see
it seems like source of income
should cover everything have the
additional language doesn't make
any sense to me.
Next thing.
Grievance procedure.
I'm not.
Concern with the existing land
region you're probably gonna
tell me that I'm not read by but
it says a person claiming to be
aggravated by an unlawful
discriminatory discriminatory
practice and a member of the
commission who has reason to
believe that discrimination has
occurred may file with the Human
Rights bureau doubled up.
My question what is it require
both level but not one or the
other all.
And.
Our.
We don't have to answer I just
just to provide a lot of.
I'm a bit.
Worried about.
Filing these are on a landlord
tenant matter were were
Right.
Degree with the speaker in terms
of paragraph Hey that we are
essentially over ruling exist
existing.
Press it out we ought to have to
administer we ought to have to
our.
Exhaust our state administrative
remedies in the
three minutes procedures same
to be where you go to court the.
The it does saying that in this
context your your point out to
trust because you're by if I
understand it right.
Yep the we use is not entered
into.
Because of a discriminatory
discriminatory practice that's
when you would file with the
Right Spiro.
If you have an existing lease
and there's a question of
breach.
Then that ought to be on the
court and take that that track
so I would agree that we need to
work.
Now with respect to the bill.
It is a lot to swallow and do
it's a lot to digest.
Yeah sure order and and I think
that the comments made that are
maybe some of the landlords
should read at the table for
time R. may have resulted in
addressing many of the concerns
I might out
and I would encourage the
Sanchez to maybe take them up on
on that offer
One thing that that I I truly
don't understand is how.
Or were why.
A source of income would be an
issue.
That.
A person should not be able to
consider.
And.
Entering into a contract that's
going to require payment
Madam chair representative why
you source of income now going
to be Hey.
A source that that could result
in New I guess discriminate
report practice why is it
program.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representative neighbor what we
have heard since prior to the
pandemic for many many actors
whether it be state related city
related municipality federal
funding there is basically
discrimination happening across
the state where folks
essentially where the landlord
finds out that a tenant like a
veteran is getting assistance
from the federal government and
once they find out where the
income is coming from don't want
them to be there any longer and
so the voucher programs that
have been sought out and after
in order to be able to protect
these folks find them housing
unfortunately there's no
protection for them when those
landlords to discriminate upon
them and so what we've heard is
that this is the way to be able
to create that protection and
that's why the language reads as
it does on on that source of
income so you can't deny someone
housing based on where that
voucher or where that
supplements supplemental income
is coming from Madam chair
representative and all defer to
my experts say to add in some of
the information as to why
language says what it.
Thank you madam chair at
Representative Romero and and
Representative number I thank
you for the question
as you heard from one of the
proponents of the bill earlier
I'm cert credit source of income
discrimination is often a proxy
for other forms of
discrimination so discriminating
against someone because of a
disability or or at racer or any
number of reasons
But this this prohibition
against discrimination does not
take away a landlord's ability
to conduct a minimum income
increase a credit inquiry they
can still have all of those
requirements in place it's
simply just requires that the
landlord take into account any
lawful source of income when
looking at minimum income
requirements so it doesn't strip
away any of those writes that
that landlords have in
determining whether or not to
attend it will be able to to
pay their rent every month.
Well it.
Banking transactions which I'd
be a little more familiar with
and then our landlord tenant
transaction but if I'm going to
extend credit to to an
individual.
The amount of income.
And the source of income.
Is a critical component because
of the source of income.
Is temporary in nature.
That the risks that I undertake
in extending that loan is
greater than if the source of
income is our constant or is
relatively
Longduration and you have and so
it.
so so that would be a factor
that I would think in a
lender would consider and I
think we heard testimony early
on that in a landlord tenant
situation because of the nature
of that business the landlord
years in assets.
Wendy and I think that was a
word that would use or expanding
some credit to the tenant and
again under taking some risks as
to.
The repayment in terms of rent
each month for the extent
reporter for extending and
entering into that contractual
relationship and so source of
income.
Seems to me to be a critical
component in determining the
credit worthiness of the
individual seeking that the that
that creditors seeking to enter
into that contract and so.
I I I come to this with with
some real concern that.
That may not tell the whole
story
I thank you bye hear the
comments correctly it was
maybe the sprout your system or
something that was leading to
some problems and some landlords
refusing to consider the the
about yours or or what have you
but if those vouchers are
temporary sources of of income
or or temporary sources of the
ability of that to pay the rest.
Then you still have the problem
of the landlord under taking
some risks.
If the duration of that tendency
is is is law and so I just I'm
having a hard time.
Calculating how as a landlord to
properly comply with this bill
and still properly assess the
risks that they are undertaking
when they enter into a contract
with a.
Potential tenants.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representative just a couple
comments and I'll turn it over
to my experts but what you're
talking about in the risk
assessment is going to happen
throughout the lifetime of any
sort of lease or any sort of
circumstances a contractual
relationship right so they have
to still meet their obligation
whether that fund was temporary
or long term there are still
involved in a contract with
their landlord and so Madam
chair representative as far as
calculating how long that's
going to be those should be
negotiated in the lease
agreement Madam chair
representative in particular if
you know the home is offered for
a year but you only have six
months worth of subsidy for your
rent madam chair representative
so part of that is is as with
any sort of negotiation or of
the availability of housing is
to assess where that makes sense
for the for the both the
landlord and the tenant we're
not taking away any of that
flexibility Madam chair
representative what we're asking
in this bill is to protect those
who have a source of income that
has been discriminated against
and to ensure that they will not
be basically removed from
housing and or
not provided housing because of
where that source of income is
coming from but when in regards
say keeping those payments up
and and what it is that you're
talking about madam chair
representative that is
absolutely part of that
negotiation process and we would
never want anyone to get into a
could contract that they
couldn't obviously commit to
Madam chair representative and
I'll defer to my experts with
with
Any additional comments
regarding what that means that
with the source of income.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Romero and
Representative neighbor our our
source of income discrimination
expert had a medical emergency
today so she's not able to be
here and I'm not right on this
topic I'm wondering if it would
be possible to promote three
celery at as a panelist I think
she's probably best suited to
answer this question.
We're happy to do that.
Thank you.
Hello madam chair can can you
all hear me.
Yes yes thank you we see or to
our.
Wonderful I'm thank you madam
chair and Representative
neighbor if if if I might could
you could you repeat the
question so that I can
assessment answer specifically.
Well in essence madam chair and
the.
Right.
Neglected to write down your
name but Madam expert the.
The issue is how to why.
As a landlord.
If I am trying to comply with
this bill.
How can I properly use the
source of income.
Yes trying to determine the risk
that I am undertaking in that
entering into a contract with
with a potential tenant
without running afoul of of the
provisions of this of this bill
because source of income.
As I pointed out I think is a is
a critical measure is that
source a consistent source you
know did am I employed have I
have a.
Job for twenty years or or have
I have a spotty employment
record shows that that the you
know I bounce around and have
jobs for short periods of time
what what have you of the risks
are different between those two
individuals and so how is why is
a as a landlord.
Properly fall were properly
comply with the provisions of
this bill and still use source
of income.
Yeah they.
Non discriminatory fashion can
assessing the risk of entering
into the contract with that
potential to.
Okay thank you thank you madam
chair Representative Nibert I'm
gonna do the best as I can to
answer that question as well I'm
again our our best expert on
this had her medical emergency
I'm.
The best way to.
To answer this is to is to say
that as as a person comes to a
landlord they've already gone
through the housing process they
have a case manager that they're
working with and they have eight
housing voucher in hand.
And they're looking for an
apartment so that they can rent
I'm some some some place to have
some housing stability and the
way that you would assess the
the risk is going to be the same
as in any other situation except
for there's going to be that
added protection of a regular
okay recurring payment that's
being placed from the help of
the provider directly to you as
the as the landlord.
Is that it is it is as housing
voucher program a temporary
COVID measure is it a temporary
measure or is that a measure
that can be counted on year and
you're out.
Chairman representative each yes
madam madam chair Representative
this is a recurring amount of
this is recurring funding so we
have a flush of additional funds
that have come into the state
due to the condemning response
and will continue to for for
quite awhile however we have had
regularly occurring permanent
supportive housing vouchers and
rapid re housing vouchers that
have been regular recurring
funds that have been coming into
the into the state for a regular
amount of support for an
extended period of time and will
remain so we have some
we have some programs that have
had tenants on permit support
supportive housing vouchers
stably housed with landlords for
up to ten years three permit
supportive housing vouchers we
have others that are
house on temporary means through
rapid re housing vouchers which
is assistance that's provided
for up to two years.
And there's a whole system that
channels the process to
streamline a person who is
needing assistance to get them
to to the right housing choice
using the right housing voucher.
In order to help them stabilize.
Madam chair and.
Representative when I read the
bill.
Yes boil down to through its as
central language it basically
says I can't discriminate based
on source of income.
And I think the concern that
landlords have is that source of
income.
Is a critical component.
On my ability to assess the risk
and my desire to enter into a
contractual relationship whether
it's a landlord tenancy issue
whether it's extending a loan or
whether it's.
So in my car I mean she had a
long credit.
I just I think that.
The word source of income
really.
I think.
It it's real concern is that's a
critical component of my ability
to assess the risk but but I'm
engaged and then you have to
make that a word or words now
that the up to become
discriminatory discriminatory
practice
okay it's it's hard to.
The digest that so I would
encourage you all to to really
work on that or language because
so the.
I I think that that that could
cause some problems and would be
a true source of
Great litigation down the road
of that that frankly should
shouldn't the Kirk.
Let's move on
Once.
Page eleven.
It cell wall full.
To do those things.
It says war because of the
requirements of any program
providing a source of income
that any dwelling is not
available for inspection cell
rental what the twelve line is
available so so I guess this
means it's unlawful for me to
have a place available to rent
but I did not I the renting of
that.
Based on.
The requirements of any per
program providing a source of
income and again yes it's
temporary.
I would argue I ought to have
the ability to not rent to that
individual because.
There's no evidence of their
ability to fulfill maybe the
terms of the contract I'm
wondering what a dinner and two
sides of a five year term or
something or or two year term
and if it's temporary
They may not be able to meet our
the long term.
Goals of that I I I do have a
concern with that
So.
We talked about the grievance
procedure which is your
amendment and then the.
Okay back over on page fifteen
of.
Wind.
For.
I just have a question on this
it talks about the the owner may
charge the resident a late late
the only about not to exceed ten
percent of the residents portion
of the rent payment for each
rental period but the resident
is in default now my question is
doesn't that tenant.
Are they obligated for a hundred
percent of the rental payment.
Madam chair representative this
is solely about the fee for late
payment.
Brent so usually it's about a
daily basis of of the late fee.
Well when I enter into a
contract to lease the building
I'm a hundred I've responsible
for a hundred percent of that
the.
payment each month and if I am
if I haven't paid a hundred
percent of that rental payment
I'm white I owe a late fee
right.
That's so so I don't understand
it says that questions the
residents portion of the rent I
I don't I don't understand what
what that is our.
Are they responsible for a
hundred percent Madam chair
representative the idea is that
if a source of income is coming
from an alternative source right
so it's a coming from about your
program and that's paying say
fifty percent of your rental us
your rental agreement be on a
monthly basis this is for if the
rent is that right and they're
supplementing that some say it's
a thousand dollars and still a
little.
And five hundred is coming from
veterans assistance and five
hundred is coming from the
perspective on the veterans
cells and we're saying that the
fee cannot be over ten percent
of that five hundred dollars
because that's when that's the
fund that they're coming up with
Madam chair representative.
We're not talking about the
right you're just talking about
the late fee on top of the rent
that's correct chair
representative that's
specifically what we're this
this area the statute is looking
at.
Okay so so my my question madam
chair and representative this.
What fees are generally imposed
To number one encourage timely
payment.
Make it a penalty to pay was.
But but number two.
I think they're alternately
imposed because of the
experience of landlords that.
As.
There are delays in receiving
Representative it's more
indicated that there's going to
be a default and that the
landlord is going to a court of
various fees and costs of trying
to collect on on those those
Representative Sir and so you
know again most cost are pro
rated
It just it just a lot to me that
we were pro rated or.
A lady she.
Yes the resin that has entered
into a contract says are going
to pay.
You know a hundred percent of
the rent each month regardless
of where the action sources
would come from that they've
agreed to pay a hundred cents on
the dollar.
For we say that property and if
only fifty percent gets paid the
late penalty.
Is a late penalty I don't know
why why it would be programs and
stuff.
All.
One of.
You.
Representative H. on page
sixteen lines two through six.
Miss you too some of the remarks
by Representative McQueen.
This provision requires a signed
receipt for
Basically you need.
I think you're Madam chair
representative you you said your
rent was paid the some other
mechanism and I suspect you did
not get a signed receipt for
that payment.
And I suspect that ninety nine
percent of the transactions
today are transactions that are
are maybe not ninety nine
percent but I I would bet you a
majority of them are
transactions that that don't
involve a person walking into an
office and paying cash or
riding.
Well it check it check to
receive them of that self but
paying cash.
Probably that doesn't occur very
often anymore and so I to our
with Representative McQueen
question the need for this M. I
would certainly like to see that
the.
You know a signed receipt as a
signed receipt anymore ballot
them a that I.
Email receipt.
So is it any more valid Gen and
the knowledge that payment.
You know I think.
I think for cash transactions
having a receipt is important
but the form of that receipt the
requirement to have it signed
I'm not sure it adds so I think
you could work on that paragraph
a little bit and maybe make it a
little more.
A little more reasonable in
terms of actual practice today.
Well.
Now for the for the the real
concerns that I have
Thank you eighteen.
Why twenty were striking.
That is.
What we're imposing.
A penalty provision if you will
twice the amount and properly
without seems to me that that
if we're going to have the of
penalty provision we ought to
have some intentional act on the
part of the the landlord and so
I would suggest
that face was probably a proper
terms here and and that that
goes back to I think this is the
uniform resident solutions
whatever hi.
Our.
What.
Mr.
Madam speaker and and
Representative
I think this is part of the
uniform act and my question
there is the changes you're
making to the uniform act we're
not changes.
Prompted by the uniform
law commission are right.
Madam chair Mr speaker Mr
Representative.
Well.
So these changes to the uniform
actor or basically changes that
would be unique to New Mexico
correct.
Madam chair representative
neighbor these are not unique
unique to New Mexico as they've
been changed in multiple states
throughout the the country these
are actually matching many many
laws that we've seen and I
there's a list.
but the reality is is that is
really modernizing the law Madam
chair representative my part.
The.
Changes that we see here
I'm in the fortunate or
unfortunate position of.
Now having to be a landlord
because of the death of a
relative who own property and
the.
You know why my experience is
that the.
Landlords.
Generally give tenants which
ones are are generally given
tenants quite a bit of leeway
before even imposing a light
weight for your fact the I have
several tenants Representative
but I'm having to follow down
they never pay when do and I've
never imposed a late fee because
they come Kirkland and you know
two weeks later
The contracts allow me to impose
a late fee but but I don't do it
and I suspect that that a lot
of.
Landlords don't enforce their
contracts the maybe is keen
years as so what would be
provided to the terms and so
much in my concern with a lot of
from the provisions in this is
work spending time it's.
And it would be my supposition
that in many instances landlords
automatically extend those time
periods M. R. I..
I believe in talking to some of
the associations thank farms
that the
most of the landlords that they
represent.
Do not avail themselves to the
short time periods that are set
forth in the bill now
Madam chair representative would
would you have any information
on of the actual practices of
landlords and whether they
adhere to the three days or
whatever it is verses of the
time period that you're
suggesting in the bill thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative well exactly what
you're talking about we would
hope that there's a discussion
and negotiation between
landlords and tenants we just
want that to be in the law we
want that to that that time
frame to be explicit so that
folks do have the opportunity to
cure their situation with their
landlord and tenant in that we
give that we build that that
into the lot self and and I'll
defer to my experts to to add
thank you madam chair.
Some.
Madam chair representative
Yes I do have experience with
what goes on in the fiction
court
I've been a housing I was a
housing lawyer for many years I
worked very closely right now
with legal aid and have it ask
them those kind of questions
And there's two parts to the
answer the first is that for
every good landlord of which
there are many many many there
are also on the other side
landlords who are not responsive
to do not work with their
tenants who do not try and work
out something before they take
them to court and so what we're
trying to do is have a level
playing field so the landlords
who want to continue to do that
kind of cooperative type
resolution process or mediating.
We continue to do that the
landlords who bush what to its
limit
get our the of some more but
detections for tenants so that
that tenant is also taken into
consideration one of the biggest
problems we've seen over the
last eight months is that we
have at the City of Albuquerque
have been trying to work with
the courts both up and down all
cross
to try and use mediation to
protect housing and to get
landlords and tenants to try and
resolve the situation before
attendance is how come and the
response that metropolitan court
has been very positive but all
across the state what we hear is
the statute is so restrictive we
can not come up with creative
solutions that are being.
Right out all across this
country to encourage mediation
to get enough time for of rental
assistance to be get to the
landlords to pay them
and the courts basically have
told us repeatedly that the
sovereign nature of all the
deadlines is prohibitive and
preventive at coming up with
alternative ways of dealing with
the situation of protecting
people's housing and so this is
a response to that to try and
give the court discretion so
that it is not so immediate many
many other states have more of a
have been of a longer time
periods for violations to be
cured they have longer time
periods to go to court given the
chance to get legal
representation or seek other
financial assistance and that's
what we're trying to accomplish
in all of these changes in the
context of the systemic
timelines that apply.
Is to try and preserve housing
and to bring landlords and
tenants the opportunity to work
together and we're rental
assistance is available it is to
get the money to the landlords
to their benefit because the
rental assistance system does
not work in a three to seven or
and the time period not
possible.
That's the goal here.
thank you madam chair and thank
you miss Myers maybe a couple
other questions for Mr Myers
part might madam chair it was.
Representative made by by some
of the apartment owners that
right now.
Before affection is even
contemplated you have a passage
of time of the of the least
twenty days almost.
and certainly I think it was
five days of your doctor and a
lawyer but actually in actuality
the right they said that you
know most landlords are are
waiting twenty days and their
concern is that in this bill
you're going to have an extended
period of time of maybe up to
two months before
recovery of that unit can be
secured and and that's the two
months so lost rent that's two
months the.
The value that probably is what
we're going to go up Hey that I
think that's a concern of the
the landlords and and certainly
you know it's not a good
situation for the tenant or the
landlord more and so the the the
time periods are in the statute
but in practical terms those
time periods are going to be
drug out a little bit the best
buyers would you agree with that
statement Madam chair
representative no I wouldn't
with all due respect.
I think it depends on the
landlord.
And it depends on the tenant
obviously if the landlord is
having problems with the tenant
they given the three day notice
if there's illegal activity they
have the right to do that under
the statute of then they proceed
to court but it's a choice of
the landlord whether they want
to do that and given the three
day notice or that they want to
wait right that that is an
individual choice but the law
provides that protection in the
context of non payment of rent.
Each landlord I don't think you
can say that because there is a
landlords association that all
landlords treat tenants the same
way.
I certainly am aware of from
talking to community people that
of the landlord after the three
days if it's late they get.
That's of.
Are some more I've been reported
that are starting to charge a
fee to put the notice for non
payment on the door so that
they're finding another way of
you know creating more months
money when a tenant at that
point is struggling
they also
And choose to wait and work with
the tenant we're trying to find
mechanisms through the court
system to encourage that.
By putting in more time because
there are different experiences
based on the landlord based on
the property based on the
history with tenant one of the
biggest biggest problems we're
seeing is that the the and and
this is this is unique to the
fact that we've been in a
pandemic for a year admittedly
but there are many many leases
that are expiring.
And there are people who have
not been able to pay their rent.
And the landlords are taking the
opportunity to terminate those
leases put those people out on
the street.
On the basis that moratorium
does not protect people whose
leases expiring even though the
reason that the situation has
gotten to that point is because
of non payment.
So that is a problem because
those tendencies are at risk and
those families are at risk
the other thing that we I have
been it's been reported to me
we've got the mortgage finance
authority we have the City of
Albuquerque we Bernalillo county
and all all of them plus
nonprofits all of whom have
rental assistance programs.
That have been working overtime
to get money out to tenants
many landlords work in
collaboration and they get paid
directly and they benefit from
those programs which is what
they're intended to do and the
tenants can stay in the in the
whole other landlords refuse to
even talk the battle assistance
entity they will accept the rent
they won't cooperate they won't
respondents and their documents
and then the tenant and the
building and on the street.
So you I think what I want to do
is impress upon you the fact
that there is no universality to
what happened in this market
that there are good on and not
non compliant people on both
sides and what we're trying to
do is create a level playing
field that balances out the
needs of both parties and give
support enough time to develop
flexible mediation alternative
programs and processes that can
help people get money to members
to get paid an opportunity to
try dispute resolution and keep
tenants in their houses.
I think this Griego I didn't did
you still want to speak on this.
Thank you thank you for your
question I I think miss Myers
Act covered everything I was
going to say I appreciate it
thank you.
Madam chair and again miss
Myers.
Is this bill.
Yeah at the existence statute
limited to residential property.
Yes leases of residential
property.
Madam chair representative yes.
So so this bill is not the at
the commercial property it's
residential all Madam chair
representative yes that's
correct and.
This bill.
Doesn't your is not further
limited by.
Lower income housing this
applies to whether it's a.
Five million dollar house be a
Leycester or whether it's a.
You know seven hundred dollar a
month apart right madam chair
reading that correctly that's
correct chair representative
okay.
The other.
major concern and I think it was
brought up by Mr Vance is that.
The.
In the effort to I think the
words were level the playing
field our it now seems to
presume.
Legislative it presumes that
landlords are retaliating have
and I'm not sure that that we've
achieved the level playing field
that that you were talking about
if we buy.
Assumptions that.
Go the other way and so I would
just just that issue as you look
at the US and maybe work with
our the apartment association
the others that you look at the
language concerning.
Of the.
Actions of of landlords and you
know same thing we should be put
back tenants all of the same but
we should be putting a lab works
all the same boat and I think
everyone here agrees that the
bad actors on both sides are.
We need to deal with but I think
you're you're amendment to go
after the people causing harm
and and really
No shooting through the wall
causing the safety issues for of
the other tenants most people
need to be out of service
possible
Obviously
are you have landlords that that
the White miss Myers said take
things to the extreme and there
may be are are a little bit the
property in on their on their
portion of their lease
agreements but I think the vast
majority of landlords and I
think the vast majority of
tenants
don't threaten those extremes
and and so I would just have you
look at that and try to level
the playing field all right if
that's your stated goal but you
look at it from both sides and
try to accommodate both are
because you know I see words in
here that really put the burden
on the landlord approved they're
not discriminatory well.
It's very difficult to prove
A negative of in fact it becomes
almost impossible at times so I
would just ask that you are
really look at those things and
Then the.
It looks like.
On page thirty four.
Or beginning on page well.
Before that I have a couple of
comments
Okay sure.
Thirty one.
Eels process.
there's an automatic stay up I
read the bill correctly line
fifteen on page thirty one so
there's a lot of automatic stay
as as I read is that correct.
Madam chair representative I'll
go to a multi year caring to
respond to that eight thirty
one.
Maria do you want to take that
or should I just
miss fires okay
So this is to correct madam
chair and Representative this is
actually to correct a problem
that exists in the current
statute the time period in which
to appeal which is certainly a
right we want to preserve for
tenants
is longer than the time the
landlord at get to of it so that
typically what could easily
happen is there could be a good
faith reason to appeal a loss.
And they'll be evicted the
tenants could be evicted input
on the street without having the
chance to exercise their appeal
rights also the there is a
problem with if you file an
appeal is the stay on the rate
of restitution which is the
eviction order that the chair of
the fancy way of saying
fictional order that the sheriff
gets to serve to a big somebody
is that automatically stop.
By you following your appeal
which is the whole purpose of
having an appeal right.
And what this is fixed thing is
the fact that if I appeal a case
you you don't get this affect me
until my appeal is to fund as
long as I'm complying with
statute in terms of what I have
to do to protect and preserve
the appeal during the pendency
of the appeal so this is fixing
the problem where people get put
out of before they have a chance
to even appeal or get put out
because the sheriff says to them
I don't care if you filed an
appeal I have a rid of
restitution and I'm putting you
out.
And madam chair and misfires I
don't I don't have a problem
with the automatic the state
and
preventing the chair from
education on the eviction order.
Yes there's a mechanism by which
the tenant has to secure the the
past two and future rents during
the course of that appeal so was
there a bond requirement.
madam chair Representative there
are provisions existing in the
statute that set that up for
specifically what the tenant has
to do to preserve the appeal
yes.
And is that discretionary only
court where those things
mandatory as well.
I believe it is not mandatory
but I have to re read this
section because I haven't read
it in a while.
I see over on page thirty three.
It looks like there's a.
Interpleader type.
The situation there
That.
I'm thirty are you working with
C. are you looking at sea on
third yes ma'am.
The if I may
Madam chair representative the
intent of that is that if a
tenant files an appeal and then
the landlord does not accept the
Brandt during the pendency it
allows them to pay them to the
court to demonstrate compliance
so right the amendment or can't
use that against them.
Okay so so that's kind of like
an interpleader action of your
site and then
grouse well section the new
section fourteen which begins on
page thirty three
You know we we say that that
the.
Additional provisions regarding
a declaration of emergency and
yeah and here's here's my
concern and one of the former
Representative six sessions.
For me brought up the fact that
that term there's no emergency
provision in this map you know
we all hope that by the time
that the this bill would go into
effect this pandemic sober yeah
and were no longer under a state
of emergency but.
I'd like to point out that
online twenty.
This this bill says that if
there is a declaration of
emergency or does Astor issued
by the governor that all these
things come into play.
And.
There are a number of
declarations of emergency or
disaster issued by the governor
in the course of most years
I know in in Travis county we
requested that when I was a
commissioner a declaration of
emergency due to drought
conditions other band
declarations of emergency for
flights for for NATO damage for
a variety of other things that
that the the governor.
Has to declare an emergency in
order to appropriate or access
FEMA and maybe potentially
federal funds and so but my
concern is that's very broad and
it could occur many times each
year and bring these provisions
and to force and the fact that I
don't think that you're into but
that's what it does yeah in the
statute and so if you're looking
at this this bill again and
maybe looking for some things to
address.
I think you need to you know
hopefully address the one time
every hundred year pandemic.
Purses the flood or drought work
for NATO and Europe if you find
any relief for those things it
ought to be only the properties
within that area impacted by the
emergency not the entire state.
So I would encourage the
representative and and those of
you working on this to really
look at that language because
I'm hopeful that this
emergencies gone by the time of
this thing comes into a fact and
that we're really dealing with
with the what I consider the
normal emergencies that occur
year and year out within the
state of New Mexico that are
limited in scope limited and may
be burial extent maybe portions
of the city portions of the
county may be a watershed
and and not affects the entire
state of New Mexico and bring in
to play all these additional
protective measures that are
going to affect every landlord
and tenant in the state when the
armored urgency has nothing to
do with with the without sh
This housing council.
On.
Thank you thirty five thirty six
thirty seven
One thing that jumped off the
page this page thirty seven one
six and seven.
So the housing council's going
to study the legal relationship
between landlords and tenants
and statewide that's why we have
this bill in front of us we're
already doing that and then a
line sixteen and seventeen.
Madam chair and and
Representative.
How is this council going to
secure resources to remediate
substandard housing conditions
of it is a council's going to
now become involved in building
apartment complexes and housing
to do that how are we going to
secure resources to remediate
substandard housing.
Madam chair representative so
part of the hope for the housing
council is having a strategy
that looks at federal resources
state resources local resources
that we're currently not in a
strategic way of dealing with as
a state so as far as their own
procurement may perhaps we can
clarify some of that language
I'm trying to follow where you
are are you said page thirty six
thirty seven page R. one sixteen
and seventeen.
Madam chair representative so
yes I would perhaps we can talk
about not securing resources
within the council themselves
but talking about the strategy
for doing so we do not it like
you said it was it's not our
intent for them to become
developing agency are developing
council but but it's not your
intent to to have a state run
Housing Authority either I
suspect you're that's correct
shares.
Madam chair of I I I sincerely
hope that the sponsors will our
thank you Mr Vance and the other
landlord organizations up on
their offer.
This is a far reaching
piece of legislation.
Yet
does some things that
you know I think are actually
being done today with most are
reasonable landlords I might say
but but the but I have some
legitimate concerns I I I do
think that
Yes probably not
Good public policy to create
presumptions Representative
there are.
May go against.
Motive serves Representative
majority of good actors and I
hate to see that out of I also.
Concern that but several of the
of the parties are we're
thinking about this did this
legislation was just going to
deal with COVID extensions and
that it need to be done for
COVID the.
This thing is is going to be the
law that affects landlord tenant
relationships even after COVID
it's in the rear view mirror and
I think that's the that's our
our major concern is is not for
not this pandemic but but
certainly the change and how
things will be done in the
future after will be on this
pandemic yeah and again
I hope that the I hope that we
can come up with something that.
Are you sure words
Representative.
That level the playing field
make sure we don't tilt it the
other words if it was until two
first and so with that madam
chair all our I'll be quiet and
listen to the rest of the debate
thank you.
Mr speaker.
Thank you madam chair I wanted
to just make a.
A brief comment about section
eight and.
That's the section where we have
about rebuttable.
I presumption of discrimination
and madam chair and and miss
Myers is this.
Is this presumption created
within the Human Rights Act
forces a presumption within the
owner resident relations act.
Share
Representative first Mister
speaker I would I'll defer to
Monier occurring on that just to
make sure we're in the right
section.
On page twenty four is section
eight
Are you ready yes madam chair
Mister speaker I believe it's in
the your uniform or reduce
residential relations acts.
Forty seven eight thirty nine.
Is the moment to.
Well I believe that that's
correct Maria is that and I
write.
I'm not at chair representative.
Romero and as speaker yes that
is correct.
So I I would ask you I know this
bill is coming back madam chair
and.
Representative Romero
Representative Rubio
this this is the one section
that gave me some pause simply
because.
Available presumptions in the
law our.
You and far between and I can
see this.
Coming up office and.
and then the rebuttable
presumption is triggered by some
things that
can be I think fairly commonly.
done you're certainly requesting
a reasonable accommodation and
fair housing act is is
reasonable complaining but
however you know on page twenty
six at one fourteen back
complaining to utility company
about the functioning of an
appliance so if if the tenant
complaints to PNM.
About the functioning of a.
Their utility service.
Then there is a presumption that
education.
Is now discriminatory right so
the the landlord may have no and
we had nothing to do with it
right and you've got a ten
effects of the phone calls PNM
complains about the utility
services and now the landlord.
Is.
Representative putting a
presumption created by law.
That that that seems a little
over the top
And.
So I think I think certainly.
Here I'm I and I understand a
lot of these a lot of the things
that trigger the rebuttable
presumption are already in the
law and that retaliation for a
prohibition.
And I think if we're gonna.
Madam go into and the creation
of a rebuttable presumption of
retaliation.
that it should either be
tightened up for maybe give some
thought if you know whether or
not we need.
that would be one comment as we
look to modify the bill I think
the rebuttal presumption
generally.
That's a big big.
hammer against the landlord and
could also have an unintended
consequence of.
Significantly increasing.
Litigation right if if you got a
landlord is having to rebut this
presumption.
There's going to have to be I
would imagine a fair bit of.
I discovery done in a fair bit
of
Motions practice around that one
point.
If if that.
Arises in the case of the other
piece is
If there's an appeal.
I presume that would be it well
I don't know if that's an appeal
from the magistrate court to
District Court I don't know if
it if you feel we're also
talking about if you're from the
District Court on eviction to
the court of appeals that that
could be quite a long time line
especially if it's a District
Court appeal on an addiction
to the New Mexico court of
appeals and some sort of
security you're the landlord
wins in District Court.
And there's an appeal.
Yeah that's going to be a two
year process and a minimum and I
think there should be something.
In there by way security.
Supersede yes bond or something.
To protect the interests of the
landlord during the pendency of
the appeal because you could
have a tenant.
You the property right and is
going to be rents accruing.
but not necessarily way to at
collect so if if those those two
issues could be look at.
I would certainly appreciate.
Thank you madam chair.
You madam chair thank you Mister
speaker duly noted.
Thank you Representative
Oakland.
Thank you madam chair yes this
day in the US is of course the
question comes up you're having
housing council.
And the final deciders on and
everything that this legislation
is gearing towards is in
Judiciary.
And this is also meant is we
don't have anybody from the
judiciary on this council.
Chair representative that's a
great possibility Isshin Madam
chair representative we we had a
we're very prescriptive to begin
with with the list and we
basically said what are we
missing and instead of being
over overly prescriptive we may
have been to fake but that said
Mr a Madam chair representative
we may want to be explicit about
that rather than it be appointed
later.
Chair I I do understand what you
said they're at the very end.
Madam chair representative we do
have an allowance for the
appointment of additional
members if we believe that we
may have missed something just
to have enough flexibility
rather than B. two prescriptive
so there it but there is that
option but if we feel more so
that we should have a a member
of the judiciary in there
we we can absolutely at plan
that and madam chair
representative.
Thank you thank you madam chair
I just funds in the this Madam
no one of the hardest parts of
being a judges
here in the.
Jane cases and you know you have
to make that decision as some of
the state their house or their
live out on the street or what
they're going to do from it is.
Price in statute then you don't
have the three to seven days and
that's it our highlights how
this is an extension on time.
it's not easy for somebody
especially a family can be out
on the streets within three days
so I like that my question is.
On the vouchers even agree with
them make.
My understanding that there's a
lot of landlords that would not
accept vouchers.
Is it for any reason and I
always heard.
That.
Especially in the Albuquerque
Rio Rancho area that they people
can get vouchers but they had no
landlords to accept.
And the.
Well number one is true.
Madam chair representative that
is absolutely true that's what
informs this legislation madam
chair representative.
Those are my questions madam
chair I don't have any other
questions thank you.
Representative I have no their
hands from committee members.
I wanted to Graham a couple of
oh I'm sorry did you did
never and always gets lost.
My background thank you know I
had Representative I appreciated
this long discussion and
certainly my primary concerns
have been raised both
Representative nine very and
then specifically by speaker
Egolf madam chair representative
in discussing section eight I
just wanted to add that I very
much want to vote for this bill
I appreciate the considerations
that came through in these
amendments and to be committee
set up but I certainly want to
just name again like others have
it's a lot for us to figure out
how we respond to emergencies
and then also to think about the
significant and substantial ways
we're changing off for the long
run
Madam chair representative I
just might offer that one of my
hardest experiences up doing my
best to survive survive COVID
nineteen came early on because I
have a beautiful home and a
beautiful town next to some
apartments but the landlord
that's been somewhat problematic
so I've often considered have a
better support or show up for
the people that have to deal
with this problematic road and
then as it happened in the very
early months of COVID
I lived in a harrowing
circumstance because there was a
person that lived in those of
parchment struggling with
substance use and also in New
and a violent relationship so I
had to spend my days trying to
keep my kids safe and my nights
trying to navigate whether or
not it was the kind of night
that I called law enforcement to
hopefully keep this tenet alive
in a situation that was
unfolding just down the country
road from mine and at the time I
just paid more attention than
ever to what kind of rights
people have to stay in housing
what kind of rates tenants
landlords have to adjust those
circumstances and I certainly
appreciate that you are trying
to find something down the
middle I just and madam chair
and representative as some of
you know my father recently died
of COVID but he was a working
class person eventually became a
teacher.
And he managed a small property
near money as a way to
supplement his income for years
including up until the time he
died so he and I got to have
lots of conversations he was a
bleeding heart always trying to
take care of somebody that
needed a house but we're always
trying to navigate what it meant
to like hold hold the sanctity
and safety of other other duplex
or a situation when some of
these dynamics are so real so
with that I just have I a couple
of questions I would like to see
further conversation again on
section eight that speaker
raised I just I don't know that
you have this information I am
hearing a lot from constituents
and others about the distinction
between big property management
companies and big properties and
then so many New Mexicans like
many of us I assume on the call
and others that have been have a
casita or up a family home we
inherited that rented do you
know what that break down is
between between units that are
like single property units that
a family me own and and we're to
manage like Representative
Representative and I'm here and
myself or these other business
oriented units Madam chair
representative as far as the
data goes I think money you may
have a better hold on it but I
know that the majority of
landlords out there are these
small mom and pop shops that
you're talking about and that's
absolutely who we've been take
taking to account for the for
the major piece of what we're
looking at and so madam chair at
Representative if money at once
to chime in about some of those
how that plays out through the
system that we're hoping to fix.
Thank you madam chair at
Representative Romero and that
vice chair cut into
unfortunately I don't have that
data I'd be happy to to look
into it and get an answer for
the committee but yes as as
Representative Romero has said
we do know that many of the
landlords in New Mexico are the
mom and pop type landlords you
know we're just we're just
different in the make up of the
rental market here.
It is something that we've taken
into consideration and we do
want to make sure that that
landlords are paid and and that
is one of the the reasons for
for example the extension of
time frames we want to make sure
that tenants have the
opportunity to access rental
assistance the courts are
providing that information to
tenants so that before they even
go to court and they can try to
work something out and and get
paid.
Madam chair representative I
appreciate that if there's
anything you can find I would
love to see it my concern and
again so many of these plans
have already been raised is that
when we are I know you're eight
amending existing law working on
existing law but that law treats
someone that owns the family
home is renting it and changing
circumstances and a property
manager with a thousand
properties like someone called
in with public comment the same
and when I think about the
provisions that relate to that
to to acting in bad faith or
retaliation I think that in
there you know my my mom owns
our family home that she's had
to rent for for years now and
she couldn't afford to play pay
to live in two places etcetera
etcetera when I think about that
my mom has no staff she doesn't
have anyone to
keep up or find notices and and
she's and she's acting in good
faith and and actually through
this emergency my sisters and I
got into a bit of a situation
where we wanted to potentially
have the house for some of us to
safely survive COVID and my mom
said I don't want this person to
be out in the drive in an
emergency but as it happens that
lease is going to end in may so
I wonder okay now my mom's ready
to move holds or some variation
of my family might live there I
see you have something in there
unless you can prove and
demonstrate that the primary
owners coming back but that may
not be all always the case and I
want to make sure that we as we
act carefully to create a fair
environment we're not
compromising these New Mexicans
who have property as a
supplemental income or property
the inherited as we move along
and so madam chair just lastly I
wanting to other sections that
haven't been addressed yet that
I had concerns on those are Page
thirties line four through
eleven and specifically
restricting the judge's
Authority to fashion relief
mandating that the judge allow
the resident to fifteen to
twenty five days to vacate one
of the things I've heard.
I don't know it will be true is
that if there is property owners
like my mom that are worried
that it's going to take so much
longer if something has gone
wrong that they might initiate
these processes sooner instead
of waiting to figure out more
creative and flexible response
this to someone facing a
situation and then lastly page
twenty eight eight eleven
through thirteen increasing the
standard of proof to take
possession of the event the
owner wants or needs to remodel
or demolish but otherwise I am I
very much want to vote for this
bill I'm almost with you but if
you do have considerations in
the next couple of days I would
I would be available to check in
and and just make sure I'm
understanding what you are doing
and that these considerations
are happening in real time thank
you madam chair and
representative thank you madam
chair thank you I share.
Thank you for we've got you very
well.
On this I just want to say that.
What my understanding is and I
think we're going to you know
we're gonna have to figure this
out because with it ever since
the COVID yes it has started to
it.
This is part of public health
and public safety this started
to threaten people's ability to
be housed the the number of
people working hard with access
to justice with the Supreme
Court to develop eviction
diversion programs rental
assistance mediation and other
resolution options.
These.
Been successful in other states.
And we can you know adopt those
here.
The.
The problem.
Right now is the deadlines that
are in our law.
And so the deadline we don't
know our.
I don't.
And with the you're trying to.
Get that fixed to is it.
I can get that person but we
have two pages of people's
regular legislative update
what's making it impossible all
right now for us to do these
created innovating how
innovative housing ideas.
That protect the landlords a on
the land the tenants yes the
deadlines so I'm please keep
that in mind.
Where are you now we can't just
say oh Hey we like it the way
it.
So with that thank you all and
when when you come back we're
not having a full hearing again
but we'll we'll hear what the
changes are that you've come up.
So thank you all for your
attention and we're going to
move not house bill one of
seven.
Thank you.
Times.
You madam chair and thank you
members of the committee madam
chair I do have an expert
Let me find it
Her name is Breanna.
Sure.
Madam chair representative
Thompson I had her name before
okay press seven ran a hand
should be panelists now okay
thank you so much so madam chair
this is a a fairly simple bill I
I've carried it before we
haven't made it all the way to
the end it's a bill regarding
health insurance coverage and it
looks like more of a monster
bill than it is for those of you
who haven't done a lot of health
care and there are different
sections that you have to amend
to amend the Health Care Act so
what's the.
Health care health care
purchasing at New Mexico
insurance code health
maintenance organization law
nonprofit health care plan and
pharmacy benefits manager
regulation Act and all this bill
tries to do madam chair is to
allow local community pharmacies
at a to participate in
insurance.
In the insurance
In health insurance so what
happens now madam chair and it
just happened to me in November
your health insurer may send you
a letter that says okay say
goodbye to your local pharmacist
we are forcing all of your and
maintenance long term
prescriptions into mail order
what do you like it or not and
there are several reasons where
I think that's a bad idea the
first one is that I view it as a
monopoly that that PBMs are
saying you can't have any
competition but even bigger one
is that we are losing our small
pharmacies it particularly in
the more rural areas and those
are sometimes the only health
care professionals for miles and
miles around I'm not going to
name names but we did have a
colleague several years back who
became very ill because of
interactions with his
medication it was quite elderly
and he went into a pharmacy and
it's pharmacists that whoa whoa
whoa wait a minute what's going
on here in this pharmacist took
the time to go through his
medications and found we're
we're something was contra
indicated got him off of that
and he got better quickly so
when you're when you're having
your prescriptions mailed out of
Philadelphia or wherever no one
is getting eyes on I'm and and
it's really hard at you know at
we use CVS and so we are we are
going to it's not just small
local pharmacies but it's where
you can go to a real brexit
place and see a ripple human I'm
and and we're we're trying to
protect the local pharmacist so
that those communities can have
someone that they can go to when
their when their kid has a fever
and there's no position our
clinic for miles around they
could maybe go into the
pharmacist in state what do you
think going on not that they're
not that they're diagnosing but
they can help out so
essentially.
This is a patient protection
bill and it's also a way to try
and protect healthcare providers
in rural areas and with that I
will let my my experts weigh in
and madam chair I do have an
amendment when you're ready for
that.
What we've done in the past is
just kind of explain the
amendment in a nut shell and
then we'll we'll act on it after
the public comment you okay it
is substantive changer it really
isn't it it was done in response
to our concerns by some of the
insurance companies so it has at
twelve different amendments but
it's just that there's six
different parts basically what
it does instead of saying
comparable prices that the local
pharmacy has to accept the same
price as the mail order so if
you can get your high
cholesterol medication from
express scripts for ten dollars
and bills pills can fill it for
ten dollars then you have the
option to do that so it said
column and they were comfortable
with that so we we change that
to equal and then we struck out
mail order pharmacies because
they were afraid that even mail
order pharmacies that they
didn't have contracts with would
rush in and trying get some of
this business so it's only with
the mail order pharmacies that
are contracted with that health
insurer and and it ensures that
the prices are equal not just
column and it's done throughout
the bill so it looks like a lot
but it's really just those two
changes throughout the bill.
Would you like to I'm here from
your expert at this point yes
please madam chair thank you I
had.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee thank
you for having me this evening
now to speak on this bill my
name is Breanna Harrington I'm
currently the director pharmacy
or I'm nonprofit health center
with locations across New Mexico
the pharmacist working in New
Mexico for the past twelve years
I have seen patient access to
much needed medications
restricted by the business
practices of their health plan
PBM or pharmacy benefit managers
health bill one oh seven promote
access to care by removing PVM
mail order utilization and
allowing patients to choose
where and how they act their
pharmacy services
I've I've had patients living on
a fixed income come to me and
tell me that they cannot obtain
their medication because they
ran out of minutes from their
cell phone while on hold with
their mail order pharmacy from
another state I've also have
patient company concern that
they cannot get their
medications because they are
actually in between housing or
don't have a permanent physical
address in real I am very it
shall.
our community pharmacists are
well positioned to assist
patients with these types of
issues and additional we they're
well positioned to recognize and
adapt to meet the needs of the
patient patients often need
assistance with language or
reading maybe physical dexterity
our vision or hearing impairment
and while the pharmacist and
mail order out of state
pharmacies do you have
consultation services available
some a lot of these patients
really rely on that face to face
connection with their community
pharmacists in order to
understand how to correctly take
their medication that PBMs
practice of requiring patients
with complex chronic diseases to
obtain their specialty
medication from out of state
pharmacies is especially
troubling the specialized and
costly medications typically
require really strict adherence
and monitoring and it makes face
to face interaction even more
critical.
In addition many of these
specialized medications are for
very sensitive health conditions
such as HIV and our my
organization takes care of a lot
of patients living with HIV and
unfortunately I have had many
conversations with patients the
fact that there are health
information wasn't protected and
their HIV status was disclosed
because of the shifting air from
out of state pharmacy that their
insurance required them to use I
know specialty and mail order
pharmacies to meet rigorous
quality standards just like our
community pharmacies you what
mistakes do still happen and
many of these patients would
just really appreciate the peace
of mind of being able to
pick up their medication from
our local pharmacy.
Lastly and I'll be pretty brief
here many patient population do
not have any issues with mail
order out of state pharmacy
whatsoever on the receipt their
medications at the primary way
they receive their medication
this bill is not to prevent the
patient from using the
pharmacies it will not cause a
mass Adventist in patients
utilizing mail order out of
state pharmacies and therefore
it will not jeopardize me
stating to health plans might be
receiving as a result and the
fact I think I believe COVID has
even increase the use of mail
order pharmacy for patients that
are very comfortable using mail
order but unfortunately for many
of our most vulnerable
populations in New Mexico
required mail order utilization
is absolutely a barrier to care
my pharmacy teams have seen it
we need to actually wasted
medication poor health outcomes
and increased costs and use of
medical resources are H. B. one
oh seven allows community
pharmacies that are able to
accept the terms conditions and
requirements of the health plan
to fill medication for the
patient and remove these
barriers to care
thank you madam chair members of
the committee that is actually
all I have the name.
Madam chair I forgot one more
point we all saw what can happen
when the post office isn't
running at tip top shape and
it's not things I I mean I'm
seeing things on social media
where Christmas cards that were
mailed at thanksgiving our our
writing across town today and
also with some medications are
very temperature sensitive so if
you're diabetic and your insulin
needs to be refrigerated and
it's delivered to your front
porch at you know nine AM in
July and you don't get home till
eight PM you're in someone is
ruined and there's also the
problem with porch pirates I'm
if your medication is sitting
outside and then there's also
the people who don't have
delivery who have to go to the
post office to pick up their
mail and again things can be
ruined essentially sitting in a
post office where I grew up the
post office was not open on
weekends so if it got delivered
on Friday and you can get there
you are getting until Monday
whether you needed the
medication or not whether it
needs to be refrigerated and not
so thank you madam chair.
Thank you very much our vice
chair is going to take over now.
Thank you madam chair and
representative with that we will
go to our folks that have joined
zoom zoom for public comment we
are first going to put a pull up
and ask people if you like
participants in today's public
comment to weigh in whether you
are in support or in opposition
to this legislation and will
leave this up for thirty
seconds.
After that we're going to start
with public comment
asking those to weigh in first
in opposition to this bill if
you'd like to make a comment in
opposition to this bill and your
signed up on our is to you can
raise your hands now folks are
going to have a time to one
minute to offer comment today.
Madam chair our poll results are
up we have eleven people about
seventy nine percent of those
weighing in today in opposition
to this legislation and three
people twenty one percent in
support.
We'll go first to the public
comment if you'd like to wait
in.
Offering public comment in
opposition to house bill one of
seven we will call on you one by
one and we will have the time
right for one minute we're going
to start this evening with
Patrick block.
A good afternoon or good evening
madam chair members of the
committee and Pat blocking today
I speak on behalf of prime
therapeutics a pharmacy benefits
manager this bill six thirty for
consumers between mail order and
local pharmacies but I think
that there's a lot of evidence
that says that passing this bill
will not achieve that aim if you
look at the FIR notes this bill
creates a conflict between the
interests of community
pharmacies consumers and help
plants this holds especially
true for the state funded
programs this bill would
certainly benefit the community
pharmacies.
But consumers health plans and
likely both will pay higher
costs New Mexico self insurance
plans have been able to realize
significant cost savings by
using the mail order option as
part of their plan designed to
contain costs for their members
as somebody who's insured to the
right retiree health care
authority at it was just.
Dressing to read about the
concerns for long term financial
stability and that not allowing
them to take advantage of the
most economical drug procurement
would make precarious finances
worse so for this reason and
others you'll hear I ask you to
oppose this bill despite its
good intentions thank you.
Thank you I'm we will ask folks
this is a reminder please
introduce yourself and who
you're representing or speaking
for today next we go to brands
more.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Roy
Moore I am a registered lobbyist
for America's health insurance
plans it is a trade association
of health plans that have
members in the state of New
Mexico and the the simple point
here is that mail order saves
money and you've heard many
times throughout the years that
pharmaceuticals are very
expensive mail order is a way
that help plants combat that
problem and try to reduce costs
for insureds in the health
insurance area you know allowing
community pharmacies to
participate really does attack
the ability of health plans to
negotiate discounts past those
discounts on to their members
and as Mr black mentioned you
you're weighing the interests of
community pharmacies verses all
of the people who have health
insurance in the state of New
Mexico and you can see that real
difference in the cost in the
FIR it is noted there and
there's a significant cost to
everyone who has health
insurance coverage in the state
of New Mexico thank you for
listening to my comments.
Thank you next we'll go to
Regina Stivers.
Madam chair members of the
committee and Regina Stivers
director state affairs for
pharmaceutical care management
association and I'm here to
respectfully oppose house bill
one of seven mail service
pharmacies are a volume driven
business to purchase large
quantities of prescription drugs
and pass those savings on to New
Mexico residents as currently
written this bill requires
carriers to use in the mail
order pharmacy system that
agrees to their terms and
reimbursement rates by splitting
this purchasing power and
decreasing the ability to
purchase and all this
legislation will force insurers
to either increase the premiums
or increase co pays for their
insured the fiscal impact report
on house bill one of seven
prepared by your legislative
finance committee estimates
enactment of this bill will
increase costs to state agencies
between two and a half million
and seven and a half million
annually and does not include
commercial insurers the
legislation cost consumers by
paying community pharmacies more
without them having to meet the
exact same terms and conditions
of mail order pharmacies thank
you it.
Next we have more live shows.
Madam chair members of the
committee my live shows
registered lobbyist for Blue
Cross blue shield of New Mexico
BlueCross BlueShield recognizes
the critical role that community
pharmacies play in our health
care delivery system this is why
we work with the community
pharmacies and PBMs in twenty
nineteen to pass Senate bill for
fifteen requiring PBMs must
reimburse the pharmacy in mail
not less than the amount that
the PBM reimburses PPM affiliate
pharmacy in the same network for
providing the same or equivalent
services we have not had an
opportunity to view the
amendments to house bill one of
seven the believe that these
issues have been addressed and
that this legislation not needed
to have copayment parity between
mail order and community
pharmacy means insurers must
abandon incentives to use mail
order pharmacies which we know
provides medicine and services
at a cost savings plans member's
benefit plans like public school
Insurance Authority retiree
healthcare Thorgy why would we
limit mail service pharmacy
incentives which will raise
prescription.
Thank you for waiting and next
we have the Gina Harper.
Good evening madam chair are you
able to hear me.
Yes go ahead okay thank you so
much so my name is Dr lu Jian
and as hard from a pharmacist
and work with prime therapeutics
which is a PBM this partially
owned by Blue Cross blue shield
of New Mexico
I want to supplement some of the
things that instead previously
focused on
and.
Out of the financial impact on
the New Mexico state you
statutes and pace concerns from
the financial impact
we haven't seen the amendment
that the sponsor talk about but
certainly and certainly
appreciate the fact that she
addressed comparable verses
because when reimbursement rates
but there are there are still
some provisions that has to in a
quality in that the talks about
accepting the same terms and
conditions for mail order but
then section six use different
language altogether we're
touched up reasonable standards
terms and conditions I'm so
that's a concern for us.
Thank you I see no further hands
raised from those who would like
to speak in opposition to HB one
of seven is there anyone that
would like to speak in support
please raise your hands now.
Okay we're first going to sherry
dot said.
Madam chairman and members of
the committee my name is sherry
dots and and I am a volunteer at
the gate for a a RP we stand in
support of house bill one oh
seven for the beautiful of
reasons that representative
Thompson and Dr Harry have
previously stated thank you.
Thank you next we have Dale
Tinker.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I'm
Dale tanker I represent the New
Mexico pharmacists Association
we do stand in support of this
bill
the issue of parity and
reimbursement is covered in this
bill pharmacies would have to
accept the same reimbursement
that would be provided to the
other contracts one of the
issues that the PBMs and plants
don't like about this is that
they on those pharmacies that
they directed patients to they
on the mail order companies they
own the specialty pharmacies and
of course they don't want to
direct the patient somewhere
else we believe that it is very
narrow perspective and patients
ought to be able to choose which
pharmacies they use we are
concerned that patient choice
goes away I talked to two people
prior to the session that had to
change insurance plans because
their plan determined that they
were no longer going to cover
methods that the patients needed
and so they had to change plans
that is a concern thank.
Thank you seeing no further
hands up we will conclude our
public comment period.
Okay.
Madam chair.
Madam chair representative my
apologies here I am still Cherry
I see Representative
neighborhoods hand up if it's
appropriate now that we go to
committee questions.
Madam chair I would like to
answer I just just respond a
little bit some of the yeah I'm
first I want to say.
I I would ask you to notice who
was in opposition they were the
PBMs and
So it's we hear all the time
that oh my gosh the costs are
going to go up the costs are
going to go up the costs are
going to go up but in this bill
it specifically says that the
local pharmacies cannot charge
more and we also hear that only
by doing this full we get such a
good right well if it's that
great of a right I don't think
there's going to be a lot of
community pharmacies who can
match the right so I think
they're kind of talking out of
both sides of their mouth with
that madam chair and what that
will stand for questions.
Thank you madam chair I would
like to know if what we're going
to do about the amendment before
we go to Representative neighbor
might have we moved that
amendment for discussion.
No ma'am.
So so move okay.
Thank you.
Representative neighbor do you
have something on the amendment.
Well I don't have the amendment
in front of me so I would.
I would really appreciate a.
The representative worked with
go through
of the amendments so I can kind
of get an idea of where they're
fit and I like what she.
I liked her overview because I
think it address the issues that
I've had with respect this
legislation and so that makes if
it makes a the the costs the
same
bad addresses a huge problem in
my mind but but I'd like to
order to explain where the
amendments are and and what they
do because I'd I don't have that
piece of paper program I don't
do well on the computer.
Thank you Representative might
you also read the to number four
just for the yes that are
looking and shared thank you two
one nine six five seven point
one.
And I think I can do this
quickly it does the exact same
thing and not a number of
section fell on line to.
Right one second just so we can
give our members.
Listen up and share okay thank
you.
And when you read that number
one more time Representative yes
it's two one nine six five seven
point one okay thank you and I
have confirms that this
amendment is available in our
share Citrix folder I understand
we're not all looking at the
folder now but for those members
interested it's it's and share.
Go ahead and please explain it
Representative so as I said it's
it's just to changes that are
through that are the same
throughout the bill so on page
two nineteen in you strike or
participating mail order
pharmacy.
And that gets rid of the the
competition that was discussed
in one of that
so that leaves that for the
insurance companies to be able
to
contract with only one mail
order pharmacy and then again on
page two line twelve strike
column and ends in the third in
lieu thereof equal.
And then that's the exact same
change throughout all the
different sections of the bill
madam chair I can go through
them if you want me to but each
each section of the bill is the
same it's just we just have to
crosser teas and dot our I's in
each separate section.
Madam chair master question them
yes Representative neighbor.
Thank you madam chair and and
Representative so changing the
word compare a bowl to equal
Means that the.
The price.
That the insurance company has
to pay.
For the mail order prescription
has to match the price that the
local pharmacy would would then
charge
But.
But I guess.
There would not be a mechanism
to determine other factors that
went into that price so and so
we're just looking at the a yes
the retail price to get charged
back to the insurance company is
that correct.
Madam chair and Representative
neighbor that's that pretty much
sums it up yes.
So if you have a lot of people
take advantage or not take
advantage but a lot of people
are to have their local
pharmacists fill the
prescription.
Long term that may decrease the.
Real competitive relationship
between the insurance company of
a mail order company.
It could have some affects on
that are I would suppose
I like I like the change and it
certainly makes it more
difficult for me to advocate
against it if it's the same
price I'll be listening to the
rest of the debate
Representative the I thank you
for making that amendment.
Committee do we have any other
questions or debate on the
amendment.
We have to adopt an amendment.
Thank you.
Madam chair do we have any
opposition to the amendment.
Seem shaking.
No okay I'm Madam.
Amendment is adopted.
back to the bill.
Representative neighbor do you
mean to have your hand up again.
Representative.
Thank you madam chair so so now
that we have amended bill
But I think the the issue
becomes.
Well the price may be the same.
Does that change the competitive
advantage of the insurance
company going to a mail order.
Outfit in the long run and would
in the long run yet have a.
have the effect of may be
increasing the cost of
Prescription medication.
Madam chair.
I will start with that and then
I will let the doctor and take
over but as you heard that all
the people who spoke in
opposition talk about how they
can get a much lower rate by
going with mail order so what it
appears to me is it really it
truly a much lower rate there
will not be a lot of pharmacies
who were able to meet meet that
so I don't think it's a major
deal I think there are things
that we cannot possibly capture
in in a price like that are more
former colleague that I spoke of
if he had had a major medical
issue and ended up needing
surgery or something along those
lines then that the cost savings
of having you know ten or twenty
people I'm in Santa Fe using the
local pharmacy as opposed to the
mail order is going to be more
than out weight and and that's a
problem with our system that we
can't look at what we're
potentially saving in terms of
of health care costs quality of
life and those kinds of things
plus I believe it's also a jobs
program I mean that and when
we're getting everything mail
order we are not having any jobs
in New Mexico who.
Just speak up whereas if we can
keep these local pharmacies
working even if it's a CVS or
Walgreens those people's
paycheck goes back into the
economy of the local the local
economy when we have a mail
order pharmacy out of New Jersey
we're not going to ever see that
money so you know you will hear
that argument I don't think that
it's it's not is there yes I
think it's one of those trying
to protect your turf kind of
arguments madam.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representative I I guess you
know bottom line is that.
There there's really no
incentive for the mail order
pharmacies in the long term to
offer maybe better prices to the
insurance company if they see a
substantial decrease in volume
because people are taking
advantage of our are you know
going down the street to their
local pharmacist and so I I
could see how maybe the mail
order pharmacy would be less
inclined that you enter into a
more lucrative deal with with
the insurance company but this
is one of those deals where on
the one hand we're trying to
save money on on prescription
medication and all the other
hand we have our local
pharmacists who are of course
wanting us to our.
Have.
I guess.
We use the term we use in the
last debate more level playing
field so they can compete with
these bigger mail order entities
and and like you said the it's
the local folks verses the maybe
the cost savings up so it's a
it's a it's a difficult one for
for me anyway in that regard but
I appreciate the the amendment
thank you have and
hi
I'm kind of at a crossroads in
this sport your friends or do
you support your friends all
also for my friends but I hope I
don't lose too many in the
process thank you madam chair.
Thank you next we have Madam
chair representative to see.
Thank you madam chair
Remiss if I I didn't
I really appreciate the spelling
appreciate representative
Thompson but I do I just want to
say how vital our community
pharmacists are to the lifeblood
of the community and
Dealtaker does a really good
job.
Trying to advocate for the we
used to have a community
pharmacist among our
in our caucus and it was really
really awful awful to us in in
making policy but my husband's
pharmacist passed away
unexpectedly in December and we
sort of feel like we lost a
family member.
She was like a second doctor
because he you know when when my
husband husband sees a number of
different health care providers
and we would get a new
prescription Canberra also would
call me up and say well now he
can't be taking this would.
I'm when I so no he's not taking
that one anymore but I mean he's
litter explicitly on a life
saver and I I basically told the
ability group is going to be
providing that kind of care and
reminded me in some ways about
how to set goals to set a late
lobbyist to was a fixture out in
eastern New Mexico explained.
To our Education Committee many
years ago that.
When his family is.
They were very poor and the way
he and his siblings not their
health care was rural school
nurse is it right.
Kind of reminded me of that when
I think of how important the
committee pharmacists pharmacist
is to us so if we can find a way
to save them they are indeed and
I'm.
Their own kind of treasure not
not something that would be
through the cultural affairs but
through the.
health system.
And I I think that the amendment
certainly curious any objections
the big companies could have but
I I'm I'm I'm very much in
support of it and I wanted to
say so and in memory of economic
and and
with thanks to the sponsor.
Thank you madam chair next we
have Representative Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair my
internet is very unstable today
so we'll we'll try this I I
couldn't agree madam chair with
madam chair Jaycees comments
about our US small pharmacies in
particular in rural areas this
isn't for every pharmacy is not
for every patient it's not of
concern to many many and even
during the COVID I think it was
mentioned that farm mail order
increased from many it's
it's what they need to get their
medications to be able to have
that delivery but over the years
and I carry this bill one point
before Representative Thomson
took it out of we hear from
people who were delivered
medications that went to the
wrong address.
And or that the temperature
weather hot or cold was
inappropriate for the medication
or and I think mail order was
mentioned I can attest I've had
several things that were mailed
around Christmas that were just
received a.
This last week I'm and there are
some conditions at HMP but in
particular hepatitis C. if you
missed any doses you got to
start the course of treatment
all over again and so for some
patients on some
medications that is absolutely
critical that they get don't
miss doses and for people who
have in stable housing or live
in a place that's difficult to
find and and you can't deliver
actually in person they have to
have a PO box
it it it's it's critical to have
the option and I I actually
don't think they'll be a lot of
pharmacists that take pharmacies
that take this up that can make
the price but they might and
there are some we've heard from
some who want to and our ready
willing and able to take that
out for the kinds of patients
that they see so
with that madam chair I want to
just say I stand in strong
support of this as well thank
you thank you next we have
Representative Townsend.
Yes.
Chairman thank you I'm house
bill one of seven.
As amended bill now pass.
A second.
We have a due pass motion one of
seven as amended by
Representative Townsend and a
second by Representative
Armstrong.
Making sure there's no further
debate As.
Going down.
with that madam at quick might
you call the roll please.
Representative Akan yes.
Representative Armstrong.
Yes.
Representative Cook no.
Mr speaker.
Representative Eli yes.
Representative Lewis.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative neighbor.
Yes.
Representative Rehm yes.
Representative Townsend yes.
Representative Mister speaker.
This is.
Yes yes work.
Mr speaker is unmuted really
quickly if we go back to him
okay.
Yes can you hear me.
Now we can okay all right
thanks.
The by check.
Yes.
Madam chair yes.
Eleven yes one.
Representative.
Eleven to when you have a to
pass on house bill one of seven
as amended.
Representative Townsend you
still have your hand up did you
want to make one more comment.
I don't think so okay thank
thank you madam chair and I just
want this committee to remember
I brought you a quick easy bill
on a on an evening when you've
been here for awhile so you all
only one thank you madam chair
and representative if you
remember that I made to the past
motion on your well I will never
for.
Thank you you're welcome.
So madam chair.
Okay our last bill is House Bill
one fifty eight and
Representative McQueen it'd.
The co sponsors are you putting
that on tonight.
Madam chair of Representative
are the ones but the bill on are
always shared.
Okay great Representative
Fajardo welcome.
Good to see you.
Move to table.
Okay.
Thank you thank you thank you
madam chair and thank you
representative
I just logging on so am I ready
to proceed or did you want to
introduce or how do you want to
proceed madam.
Why don't you go ahead and
explain Hospital one fifty
eight.
you know you don't have any
equipment for the GM I do not I
do not we did have conversations
in the last committee but I want
to wait to we got here I do have
an expert witness because let
him into the room Mr Greg
Williams.
Sure.
We give them a minute to that.
Thank you is with us now thank
you I'm thank you thank you
madam chair and thank you
members of the committee so this
is a simple they'll this is you
know it's a huge as you can tell
it's it's one paragraph and
basically what it's doing it's
asking and that anytime we
create a task force you know the
the
created by the legislative body
that those task force meetings
are subject to the open meetings
act the reason we the reason we
feel like that is so important
is because we are doing Task
Force you know sometimes to
create policy sometimes you get
information and for other other
reasons and what's happened
often on is sometimes these task
force are kind of done in the in
a silo or kept in the dark and
we believe that if the
legislature is going to create
policy and we're gonna great
task force those meetings need
to be subject to the vote to
meetings and I'm gonna let my co
sponsor Representative McQueen
also share some words.
Thank you madam chair thank your
is part of so we see this issue
to start per coming up a lot the
last year to start tacking on
language that every memorial we
came through the house and then
sometimes.
There was confusion is on there
is no on there you know was a
put on the committee and this
just so the issue once and for
all so I think this is a good
approach thank you madam chair
thank your is part of.
Thank you madam chair and if my
because it might expert
witnesses in the room let me ask
him if he wants to say the words
Mr Williams.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
Check the opportunity to speak
with you tonight.
just by way of background I am a
board member of the New Mexico
foundation for open government
and a past president of that
organization for several years I
have been involved I'm an
attorney with litigation
regarding the open meetings act
Representative at various
seminars of journalists and
members of the.
Public in regard to open
meetings issues.
Our what I think is significant
about this bill and why I would
urge its passage is it reflects.
That so much of the important
decision making.
Work that's done in regard to
public matters sometimes happens
outside of of a more formal
process.
When this when the legislature
for example a few years ago made
the decision to open committee
meetings to the public it was in
recognition that.
Much of the the hard work and
discussion in real fought and
input that was going into
legislation was not just
happening on the floor of the
house and the Senate but in
committee meetings and the same
is true for these task forces.
Because they are they have
played important role in policy
making it's important to make
them as accessible to the public
as possible there's a couple of
reasons for this one is that you
have you you have closed tasks
task forces of this type then
they tend to be almost directed
solely at the discretion of one
or two people people who believe
that that limits the access that
the public and others have in
terms of agendas and topics and
viewpoints and so the task
forces are much less effective
because they do not have more
widespread input.
Second of all is the recognition
that underlies the open meetings
act which is that policy making
and government is much more
effective.
And has much more oversight when
it's done in a public manner and
if you want these task forces to
be above board and to be
effective then you have to make
them as open as possible and
making them subject to the open
meetings act would accomplish
that thank you for your time I'm
happy to answer any questions.
The audience if we have anybody
out there looks like we do.
first we're going to do a couple
all those in favor of house bill
one fifty eight would you please
say yes and those in opposition
the state now.
We have.
Okay we're going to go twenty
seconds.
I don't think we can close it
now and we have a hundred
percent in support it's only two
people.
I'm gonna see if they would like
to speak either of them yes
first I have now integers.
And
good morning good afternoon I
just want to I am the Melanie
majors I am the executive
director of the New Mexico
foundation for open government
and I stand behind my boss Greg
Williams supporting this bill we
do feel that it's important we
feel that US forces point
meetings are important and we
believe this bill should pass to
make sure that the law is quite
clear thank you very much.
Thank you Jason Espinoza.
Madam chair members of the
committee Jason Espinoza
registered lobbyists with the
New Mexico where we stand and
strong support of this
legislation I am just a personal
note I participated on on
several task forces that were
created out of legislative
memorials and I know many of the
agencies tried to comply with
the open meetings act I just
leave that passes is this
legislation would just create
that standard so that everyone
knows how to operate moving
forward so we stand and support
thank you.
Thank you and.
The building.
Yes thank you madam chair thank
you members of the committee I
am a resident of New Mexico for
thirty five years and I would
just like to stand in support of
this bill I think in the for all
the reasons that in the support
of open government and
transparency it's despite all
that we have this past and I
hope you can support it thank
you.
Thank you thank you very much
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you representative I was just
taught double to double triple
checking the the bill that it's
it wasn't limited to task force
but similar anything similar as
in and advisory group I know
I've done I've been guilty of of
memorials creating various
groups and sometimes are called
task force and sometimes advisor
groups and sometimes workgroup
St
and so forth so I just wanted to
make sure that the languages
inclusive it looks like like it
is so I'm satisfied with that I
think when we create
legislatively such
such groups is to seek input on
public policy and and report
back to us so I I agree with
making that making those open
thank you.
Not seeing other hand yes I am
Representative McQueen co
sponsor go back.
Like to move in the past.
Second.
Have a motion for to pass
Representative McQueen a second
Representative Eli.
Is there further discussion on
the bill.
It is there any objection to the
Jew past March.
If you will raise your hand.
Okay then I don't think we need
to call the roll
we will show all members present
voting in the affirmative and
you have to pass Representative
part of Representative queen and
your co sponsors.
And good luck on the floor I
hope we get such it.
A good hearing their.
Thank you madam chair thank you
members of the committee I am
off to our thank you very much
women's caucus is now going to
meet so I gotta go to my next
meeting so thank you that's what
I thought that's what I ask
Representative where he was
presented the bill because I
know you have that it that's
coming up.
Okay can drop in on that thank
you all members we've had along
committee today and I appreciate
the hard work thank you very
much.
We're adjourned until Wednesday
all right.
