Representative Hall.
Here.
Representative Hoffman B. Hill.
Representative Martinez.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen.
Representative Reeb, here.
Leader Sapansky
Madam Vice Chair, here.
Madam chair.
Here you have a quorum, madam
chair.
Very good. So the first item on
our agenda is House Bill 16
fentanyl trafficking sentences
representative little.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and good
afternoon, members of the
committee.
Uh, I am here this afternoon
joined by Mark Baker, my expert
witness. He is an attorney.
And let me begin by saying.
But
From Farmington to Roswell.
Returned to Demming.
House to Las Cruces, Gallop to
Duke and Carry.
Albuquerque, Socorro, and towns
and villages in between.
For them, for all of us, last
week was Survivor Day for
families of gun violence.
Madame Charon members.
I submit today that every day is
survivor's Day for families of
opioid overdoses.
Their families
The survivors and neighbors are
asking for our, our help to curb
this crisis.
In my mind, addressing this
crisis is a multi-pronged
effort.
No one thing will fix it. It
requires compassion.
Treatment and consequences for
those who prey on our citizens.
And again, their families are
asking us to take action.
Bill 16 amends the criminal
sentencing Act.
Or fentanyl traffickers and
dealers in New Mexico.
Increasing the sentence
depending on the amount
traffickers possess.
Madam Chair, again, I would like
to introduce Mark Baker.
Um, my expert witness, and with
that we stand for questions.
Mr. Baker, do you like to
elaborate or add anything?
Madam Cha just briefly, the uh
the bell would um
Adopt 3 potential sentencing
enhancements, none of which are
mandatory minimums, um, and it
has been 3 years would be
available for sentencing judges
for someone who had 100 to 500
pills.
Containing fentanyl.
More than 500 pill
would trigger and
Enhancement of um
Up to 5 years and if you are a
leader or organizer and there's
a list of words to use to
describe that. You would also
have a 5 year available.
Enhancement.
Um
Fentanyl is 50 times more
potent.
and heroin, um.
100 times more potent than
morphine.
And um.
The risk of every pill is death.
I'm sorry for the audio. I don't
know your fault. You might want
to pull it back a little. We
found it does less of that's a
little far. How's that?
I think that's better. We'll
see.
So my last comment was just
that, um,
Any individual fentanyl pills
potentially deadly. um, I have
high school kids.
And they
Carry around tests.
To be able to check for
fentanyl, which is something
that
Um
You know, when kids make
mistakes when they're young is
sometimes kids do. You didn't
used to have to think that they
needed to check anything they
got to make sure it didn't
contain a deadly substance. With
that, we'll stand for questions.
Thank you, Mr. Baker and thank
you, Representative. We'll go to
the audience, um, first we'll
take those in opposition. I'm
gonna allocate 5 minutes to each
side in the in person and then.
2 minutes online.
I ask that you try to keep your
remarks to about, you have a
pretty full agenda, some of the
other bills will have some
comment as well. So those
wishing to speak in opposition,
please come up to the.
Um, microphone, please.
If you, and if you're gonna be
speaking line up, it will, it
will facilitate a prompter.
Comment period.
My name is Courtney Montoya. I'm
a community engagement
specialist with the ACLU of New
Mexico.
We appreciate the efforts of the
sponsors to address this serious
issue.
We respectfully ask you to vote
no on HB 16. We know that
increasing sentences does not
benefit crime control. Instead,
it perpetuates racial
disparities and contributes to
prison overcrowding, further
straining resources for our
state.
This bill revives a tough on
crime, over-incarceration policy
that we know does not work, and
increasing sentences without
providing people the necessary
community support they need.
Isn't feasible. Additionally,
the bill will cost our state
resources that can
And should be directed to the
treatment and other intervention
programs that communities need.
The way the money will be spent
under this bill has no
statistically significant effect
on recidivism in the cartral
system.
The mandatory minimum provision
removes discretion from the
judge's in sentencing, and these
mandatory minimum sentences
don't benefit crime control and
create further harms.
Thank you so much. Anyone else
wishing to speak in opposition.
To the bill.
In in the audience.
All right.
Go online. Anyone wishing to
speak in opposition to the bill
online, please raise your hand.
Please raise your hand if you
wish to speak in opposition.
All right, I don't see any hands
raised, um, let's go to the
audience now, those wishing to
speak in support.
Please line up your um behind
the gentleman with the
microphone and.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, good afternoon,
Troy chief New Mexico State
Police. State police stands in
support of this bill,
appreciates the sponsor bringing
it forward, especially given in
the targeted approach uh in this
bill towards a large scale uh
traffickers, um.
Hundreds of individuals die from
overdoses in this state every
year and thousands more have
non-fatal overdoses, um, we feel
that, uh, a, uh, that this bill
is, is much needed. I oversaw
state police narcotics for many
years on a statewide basis. Um,
I will say,
The issue that I have seen
generally across the state has
not been um.
Individual being receiving too
difficult of a punishment. The
majority of the time, we would
arrest the same traffickers over
and over again and not until
they had been arrested after
they were on probation and
violated their probation 2nd,
3rd, 4th time that we had
arrested him for trafficking
where they significant
consequences go into effect, so
we appreciate the sponsor
bringing this bill and hopefully
you will support it. Thank you.
Thank you. Anyone else wishing
to speak and support in the
audience.
Hey, I don't see anyone, anyone
online. I do see a couple people
online, um.
So Carol Santag.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. I'm Carlos
Sontag, the president and CEO of
uh Better Together New Mexico,
and we stand in support of House
Bill 16.
We're very concerned about drug
use and most especially about
trafficking of the drugs in the
state. We've got people that are
being killed by this some
Not even intending to use the
drug. Something's gotta be done,
and until the Mexico takes a
tough on crime stances against
fentanyl traffickers. We're
going to continue to have a
problem in the state. We
encourage you to support this
bill. Thank you.
Thank you. Um.
Val
Westfall
Madam Chair and members of the
committee. I'm Duval Westfall,
executive vice president of
policy and programs at the
Greater Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce.
And it's no secret that fentanyl
is a major threat to the lives
of New Mexicans. The good news
is that according to the New
Mexico Department of Health's
recent report, overdose deaths
have declined slightly. The bad
news is it's still almost 1000
people. Mexican cartels are
importing and peddling this
dangerous drug nationwide. It
often comes in the form of fake
pills laced with other dangerous
drugs, and we've got to do
everything we can to stop the
drug trade and punch those that
are literallyurveying death.
Hospital 16 establishes enhanced
penalties for those trafficking,
not consuming large quantities
of fentanyl from 3 to 5 years,
depending on the amount after
findings of facts by a judge and
a jury. This bill is targeted at
those trafficking the drugs, not
the victims. That's exactly the
right approach, and we
respectfully urge you to vote
yes on health bill 16. Thank you
so much.
Thank you. Anyone else online,
um, wishing to comment.
I see uh Steve Cisneros.
Can you guys hear me?
Mr. Cisneros, you can proceed.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
This is a great bill, uh,
I, I lost my brother in 2014 to
have foundanyl overdose. Uh, I
just looked at it really
quickly. I'm kind of a, a
numbers guy and I just wanted to
bring up that 2 mg of fentanyl
is considered the deadly dose by
the DEA, um, so when you guys
get into the micro on that,
you're gonna have about 500
doses to a gram, which is
insane. So just as you guys move
this further, if you could talk
with your uh expert witnesses
about potentially lowering those
amounts.
To the reflective index, people
are dying, people have been
dying. Uh, thank you for your
work. I appreciate it. Thank
you. All right. Um, now let's go
back to the sponsor, anything
you wish to add represented
before I go to the committee.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, the only thing I want
to underscore based on public
comment is this is not a
mandatory minimum.
Our judges will still consistent
with New Mexico's approach to
criminal justice, be able to
take into consideration.
Visual characteristics of each.
And adjust accordingly within
range. It
does underscore the significance
of fentanyl and the threat that
it poses, but there is no
mandatory minimum.
Thank you. Um, I have
Representative Reeb on the list.
I'm thinking Madam Chair, um,
and.
Representative and expert, that
was my question.
The mandatory because normally
when you're dealing with an
enhancement, it is a mandatory,
especially when you're dealing
with the jury finding or a judge
finding, so this is not like a
firearm enhancement, Madam
Chair, representative and
expert, it's good, it's just
discretionary, the 3 and the 5.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, yes.
OK, so just reading through the
bill, um, Madam Chair and
representing an expert, so if
you traffic fentanyl.
You're gonna have 0 to 9 years
under this statute.
Um, that's, is that correct?
That would be the default under
current law, yes.
And then if you possess
This amount of pills, well,
it'll be, I guess, anywhere
from.
02 15 years.
On the first one, the additional
3 would be 12.
12 years, 0 to 12, correct?
Madam Chair, uh, Representative
Ree, yes. OK, and then the next
section is the 5.
5 years, um, so you're adding
another 5 onto the 9.
Um, how will this affect Madam
Chair and representative the 2nd
offense traffickers who are
mandatory.
18 years, so.
Guessing it'd be with the
finding 18 + 3 + 5.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I, um,
I would imagine that because it
would be discretionary if you
get to the mandatory 18, you
wouldn't see a lot of sentences
going above mandatory 18. It's
my understanding in the state
system on a second offense, you
could get 18 reduced to no less
than 12.
And if you applied this because
of mitigating.
Oh, OK. mitigation.
Um
And so I wouldn't
I think it theoretically could
be available in a particularly
serious case, but I wouldn't
expect that to be the norm.
OK, uh, madam chair and expert
and I.
Not that I'm complaining, it is
pretty much that it's not, it's
not basically uh you cannot
suspend or defer it. You could
mitigate it. I get to see it
mitigated, at least where I
practice, um, so it is 18
generally and, and that's what
the current law is. It's
nothing, you know, that deals
with your bill, um, but the big
question I had is the section C,
Madam Chair, I, I don't, I
really kind of want to go
through what those words mean,
so I understand they're not
really defined, um.
Recruited, coordinated,
organized, supervised, directed,
managed, or financed another.
Can you explain Mountain Chair
and representative and expert
kind of what you're looking to
do with that section.
Madam Chair Representative Reeb,
one of my, one of the goals.
this legislation was
get people who are involved in
the drug trade and not addicts
who are merely
Perhaps selling a pill to buy
their next pill, for example, at
an extreme level, and this would
be to ensure that regardless of
quantities, if you are setting
up a drug.
Enterprise, if you are starting
to run other dealers, you have
now crossed into a different
level of drug trafficking that
is getting pretty far removed
from addiction and involving
other people in the drug trade
to spread the poison more
broadly in it's targeted towards
that.
And Madam Chair and expert and
um representative. I like that.
I, I'm wondering though defining
some of these terms.
It seemed different. I've never
seen these terms really in
criminal law, um, you know if
they're defined anywhere in the
criminal code man.
Madam Chair Representative Reeb,
I don't believe so. I, I was
operating on the assumption that
these would be the types of
terms that judges could develop
a judicial definition of that
would conform to
No common sense and plain
language, but if there were
definitions that the body
wanted, that's a possibility.
Um, it's just
They seemed within the realm of
terms that you see courts
interpret and apply.
The federal system on this is a
mess with leader organizer. I
did not want to borrow.
Their definitions because
they're all kind of a matter of
degree and
These seemed more concrete than
that type of language.
OK, so, madam chair and
representative an expert, you
then you're now trying to get
the person who's.
The person above the one selling
it.
There may be another one above
that and another one above that,
but.
I cut the plea deals, try to
work our way up to the top,
basically, is that kind of the
idea and share son.
Madam Chair Representative Reeb,
yes.
And the last question I have,
and I don't even know this, but
we discussed it. Is there, is
there liquid fentanyl?
chair expert.
or not.
Madam Chair Representative Reeb,
I actually don't know if it's
been converted to a liquid. I
know it's inhaled. I know it's
smoked, and I know it's
manufactured to look like
pharmaceutical pills, um.
that I don't know about liquid.
Right, and so I'm, I'm just
trying to think out loud my
share, so if it is in the form
where it's, you know, being
injected or whatever. I'm not
gonna have pills.
Um, I'm not exactly sure how
people, you know, do fentanyl.
I, I have heard that it isn't
liquid and obviously you can use
it in different ways, so I'm
just trying to figure out how
this statute will grab those
people also, Madam chair.
Madam Chair Representative
Reeve, it's um.
Let me find the
The language here. It's a
detectable amount of fentanyl.
Um
And so you would do the chemical
testing regardless of the form,
whether it's an inhalant, a
pill.
And if there's a fentanyl.
Detected
It would count towards the
total.
Representative, do you have an
idea the
Between 10 and 50 g of fentanyl
like how much that is?
Just for the average person, me,
I'm even trying to understand.
I, I can think of pills, but
I've been thinking they're gonna
be pills possess a lot more
fentanyl in a maybe, you know,
laced in another form or
something like that, so with all
of these, Madam Chair, have to
go to a lab and then it's all
just broken down.
By the percentages in the
different whatever substance it
is, is that the idea of Madam
chair.
Madam Chair Representative Reeb.
Yes, there, there would be
testing that would be required
like there would be in any drug
prosecution, so I assume that
would follow the normal course.
In terms of the relative amounts
just by way of example, Colorado
passed a
Fentanyl bill and their
thresholds were.
Lower than this, um.
They increased, they use
presumptive sentences, and they
would have a presumptive
required 4-year sentence that
would only be reduced if there
was proof of extraordinary
mitigating circumstances for 40
pills and
So we're doing.
Um
100, 2.5 times that amount to
really try to create a gap
between
If you have a user who happens
to just be a user but carrying a
substantial amount before you
would trigger the enhancement,
you're at a high level of
fentanyl.
Um, it's a balancing act, and
there's, there's no magic to it,
but um,
40, um, I think it's 40.
Grams triggers the federal
mandatory minimum of 5 years.
And that would be
400
Madam Chair, um, representative
and expert, do you worry that.
I mean
Let me ask this question first,
do you?
Know how many is.
Average, um, back in the law
enforcement if you possess 10
pills or 25 pills, um, how would
your officer testify as far as
If that is uh traffic, have you
gotten any background on that
from law enforcement of what is
considered personal use and
what's considered.
Traffic, I'm sure.
Madam Chair Representative Reeb,
yes, there's a number of factors
that go into possession with the
intent to distribute under
settled law, and those would
remain the standard to determine
whether it was possession with
intent to distribute that would
bring it in the drug trafficking
charge in terms of relative
amounts, I've heard that the
state police, and I don't want
to speak for them, but in
talking to prosecutors have
talked about 50 to 100 pills
being really where you're
crossing the line into
trafficking, um,
it's, it's tougher to balance
because
These pills can be sold as cheap
as a couple of dollars a pill
and so you could have somebody
who had $20 worth of fentanyl
and it could be a number of
pills. So in terms of the line
drawing, this was an effort to
To capture more serious
traffickers.
OK. And Madam Chair, an expert,
and um.
Representative, I
I just wonder if we're gonna
lose a lot of traffickers by
making this so high, um, instead
of making it a.
An amount that
I mean, I would just argue.
If I was trying to, if I was a
defense attorney, well, look,
you've got the statute here that
says
100 to 150 pills is, is gonna
give you an enhancement, which
is trafficking. I don't want to
tie our hands, Madam Chair
Representative, and expert that
if maybe somebody has 30 pills,
maybe that is trafficking, I
don't know, you know what, what
that is to me, that seems like a
lot of pills for personal use,
but I mean.
Not a fentanyl user, so I guess
I don't know that, but there's
something to think about um.
You know, making it this high.
Really, I mean, I know you're
going after trying to get the
the big large ones, but what
about the ones that let's just
say 50 or 75, um, Madam Chair,
is now that just gonna be
considered possession or is
there gonna be an argument
that's not trafficking.
kind of chair.
Expert, so that that's just a
concern I have.
Madam Chair Representative Reed,
my thought on that would be.
The factors under the case law
would still control whether it
qualified as a possession with
intent to distribute charge, and
then this would just be for
purposes of sentencing and in
terms of some of the arguments
we heard in the against the
bell, trying to avoid using the
um criminal justice system to
treat addiction. This would
avoid incarcerating people that
are
ly addicted, not that that's not
serious, but that are addicted
and have, you know, more than
you or I would wanna have
because I think you were, I
would
Almost certainly face death or
at least be in a world of hurt
if we took a single fentanyl
pill, but
Kind of like representative
Little was talking about in
terms of striking the the
balance between providing
resources for people suffering
from addiction to combat
addiction and try to eradicate
it that way while also
A stick
To provide consequences for
dealers and traffickers who were
taking advantage of people's
addiction, this, this was trying
to strike that balance.
I can't claim that it's perfect,
but that's the goal.
And, and I'm, I'm gonna support
this bill. I just have one more
question just because I'm trying
to figure out how this is gonna
work in the every every day.
Prosecution, um.
You keep stating that it will.
Whether it's trafficking or.
For uh distribution or whatever
it might be, it's what the
current case law says, um, can
you explain, Madam Chair and
Representative and expert.
What you believe you would have
to have in order to prove
trafficking fentanyl, besides,
obviously these high numbers, I
mean, I'm just wondering.
I, I understand methamphetamine
and, you know, fentanyl is kind
of a new deal, but if we're
we're limiting pills and
figuring that out, what, what in
your opinion is gonna be enough
for
Us to charge
Trafficking fentanyl, maybe not
with the enhancement.
Madam Chair Representative Reeb,
my understanding of the current
state of New Mexico law is that
if you, if you're prosecuting
based on a deal.
And that's sufficient too.
To prosecute his trafficking.
full stop.
If it's a possession of a
certain quantity, then there are
a list of factors that the court
goes through, and I'm trying to
find the case site right now.
But it's things like having an
officer certified as an expert
in law enforcement and drug
trafficking to testify about the
presence of scales, other
indicia of tracking like little
baggies where you're separating
it out for distribution rather
than personal use, and those are
traditionally been used with
other drugs in New Mexico State
court. I think the approach
Could still be the same from law
enforcement, it just would be
that this enhancement would then
be available following a
conviction.
OK, um, thank you. I appreciate
you um taking the time to answer
my questions. Thank you,
Representative. Uh thank you
expert. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative,
Representative Hall and then
Representative Martinez.
Madam Chair, Mister Baker,
representative.
Um, I had a couple of questions
here. Um,
When do we have any examples?
Of large seizures.
That you guys have
for
Point
Uh, according, if I remember
right, 28 g equals 1 ounce.
So to put that
Put that in perspective. Do we
have any large seizures, large
numbers of pills that have been
seized, you're aware of?
And
Uh
Madam Chair, Representative
Hall, um,
What I do know is that a common
metric in the fentanyl dealing
industry is a called a boat,
which should be 1000 pills, and
I believe that there have been
takedowns of many boats of
fentanyl. Um, I can't give you a
number on a local takedown
that's involved a certain
quantity, but I've, I've seen
pictures of the US attorney
standing next to staggering
numbers of pills.
Madam Chair,
just, I know.
I mean 2020, 2021, the New
Mexico State Police near Zuni
took off approximately, I
believe it was 35,000 pills in
one traffic stop. So it 28 g per
1 ounce.
And just doing some very, very
rough math because anyone that
knows me can attest to the fact
I don't know math. That's a lot
of dope.
Is that fair to say?
Madam Chair, Representative
Hall, that's absolutely a fair
statement.
And Madam Cha, do the, the.
How deadly this drug is. I know
all of our law enforcement have
to carry Narcan.
Constantly uh on them because of
this.
And no nationwide we've lost.
Uh
Drug detecting canines.
2 fentanyl
Overdoses for dogs just as
they're sniffing cars, the very,
very serious crime, so.
When we look at this, um, I, I
began to
I applaud this bill because I
was looking at uh
Facts USA that in 2022 we were
second in the nation, 2nd in the
nation.
Infantal deaths.
So I, I applaud your work on
this. I support this bill, and
thank you for your time, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Representative. I
have Representative Martinez and
then Speaker Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative Little.
An expert
I love this film. I think it's a
great idea.
I'm, I just need one question
answered.
Satisfied my curiosity.
That's on page 2.
Uh, the end of line two and
dream.
Says uh regardless of its
concentration.
Can you explain?
First of all, what that means
and then
Why, Madam Chair, Representative
Martinez, yes, the concern is
that fentanyl's being added to a
lot of other street drugs and
down to marijuana and so when I
was talking about my kids, um,
having the ability to
test for fentanyl and other
parents giving their kids
something that tests for it.
It's because there's a huge
concern that it's adulterating
other drugs. Those drugs are
serious enough as it is, but if
you add fentanyl and someone
doesn't know that the drug
contains fentanyl, you end up
with some of these death cases
that they've talked about
because
Somebody's using what they
expect to get them a little bit
high and instead it's a lethal
dose dose of fentanyl.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative, um.
So it's basically
Allowing for those.
Those that are laced with
fentanyl, great.
Thank you very much. Thank you,
Madam Chair, Representative.
So we have um.
Speaker Martinez and then
Representative McQueen.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for said Little and
Mr. Baker, thank you for
bringing this bill forward. Um,
I want to commend you for moving
on this so quickly. This is
something that is impacting our
communities, particularly in in
our hometown, especially hard,
um.
And it is cost, it's, it's
taking a lot of innocent lives.
Um, it's, it's, it's tricky, and
then I appreciate it's line of
questioning because I think it
really goes to the heart of the
problem, right? These, these
folks are trafficking and
incredibly large amounts.
Um, this is a huge industry.
Um, you know, we know.
That
Uh, close to 90% of the fentanyl
trafficked into this country is
coming through legal ports of
entry.
And trafficked by United States
citizens.
That means that it's not just
The cartels on the other side.
That are responsible for this.
We've got a lot of American
citizens who are participating.
In this
Um, terrible industry.
And it is pretty scary, Madam
Chair, representative, as you
know.
Um
The impact of this drug on, on,
on the streets.
Um, as a heroin.
Uh, was not bad enough, and of
course for those of us in
northern New Mexico, we've
Lived with the heroin epidemic
for generations. Uh, you go down
to the South Valley of
Albuquerque, um, same thing,
right for generations people
have lived with the.
Threat of heroin in their
communities. And now with
fentanyl.
It's a completely different ball
game.
Um
Not perfect, not, you know, the
piece of legislation that will
fix the problem, but it's
certainly an important step in
the right direction. So I just
wanted to, on the record commend
you.
Or the hard work you all have
done to put this together, uh,
and to you, Madam Chair, and to
this committee for, for giving
it. um, the hearing and the time
that it deserves. Thank you,
Madam Chair and thank you,
representative.
Thank you Speaker, uh,
Representative McQueen.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you Madam chair.
Um, manure, um, said Mr.
Speaker, so there was some
discussion about whether or not
this was a mandatory minimum.
Um, and I understand that it's
not, um, but I, I had a question
about the structure and the
language.
on page 1 line 24.
It says shall be enhanced by.
And
That structure strikes me as a
little bit odd.
The shell is certainly a
mandatory term.
And up to is.
permissive.
So I wonder if that
Is that a typical structure is
that the right structure.
Should it say me?
Enhanced by up to?
Madam Chair Representative
McQueen, this is tracked off of
other enhancements in the same
section, so it's the language is
structured similarly.
I'll just tell you how I
conceptualize it. It expands the
available range from 0 to 9 to 0
to 12 where it's applied.
Functionally, what I think it
does is it sends a message to
the judges who are very rarely
sentencing at or.
Close to the max.
to underscore the significance
of a fentanyl conviction from
the legislature as the body that
sets public policy for New
Mexico. And so I think it does a
lot of its work less at going
from 9 to 12 and more at
encouraging judges who were
looking at probation versus some
time.
Consider a period of
incarceration given the
legislature's statement that at
these levels,
Fentanyl traffickers.
a sufficient threat to the
safety and health of New Mexico
that and enhanced sentence is
justified, so there won't be a
magic to the 3 years and the 5
years, so much as it will, um,
Expand the range of available
sentences which judges start
with in sentencing to evaluate
where they're gonna go and then
underscore the legislature's
concern with this drug is a
particular threat.
The men here, Mr. Baker, to me
it reads.
That there is a mandatory
enhancement, but then the next
breath.
The enhancement is 0 to
whatever.
That correct?
Madam Chair represented McQueen,
yes.
Thank you, Man.
Uh
For clarification, this bill is
a candidate for our package.
I've been working with speaker
and with our ranking member on
identifying bills and this is
one I think we've had some
agreement on, so I would
recommend that we roll the bill,
we plan on if things so.
as we would like, hearing the
package probably on Wednesday
and house Bill 8, which was just
introduced today that I've been
working with our ranking them
into that package, they've all
been heard by this committee
before, once, so it won't be.
Um, really a surprise to any of
you as to what's going on and as
I said, I've been communicating
I think with um.
There we are, um, appreciate you
bringing this bill forward.
Representative, thank you, Mr.
Baker, for your support. Thank
you all.
Very good, um.
We are now on House Bill 106.
DWI.
Blood testing.
Flos your representative Reeb.
Thank you Madam Chair, um.
This is HB 106, which deals with
um.
Allowing basically blood tests
for certain substances and
misdemeanor DWI offenses
basically DWI 12 and 3, and also
I think that's that's actually
those those DWIs um with me is
Julie Gerardo. She is with the
Department of Public Safety and
also uh Curtis Ward, Lieutenant
Curtis Ward is with, um, state
police, and I know that the
committee has heard this bill
before. uh, what we did is we.
Um, did go in front of health
and there were concerns that the
bill had cannabis in it and the
fact that cannabis, Madam Chair
wasn't.
Uh uh greatly developed test yet
as far as to determine whether
someone was actually under the
influence at that time, uh, we
did take the cannabis out and
allowed for every other
controlled substance to be
tested via blood with a valid
search warrant, um, after a
valid arrest in order to um be
able to better prosecute those
individuals for a misdemeanor
DWI offenses. So I think with
that I'll stand for.
Questions and then I'll let the
experts answer those questions
if anybody has them. OK, so
before we do that, let's go to
the audience, those wishing to
speak in opposition to the bill,
please stand up and we'll use
the same model, so about 5
minutes, 1 minute each.
I don't see anyone wishing to
speak in opposition.
Um, let's go online.
Those wishing to speak in
opposition, raise your hand,
please.
I see, um, Kim Chavez Cook.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, Kim
Chavez Cook with the Law Offices
of the Public Defender, um, a
warrant is required currently
for blood testing because our
constitutional law recognizes
that it is an intrusive bodily
search, and it should require a
strong state interest to force
it on someone. The law currently
draws that line at having a
felony or a case involving
injury, and we maintain that's
an appropriate place to draw
that line. Additionally, at a
time when the burden on lab
analysts is already high, this
approach.
would add to laboratory backlogs
and analysts, expert witness
duties. On the legal front, the
legal issue that triggers this
legislation has to do with
aggravating DWI charges when a
person refuses chemical testing.
This bill is often called the
birch field fix because there's
a US Supreme Court case by the
name of Birchfield that held the
state cannot punish a person for
refusing a blood test that would
not have been constitutionally
authorized, but it does not
prevent charging the DWI itself,
and
want to make clear that although
the state certainly prefers to
have chemical tests when
charging a DWI understandably
chemical tests are very
persuasive. It is possible to
get a DWI conviction without
chemical tests, and it happens
all the time. Prosecutors can
rely on evidence of bad driving,
a suspect's behavior, and their
physical symptoms when
interacting with officers, all
of which is usually captured on
video that the jury can rely on.
And that's also true in drug
cases where additionally drug
recognition
Experts can testify to their
opinion that a person's behavior
shows signs of impairment. So
although the law currently
limits these warrants to felony
DWI or cases involving injury,
we believe that is a rational
and reasonable limitation in the
interests of both judicial
efficiency and the privacy
interest that comes with blood
draws. So we would ask you to
oppose this legislation and
allow us to continue using the
system that we have in place.
Thank you.
Uh, thank you, Ms. Chavez Cook.
Anyone else online wishing to
oppose, please raise your hand,
don't see any other hands
raised.
Um, represent of anything else
before I go to the committee?
Oh, yep, I forgot, you're right,
those in support.
Um, those wishing to speak in
support of the bill, um, please
come up and.
There's more than one, please
make a line. Madam Chair,
members of the committee, you
can probably tell from the
people at the table that we
support this bill, um, you know,
there is a growing problem with
DWI related to drugs, really all
we're trying to do with this
bill is to get the tools that we
need to be able to deal with
that issue, um.
I think you heard that, yes, it
is possible to get a conviction
without a chemical test, but it
is very difficult and fairly
unlikely. Uh, we are not asking
to do away with any war
required. We're just asking to
be able to get.
To be able to present that to a
judge to be able to get a
warrant. Uh, so we appreciate
your consideration and hope that
you will uh pass this bill.
Thank you.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair.
Members of the committee, Rick
Tedro, uh, the administrative
office of the district attorneys
here on behalf of the New Mexico
District Attorneys Association,
uh, they asked me to come over
and speak on their behalf. So
thank you. Uh, we do stand in
support of this. We've been in
support of this for I think 13
years now.
I think the
like to say is that just because
something may be more efficient
in the judicial system doesn't
actually equate to justice, and
we would like to see
Uh, the protection of the
citizens and the victims out
there from DWIs and be able to
prosecute these as we need. So
in that we stand in strong
support of this. Thank you.
Everyone
All right, those online wishing
to speak in support.
Please raise your hand.
Uh, Larry's son
Chairman and members of the
committee of Larry Sontag,
speaking on behalf of Better
Together New Mexico in support
of House Bill 106. While we were
disappointed that cannabis has
been removed. This bill does
update New Mexico's DWI laws in
ways that are needed. Current
laws are outdated, hampering law
enforcement's ability to address
impaired driving. HB 106
terminology to include chemical
blood tests.
And including additional
substances that
Cause impairment is much needed.
Also expanding the.
Number of people that can
conduct these blood tests is
also needed. This bill aligns
our legal system with current
realities while enhancing road
safety.
Please vote yes on House Bill
106 for a more effective and
modern approach to DUI
enforcement.
Thank you. Thank you.
And we have um Ms. Westfall.
Thank you again, Madam Chair and
committee. The all Westfall
again with the greater
Albuquerque Chamber and we
greatly appreciate the sponsor's
hard work in listening to all
those who support and have
concerns about the bill, and we
commend the sponsors for
crafting a compromise that gives
law enforcement and prosecutors
the tool they need to better
target drug driving in our
state, whether it's beer, hard
liquor, a prescription drug or
an illegal narcotic, these
substances can impair the safe
operation of the vehicle and
lead to.
for your death.
And all should be treated as
such, providing the ability for
a blood test after a valid
arrest for controlled substances
like meth.
Coke, opioids, fentanyl, all the
harder drugs for which there is
reliable testing will help law
enforcement and prosecutors make
our streets safer.
The primary standard for any DWI
conviction in New Mexico is when
the defendant is proven impaired
to the slightest degree and
impaired is impaired, see it by
beer, hard liquor, prescription
drugs, or illegal narcotics. A
blood test is the best way to
back up law enforcement's
observations of impairment, and
the chamber respectfully ask for
you to vote yes on House Bill
106.
Thank you.
Anyone else wishing to speak in
support.
Online.
Don't see any other hands
raised.
Representative and the other
remarks before we go to
committee. No, ma'am, we'll
stand for questions. OK.
Uh, uh, rep.
Uh, I'm chair representative. I,
so just trying to be clear on
the bill.
Your expanding.
The opportunity to do
Uh
Blood test.
And so currently, my
understanding is based on the
comments from the public.
The, uh, it only occurred.
In certain circumstances, such
as an accident that involves
great bodily injury and you're
expanding it beyond that.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative
McQueen, yes, back before this
Birchfield case, which was
2006, 16, you could, the officer
could choose which type of tests
based on their observations,
they wanted to ask the person to
conduct whether it was a breath
test or a blood test. But then
Birchfield came out in 2016, um,
and represented that stated that
to take somebody's blood, that
was a search and seizure issue,
a very big thing to do, so you
needed a warrant to do that.
currently right now, the only
way you can do that is if it's a
felony, which means you've had 3
prior DWIs, and it's your 4th
offense or you cause an accident
that causes injury or death, and
then you can get a warrant that
way. What this bill does is
allow if an officer can
articulate after their arrest to
a judge that they believe
they're under the influence of a
narcotic drug or controlled
substance, they can articulate
that in a warrant if the judge
approves that warrant, then they
can go and get a person, does
that answer?
question, Representative.
Um, man, uh, representative
perhaps, um,
So
If uh
I'm looking at the aggravated
language. If, you know, and my
understanding is, um,
Typical DWI, there's a
breathalyzer and refusal to take
the breathalyzer results in
aggravated charge.
Um, is that
So, is there a similar structure
in here where uh an officer can
request.
Uh, a blood draw and refusal to
do a blood draw results in
aggravated ar.
Madam Chair, Representatives. So
the purpose of this bill is to
take us back to where we were
pre-Birchfield in 2016. You
probably don't recall, but, um,
back before then, we had
something called the implied
consent advisory that
Representative Reeb said,
allowed us to do a breath test,
a blood test for both, and that
was given the, the officers have
the ability to do that.
Birchfield then limited the
implied consent advisory and
what we could do to just breath
tests. So with that, nothing
changed with breath tests. So
when someone refuses to submit
to that breath test that
They've already given consent to
through implied consent, they
are then penalized with an
aggravated DWI charge.
Archfield removed the ability to
give an aggravated charge on
blood draws because that was no
longer a right that they had
given us that they were taking
away. And so this puts back in
the language to allow for an
aggravated charge when someone
refuses to submit to a blood
draw just like it had been
before Birchfield.
So I also think just to add,
Madam Chair, the, the first
thing will be a request for
consent, um, um, for the blood
test and if that is denied, then
that is when the officer will go
to the judge with a search
warrant, if I'm correct, I'm
sure.
OK, and Madam Chair,
representative experts on.
Oh I'm missing something there.
There's a disconnect.
Does the aggravated charge.
Where, how does that aggravating
the charge in the search
warrant, how did those two
issues interact.
So the aggravated charge for
purposes of um actual
prosecution. What that does is
it, it allows the prosecutor to
pick which jury instruction is
given, depending on whether
you're talking about blood or
breath. You don't really have an
aggravated variety when you're
talking about drug DWI when
you're talking about aggravated
for purposes of alcohol, you
have multiple varieties of that.
So that provides that ability,
um.
So
Right, so it, it doesn't
necessarily matter with respect
to the warrant. The reason why
the warrant is important is that
in Birchfield, there were 3 ways
that we could get warrants post
that case. And that was that you
ask someone for express consent
that you have exigency, meaning
that there are circumstances
that would prevent you from
being able to get a warrant or
getting a warrant. Then there
were there was case law that
came after that here in New
Mexico in particular, the case
was Day Julian's story that
provided that we cannot get
misdemeanor warrants in DWI
cases. And so
That took away the ability to
get a warrant. So, um, the
aggravation is really related to
what I said before with respect
to the fact that you get
aggravated now or you don't get
aggravated now with a blood
draw, only with a breath test.
And so this puts that back.
Right, if, if they refuse, then
we're back to where we were in
Birchfield, where if they refuse
on a blood test, we now get an
aggravated charge or you can
charge an aggravation on that.
For refusing that test. Well,
how it stands now is there is no
refusal consequences because we
don't have a right as law
enforcement.
Right, and then you get the
warrant. But at this point, the
way the law stands is we don't
even have the right, the ability
to get it. That's what came from
State Julian's story.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative.
Representative Romero.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. I'm
also trying to just understand
part of the um
Need for this, I think just
generally what is not working
currently about the status quo
with the improvement of.
Having video equipment.
Um, are we?
What, what isn't currently
working?
We need this.
So it primarily.
Madam Chair, Representatives, it
primarily is impactful when
we're talking about drug DWIs.
Section 668-102 be requires that
we prove that someone is under
the influence to any of any drug
to a degree that it renders them
incapable of safely operating a
motor vehicle.
That's hard to do when we don't
have any sort of chemical test
proving what sort of drug
they're under the influence or
the amount of drug that they're
under the influence. When we can
get a blood draw, the benefit of
having that sort of evidence is
that we then have that tested
through the scientific
laboratory division of the
Department of Health. They then
will bring an expert into court
to testify about the the sort of
things that that particular drug
found in that person's system
does. And then they also look at
the report and the videos to say
whether or not the behavior that
was being exhibited by this
person.
Constitutes what you would see
with that sort of drug and at
that sort of level. Without that
right now, we have, if we're
lucky, admissions from that
person that they are under the
influence of a certain kind of
drug if they give that to us,
and then we just have to go
based on whatever evidence we're
seeing in terms of signs of
impairment. We don't have the
extra added, um,
testimony and evidence of what
kind of drug and what that sort
of drug does to someone under
its influence.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for the explanation. When it
comes to the misdemeanor, um,
offense, I guess I'm trying to
understand because taking a
blood test for a
In order to determine drug
intoxication, Madam Chair, uh,
representative. We're talking
about potentially legal drugs as
well, not just illegal
substances. Is that correct,
Madam Chair, Representative?
Chair representatives, yes, that
is correct. It, it doesn't
matter if it's prescription from
a valid prescription or if it's
illegal narcotics. And, and
currently, Madam Chair,
Representative, where we have
the ability to do roadside tests
and other ways to determine
intoxication from the ability of
who we train as law enforcement
officers to determine that
correct, Madam Chair
Representative?
That's correct, um, field
sobriety tests can be done on
any impaired driver. I believe
the law office of the Public
Defender referenced drug
recognition expert. Um, that is
someone that's specifically
trained in determining whether
or not someone is under a
specific category of drugs, um,
one of the steps in the DRE
protocol though does ask for a
blood test, so it's still
embedded in that, that structure
as well.
So there is an ability, yes,
representative.
Be chirps and if I could just
put this into layman's terms a
little bit, I think that would
help everybody.
Maybe so.
Let's just assume that I've made
a traffic stop because someone,
someone was driving really,
really bad. And I'm trained that
I can't get them out of the
vehicle and do field sobriety
tests unless I can put into
words why.
I've done that and they've
performed very poorly on these
tests to the point where I've
got probable cause to arrest
them.
So now they're in handcuffs.
That being said,
What I've detected along the way
leads me to believe that it's
something impairing them other
than alcohol, they got them in
handcuffs that got us where we
are at this point.
As it stands right now in New
Mexico, which I think is one of
very few of, if not all other
states can do this in New
Mexico, we cannot.
Get a warrant
On their blood, I'm gonna ask,
I'm gonna ask the question,
would you give me your blood?
There's terminology that goes
with that, but in a nutshell,
I'm gonna say I would like to
draw your blood.
They're going to say yes or no.
If they say no.
The reality is most of arrests
that we make are misdemeanor
level arrests, and our goal is
to keep it at that one and done.
They made a mistake, never gonna
see him again.
That being said,
Drunk driving is killing people
and from my standpoint out on
the road, I've arrested somebody
I believe is under the influence
of something other than alcohol,
and because it's a misdemeanor,
I can't, when they say no, I
have no avenue to.
Right up for a search warrant
presented to a judge. Judge says
yes if all the elements are
there, you've got enough, you
can put into words why you think
it's something other than
alcohol. I don't have that
avenue to get that test done by.
To then walk into
say, Here's all the reasons I
think there was something other
than alcohol causing what I saw
that night. And here's a piece
of piece of paper to back that
up.
And here's an expert that's
gonna.
words, why they think that what
I saw that night matches.
The reality of the, the drug
that was in their system.
Then it's still at the end of
the day, it's still up to a
judge or a jury to determine.
Guilt or innocence
But without that tool, without
that ability to
So impairment of something
outside of alcohol when somebody
refuses.
kind of dead in the water.
And in a courtroom it's very,
very hard to get a conviction,
um.
I think the
Said something to the effect of
it, you know, we can still get
it as long as we can show
compared to the slightest
degree.
It sounds really cool. The
reality is it's not that simple,
and it's very, very hard to
prosecute a case when it's the
officer saying I think they were
under this or that or whatever,
but I have nothing to back that
up.
Kind of hard to meet the
threshold beyond a reasonable
doubt when
It amounts to me saying that
based on my training and
experience, I think it was this
or that, and I have no piece of
paper to back that up and I have
no expert to put into.
why I think it was what it was.
I hope that helps a little bit,
Madam Chair. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you,
Representative. Thank you, um,
experts, I think that.
It does help, I think.
My concern is it pertains to
both Birchfield and the process
is.
Multifold, I think one is just
in the sense of.
We, we don't have good tests. We
just don't. Um, and I think
that's why cannabis was removed,
Madam Chair Representative. Um,
we don't have the ability to
look at blood tests and see
what's legal, what's illegal,
what was irresponsible use and
what just at what threshold
based on even when we know in
the archaism of
blood alcohol content.
The
Mountain chair representative,
depending on your, you know,
Physical makeup, sometimes we
don't know if that's um,
Whether or not it's accurate,
and I think the challenge with
doing this type of test, Madam
Chair Representative, um.
Adding to the to the opportunity
of this perhaps, um,
nonconsensual blood test for
Perhaps overcomplicating.
What happens in the court system
when we're hopefully relying on
Um, after Birchfield, the
ability to have these roadside
tests be accurate in the sense
of what opinions we're asking
our law enforcement to
um make
Why we're pulling somebody over
and why we're asking them to do
a field test.
So I'm trying to balance, Madam
Chair, the interest of
What tools we have available to
do this type of testing, while
also understanding that they're
very limited. What we're
criminalizing and adding to a
misdemeanor offense, or what,
what we're trying to do in
public safety while also
maintaining the rights of
individuals who are being
subject to these tests.
Um, so, Madam Chair, um,
representative, it just, it just
does give me pause and makes me
uncomfortable about the
expansion of of the testing
ability while we're still
dealing with the unfortunate
signs of.
Um, how
Limited it is, um.
The other concern that I have,
Madam Chair, um.
I would love to just talk about
is the increase in the
professionals that would be able
to take these tests, the
Medical technician, the
certified, um.
Phlebotomist is what's the
reason for those additional um
folks to be trained. It's not
sure, uh, Madam Chair, that is
already current case law. Uh, it
did come out that EMTs and and
these different people were
qualified to take these tests
and so we're just putting from
what came out in case law
recently into the bill just to
to take care of anything and and
Madam Chairs representative just
to kind of backtrack on what you
said. Well, cannabis testing is
more difficult and I'm.
someday we'll get there, um,
I've talked to the lab.
And used testing over my years
of prosecution. The test for
narcotic drugs and fentanyl and
uh methamphetamine and heroin
and opioids and sleeping pills,
whatever it might be that you're
driving on that test is that's
very, those are very accurate
testing. They can tell you how
much is in there. They can,
these lab experts can tell you
when they look at the video and
they watch the driving to read
the report. Yes, this is
consistent with what I'm seeing
in the mountain here with
somebody who is under the
influence, um.
So that testing really is pretty
advanced. It's the cannabis
testing that isn't and we'll get
there someday, but we're
talking, Madam Chair, and, and I
understand Representatively
trying to balance taking
someone's blood, again, I remind
you, we did this all prior to
Birchfield, um, blood was taken
all the time and they were using
a DWIs all the time and it does
require that search warrant, um,
and, uh, it's, it's just
something that, um.
is a needed tool.
And, and I'm not talking, it's
just not even a first offense.
This could be a 3rd offense,
DWI. So you're talking a
habitual, probably DWI person
that we can say he's under the
influence of something, but
we're not really sure what and
there are drug recognition
experts, but there are so few
Madam Chair and representative
in the state because they
require so much training that
law enforcement will spend their
money to train on these, and
then they they take off and they
leave so to get a DRE is what we
call them out onto the scene,
especially in a role committee
or
I don't even think we have any
DREs in my area. I don't even
know how many we have in the
state if you guys know, but
they're they're very far and few
between. And again, they are,
they're they're able to be more
accurate on the, the idea that
someone's driving under the
influence of a substance, but
again, they still may not know
what substance that is, um, and
if I'm wrong, please correct me,
but I hope that explains a
little bit more about that to
you, Madam Chair. Thank you. I
think.
When we're trying to think
about.
QI, which I think everyone is
extremely sympathize to um.
That it was there a drastic
increase post birchfield system
that we're trying to improve,
and I know that with the DREs,
even state police level, we're
trying to get everyone trained.
We possibly can to have that
level of
Training, so.
You know, for me, Adam chair,
um,
Representative, you know, when
we think about
What's the first best step?
At least in trying to deliberate
with that for me, that would
burst.
And then if we could figure out.
Going back to the science of
this, my concern is with, even
with the blood test, I don't
know the difference between an
OxyContin prescription or a
fentanyl.
For the test.
We're talking about folks that
are, you know, trying to do
their best and, you know, now
they're subject to this
mandatory.
As the compromise, you know, so
much more, and then we're
holding fentanyl dealer
accountable here and not the
OxyContin dealer, um, as it
were, Madam Chair
representative. So, you know,
trying to balance each of these
interests in what the intent of.
Meeting folks where they are
with what this test could
potentially prove or disproven
how it's being used without.
Furthering, um,
The worry that we could be
targeting, you know.
Person or crime or or get the we
really are.
Look at who are driving
intoxicated.
You know, I, I'm trying to
balance that interest here
while.
I, I'm just not there yet. I'd
love to.
the debate, um,
But I, it just gives you.
Thank you. Anyone else wish to
come representative Hoffman.
Thank you very much, um, Madam
Chair, uh, just a couple of
questions for you,
representative and your experts.
Um, are there any other states
that have laws similar to this?
I believe we're one of
Very few, if not the only state
that is not able to get a
warrant on a misdemeanor due
toBI arrest at this point.
Madam.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representative and,
and experts, and you know um if
any such laws have been
challenged constitutionally.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
not that I'm aware of. I mean,
we are just, we just haven't
been doing this here, so there
hasn't been any challenges, you
know, since Birchfield, so I'm
in the other states, um.
They're doing it, so I'm
assuming, assuming everything's
fine and there hasn't been any
issues if we're one of the only
states that aren't allowing
this.
Thank you, ma'am. Thank you.
Anyone else wishing to Madam
Cherry, thank you, thank you for
being here. Um, I have a few
questions and thank you to the
other representatives who helped
expand on a few of those other
questions.
Well
Um, I'm, I'm concerned about.
The amendment from the standard
from probable cause, committed a
felony and.
Going back to the scenario that
you had proposed a moment ago,
and I understand that you're in
a difficult position.
me understand.
profiling would not be an issue
in this situation and what type
of training your officers would
undergo to ensure that.
Madam Chair, Representative.
I guess I'm not understanding
how profiling even becomes part
of the discussion because.
When I'm out cruising around
looking for bad driving.
Um
I find it hard to think I'm
profiling anybody other than the
person that's driving in a
manner which gives me reasonable
suspicion to make a traffic
stop, so.
Um
With all due respect, I'm, I'm
confused about how profiling
even can enter the conversation,
Madam Chair and representatives.
Officer, I will go ahead and
explain. So District 69 has 6
counties, very large
multi-jurisdictions, and in some
areas you do have, I'm gonna use
an example, elderly people,
elderly indigenous people who
are driving on these roads and
uh perhaps bilingual or may not
even speak English. And then the
interaction happens, um.
Now, based on this.
Language in here.
There's a, there's a standard
that a very low standard that
can be met.
To go ahead and have his blood
drawn, right?
Madam Chair Representative
But now I get the gist of your
your concern.
That
make something clear.
Just because somebody's elderly
or any, any number of things.
There's telltale things that
people who are impaired do.
That look very different than
the person who's older, maybe
has some injury issues going on.
Maybe just has poor balance.
The threshold to put handcuffs
on somebody in a DWI arrest
situation is very, very high,
and we're very well trained to
differentiate between.
Is the person that I'm dealing
with right now doing what
they're doing because they're
old or
Just physically incapable for
whatever reason versus impaired.
There's a big difference.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative and officer, um,
and you, thank you for that,
that helps. Um.
This area is very rural and this
morning we had talked in our
house memorial about our
appreciation for law
enforcement.
And
One of the concerns I had was
that the response times.
That are prevalent in my
district and also just the
distance from where a traffic
stop could occur to the nearest
medical professional.
Can you expand on on that
partnership and how that would
play out with this.
Madam Chair Representative
I too am concerned about the
very same thing. I grew up in
New Mexico. There are rural
places in New Mexico where um
it's kind of scary that there's
so few of us out there and
believe me, if anybody in this
room wants more people, it's my
chief, he's, I think he's still
here, and everybody else in this
room we want.
We want as many of us as
possible because
Yeah, it's scary out there for
us, for people who are broken
down, people who are
And and who need help of any
kind. It's scary. We need more
officers, especially out in the
middle of nowhere in New Mexico,
um, how it relates to this.
Let me give you a scenario.
I've worked and I don't know
what, what district you work out
of. I've worked all over New
Mexico.
If I stop somebody out in
I'm gonna use McKinley County.
Middle of nowhere in McKinley
County, and I find an elderly
person such as what you
described, and I have reason to
believe they're not safe to
drive.
But I don't have reason to
believe that.
The reason they're not safe to
drive is because they're
impaired by something. They're
just elderly tired.
Something's going on there.
I'm also a community caretaker,
so I have an obligation. I'm not
just gonna leave them there. I
have an obligation as a law
enforcement officer and a
community caretaker to ensure
that that person gets wherever
they're going safely, so we've
gone so far as to call an
ambulance, get him headed toward
me. Meanwhile, I'm going to load
this person up, get them headed
towards the ambulance so we can
cut down the time a little bit,
call family members, call
friends, call somebody to make
sure they don't get hurt or
killed that night because of the
condition they're in.
But
That happens more than people.
realize
Our job is not to go see if we
can arrest everybody we stop by
no means. We make many more
traffic stops that don't end up
in arrest but end up in a
community caretaker situation
than we ever do, making an
arrest for DWI, and at the end
of the day.
Our goal, we all sign up to do
this job to make the world
safer, to make our communities
safer. If that means helping
somebody who's not able to help
themselves in the middle of
nowhere. Guess what?
We're going to do that and if I
find out any of our people
should have done that and
didn't.
I'm gonna be the first one to
address that as well.
Adam Chair representatives and.
Thank you so much. I appreciate
that. Thank you for that
scenario.
And the reassurance. Thank you.
Anyone else?
Um
Blood tests be exculpatory?
Meaning
Have you taken blood tests when
you have thought someone is
intoxicated on some sort of.
Illegal substance or abusing a
prescription drug.
And determined that in fact.
That was not the case because of
a blood draw.
And I think we'll all probably
agree, Madam Chair, that yes,
that does happen and when that
does happen.
DWIs are dismissed, um, so it
can be very it can be
exculpatory if nothing comes
back in the system whatsoever,
then the DWI is just so a person
pulled over um based on maybe
erratic driving, they may appear
to the officer to be impaired in
some way, but it could be some
other thing like fatigue or, you
know, um, ill maybe illness and
as a result, they're not driving
quite as well as you you would
like them to.
There's a blood draw and then
then there's no question that
they're not impaired.
Case is dismissed. So, obviously
I'm pointing out the double
edged sword is to me is we're
just getting the best
information that we possibly
can.
Person is getting.
Evidence in their trial that
they possibly can. Is that a
fair statement?
one of you can answer that,
Madam Char represented. That's
exactly what we're doing. Um,
I'm with the Department of
Public Safety now, but I've been
a DWI prosecutor for the last 14
years before that in Albuquerque
and in Santa Fe, and I've had
cases that I've screened out
that come back with nothing in
terms of drugs or alcohol, and
I'm, I, what I will try to do in
some instances is refer it back
to law enforcement so they can
proceed forward on the traffic
charge if appropriate. Yeah,
there isn't sufficient evidence
to proceed in a case, the
obligation of the prosecutor is
to get rid of.
That case without sufficiency.
And I, you know what I've heard,
you know, in terms of some
objections to this bill is the.
Um
What is it called the
aggravation component, but the
aggravation component already
exists in our law, if we don't
like the aggregation, the
aggravation component based on
the implied consent, which is
really what is involved when
someone refuses. That's on us to
change how we do aggravation,
not necessarily how we address
the blood draw issue here.
So, Madam Chair,
Representatives, so the
aggravation works in a couple of
ways. Um, the first one is that
if we're talking about a
misdemeanor level DWI offense,
part of the total jurisdiction
is mandated to be in custody. So
if we're talking about a DWI
first defense. You have a
mandatory 48 hours in custody of
the 90 days if you refuse to
submit to a chemical breath
test.
On a second, it's 8 days instead
of 4 days, and on a third, it's
90 days instead of 60 and 90
days instead of 30 days. The
other way that it works is on
the revocation side. And so when
someone refuses to the law
exists is when they refuse to
submit to a chemical breath
test, they're licensed
automatically gets revoked at an
administrative level, and then
they have the opportunity to go
through with the hearing and,
and combat that and then if
there's a DWI conviction in
court, then a revocation happens
at that point as well.
Appreciate all your work on this
and um you may be hearing about
it again, so, all right, um.
So
We have next on our agenda is,
um, the workers' comp bill.
And I have to admit I'm a little
frustrated with it.
Um, is there is representative
Herndon and the expert around.
Um
I
Oh
Excuse me, sorry, 10 before
that's probably why um
representative Herndon is not
here because we're on 10.
Um,
She knows my agenda better than
I do, so, uh, Speaker Martinez,
do you have your? Are you
looking for an expert?
Hey, Speaker, the floor is
yours. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, members of the
committee. I'm a co-sponsoring
House Bill 10 with
Representative Gallegos, who's,
as you know, running her
committee as we speak, so I'll
be presenting this for her.
Um, how's Bill 10 is an agency
bill with the regulation and
licensing department, uh, if you
remember just a few years ago,
this legislature.
Um, and it's wisdom, uh,
legalized recreational cannabis
and created.
Uh, what I think is a very
equitable and fair, uh.
Recreational cannabis framework,
um, one of the best in the state
as far as I'm concerned in terms
of ensuring that
Uh, there's enough, um, for both
big, medium and small operators
to to succeed and thrive in this
in this industry.
Uh, the industry itself
generates revenues in the
hundreds of millions of dollars
for the state of New Mexico
money that we used to fund the
critical services like Medicaid,
uh, other healthcare expenses,
public education,
infrastructure, etc.
Um, one of the things that we've
seen
Um, over the last couple of
years that has me very
concerned, Madam Chair, members
of the committee.
Is illicit cannabis.
Um, and that's an area that I,
you know, wish if I could turn
back the clock that um I would
have paid closer attention to
because it is an issue that is
hurting the industry,
particularly the small and
medium operators, both
producers, manufacturers, and
and retailers. Uh.
Part of the problem we've seen,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee is
Quite frankly, I think
The lack of capacity, bandwidth,
if you will, for local law
enforcement agencies.
Uh, in my hometown of
Albuquerque, we have retailers
that pop up, um, you know, for a
couple 1000 bucks, they can get
the business license and as long
as they are within the
Um, you know, permitted area for
local zoning law.
Uh, they're allowed to operate.
Um.
Oftentimes with very, very
little oversight.
From local law enforcement or
even from the agency itself, the
cannabis Control division within
the regulation and licensing
department. So over the course
of the interim, um, I've had
many conversations with the
superintendent, uh, around this
particular issue that is in
front of us today.
Uh, looking at ways to give
The RLD cannabis Control
Division.
Law enforcement abilities to be
able to go after these bad
actors.
Um
As an example, I think you all
have seen what's happened in
Torrance County with an illegal
cannabis operation. I think it
was mentioned on the floor
today. If I'm not mistaken, um,
forced labor and all kinds of
laws and rules being broken, but
very little in terms of
accountability against that
particular actor until very
recently. Um, I believe that had
we had this in in in in our
original bill, he would have
actually uh helped RLD go after
the.
these folks, uh, in much more
efficient, effective and
impactful ways, um.
The bill in front of you has
been subbed out. It was subbed
out in the prior committee.
Um, in my understanding of the
Changes uh in that sub are
Uh, 1st, 1st and foremost, the
new enforcement bureau is
dedicated only to matters within
the scope of the cannabis
regulation Act. We wanted to
make that clear, so they're not
gonna go after, you know,
construction or, or, you know,
trailer parks or whatever else
that the division regulates, uh,
the law enforcement bureau will
also stay directly under the
superintendent's authority to
make sure that there is
accountability at the highest
level of the department.
Um, the types of cases they will
work are only cannabis related
cases.
Um, in addition, we cleaned up
language in the substitute to
make it clear that the new
bureau chief and enforcement
agents at LLD will be properly
trained officers who must meet
all standards and training under
the law enforcement Training
Act have necessary law
enforcement authority to
properly investigate cannabis
related cases and able to gather
evidence and prepare cases that
can be effectively prosecuted by
district attorneys across the
state, and then the term peace
officers.
is used in the substitute bill
in front of you to keep it
consistent with other areas of
law that use the term peace
officers as well.
Uh, in addition, we cleaned up
other language, making it clear
that the new authority being
given to the cannabis control
division is being given to the
cannabis control division. Um.
And what it will be responsible
for. And then lastly we struck
an appropriation that we had in
the original bill, um, my
understanding is that we do have
Uh capacity in House Bill 2 to
fund the agency appropriately
for this expanded scope, uh,
with me, I've got a number of
experts. Hi, how are you? Good
to see you, you switched out.
Superintendent of RLD is with us
here today as well. Uh, I'll
turn it over to them for some
very brief remarks and then um I
know that you want to get to
Q&A, Madam sure, so thank you.
So Madame Chair and members of
the committee, thank you for
taking the time to hear this up
front. I'm gonna apologize.
They've got me up over it.
House appropriations next so I
may have to leave here in just a
minute I'll come back up, but
yes, there's not much I can say
more than what the speaker's
already said except we're living
it we're out in it, uh, I take
an active role and active part
in it right now all we have is a
administrative authority and the
bad actors, big or small, they
just ignore us we go in we tell
them what we've got, tell them
what to stop doing their
business, and they won't stop.
I've tried everything in the
world we've tried injunctions
NCAs we've done it all TROs
they're difficult to get. I
think part of it was not.
Law enforcement. We don't have
that ability, but as soon as it
turns into the criminal activity
is no longer falls within CCB
right now we have no authority
whatsoever and many probably on
this committee has called
wanting us to do things we get
it from constituents we get it
from legislators and we don't
have any authority to do that.
That's why we're coming forward.
We're not trying to grow over.
Each. I'll be one of the few
state employees you'll see
that's coming and asking for
more responsibility. I need it.
I want it and just to get it
where we're taking care of the
the individuals, the
constituents and the you know
the the businesses, I mean this
is to help the businesses too
this is to help everyone these
law enforcement that we're
asking for the peace officers,
they're gonna be we're not gonna
hire anybody unless they're
certified. We're not turning in.
I heard it on the news two
nights ago that uh.
We were gonna turn our our uh
inspectors into law enforcement.
These are gonna be law
dealing with criminal activity
only we got inspectors to deal
with the ones that are doing it
right and the ones that are
licensed to do it correctly so
with that uh we work closely
with law enforcement we really
do state police we went out and
got a uh injunction in San Juan
County state police had to go
and force it for us. It took 50
of their officers out of the
field for I think 2 to 3 days
and and you know that stuff that
they're taking away from their
needing to work with the crimes
with the guns and the violence
and fentanyl and everything you
just heard about, right? I
believe all the law enforcement
that I have.
spoken to are willing and
wanting this with us to support
us with it, so with that uh if
you don't mind, I may have to
step out, but I do appreciate
y'all taking the time to uh to
visit with us and also I have
our uh general counsel Kevin
Graham and our CCD director.
Thank you.
Anything else, Mr. Speaker,
before I go to the audience? OK,
very good. So, um, those in the
audience wishing to oppose this
bill, please step up to the
gentleman with the mic.
Same kind of limitations I've
been doing.
5 minutes, 1 minute maximum per
person.
I don't see anyone in the
audience opposing online.
In the, um, wishing to oppose
the bill, please.
I don't see anyone online
opposing the bill. Those in the
audience wishing to support the
bill, please step up and um
speak, as I said, try to limit
your remarks to about.
A minute and we're gonna limit
the comment period to.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of committee. My name is
Andrew Amidis, and I am.
One of the owners of Sunshine
Farm, a local small vertically
integrated cannabis business in
Albuquerque.
I respectfully urge the
committee to pass the
legislation.
I believe that the cannabis
industry requires the
involvement of law enforcement,
as there are still many
questionable activities
occurring throughout the state,
both within the legal framework
and the underground market.
With law enforcement support, we
can effectively address illegal
cannabis sales from unlicensed
dealers and out of state
products.
This collaboration would also
allow compliance officers to
concentrate on compliance issues
rather than criminal activities.
Thank you for your attention.
Hello, Madam Chair and members
of the committee. My name is Amy
May, and I am in a dispensary
owner in Estancia, New Mexico in
Torrance County. Um, I've been
in support of this. I've been
asking for help out there for
years now, um, county keeps
telling me to go to state. State
tells me to go to federal.
Federal tells me to go back to
county.
It's
Nobody knows what to do, um.
They've, they come to my store,
they've sat out in front of my
home. I have children.
We've had to do things in
stancia.
To, um, at our school district,
they sat out in front of the
school district watching our
children. It's, it's crazy. We
need help out there and we would
really appreciate it.
Thank you. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I'm Ellie Bezanson.
I'm the president of the New
Mexico Cannabis Chamber. I also
oversee operations for a
vertically integrated
microbusiness in Albuquerque,
and I'm here to support this
bill. Uh, I've been working in
New Mexico cannabis since 2017,
running a variety of operations,
and we need help. We need to
sharpen the teeth, or CCD so
that they can help those of us
who are doing our jobs well,
right, and providing safe
products for patients and
consumers, so we can
continue to do that. Thank you.
Hello, good afternoon, esteemed
committee members. My name is
Drew Little micro operator here
with custom cannabis. Um, I've
been involved in the medical,
uh, and the cannabis community
since the medical era. Um.
here to express my overall
support for House Bill 10, this
bill has a significant step
forward as it equips the CCD
with critical resources,
including the establishment of a
dedicated enforcement bureau.
This bureau will play a vital
role in identifying unlicensed
operators and embargoing illegal
illegal products from our
market, actions that are
essential to protect consumers,
to ensure that compliant
operators have a fair chance to
thrive in our resilient
industry.
I respectfully urge you to
support House Bill 10.
So that we can further build a
safer, more competitive, and
equitable cannabis market for
all New Mexicans.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name's Dale
Wagner.
I'm a deputy chief of the New
Mexico State Police. I'm over
the criminal that the narcotics
and the special operations
Bureau.
EPS strongly supports this bill.
It addresses enforcement gaps in
the cannabis industry. The
illicit market undermines the
legal industry, but enforcement
is currently spread thin across
multiple agencies, given
staffing shortages and competing
priorities, existing law
enforcement agencies lack the
resources for the sustained
oversight.
Integrated law enforcement
within the cannabis Control
Division will improve
coordination, efficiency, and
information sharing between
regulatory and criminal
investigations.
It also allows for the seizure
of a illicit cannabis products,
closing legal loopholes.
This bill removes ambiguity and
allows agencies to see seize
illicit cannabis, preventing
illegal operators from
exploiting legal gray areas.
The example which was already
brought up is the San Juan
County.
that we, we assisted with and a
legal operation pro pro.
profited for months due to legal
loopholes.
And DPS still faced a lawsuit
after following a court order.
To seize and destroy illicit
procedence.
Without clear legal authority,
agencies may hesitate to act
further enabling illegal
activity. And the last thing
I'll bring up is just the
financial considerations.
Large scale operations like the
San San Juan.
Illegal cannabis operation costs
hundreds of thousands of dollars
to. And um,
Sir, uh, no, sorry.
You, you'll be the last one.
I'll, I'll make an
accommodation, you'd be the last
one, please keep your comment to
one minute, please. Thank you,
Madam Chair, committee members.
My name is Ben Lowinger. I'm the
executive director of the New
Mexico Cannabis Chamber of
Commerce, where the state's
industry association
representing a variety of
license holders in the regulated
cannabis industry. I very much
want to thank Speaker and other
sponsors who have brought this
bill forward as Speaker
mentioned this should have been
part of the original cannabis
regulation Act. These are
resources and abilities that the
cannabis Control division is
sorely missing.
to be able to effectively do its
job. And there's a lot of
attention paid to these huge
illegal farms, but for each of
those, for each of the farms
that we have in Torrance County
or the one in Waterhole, there
are dozens of licensed cannabis
industries who are bad operators
and acting in bad faith. And I
think more than uh more than
anything else, this will help
our industry be legitimate.
It'll help our industry operate
in the light, and it'll help to
ensure that there is a
competitive playing field,
especially for.
Small and medium sized New
Mexico businesses.
Thank you. Thank you.
All right, those in online,
wishing to
speak in support and I'm going
to see only one person, so, um,
Matt Kennicott.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Matt Kennicott. I'm the
uh CEO of the plug. We represent
small canvas businesses
throughout the state. Um, I'm
also a uh microbusiness, or I
own a microbusiness with my
partner Veronica here in Socorro
called High Maintenance. Um, in
addition, I've, I've worked in
literally hundreds of cannabis
facilities around the state as a
consultant. Uh, we've definitely
seen many, many of the messes
that that have occurred, um, and
something
needs to be done about it. Well,
we're actually neutral on this
legislation, um, I do believe
personally that um that this is
worth passing and worth, worth
working on. Uh, I've actually
been at several of the, uh,
several of the the the larger
grow operations that were
Uh, taken down and something
hadn't had needed to be done for
quite a while. So I'm glad we're
seeing, seeing steps in the
right direction here and
definitely appreciate the uh the
work on this legislation.
Thank you. I don't see any other
hands raised um back to speak.
I'm sure you're ready for
questions.
All right, Representative from
Marro and then representing
McQueen.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
thank you, Mr. Speaker, and all
of the folks, um, here to.
champion, a great industry that
we've created in New Mexico and
I love to start with that
because I think.
You know, when we look at how
we're trying to reinforce um the
protections available to uh New
Mexicans, and of course those
that are involved in the
industry, I just wanna make sure
that this is
Meeting that intent scope, um.
And so I'll just start with the
question on Madam Chair, uh,
Representative or speaker, um,
and experts.
Why this falls within the
purview of RLD or CCD versus law
enforcement itself when we just
last year.
Um, took the step of
recriminalizing trafficking,
ensuring that the penalties
matched much of these crimes,
um, and when we were talking
about getting law enforcement
involved, that was meant to be
the impetus to ensure that they
would be able to come and um
review these situations with
which we knew were criminal
activities happening, um, in the
state, Madam Chair, uh, Mr.
Speaker.
Yeah, thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative. That's a great
question um I think a lot of it
has to do with just
bandwidth, um, at least that's
what I've heard in my community.
Um, the number of times that a
Um
Cannabis retailer pops up.
In whatever neighborhood.
Um, oftentimes with very poor
signage, you know, very, uh, not
a whole lot of traffic, um, it
makes you wonder, right? And so,
I mean, I've had neighbors call
APD for example.
Uh, and there's not a lot that
they're able or perhaps even
willing to do because I think
the level
Of
I, I think in the view of
Some law enforcement agencies
and I don't mean to speak for
them, they can speak for
themselves, obviously, but it
seems like maybe they don't
consider these things.
they don't consider them to rise
to the level where they need to
respond.
Um, and I think that's why these
folks are saying, well, we would
like to do it, and in many cases
they do do it, but they've got
to then wait for an actual law
enforcement agent to say, you
know, take illegal merchandise,
for example, right?
Um, so I think that this is
A good
Next step,
Um, will the, will this fix the
problem? I don't know that it'll
fix the entire problem, but I
think it's certainly going to
make a dent.
Because I think that what we're
seeing is, you know, and I've
used this example before, um.
That there's an operation.
A, a, a legitimate operation. It
was in the newspaper for
teachers who retired and said
we're going to start a little
retailer.
The South Valley.
They did everything by the book.
Within a year or two.
A random operation popped open
just across the street, very
random.
Uh, no signage, um, and um like
very little foot traffic for
that matter.
Um
The question is, is that a legal
operation? And maybe they do
have a license to sell retail.
But the enforcement isn't there
to ensure that they're selling
product that is legally grown
manufactured in New Mexico for
the cannabis.
Control Act, cannabis regulation
Act.
And so it's putting those
teachers.
At a terrible competitive
disadvantage because, you know,
their tax that they're paying
their excise tax or paying their
groceryceipts, they're doing
everything by the book, they're
buying the product from other
illegal producers, and yet
there's this operation across
the street that potentially is
not doing any of that.
Um, so I think that this
The tools that this legislation
gives the RLD.
Are designed.
To ensure that
that operation across the street
really is following the law. Now
there's also, you know, we we
talked about earlier, right?
Like.
There's also
Something to consider when it
comes to illegal product and
what it's laced or not laced
with.
Um, and it is a terrible scary
thing to think that at some
point somebody is going to
You know, suffer some sort of
overdose, accidental overdose
because they purchased product
that is not up to the standards
of the folks that we heard from
during public comment, the folks
that are doing everything by the
book, growing their product
here, getting their product
tested the way they should be,
um, and, and selling their
product.
Above board versus um what we're
seeing in in other situations.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, um.
Like the question though is why
aren't we putting this, if we're
gonna dedicate those resources
to a criminal issue, why would
we?
And give police powers to our
regulators rather than see that
those resources were
appropriated toward we do have
to give police powers to, which
is in our law enforcement.
And train them up to do this
work.
Rather than try to now take a
workforce that is of, of
regulators and ensuring that the
products that they are looking
at that are legal on the
shelves, um, that they can
continue to do that job well, as
they're, you know, maintaining
what, what we have asked them to
do. Why would we then give
police powers to that body
versus train up who we already
have trained to look at illegal
activities within our law
enforcement agencies, um, Madam
Chair, uh, Mr. Speaker.
mature representative. I, I
don't know that it's a training
issue. I think it's a capacity
issue. If you're in Albuquerque,
I think APD is stretched too
thin.
And the reality is, they're not
gonna be able to respond to a
call for suspicion the
suspicion.
cannabis activity. Um, I think
state police might be in the
same boat in many cases, um, I
know our sheriff's departments
in the same boat.
This is the department coming to
us and saying, hey,
That other stuff's out of our
control.
But this is something we can
take on, uh, which I deeply
appreciate because I think that
they're trying to solve the
problem versus just showing up
and pointing fingers and telling
us that this isn't working.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think
that's those still where I, I'm
a little worried that where we
lack in the personnel to do
policing across the state that
we're now gonna increase
policing and within our
departments and that's
essentially what this is, um,
Madam Chair.
Um, Mr. Speaker, is giving that
additional power to
Folks that wouldn't
traditionally have that. And so
as they.
And again, we want to make sure
that they're only targeting bad
actors, but Madam Chair
Representative, where in the
bill does it ensure that the
good actors aren't the ones that
are gonna be continued to.
Have the door knocked on, um,
for those that are needing this
type of enforcement, Madam
Chair, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, madam chair, um, and
um I know that wasn't a
question, but if I may just add
a couple of things here that my
expert just handed me. Looks
like the board of pharmacy has
Law enforcement powers, state
fire marshal the livestock
board. So we've done this
before. It looks like um in ways
that
help um
You know, elevate or protect
those industries. Um, so, you
know, this could be.
Thought of in the same vein,
right, that this is uh this is a
department who, and by the way,
as I said earlier, right,
they're they're not just going
to turn the
You know
Random
regulator and give them a batch
and a gun. I mean, they're
gonna, they they have to be
certified law enforcement.
Officerss in order to be.
I hired in this new capacity,
which I think is an important
distinction.
With you, right? I mean, it's
a badge and a gun to somebody
for the sake of doing so. These,
these are gonna be trained
professionals, uh, who, who, who
will be.
Uh, executing
Uh, these duties.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. In those other
police powers that we have, do
they also have the ability to
see his product, um, manager, uh
speaker. It's a great question
from my expert.
Please
And get close enough to the
microphone here.
I'm sure remember Kevin Graham,
general counsel for the
regulation and licensing
department that is you're
hitting on a critical part at
this kind of the second part of
what's in the bill here. One
part is creating this new
resource of law enforcement and
skipping back one question I
just mentioned that our
securities division in the RLD
already has sworn commission law
enforcement officers to
investigate securities offenses.
The pharmacy board, which is
administratively attached to the
RLD already has Warren
commission law enforcement
officers to investigate there
so.
In that regard, this is not new
to us. This is something we
already are accustomed to
dealing with, although this will
be a new, completely new
enforcement authority for uh
cannabis related offenses, but
the second kind of part of the
bill which is equally important
to get law enforcement are the
additional authority items that
are given to the the division,
the cannabis control division
and then also our new
enforcement bureau one of those
it'd be the ability to seize
product if it, you know, if
there really is probable cause
to believe it's criminal.
Product. Another is something we
call embargo, which would be
kind of an in-between step if we
have evidence that looks like a
product is adulterated or is
otherwise illegal we can order
under the terms of this bill or
the licensee to put that product
in a secure location within the
facility under video
surveillance that can't be
accessed by anyone else while we
can continue to investigate and
determine whether or not we need
to proceed with criminal
investigation and potentially
charges there, um, so there are.
provisions there. Another key
one that's involved is the
ability for us to see samples
for testing and then also to get
destruction orders if we do have
operations where illegal product
is called, currently we don't
have that authority to see
samples for testing and that's
gonna be a really important
power for us to be able to
properly investigate cases but
also to be able to make sure we
can do recalls to take dangerous
products off the shelves.
Thank you, Madam Chair, thank
you, Mr. Speaker, um.
General counsel
Do we have this seizure embargo
power for any other.
Um, of our licensees or within
the purview of RLD do we give
RLD?
Um, that power in any other one
of these, um.
circumstances meant.
Madam Speaker, the, the closest
that I would say we would have
would be in our securities
division or the pharmacy
investigators where they are
able to go investigate criminal
cases because they are sworn
officers, they can seize
evidence ordinarily they would
do what ordinarily I'd be
instructing our officers to do
here, and this is if you believe
you're probable cause, go get
your search warrant and get the
court to order it, double down
on making sure that we're
upholding the law and that we're
upholding due process, um, but
they do have that authority now
is sworn off.
r s
So Mountain chair, um, Mr.
Speaker, general counsel.
Is that the same process that
this would go through with the
sworn officers and being able
to, in order that they can
actually get the authority to
seize. Are we asking them to do
the same process here, um.
Madam Speaker
Remember, the, there would be
two different kind of provisions
here. One would be the
traditional process of going for
a search warrant, but there are
provisions built into the law
here that would allow for more
immediate seizures or embargoes
to be taken place, but it also
then guarantees a right to a
written statement as to why your
product was taken and then
secondly, an administrative
hearing within, I believe it's
10 days after that.
And so we, we do make sure that,
you know, while it gives us
additional flexibility to
address critical needs on the
spot, try to stop uh harmful
products from being out there
that that any party who has
their products taken is going to
get dirty process as well.
Uh, mountain chair, um, Mr.
Speaker, so as far as just due
process or somebody that um.
Whose products were seized by um
CCD by the officer, so.
First and foremost, they don't
go through the same process as a
pharmacological process or the
board of pharmacy that would
currently um or any of the other
seizure processes is, let me
just confirm that first mountain
chair, um, Mr. Speaker.
This is the only process that we
would have preemptively being
able to seize product from the
shelves of.
A licensee, is that correct? I'm
sorry, ma'am, to my
understanding, that's correct.
This would be a a new um and
directive authority very limited
just to cannabis.
And that said, uh, Madam Chair,
Mr. Speaker, what is the due
process for somebody who
believes that what product was
seized, was improperly seized um
by CCD, um, I'm sure uh speaker.
The first step was that they're
in they're guaranteed the right
to a written statement
justifying basically an
explanation for why it was
taken. The second is an
administrative hearing that
they're entitled to within 10
days of the seizure taking
place, and then additionally
after that they can take that to
district court. So if they were
to disagree with the
administrative hearing judge on
you know the seizure authority
they can appeal that to district
court.
So if I'm hearing that
correctly, um, Madam Chair, Mr.
Speaker, that within 10 days
they could.
Perhaps retrieve, um, what was
seized from them within that
administrative hearing capacity.
Is that correct? Um
I'm sure.
I'm here, yes, I believe that's
correct. Within 10 days they
would have that hearing, um,
and, and if they presented their
case and were able to show that
it was not illegal product or
unlawfully adulterated product
or one of the other bank, you
know, uh, basics for a lawful
seizure they potentially could
get the product back in at the
end of that administrative
hearing, if they disagree with
the findings of the hearing,
they can appeal to the district
court.
Uh, Madam Chair, um, Mr.
Speaker.
In the context of a criminal
seizure potentially.
Um
Would that require like an
attorney present we or we
following the same laws of due
process as it pertains to a
criminal proceeding, Madam
Chair.
Hello
Madam Chair, committee members,
uh, I'm Jack Fortner. I'm the
disc attorney in San Juan
County. Uh, the criminal, uh,
process does not attach until
they actually if if something is
seized or something there's been
a hold put on it and then they
try and destroy it or sell it,
dispose of it in some way at
that point, and that's when the
criminal proceedings start.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair.
So with this additional step of
having the um.
District court petitioned.
At what point is the district
court petitions after the
seizure.
Madam you remember if there.
Correct me if I get off on the
wrong tangent here but uh
there'll be two different
processes. One would be if there
was the administrative seizure
that was taking place. That's
when they get the opportunity
for the administrative hearing
and then it would be up to the
property to decide whether they
wanted to appeal it to district
court or not.
On the other hand, if there was
a a seizure taking place and
then a petition was filed with
district court for a destruction
order at that point, it would go
before the district court judge
and the district court judge
based on their calendar would or
would not you know hold a and
administered well I almost
certainly feel they'll they'll
hold a hearing and your hearing
on that matter before he uh
order is issued, but at that
point they would get a hearing
for the district court and then
uh potentially could appeal that
order to court of appeals.
So mountain, um,
Mr. Speaker, if, so through the
process.
There's
CCD goes in, believes that
there's product on the shelf
that should not be there.
Goes in, seizes it.
Um
There's a 10 day opportunity for
that.
Licensee or whether they are
licensed or not licensed to
potentially appeal that
administratively.
If it's a criminal and or.
Let's just stop with the
criminal. If it's, if it's a
civil procedure at that point.
It then gets petitioned to
district court.
Or the the illegal illegal
product to then be embargoed or
destroyed.
Um, mound chair, um, Mr.
Speaker, so then at that point
we're waiting for the district
court to make that
determination.
What happens to the licensee at
that point, is there?
License revoked? Are they still
able to sell their products?
What were are they in the
license process, um, Madam
Chair, Mr. Speaker.
I remember.
The, the process there would if
there was going to be any other
licenser action taken would kick
back to the the standard uniform
Licensing Act process for the
that the CCD always has to go
through if we're going to
suspend, revoke, uh, or deny a
license or if we're going to
issue a fine under the act on
the license and so a notice of
contemplated action is filed.
It's something like the simple
equivalent of a charging
document where we have to lay
out the law, the facts, and what
we're proposing as far as a
penalty to be impos.
That then is also entitled, you
know, that process is entitled
to an administrative hearing,
and again, if you don't like the
results of that hearing, and the
action of the CCV is proposing
to take. You can appeal that to
district court. So there are
always those appellate steps
available before the CCV can
take any final action on license
or the issuance of any kind of
fine.
Madam Chair, Mr. Speaker, are
there?
Candidates that are already in
that level of scrutiny or
activities that are compromising
the legality of CCD generally.
I mean, would we already have
folks that are?
Doing those activities that
we've certainly found, um, as
illegal actors, um, or not at
least not acting within
compliance of their license. I'm
sure that where we.
identify that without seizing
their uh product and having to
go through this process, I'm
sure, um, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you Kevin Graham again,
uh, remember the CCD has taken a
number of administrative actions
um since the beginning of the
imposition of the cannabis
regulation Act, uh, Director
Stevens may have the total
number.
But I think we're somewhere
around 13 or 14 NCAs.
39 NC the notices of
contemplated action now those
can vary from a fine to a
suspension of a license to full
revocation of a license, not all
of them are revocations, but
there have been 39 notices of
contemplated action filed in the
last.
2.5 years.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you for that
clarification. Um,
I don't know if there's any more
debate on this. I, um, I.
hesitant to.
Figure out how we're increasing
these police powers specific to
this industry in the sense that.
I know we have this problem, but
I don't want folks to be
targeted at a process that is
brand new, right? This is the
first time we're ever
Um
Trying to increase this police
power to this level within CCD,
so my caution is more so how
does the process improve.
Um, you know, and giving all
these resources and time and
getting folks trained up.
When we certainly just want law
enforcement to do their job.
Overall, when we've tried to
increase that ability for them
to get involved in the stakes of
what we're trying to talk about,
which is criminal trafficking,
where that's what we're trying
to prevent from happening.
Um
So I'm
Cautious, Madam Chair, to.
know that when we go through
this process, that it's an
improvement, my concern um is
generally that we still have to
go through district court, and
we know that they're dockets
are.
Same, um, Madam Chair, um, Mr.
Speaker, there could be years
before getting a determination,
and if it's not a criminal
proceeding.
You can't
Necessarily say that these folks
who were innocent perhaps to
this process, are now having to
hire legal counsel and try to
figure out how to pursue this
process that again is brand new.
So, um, I'm, I'm cautious and I
know there are so many folks
that hope that this is the fix
for these this illegal activity
for folks that are um acting
under the guise of, of, of legal
activity and certainly what
we're trying to prevent from
from being a risk in our
communities, um, but that's the
pause, that's
The tension that I have, um,
with creating a process. So I
hope to watch it closely, but
ultimately hope, Madam Chair,
um, Mr. Speaker, that
We could somehow get law
enforcement involved directly
rather than having to create
this alternative admin process
and to just enforce the laws
that we have already put on the
books to ensure that this will
like illegal activity doesn't.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, um.
Thank you, um.
Mentor, uh.
He said Martinez, Speaker
Martinez.
Um
That that Philly fan.
Thank you, ma'am.
Representative Sapansy.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and Chair
Gallegos also.
Co-sponsor, um.
I was involved with the uh
initial effort.
Many years ago with the original
line and A and compassionate use
act back before.
We thought
Legalization, decriminalization,
would even be a possibility, um,
so I just wanted to make a
couple of brief comments and
then I, I just had a question,
but you know, I, I really like
this approach, um, Madam Chair.
And uh sponsors, because I think
it allows for this unit to
really specialize in.
The enforcement of this very
complex law.
Um, and really meet.
Each individual business owner
where they're at and really
ensure compliance with um what
can be a very complicated
process, um, you know, and I,
um.
I have been contacted by some of
the advocates that I worked
with.
Um
On the passage of the linen air
and compassionate Youth Act and
they are very much in support of
this, um, because I think they,
they also, um, as well as myself
when I worked on these issues,
we talked a lot about tax and
regulate.
It was never intended to be sort
of a free for all kind of
situation. Um, it was intended
to be regulated as, you know,
any substance that has the
potential to, um, at, at that
time provide a lot of
beneficial, um, uh.
Positive effects for medical
patients that were seriously in
need of this relief.
Um, but also be regulated in the
way that we, um, look at those
substances, um, that have the
possibility for, um, also some
negative, uh, aspects and.
Uh, so I, so, Mr. Speaker, and,
and members, I just wanted to
share that, um, the number of
the folks that have stayed in in
touch with the industry and
really looking at what the
development of a safe industry
for New Mexico looks like are
very much in support of this.
Um,
And Mr. Speaker, and, and um and
uh members, I, I also feel that.
Uh, we're, we ask law
enforcement to do a lot, you
know, a a lot of complex. They
deal with a lot of complex
situations.
So it makes a lot of sense to me
to have this uh unit that's
Really gonna know these laws
inside and out and really gonna
know.
How to hopefully resolve some of
the issues.
Uh, in a
Uh, in a manner that.
Benefits the business and also
benefits the community and the
safety.
Um
I'm curious. My, my only
question, um.
Is
You know, we're obviously
giving.
The powers of the peace officer.
to these individuals, so, um, in
the sense of, you know, we have
the uh various boards that
maintain certification for law
enforcement officers. They also
deal with disciplinary issues
and so.
You know, in the event that
there were some issues. How
would that be addressed um in
terms of
These specific officers that are
being agents that are being
authorized through this bureau.
Um, what would happen if a
member of the public.
had a concern with a specific
agent, how would they?
Uh
Note that concern who would they
file that complaint or concerned
with.
Um, how, how will disciplinary
matters be handled?
Madam Chair and um Mr. Speaker
sponsor experts.
I don't remember.
They would be dealt with
essentially the same way for
starters as any other employee
of the regulation and licensing
department. Someone can make a
complaint to the department and
we will look into that matter
through our, our HR department,
but from a law enforcement
standpoint, the
Chief or a bureau chief for this
division would be their
immediate commanding officer,
superintendent will be their
ultimate employer. We, we have
made sure that we have kept
review of this and control of
this very narrow unit at the
very highest level in the
department so superintendent
would be the person who would be
the ultimate decider on their
employment issues as far as
their law enforcement
certification because we require
in section 2, subsection C, the
last sentence there that the
bureau chief and enforcement
agent shall.
meet the qualifications for
certification pursuant to
Section 2976, Mexico statutes,
then there could also be a
complaint brought with the.
And
Perhaps someone else remembers
the the proper title where our
law enforcement certification
and training folks through the,
the uh
Training Academy and they
certification could be taken
away if there's certification
was taken away, they would be
terminated because that's a
requirement to hold this
position.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um, Mr.
Speaker, Cha Gallego, so it
seems, um.
That we've actually added an
additional.
pathway
Or addressing any complaints or
concerns because you've got the
RLD process, as well as the
typical.
Law enforcement process to
address complaints.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair. I
just appreciate you all for
bringing this forward. Um, I
think it's a step in the right
direction. Thank you. Thank you,
um, Representative Hall and then
Representative Martinez.
Madam Chair, expert witnesses,
Mr. Speaker.
Most of mine have been asked and
answered.
However, I would just one
question, since this is gonna
involve both civil and.
Criminal, who would be
prosecuting this. The Attorney
General's office, the district
or the district attorney's
office or both, Madam Chair.
District attorneys for the most
part.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, Madam Chair, uh, district
attorneys would be the
prosecutors.
Although the attorney general
would also have equal.
Responsibility if they wish to.
Alright, sorry about that. I.
Got distracted. Representative
Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Mr.
Speaker, I appreciate you
bringing this forward, um.
It's a great idea.
Um, my only question is,
or
6 officers on
On the road is gonna be enough
to cover the entire state as
My small community of Berne Leo.
I mean there must be.
When he dispensaries there?
Look at places like
Albuquerque, Las Cruces, some of
the bigger
Some of the bigger towns.
7 officers gonna be enough.
6 off actually.
gonna be enough to
be able to handle the workload.
Madam Chair, uh,
representatives, um, I, I do
believe it will be enough. Um,
we can always re-evaluate at the
fiscal year, but I think it's
important to keep in mind we
will still have our traditional
compliance officers out on the
road conducting those
traditional compliance
operations working with our good
faith operators, this would only
be used for those criminal, uh,
levels of violation. So I do
believe that this would satisfy
our need currently.
In my chair.
Mr. Speaker, so.
your compliance officers will
basically be
Funneling cases to
These offices
Madam Chair, Representative, uh,
that would be one way we could
possibly open an investigation
would be an officer on a, on a
um normal compliance visit
identifying some criminal
activity, but again, we would
reserve this for uh those
actions that are criminal in
nature. Again, our good faith
licensees are unlikely to see
these officers in their uh
facilities.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Mr.
Speaker, that's
Anyone else?
I move for a due pass.
have a motion for a due pass on.
Um, committees, oh.
This a committee substitute.
Oh, OK, OK.
Um, and have a do pass on house
bill 60 on House Bill 10.
Um, made by Representative
Reeves seconded by
representativesanski.
We call the role. Yes, thank
you, Madam Chair. Representative
Abeta.
Representative Chavez, yes.
Representative Hall.
Yes
Representative Hockman B. Hill,
yes.
Representative Martinez.
Yes
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen.
Yes
Representative Ree, yes.
Leader Sapansky, yes.
Madam Vice Chair.
Yes, with Rose
Madam Chair
Oh, yes, Madam Chair, with 10
yeses.
Sorry, Madam Chair, with 10
yeses yeah but what what.
Representative of Baytown, yes.
Thank you with 11, yes, as you
have a do pass on committees of
House Bill 10. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, members.
Why was I being asked about?
pressing for us to.
It was.
Well, I have showed you because
I have to print it for you
because I couldn't print in
here. I just show you this
electronic version.
So until you get the.
This is gonna be a little crazy.
We are now on.
House Bill 66.
Workers' comp.
Cha.
Um
So I just want to tee this up a
little bit.
Um
We have a bill, but um we and we
got a committee sub yesterday.
And I was informed, there was a
prob a small problem with the
committee sub that we got
yesterday.
Um, in that
about 4 or 5 words that need to
be changed.
Um, and I worked with our
ranking member and.
Notwithstanding the fact that we
just got the committee sub, you
know, very recently.
Seems to be
Consensus that we'll move
forward with the Medi sub. It's
a they small changes and we can
have someone it sounds like
maybe there was a drafting
error. I'm not precisely sure
what the issue was there.
So we are on a 0.3 version, I
understand.
Yes, please, please.
Not my preference.
It's a few words. It's not, it
is not a large change. It, it's
like 3 words or 4 words, it's,
and we can talk about that all
right.
So with someone um
Consider
Adam.
OK, let me read the, let me make
sure we read the 202 number
since we've had so many in the
last couple of days, um,
0230582.3, OK?
Right.
Um
And um
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, I am
Representative Pamela Herndon, I
have with me a an expert. His
name is uh
Uh, good afternoon, Madam Chair
and committee members. I'm Ben
Sherman and I'm a worker's
compensation attorney.
so that I can assuage people's
interest in the change, you
could share with us the change
right away so that people
understand.
The low magnitude of the issue.
Certainly, Madam Chair and
committee members, uh, the
changes are on page 9 and.
17, um, we changed essentially
four words, um, we changed the
on page 9.
We change where it says.
By May 1st, 202019. It said the
division, that's been changed to
the advisory council on workers'
compensation occupational
disease disablement. I'd
microphone away from you. I know
that's counterintuitive, but we
do a lot of things here that are
counterintuitive. Yes, madam
Chair, and we changed that as
well, uh, right below that where
it says by November 1st 2029,
the division.
That's been changed to the
advisory uh on workers'
compensation.
And diseased disablement.
The same changes were made.
On page 17.
There we changed
To mirror that language where it
says by May 1st, 202019, the
Workers' Compensation
Administration, that's been
changed to the advisory council
on Workers' compensation and
disease disablement.
And it may be occupational
diseases disablement, but it's
the advise we call it the
advisory council, uh, in, in
layman's terms. Thank you. All
right. Thank you. So, um,
representative the floor is now
yours in terms of speaking
about.
Your, your bill.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee to give
you a high level view of what
this legislation does. House
Bill 6 the substitute for House
Bill 66, uh, works to
Amend section 52-1-54 of the New
Mexico Civil Statutes of 1978 to
increase the size of attorneys'
fees that can be collected in
workers' compensation cases and
increase the amount of money
that can be advanced by
employers for discovery costs.
And that's basically what this
legislation does.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, and I have my expert
here to provide any other
additional information uh
regarding this. We did have a
task force, Madam Chair, that
was put together to look at
these um these increases before
they occurred and uh so as in uh
They negotiated agreement, the
amounts that are shown in this
substitute are the amounts that
we are presenting before this uh
body today. Yes, um, Madam
Chair, thank you, Representative
Hernon. Madam Chair and
committee members, uh, they're,
as you might be aware, we have a
large access to justice issue in
New Mexico when it comes to
workers' compensation and it
comes to injured workers finding
representation. Um, part of that
reason is because of the cap on
the attorney fees that was last
addressed in 2013, which said it
at the current.
Rape, which is $22,500. Uh this
bill proposes to increase the
attorney fee to $30,000 and just
as a note, if that $22,500 from
2013 were to be adjusted for
inflation, it would be $32,750
today.
Um, so this is a compromise that
was reached and this would be
also the recommendation of the
task force that was put
together. Um, there was also
discussion, and this is another
compromise that's been reached
among other parties to do a few
increases uh to, to keep up with
inflation to that attorney fee,
uh, and there'll be two
increases, one in 2027, which
will increase to $2000 to
$34,000.01 in 2029, which will
increase it another $2000 to 34.
400 $0 and at that point, uh,
The advisory council, as we call
it, will take a look at that
attorney fee and then can make
recommendations to the
legislature about whether that
attorney fee at 34,000 in 2029
is keeping up, uh, and
benefiting the system or if it
needs to be changed. The other
um changes to the discovery
advanced um that uh early
addresses the access to
healthcare crisis that we're
seeing in the state for injured
workers. There is a huge
shortage of doctors.
Who will agree to take workers'
compensation patients. Uh, this
is the compromise amount as
well. Um, the current amount is
$3000 and what that is is um if
a worker's attorney wants to to
take that position of a, of a
doctor. That's mainly where it's
used.
Um, employer insurer, the
insurance company will advance
the cost so that uh the worker
can take
The doctor's attorney, uh, the
doctor's deposition.
If the claimant
veils at trial they get
reimbursed, um, that, that money
they keep that. If they don't
prevail, that money goes back.
So that is being increased to
$4000. Uh, and then there'll be
a, uh, I'm sorry.
me
get the exact amount for you.
$3500. I'm sorry. Um, that's a
compromised amount and then
it'll increase $500 in 2027 to
$4000 and it'll increase again
in 2029 to $4500 and at that
time, the advisory council will
take a look at it and determine
whether or not the discovery
advance is keeping up and
benefiting the system or not,
and part of the reason why we
need the uh discovery advance
because
Doctors are wanting to get paid
more for their deposition time.
Uh, they are, they get paid very
little to do a deposition in
workers' comp under the current
rules, um, there's been talk to
increase that amount to
encourage doctors to take
workers' comp patients and uh
part of that is to increase
their deposition fees. So this
helps to cover that. Uh and I'm
happy to answer any questions.
Thank you.
Thank you. Anything else
representative before I go to
the audience. No, madam Chair,
we are.
ready for questions. OK.
Um, those wishing to speak in
opposition to this bill.
Please step up to the
microphone, which should be
here. OK, very good. We have a
mic.
Right, I don't see anyone in
opposition. Anyone online
wishing to speak in opposition,
please OK, I see a Peter
Compost, if you could keep your
remarks to about a minute, I'd
appreciate it.
Uh, good evening, Madam Chair
and members of the committee.
I'm Peter Compos. I represent
the Gallup-McKinley County
Chamber of Commerce.
Uh, we oppose House Bill 66 and
its intent to increase the size
of attorneys' fees that can be
collected for workers'
compensation cases. The proposed
legislation falls under the
category of, if it ain't broke,
don't fix it.
The bill adds yet another undue
burden onto the backs of
employers who are currently
struggling to balance the
pressures of high cost of goods
and services, supply chain
issues, work food shortages, and
more. By increasing discovery
costs an additional $3000 and
the cap on attorney's fees by an
additional 7500 per claim, you
will create disastrous results
for small businesses, not only
from claims, but from
ever-increasing workers'
compensation insurance rates,
especially since the bill ties
annual increases to the CP.
I.
In the bill's FIR, the General
Services Department noted that
doubling the upfront discovery
cost would not only likely be
costly, but would also provide
only marginal benefits to
affected employees. The current
payment structure of workman's
comp is working for employees
and employers, so we ask that
you oppose House Bill 66. Thank
you.
Thank you. Anyone else wishing
to speak in opposition, please
raise your hand anyone else.
I'm sorry, I, I already.
Did you just come in, sir,
because I just, OK, well.
All right, so, um.
I'll allow it, um, sir, if you
want to speak in opposition, I'm
not gonna.
about when you raised.
Madam Chair, committee members,
Jerry Shallow, the president of
the rancher Regional Chamber of
Commerce, we stand against HB 66
as it proposes significant
increases in financial
thresholds for workers'
compensation cases, thus
increasing the amount of
potential legislation.
Uh, I'm sorry, legal expenses
that will occur.
Or potential increases in
workers' compensation insurance
premiums will also happen with
the premiums increasing, leading
to increased costs of doing
business, potential for more
litigation goes way beyond this
with higher attorney fees.
Which could incentivize more
claims and prolonged disputes,
burdening both businesses and
legal systems, small and medium
sized businesses may struggle
with the financial burden of the
upfront requirement for the cost
of claims.
We ask that you vote no on HB
66. Thank you.
Thank you. All right, um, anyone
in the audience now wishing to
speak in support, please, please
keep your remarks to about a
minute, please, Madam Chair,
committee members, my name is
William Kudney.
I am a healthcare worker.
I acquired
COVID in 2020.
I was hospitalized for an
extensive period of time.
I did not know the nightmare
that I was going to go through
with workman's comp.
It's been 5 years and to this
minute right now as I stand in
front of you, it's still going
on.
I heard somebody say if it isn't
broke, don't fix it. It's broke.
Prolonged litigation.
They are prolonged litigation.
Please, please.
Give these attorneys the ability
to stand on a balanced beam and
fight these wars for people like
myself. I cannot, I cannot
receive any benefit from this
bill.
But what I stand here today for
is for the people that don't.
And can't
Please help them. Thank you.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Pete
White. I'm an attorney in Santa
Fe I've been practicing workers'
compensation law for 32 years.
I'm not long for this world, and
uh
I, I've enjoyed it, but I, I am
uh not going to be able to do
this forever. I have a client
with me, David Stausski, I've
represented for 16 years, many
years without being paid.
I need to have an opportunity to
have another attorney step in my
shoes and be able to represent
some of these long-term clients
who have problems that come up
well, well beyond uh a a career
for some folks, we need to have
uh more attorneys practicing
more doctors willing to practice
workers' compensation law.
Presently, my understanding is
there are only 33 lawyers in the
whole state.
And only 4 outside of
Albuquerque and Santa Fe, who
are actively representing
workers' compensation, um,
clients, that's a crisis, that's
a present crisis. The um fee
hasn't been raised since 2013.
This was a product, this present
bill is a product of
negotiation, uh, Mr. Sherman and
members of the insurance
industry who are here worked
this out, the basic terms have
been in place.
Uh, the adjustment to the um
doctor's bill is, is just recent
based on the increase. So I urge
you to pass this.
All right. Um, anyone else in
the audience wishing to speak in
support.
OK, online.
I see
Please raise your hand, then I'm
gonna limit it to 3 people.
Kate L.
Um,
hello, my name is Catherine
Luker Eaton. I am an attorney.
Um, with the workers' comp
administration.
Um, I just would urge, um,
passage of this bill that um
that representative Herndon has
um has proposed. I was one of
the members of the task force,
and I can tell you, um, I, I
second the comments by, um, my
colleague Pete White, and I also
would like to point out that
when in New Mexico, we have an
injured worker who is a younger,
but
has multiple injuries, um, that
will affect them for the
remainder of their life, though,
the nature of the medical
treatment that they receive
requires that they have somebody
throughout the remainder of
their life to ensure that either
the employer insurer is
providing adequate, reasonable,
necessary, causally related
medical attention, um, or that
there has been a settlement that
provides for the future medical
benefits. I had represented
somebody who was, OK, thanks.
Appreciate it. Thank you. Um.
Stephanie Welch.
Madam
Stephanie, are you there? Sorry,
yes. Yeah, about a minute,
please. OK. Uh, Madam Chair, my
name is Stephanie Welch for the
New Mexico Center on Law and
Poverty. We thank the sponsor
for this bill. Many workers who
are injured at work and who have
paid into the workers'
compensation system never
obtained the benefits of that
system, partly because of the
lack of incentive for attorneys
to take their cases by
increasing attorneys' fees, this
bill would help more workers
receive the.
support they need, but
increasing the amount that
employers may pay in discovery
costs, this bill helps level the
playing field between workers
and employers. The bill is good
for New Mexico's workers and
insurers are more equitable
compensation system for these
reasons, we support the bill and
ask that you vote do pass. Thank
you.
Thank you. I don't see anyone
else with their hand raised.
Go back to the sponsor and um
other comments before we get.
Madam Chair, do you see a woman
by the name of Catherine Luker.
Um, we just, she just testified.
All right, anything else? All
right, let me see, I don't have
anyone on my list unless I
missed you. Ma'am I'd like to
know the do pass.
On, 00.
We, you know,
all right,
all right, um, representative
Reeb and then Representative
Paul.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative and expert,
um, you know, we heard this in
the labor committee and, um, we
were.
I was a no on it, um, but I
wanted to see.
The the main reason I wasn't on
it, um, Madam Chair and
representative, cuz it didn't
feel like this task force, the
recommendations from the task
force for what was being
recommended to in the bill, so
are we now all on the same page
with the task force, um, and is
that the negotiation that's
taken place, Madam Chair.
Madam Sherton and committee
members, that's a great
question. Uh, yes, um, after the
House Labor Committee meeting
hearing which I know you were
there, um, there was some
extensive negotiations that took
place over many days, uh, with
both the employer and insurance
companies and workers'
attorneys, uh, and this is the
compromise and agreed upon.
Uh, Bill and language that is
supported by all sides.
Right. Thank you, Madam Chair,
and I wanted to thank you,
Representative and expert for
addressing those concerns that I
think many of us had in that
committee and and taking the
recommendations of all of you
instead of just one side and
adjusting this, so thank you
very much. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Oh, thank you,
Representative Representative
Hall.
Madam Chair.
Representative
Um,
Bree, if you briefly, can you
explain the task force process.
I never, I, I would just like to
hear a brief explanation of
that, mad I'm sure.
Uh, Madam Sharon can remembers
uh the task force had 12
different participants, uh, 13
if you count the, the chair of
the task force uh from abroad
spectrum of, of parties. There
were workers' attorneys, there
were workers were employers,
employer attorneys, insurance
representatives, uh, labor
unions, and uh they all met, I
think 8 different times to do an
extensive deep dive into data
provided by the workers'
compensation.
administration and insurance
companies.
To uh come up with this
recommendation. The
recommendation was for $30,000
attorney fee increase. That was
the minimum amount that all
parties were agreed, agreed
upon. There was also a
recommendation for a 3500
discovery advance, uh, which is
what this bill proposes, uh,
with just some minor increases
over the next 5 years. And
there's also gonna be increases
to the attorney fee if this bill
passes over the next 5 years,
but those are on par with
inflation and that's really the
The, the goal here is just to
keep the system running, uh, and
to keep workers being able to
access uh attorneys, but I hope
that answers your question about
the task force. We, we looked at
data including cases that
reached the cap. Uh, we also did
an attorney survey and surveyed
I think 270 attorneys, um, and
we had a statistically
significant response rate to
that survey and we also um got
what what are called payment
histories, which is indemnity
and medical payment histories
from insurance companies
showing.
How they spent money in legal
costs and attorney fees. So we,
we pulled all that data and we
had the help of an actual
economist that works for the
Workers' Co Administration to
help explain that data to us so
that we can understand it, uh,
but that was the, the process.
Madam Chair, Representative, um.
When you've talked about the
inflation rate earlier, which
helped.
Come to some of these
calculations.
Was that something the economist
came up with and you know what
the percentage used was for the
inflation rate, sir, Madam Chair
and committee members, uh, I
don't know how that he was from
the economist, yes, um, and I
think he used the CPI, um, but
I, that's my best understanding
and that would put the attorney
fee of 22,500 in 2013 to 32,750
in today's money. It also put
the discovery advance at $6250.
So this does uh certainly
represent a big
compromise on, on that.
And Madam Chairman, last
question, how often are these?
I know we've discussed it.
But how often are the these caps
actually reached.
I've, I've heard, you know, some
of the people that testified and
I know there's some horrific
cases, but
How often does this actually
occur, Madam Chair.
Madam Charity committee members
of the task force found that
using the data that we had uh
between 4 and 12% of cases are
reached the cap and uh that's
because they don't have perfect
data on this, but that's the
best, uh, that we could get
given the data that we had.
However, I will say that more
cases are reaching the cap.
Lately, because uh uh a turn,
the average weekly wage and
salary of workers are going up
and part of the benefits that a
worker receives are based on
their salary. So as salaries go
up, their benefits go up, um,
settlements go up, benefits go
up, and so it only makes sense
that the cap will start getting
reached more and more if it
doesn't uh go up as well.
Thank you, sir, Madam Chair,
that's it.
You, um, Representative Chavez.
Um, I believe Representative
Hall asked, I was just curious
how many times the cap has been
reached.
You just asked that question.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Yes, a Madam Cherokee members,
yes, it's between 4 and 12% of
the cases.
Anyone else?
So workers' comp is unique in a
way I I imagine in that.
Attorneys' fees for both the
employer and the employee are
capped. Is that correct?
Madam Chad remembers, yes, that
is unique about workers' comp
and that is correct.
OK.
And um I understand it's um.
One of your concerns is we are
short, we have 32 workers' comp
attorneys in the state right now
is what is what I heard in
testimony. Imagine that's
roughly accurate, is that right?
Madam Charity members, yes,
that's uh accurate in some
jurisdictions or some uh parts
of the state there are no.
Attorneys that do workers'
compensation.
So workers then have to go to a
place like Albuquerque or Santa
Fe to get the support that they
need.
Yes, that's correct.
OK.
Right.
Um, you know, I would point out
the cap is on both the employer,
but the.
Having worked it for a company.
I know that there's a lot of
staff support.
And that helped workers the
defense.
workers' comp claim.
Um, you know, there's the HR
department, if they're in-house
attorneys, those attorneys
support the um outside council.
Um, sometimes we do it, we would
do it ourselves, so.
Um
There is a little bit of a.
Advantage to the employer when
they're defending these cases. I
just want to share that with
you, and
I do think
The fee is very low presently,
and those need to be adjusted to
account.
Or increased costs like we all
are and.
To ensure that workers can get
the support that they need and
advancing their claims, um.
You know, I'm a little
disappointed.
Having been here now for 6 years
and worked a lot on the
employment side and this I
consider an employment thing.
There seems to be.
At least from some.
Chambers
View that if it's pro worker
cause I've had this set, it's
viewed as anti-business, and I
really would like to suggest to
all of us that we need to stop
thinking in those terms. It is
pro-business and have the
ability to address issues. So,
um, I'll leave it at that, and
I'm happy to, Madam Chair, I
move a do not pass on
66 and a do pass on House
Judiciary committees up for
House Bill 66 have a do not pass
on house Bill 66, but a
Do pass on House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 66, and I would point out
it's the 0.3 fusion, um, call
the roll.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Abeta, yes.
Representative Chavez, yes.
Representative Hall.
Yes
Representative Hoffman B. Hill.
Representative Martinez.
Yes
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen, yes.
Representative Reeb, yes.
Leader Sapansky, yes.
Madam Vice Chair, yes.
Madam Chair, yes.
Madam Chair, with 9 yeses, you
have a do not pass on He Bill 66
and he do pass on committee sub
for House Bill 66. OK, thank
you. Thank you very much. Thank
you, Madam Chair and members of
the committee.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee.
So we are now on House Bill 72.
nurse
low representatives.
Sorry, madam Chair, we are here,
we have some handouts that we'd
like to pass out to the
committee if that's OK, it
depends. I need to look at them.
Oh, I'm sorry. Yes, we like to
have a pre-approval before.
tend not to pass out, um,
advocate.
That's why I that's fine so.
No disrespect, cause those that
can be done.
Through the advocacy process
before the bill is presented.
So, um, the floor is yours,
Representative Chavez. Ferrari,
and we also have an amendment.
Uh oh.
Is
OK, very good.
Very good. I see we have gotten
it in advance, that's great.
Um, you're feel free to share
the number.
Uh, it is, um.
20 I mean, I'm sorry,
0.230610.1.
That's what we have.
How would you like to proceed?
Would you like to explain the
bill and then talk about the
amendment, however, as you wish,
Madam Chair I can.
It looks like the amendment is
fairly um simple. Yeah, and you
know, it kind of.
Wordsmithing a little bit, but
um, so why don't you talk about
the bill and you can talk about
the
OK, thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
how special I need to has come
from before this committee
before, but this time we have
just a few changes to it, so.
Bill, 72 proposes to create a
minimum um nurse to patient
ratios in um health care
facilities in New Mexico. It
creates a advisory committee,
um, to advise the healthcare
authority.
Um
What those ratios should look
like and the ratios would depend
on um the level of um.
care a particular patient might
need, for example, if there is a
patient in an ICU then um it
would be a 2 to 1 ratio 2
patients to 1 nurse, um, and
sort of goes on like that in
terms of, you know, which units
um would um.
Require the number of nurses for
those patients. One of the
issues that, uh, oh the other
thing that the bill um does is
that it also creates a um.
It creates also um.
Penalties, uh, if a particular
um health care facility does not
follow, um, the staffing
patterns. It also actually
provides for some time in terms
of planning, um, the ratios
don't go into effect
immediately. It provides for um
the authority um to also hold
hearings to promulgate the roles
regarding the minimum uh
specific ratios, um, that a
particular hospital unit might
have.
Um
And so I think in a nutshell,
um, Madam Chair, that is the
bill. Oh, it also provides for,
um, hospitals, required
hospitals to train and orient
nurses before they are moved
from one unit to another so that
nurses aren't taken from, for
example, an ER and move to uh a
newborn ICU so it requires
training.
Um, and in a nutshell, Madam
Chair, that's it, um, what the,
um.
Uh, what the amendment does is
really uh clarify a response to
some concerns that were raised
in the um Health and Human
Services Committee. There was
concern that it was there wasn't
enough clarity in terms of
whether or not nurses would be
actually be on this committee,
um, and that's what this, this,
uh, amendment does so it also
changes uh or it also adds
instead of administrator as
directors of nursing, um.
Uh, to, to the language, um, and
then throughout it, it, it
allows that at least one member,
um, of each section of the
committee be a nurse, so that's
really specific because some
folks are concerned that, you
know, if you have language that
isn't specific to nurses, then,
you know, who else, uh, you
know, other employees might be
um assigned to that committee.
Uh, the other, uh, piece that
the amendment speaks to, and
this is new, um, that a
semiannual report be completed
by the CNO of each hospital or
director of nursing to the
staffing nursing advisory
committee, and the purpose of
that is to document the
hospital's plans and efforts to
meet staffing ratios recommended
by the staffing advisory
committee.
And that's the essence of the
amendment.
OK.
We have lost a quorum, so we'll
be operating as a subcommittee
for a while.
won't be able to vote on the
amendment until we get forum
back here.
Um, but let's go to the
audience.
Those wishing to speak in
opposition.
Oh
Now we do very good.
We vote on the amendment one
after all the public comments
that, um, those wishing to speak
in opposition, please.
stand behind this gentleman and
take the mic.
We're gonna allocate about 5
minutes.
One minute per person, please.
Hello good evening, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Julia Ritten, and I'm
the senior director for
government affairs at the New
Mexico Hospital Association, uh,
on behalf of our 47 community
hospitals and their nursing
leaders. Uh, we respectfully
stand in opposition for today's
bill. We appreciate the work
that the sponsor has done to
address the serious concerns of
our frontline nurses, um, and we
as hospitals have serious
concerns about the unintended
consequences to a reduction in
access to care, uh, if hospitals
are unable to.
to, uh, higher the number of
nurses needed for this, so we
ask at this time, uh, for you to
vote no on this bill today.
Thank you.
Hi, my name is Mary Beth
Thornton and I'm the chief
nursing officer at University. I
stand in opposition to this
bill. While I understand the
intent is to improve patient
safety, the bill does not allow
flexibility, such as if an ICU
unit is, is holding a patient
that has a lower level of care,
we'd still be held to the higher
staffing levels. Additionally,
our progressive care units in
our hospital are mixed units.
They have progressive care
patients, floor-level patients,
as well as patients who are
holding
waiting for beds in the
community, which there are not
enough of. Additionally, there
is a shortage in New Mexico
depending on which report you
look at, between 6 and 8000
nurses. I just simply don't know
where we would get those. We
would have to bring in more
travelers if those travelers
were available, and that would
increase the cost even more.
We have a fur on this, and we
are projecting costs of $79.6
million over the 1st 3 years for
this, uh, impact of this bill.
Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you. Anyone
else in the audience wishing to
speak in opposition?
OK, um
Those individuals online wishing
to speak in opposition. I'm
gonna.
As for 3, I'll do the top 3, on
our list here, Michelle
Martinez.
Thank you.
Hello, Madam Chair. Thank you
committee members. My name is
Michelle. I'm the interim CEO of
Encompass Health Rehabilitation
Hospital of Albuquerque, and I'm
here to speak in opposition to
House Bill 72. This nurse
staffing bill aims to impose
rigid and scientifically
unproven ratios at every
hospital across New Mexico,
regardless of size, location,
unique patient need or acuity.
We are unaware of a single
authoritative study that proves
that nursing ratios at hospitals
increase the quality or safety
of patient care or access to
care. None of the studies that
do
nurse staffing recommend a
specific formula that would
improve outcomes or validate any
arguments in favor of this
proposal. We believe that our
hospital and nurse leaders are
better equipped and qualified to
develop a nursing plan that
takes into consideration the
acuity of patients being
treated. Hospitals need to
retain the flexibility to
provide the right care, rather
than focusing on specific
ratios. We believe the focus
should be on providing the
appropriate level of care that
each patient receives and
deserves as needed by the
caregiving team.
at the bedside. A nurse ratio.
Thank you, Miss Martinez.
right, we are next um Didi
Spoon.
Yes, ma'am. My name is Jeannette
Spoon and I'm from Three Cross
Regional Hospital.
Wait a second, what happened?
Miss Spoon
Yes.
We lost you, so why don't you
start again? OK, I apologize.
Um, so I am, uh, speaking in
opposition to these uh bill. Um,
I do believe also that the
mandated staffing ratios would
force hospitals to hire more
nurses and significantly
increase the labor cost, um, New
Mexico is already ranked 41st in
access um to care, and I believe
that this would just further be
a detriment to our state as a
whole and our vulnerable
population, um, in addition, we
are also 3rd.
And the highest date for poverty
and the cost that it would cost
of compliance for the hospitals
would have to be passed on to
the uh patient leading to higher
insurance premiums and out of
pocket expense, um, to require
reimbursements to sustain
operations, the state's gonna be
faced with increased pressure to
adjust Medicaid funding,
straining an already strained
public health budget.
Um, I do believe that the
consequences are dire and just
not, not good for our, our, our
population.
Thank you.
And we now have um Ms. Westfall.
Last speaker.
Thank you again, Madam Chair.
It's all Westfall again with the
greater Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce. The reality in our
state, as in states throughout
the nation, is a severe nursing
shortage. According to
testimony, we've heard this
session thousands are needed,
and the number one consequence
of this legislation is going to
be less care for more New
Mexicans.
What is the hospital to do when
there are more patients and
nurses in the ratio prescribed
an age 72, turn them away.
That's not allowed in emergent
cases.
Our hospital should not have
predetermined cutoffs for how
many patients can be served and
expecting hospitals to be able
to quickly hire more nurses or
any medical professionals. It
just isn't realistic. It's why
we're seeing numerous filter
sessions built at the chamber
strongly supports to join
multi-state compacts so we can
shore up our provider ranks.
HB 72 also adds a new
responsibility onto the
healthcare authority that's
better managed at the hospital
level. For New Mexico's
patients, mandating staffing
ratios when you're facing a
staffing crisis is the wrong
move at exactly the wrong time
and turning staffing decisions
over to someone miles away or
embracing a one size fits all
approach, disregards the.
OK, we'll go back to the
sponsors, um, before we go to
the committee, I'd like to um
address the amendment, I'm
sorry.
We didn't do support, Madam
Chair. Oh, you're right, we
didn't.
Support
Those wishing to speak in
support of the bill.
I'm allocating 5 minutes total.
So I would recommend, I'm sorry,
um, that you all.
Moderate your comments to adjust
otherwise we will have to cut
some people off there at the end
of the line.
Be aware, men in each.
Up to. Yes, sir.
Madam Smith Sandoval,
being a form of bedside
caregiver for over a decade, I
can can't express enough the
need for this bill before
leaving bedside in and giving up
on achieving a higher license of
practice, I frequently had
shifts with 18 to 24 patients
each.
I can tell you if it isn't law,
these healthcare organizations
will not change their practice
of putting gains over patients
or healthcare heroes, and their
families who all suffer from
these bad faith practices. Thank
you, Madam Chair and committee
for your time. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Megan
Greene. I'm the president of CWA
Local 7076 our union represents
members of several agencies that
would be impacted by HB 72, the
healthcare authority folks at
MCMC and Raton, New Mexico rehab
Center in Roswell and turquoise
Lodge, we also represent uh
psychiatric techs at UNM
Hospital. We stand in support of
HB 72 because our members
deserve to work in safe
conditions where they are given
the best chance to help their
patients.
We all know that we have a
vacancy rate crisis across many
of our state agencies, and
research shows that improving
staffing ratios positively
impacts the number of employed
nurses.
We believe that better working
conditions would decrease the
attrition rate of our members in
these critical positions. We
stand in support. Thank you.
Thank you.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Sharon Argen Bright.
I've been a nurse for over 45
years. I taught nursing in
northern New Mexico to alleviate
the nursing shortage. When I
located here to New Mexico over
30 years ago. I worked for a
hospital that had implemented
staffing ratios. This was before
California. I got to experience
the best nurse work environment
ever, hands down. I enjoyed my
work, my patience got the care
they required, nothing more,
nothing less. I enjoyed coming
to work.
Fast forward 10 to 15 years,
things went south rapidly.
Ratios became an option.
For more than 10 years, we
nurses have petitioned our
legislators for mandated
nurse-patient ratios, there is a
hospital nurse shortage for a
reason.
Re-establishing voluntary exit
interviews will tell you the
reason.
New Mexico nurses need mandated
ratios. Thank you for voting yes
on this bill.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Alex
Cervantes.
Thank you. My name is Alex
Cervantes and I am an attorney
here in New Mexico who
represents injured persons,
including oftentimes patients.
I'm speaking in support of this
bill because it's a pretty
intuitive approach to the issues
that I see every single day. If
you see patient safety and
patient needs at risk, then
provide them more healthcare
providers. Here, that's exactly
what we're doing. Um, and
speaking in terms of resources,
I deposed corporate reps all the
time, review staffing documents,
financial document.
documents. I've seen that the
resources are there. It's just a
question of where we allocate
them, and I can't think of a
better allocation than
prioritizing helping frontline
workers and putting patient
safety first.
Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair. Good
morning, Madam Chair and members
of the committee. My name is
Kenneth Bustos, and I'm a first
year.
UNM School of Medicine, and I'm
here today as the voice of my
support for House Bill 72. Uh, 1
of the requirements for any
medical school applicant is
direct interaction with both
phys physicians and patients,
which can be obtained through
shadowy experiences or
professional experience such as
working as a registered nurse.
While preparing my application,
I had the privilege of working
alongside Kantassha Wise, a
certified nurse practitioner in
Albuquerque who single-handedly
provides care to hundreds of
underserved behavioral health
patients in New Mexico. Uh,
witnessing her dedication, I
firsthand saw the immense strain
placed on providers serving
vulnerable populations. Through
her work differs from inpatient
acute care, the burnout
experienced.
The burnout she experienced was
undeniable. If one provider is
shouldering such a heavy patient
load in an outpatient setting
can face this level of
exhaustion. We must consider the
even greater impact of
overwhelming patient ratios have
in acute and emergent care.
Hospital 72 is a necessary step
forward towards addressing these
challenges and ensuring
sustainable, effective care for
both patients and providers. I
urge you to support this bill
and help improve healthcare
access and provide our
well-being in New Mexico. Thank
you.
Um, that concludes our in person
piece to the pro.
Um
Now let's go online and I'll
take.
Free online.
Right, uh, Deirdre.
Miss Murph
You need to unmute yourself.
Thank you, madam. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. I
thank you for the opportunity to
speak today and my name is
Deirdre Murphy, and I'm a
resident of a senior um assisted
living facility due to a botch
surgery 15 years ago. I've been
left permanently paralyzed and
over the years I've been in and
out of hospital care and have
witnessed firsthand how critical
it is to receive the care every
patient deserves. I'm here today
to voice my support for
House Bill 72 because I believe
everyone, no matter who they are
or where they come from deserves
the highest standard of care,
safe and adequate staffing is
not just a technical
requirement. It requires that
patients like me are treated
with dignity, attention, and
compassion during some of our
most vulnerable moments of our
lives. Research has shown that
the adequate staffing not only
improves patient outcomes but
also enhances the staff morale,
and retention. This bill is
crucial.
toward creating a healthcare
environment where both patients
and providers can thrive. I urge
you to pass this bill to protect
patients and support the
dedicated healthcare providers
who care for us. Um
anyone else online wishing to
speak in support, please raise
your hand.
I don't see anyone else with
raised hands, um, back to our
representatives, we have an
amendment which I think.
I'd like you to explain and I'd
like to, if it's gonna be
adopted, adopted before we go to
the committee for discussion.
Madam Chair, do you want me to
go, um, line by line
to explain the amendment helpful
very briefly to go through. It
looks like you're, you know.
Inserting a few words here and
there, um, as I explained
before, we wanted to clarify who
the members of the committee
would be specifically and wanted
to ensure that the intent was
that at least one nurse, um, be
part of that committee. Um, so
on, um.
Page 3 line 5, we have um
Struck the word administrators
and instead have included
directors of nursing in some
areas, um, that's the, the
title, uh, director of nursing,
um, so that would be in addition
to chief nursing officers.
On page 3 line 6.
After members.
Insert at least one of whom
shall be a nurse on page 3 line
9.
Again, after members at least
one of which, one of whom shall
be a nurse.
On page 3, line 12, again, the
same thing after members insert
one of whom shall be a nurse.
On page 7.
Line 10
Strike the word and.
On page 7, line 24.
Strike the period and insert and
and insert in lieu thereof.
A
And my calling?
And a period.
On page 7.
Between lies 24 and 25, insert
the language that reads submit a
semi semi-annual report
completed by the hospital's
chief nursing officer or
director of nursing to the
staffing advisory Committee.
The report shall document the
hospital's plans and efforts to
meet staffing ratios recommended
by the staffing advisory
committee.
And those are all of the.
amendments for the bill. Very
good.
Anyone, I'm happy to listen to
an emotion um.
Oh, sure.
Thank you, Madam Chair, I just
want to make sure um this was
intentional.
Um, you changed on page 3, line
5, administrators, but not on.
Line 3, I don't know if that was
because the private public or if
you just, that was inadvertent.
Not change it there.
Madam Chair Representative, you
mean directors of nursing,
adding directors of nursing,
yeah, we wanted to be more
specific so that nurses were uh
engaged sometimes administrators
aren't necessarily nurses, um,
so we wanted to ensure that they
were.
I guess my question is, you
didn't change it on line 3
though.
And so that's, did you intend to
not change that to to directors
of nursing also or was that just
a mistake.
Um, um, representative that may
have been an oversight,
yeah.
OK, thank you. I just don't know
if we, I don't know if that
works, let me understand, so
we're on page 33 line 3, right,
in line 5, Madam Charro's
changed, but not line three, so
I just don't know how we.
I just want to bring that to
their attention. I think, um,
Madam Chair Representative, no,
I think we're OK there. I think
um.
No, right here.
There's, I mean, there's private
hospitals and public. I just
didn't know if there was if that
was intentional, Madam Chair,
or?
If you wanted that to be the
Yeah, uh, Madam Chair
Representative, I think you're
right, but that was an oversight
we missed that what I hear you
saying is on.
A 3 lines we want to say one of
whom shall be a nurse. No,
madam, madam chair, strike the
word administrator and include
directors of nursing. Oh.
OK.
So we could do an amendment on
the flaw where in.
We could accept a motion.
Let's do this.
Let's, if we can adopt this
amendment.
And then we'll look at emotion
on the fly.
for the one small. How about
that? So.
If there's a motion to adopt
this simon, the written
amendment.
I'll make a motion to adopt the
original amendment. OK.
and seconded, so we have a
motion to adopt amendment.
2306101 made by Representative.
Is there any opposition?
I don't see any opposition you
have.
That amendment adopted into your
bill.
Now, um, I'm happy to accept.
Uh, motion on the fly.
I'll make a motion to adopt, um,
the 2nd Amendment, um, on page 3
line 3, taking out the word
administrators and putting
directors of nursing, I believe
is what it is, directors of.
All right.
So, um
I trusted and capable vice
chair.
Would suggest on page 3 line 3.
strike administrators.
and and
In lieu thereof.
Director, and that's your
motion.
made by Representative Reed,
executive by Representative
Romero opposition to this.
I see no opposition to the
amendment, so that um proposed
amendment is adopted, right, um,
you have presented the bill. Did
you want to offer anything
additional, um, representatives.
I, I, I do, uh, Madam Chair, and
then I also have to um expert
witnesses with me and and so um
what I wanted to um talk about
is the fact that there are um
probably about 4 states in the
country that have passions, some
shape or form of staffing
ratios, California.
is the state that has the
longest um.
Time with nurse to patient
ratios. They've they've got
about 20 years. The bill was
passed in 1999 and they went
through a planning process, um,
whereby they um established a
committee whereby they took a
public comment and, and then
it's and then um uh instituted
the the staffing ratios. And so
there are some very important
things that they experience and
again this is more than 20 years
of experience, um, so they
experienced improved quality of
health.
healthcare outcomes for
patients, uh, including, uh,
declines in mortality and
rehospitalizations. They
experienced fewer hospital
complaints, fewer patient
complaints, and one of the
pieces that we think is really
very important as well is that
there was a growth in nurse
employment compared to other
states, um, California has
experienced a uh return of
nurses to the field and they are
also experiencing a um increase
in the number of nurses around
the country here.
Coming to work in California.
There was an article in the LA
Times in September of last year
that that noted that, um, the
other piece is that um the
number of actively licensed RNs
grew by uh 10,000 the year after
the per year after the passage
of the state's safe staffing
law, uh, and that was compared
to less than 3000 before the
passage. So definitely there
have been some positive out.
Come and when we hear people
talking about there's a
workforce shortage we
acknowledge that there is, but
also if there is um some hope uh
for nurses to return back to
nursing, they will. One of the
pieces that nurses talk to me
about the most is, is that, um,
safe staffing is crucial to
their work environment and to
their ability to provide a safe
patient care. That's their
utmost concern. um.
We also know that there are many
nurses who still have their
licenses but have decided not to
work in hospitals anymore, um,
and in fact, um, when I was
working uh for a healthcare
union. We had a situation at
University of New Mexico
Hospital, where a number of uh
experienced and highly skilled
nurses in the uh newborn ICU
quit leaving the um the nurses
behind who had less experience.
And found themselves supervising
the even newer nurses. So that
was a pretty serious situation
for those newborn babies and
their families.
Um, there's more, um, Madam
Chair, but I will stop for now
and I will um ask my expert
witnesses to uh speak and uh
give a little bit more, um,
testimony in support of this
bill. If, if you could be as
brief as possible, it's 6
o'clock and we have another bill
after this, and I'm certain
they're gonna be questions, so
really try to keep it.
To like a minute each so that we
can get to the committee, who
I'm sure we'll have questions
for you.
OK, yeah, I will tell you to
keep it brief, Madam Chair, um,
representatives, um, I would
just like to speak to the fact
that yes, um, there is a lot of
nurses that have decided to
leave bedside nursing because
the work environment is um
completely un.
Um, unfriendly to nurses who are
not willing to put their health
and their licenses at risk, um,
and I actually did a survey, um,
in our hospital on 4 different
progressive care units last
year, um, staffing was the thing
that 85% of the survey
respondents mentioned as the
number one issue, um, and also I
work on a unit that has lost
almost about 75% of our day
shift staff, um, uh, because we
changed to a double bed unit and
we have not hired enough staff.
To cover it and I just have two
pictures to show, um, these are
all the nurses that left um the
unit and there's 4 or 5 more
applying to other jobs right now
because we don't wanna work
under unsafe conditions. Uh,
thank you.
Uh my name is Jessica Ma. I'm a
registered nurse at the
Presbyterian Downtown Emergency
Room, um.
I wrote longer than a minute,
but um, so I looked up some
studies, um, the NIH conducted a
study in 2021, uh, the number of
one reason nurses would leave
bedside nursing is due to
burnout. Uh, the number one
factor contributing to this is
poor staffing ratio, New Mexico
is cited in this 21 study, um,
uh having up to 28.6% of their
nurses leaving due to burnout
and 47.9 to 57.3% of New Mexico
nurses are consideringly.
their jobs due to burnout, um,
also over the past 20 years,
more than 100 studies by
academic researchers have
produced evidence confirming the
link between inadequate
hospitals nurse to patient
ratio, Staffing levels in poor
patient outcomes up to including
unnecessary death.
Um, they're
Um
Virtually 8 states, um.
That have hospitals, uh,
required their staffing
committees, um, one state is
requiring a chief nursing
officer to develop staffing
plans. 5 require hospitals to
publicly disclose the and report
nurse patient ratios in one
state, California has a nurse to
patient ratio set by law. So far
among all of those state
programs, the only major policy
response to chronic nursing
understaffing that has succeeded
in altering the quality of
patient care is California, the
law which was established in
202004,
minimum nurse staffing
requirements and has resulted in
California hospital patients
receiving an average of 2 to 3
more hours of registered nursing
care.
California has also um.
The only state with minimum
nurse staffing ratios in acute
care hospitals and as a better
health outcome and most, uh, for
most indicators, the national
averages. Um, I'd also like to
point out that nurses, um, they
want to work with their
respected, um, this does show in
California, which has a nearly
20% new student growth post
pandemic.
Also between 2022 and 2024,
California had 13,434 nurses
migrate to their state from
other states. Um, nurses work
incredibly hard for their
license, we leave to leave a
profession, um, we have worked
so hard for is not an easy
decision. Nurses have been asked
to do so much with so little for
so long. There needs to be a
requirement for hospitals to
provide safe staffing for
patients coming into hospitals
and they need to provide safe
staffing to preserve and care
for the nurses that are.
already there working in the
profession they love. Thank you.
Thank you I'd just like to add
real quickly that, um, we've
been working to try and provide
safe staffing for quite a few
years, we had to take a breath.
A break, uh, because of COVID,
we knew that was impossible and,
um, we are spending millions of
dollars to incentivize students,
healthcare students providers
and give them tuition and
stipends while they're going to
school, different things. So if
we can't provide a safe, a good
workplace for them and make sure
that we can, you know, keep them
more than 2 or 3 years, um,
we're wasting all of that money.
and we need to make it so that
you know they.
have safety for their, um, uh,
patients and reduce their
workload and stress and also
improve overall healthcare
quality, which is our goal with
all of these different programs
coming together, um, if we do
have that, then we can retain
the nurses that have been
trained and also maybe um in.
Incentivized people that have
left um the nursing field to
come back and help reduce that
um stress even more and the cost
to the um providers. Thank you.
Thank you.
Right, um.
Uh, madam chair.
I have a question for you. My
question is, I'm curious, I know
there's another nursing bill.
I'm curious to know the
differences between the two.
And I wonder if that's uh
Believe that's an appropriate
question.
I don't know if it's an
appropriate question or not, but
I know that we're.
That's the bill before you, so
if you want to question them and
not support it, that's fine.
But this is the bill we're
hearing.
Today
I chair that representatives.
Can you summarize like there's
another bill headed this way.
Can, can you tell us what the
differences are.
Uh, you don't need to answer
that question. I don't think I
can, yeah.
So that's why I asked you first,
Madam Chair. Well, that's fine.
And
So, um
Is that your only question on
this bill?
That was OK, very good.
Representative Chavez.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative expert witnesses.
First, my first questions were
going to be on the amendment. So
I had all of those circles, so
thank you so much for amending
the bill cause I know we did
have some concerns in the health
committee. Um, but my second
question is regarding the
already 8000 nursing vacancies
in New Mexico, um, I just
believe putting mandates on
hospitals would truly affect.
Access to healthcare, um,
especially how are they going to
operate when there's mandates,
so my question is on page 5.
It says here that um line 2,
page 5, you would waive staffing
ratios for rule general acute
care hospitals as needed.
To increase, can you explain
what the process is for this and
how that would work.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
um, I believe that it would one
be part of the conversation that
the committee would have and
also um this was this language
was put in in 2023, because the
hospital association was
concerned about the impact on
rural hospitals, so we agreed to
do that, um, Madam Chair
Representative, however, um,
those uh waivers would only be
in place if it did not
jeopardize the well-being and
safety.
Um, of patients. And so with all
of those in mind, I mean,
there's going to be situations
where um you might, we, we may
go back into COVID. I mean, that
would be a situation where there
would be a waiver or say there
is a multiple car accident in a
roll setting, you know, that
might be another trigger, um, so
definitely we can't outline
everything in the bill, but
those would be conversations
that the committee would have
and they would make make
recommendations about that.
Madam Chair Representative,
thank you. And I'm glad you
brought that up because that was
gonna be my next question on
page 11, um,
Line 15, talking about a
national or state emergency. Um,
or line 19 infectious epidemic,
so I thought directly of COVID,
um, and how we would.
Make reasonable efforts to
obtain adequate staff. How do
you document that?
Um, and that's on line 23 on
page 11. I guess all of this
flows together in the unknowns
because like like we stated 8000
vacancies in the state of New
Mexico. I don't think we're
magically gonna get nurses in
the next year, even if this
legislation passes, so we have
no nurses to put in a state and
remandating the hospitals to put
those in place.
So the only
Conclusion that I can see is are
these hospitals then gonna have
to close. What are our rule
healthcare hospitals going to
have to do if we don't have
nurses in place for these
mandates.
Madam Chair Representative and,
and we want to make very clear
that it is not our attention and
it never has been our intention
to close any hospital at all. As
a matter of fact, the nurses
that are sitting here with me at
this table would tell you that
they would never turn away a
patient. Um, that's not the
idea.
I think that it's really very
important for us to look at the
experience of California because
they have that 20 year history,
20 plus year history where they
have been able to improve
working conditions so that
nurses have, have stayed, have
come back, and there have been
new nurses who are coming into
the field, um, I hear very often
that nurses will tell me that.
Under the current conditions,
they would not encourage anyone
to become a nurse. We need to
reverse that and if we're going
to retain, recruit and attract
nurses to New Mexico. We've got
a deal with the issue of their
working conditions also, and
again, we need to remember that
it also improves patient care,
um, and when you improve patient
care, you're really cutting
costs because you're not having
patients come back into the
hospital, they're not having to
be readmitted, um, and that's
also very important, and you
also don't run the risk of.
patients, um, uh, getting, uh,
increased infections or falls in
hospitals, all of those things
go together.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
Representative, and I'm glad you
stated that cause that was gonna
be my next question.
You had stated that there's 4
states that have implemented
this and your expert witness
stated there was 8 states. So my
question is how many states
have.
created legislation for these
mandates, um, and how many years
have those been in place?
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
uh, the 8 states that require
hospitals have a er nurse
staffing committee or
Connecticut, Illinois, Nevada,
New York, Ohio, Oregon, Texas,
and Washington, Oregon just
recently passed, uh, racial laws
with the committee.
Thank you, Madam Chair, expert
witness. So yours was regarding
the committee, not the specific
mandates. So,
We have 4 states that have
mandates then is that?
Uh, or states that have passed
legislation for some sort of um
staffing now as as I understand
it, um, was, I believe that
Washington state doesn't
necessarily have ratios in
place, but they have a uh
committee and an advisory
committee, um, the states that
do have uh ratios are
California, Connecticut, and
Oregon.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, um, those were
all my questions.
Thank you, Representative, I
have.
Representative Ramiz, so
Representative Romero.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. I'll
try not to duplicate the
questions, um.
But I think part of the impetus
for understanding on balance
what the challenges in getting
folks hired to be able to fill
the ratios and.
Um
Understand that there is the
benefit of of being able to hire
folks when we.
You know, if or when we put this
into play.
How that would work. So, um,
Madam Chair, uh, representative.
When we're mandating this to be
enforced by next July.
How was that?
Decision, um, made to
But this uh
And into placement.
of
Um, Madam Chair representative,
um, basically what's mandated in
here is that um the the
authority uh with the advice of
the staffing committee hold
hearings at promulgate roles,
um, you know, we've had
conversations about, um, you
know, if there are, you know,
what about a situation and I
think this speaks to your
question in terms of we don't
have enough nurses to implement
the ratios, then um I think that
we are probably going to.
have maybe some um.
I don't know what word to use,
um, sort of, um, uh, uh
implementation, uh, maybe in
phases. That's what we might
want to do and I think that's
really, you know, part of why
there's a staffing committee
that's been set up to make the
recommendations in terms of how
this might work.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. I think
that's where the.
The rigidity and whatever would
be adopted.
Be enforced immediately without
that sort of step of is it even
possible?
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
and I think that's the real
reservation that I have in
seeing the disparity currently
coming out of COVID and then
trying to figure out where are
we, what's even possible.
state while we've been trying to
incentivize nurses to get into
the field.
Um, over the last several years,
including during.
Um, so, Madam Chair,
Representative, what would lead
us to believe that we would be
able to fill that gap.
Even at the smallest ratio
increase versus the largest.
Madam Chair representative, um,
I, I, it is gonna take us some
time to be able to do that, um,
8000 nurses aren't gonna
magically appear, but again, as
California experienced once the
rate the ratios were actually
put in place, um, nurses found
that their working environment
had improved.
And they stayed and other nurses
came, um, so again, it's gonna
be a matter of time, um, you
know, before we're up to speed
where we where we wanna be. I
think the other pieces that we
are going to have to continue
with the programs that we've put
in place in New Mexico to
incentify incentify and educate
nurses, uh, to become nurses and
to stay in the state.
Thank you, Madam Chair. um,
thank you your representative. I
think just the concern of.
How we get there with the all of
the shells and what we're going
to mandate happen.
Um, what do you deem Madam Chair
Representative is sort of the um
Opportunity for folks to to
challenge or uh perhaps question
what the ratio becomes through
the health authority or the
through the council that's
proposed, Madam Chair
Representative.
So Madam Chair Representative,
again we're looking at minimum.
Nursing standards, um, and there
are already um national
standards that are set national
standards that are recognized as
you call it.
Yeah, there's there's national
standards that are recognized by
nursing professions already,
nursing associations, as for
example, I'll use the ICUs 1 to
1, um, there are several cases
where hospitals already have
some of these ratios in place,
um, and I think where, um, you
know, things get difficult are
in places like the ER, um, and
other um units uh where uh
staffing isn't um optimal.
So there actually are um ratios
already in place at that
hospitals have at this moment in
time. So we're really looking at
maybe some particular areas in
the hospital that don't have the
ratios that we need and we also
believe that they need to be
codified so that they don't um
change at the at the whim of,
you know, an an administrator
who's trying to cut back on, on
nurses and save a little bit of
money.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, that really helps to try to
understand, and I don't know the
full scope of where, what, what
even hospital sort of units
would be called or how those
distinctions are made, so I
appreciate.
Having your expertise and and
trying to understand this
better, um.
I guess just on my last
question, I.
was looking at the fact in our
one of our um.
Analyses that private equity
owned hospitals, uh, we have the
highest proportion of those in.
Um
In the country here in New
Mexico.
Um, I'm just curious what layer
of.
Insight does that provide us as
far as just understanding how
We're trying to regulate through
this and and what the
protections are for the laborers
putting in this work and chair
representative or what that
means for how we continue to
proceed with healthcare mandates
and we're trying to, to sort out
and suss out with with our labor
force, with that ownership, um.
Layer sort of provides us, Madam
Chair representative.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
I'm not sure that I understand
your question.
I guess, Madam Chair
Representative, having the
highest proportion of private
equity owned hospitals is is
something that I, you know, of,
of.
The facts when we're talking
about ownership being local or
meeting local demands, that's
alarming to me for how
ownership.
provides that layer of question
as to how do we meet local needs
and take that in when
These are not owned by local
practitioners for the most part,
um, most private owned private
equities dispersed nationally,
if not internationally, Madam
Chair representative, so I'm
just curious how.
How that interplays with how
we're trying to justify the need
to be able to do this, and if
that, if at all, there is,
Madam Chair representative, I
think that, you know, one of the
things that we've wanted private
equity hospitals to do is, uh,
do what's right by the
communities that they're in, um,
and one of those things would be
hiring an adequate number of
staff. We know that private
equity hospitals have the money
to do that and so they would
obviously be um under the uh
ratios.
you know, having to follow the
ratios and so.
That would um hopefully force
them to hire nurses and um.
You know, we want all of that
money to stay in New Mexico,
don't we? Um, so that's how I
see it. That's how I would
envision it playing out, um,
that they would have to hire um
nurses to provide care for the
patients. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you,
Representative. Yeah, I just
feel like.
Um, in addition to the concern
for being able to staff and and
figure out the right way to do
that, but that's also something.
Thank you, Representative, I'm
representative of Beta.
Thank you, Madam Chair, thank
you, representatives.
Experts
I'm coming from a district that
serves.
A lot of um citizens into
hospitals and we're talking San
Juan and Cibola.
And my concern, I, I have a few
concerns and thank you for
presenting this and I do want to
make it clear that I, I do
support our nursing staff or
medical staff.
And I have family members who
are in that field and who've
talked about it, and I live in a
small community that has a small
clinic, and that's face
shortages before, um, in my
experience, I've noticed my 8
years of education leadership
and serving on a school board,
I've noticed that a lot of the
trends that the education
employment industry build is
facing our almost parallel with
the medical.
From recruitment, retention to
getting them through the
institute, the educational
institutions and passing exams
and getting them prepared in the
classroom.
Um, so I, I understand that, um,
and I wanna stress that when we
do one thing on the state side,
sometimes we forget how it
impacts us in tribal
communities. And for example, I
remember when the state did an
increase for teacher pay. That's
great. We want our teachers to
be compensated, but the flip
side was that border town
schools like mine and I have a
lot of them in my district. They
suffered the federally funded
schools because while the state
was able to give increases and
teachers migrated to those
schools.
are federally funded schools are
tribally controlled schools
suffered the loss and we had
classrooms that did not have
adequate teaching staff, which
set us back and we're stuck
because our advocacy is on a
national level, so we don't have
a quick fix for that.
So where I'm going with this is
when I, when I look at this, one
of my concern is, um,
If this is passed and.
You, you have this committee.
Comprised of all these
individuals, um.
How will you handle the
competition aspect because now
everyone's gonna be fighting for
nurses to fill their staffing
ratio to make sure they're not
facing these fines.
Just the way our schools were
competing to keep teachers.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative. Um, I think you
bring up a good point, and I do
agree there's a lot of parallel
parallels there, um, with the
education um system, um.
I mean, two things I think for
one, this is a statewide bill,
so the the rules would apply to
every hospital in the state
equally. And so I, I guess maybe
that would like even out the
competition, um.
And, um, and then secondly,
maybe some of those, um, um,
hospitals like in rural or um
the tribal communities would be
able to have the um exception
that we have in here for rural
hospitals when they're not able
to meet those needs, um, so they
would, um, kind of have like
that easement, I guess.
Um, that's, that would be the
answer to like.
Um, and so I think the, the
other piece of that is that we
really need
to think about how we're going
to improve.
patient care, right? Um, and
this is one way to do it and I
use the example of California,
what they were able to do in
their state. They were in a
situation where nurses were
leaving, um, because of, of job
dissatisfaction and because of
the fact that they were putting
their licenses at risk. Um,
You know, we have 2 nurses here
who have talked about, you know,
their coworkers leading um in.
In her unit, 75% of the nurses
left within a year, and they
predicted that.
What they wanted was safe
staffing.
Management ignored that.
Management has continued to not
come up with any kinds of
solutions, um, for the staffing
issue, um, and we think that
this, this is one way to do
that. We, I, I guess one of the,
what I'm trying to say is that
we continue to think about all
the reasons why we can't.
And we need to begin to think
about why we can and what the
possibilities are.
Thank you.
Chair Representative, um, I'm
sorry, I, I also want to point
out we, we keep asking about
talking about the 8000 nurses
that we need in New Mexico, if
we do not do something, nurses
will leave their positions, and
you will now be 10 12,000 nurses
in need.
Um, nurses are not going to
nursing school currently because
of how horribly nurses are being
treated. It's very obvious if
anybody walks into a hospital,
I'm in an ER, I hear from my
patients all the time.
You guys are being worked too
hard.
You know, you are running around
the whole time we don't get
breaks, we don't get lunches, we
don't get time to go to the
bathroom, so it it's something
needs to be done and if we keep
kicking the can down the street,
we are going to be in dire,
dire, dire need.
We just need to do something
now.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, representatives and expert
witnesses. I agree with you that
earlier you had said we want to
do right by the community. Um,
you also
said just a moment ago that we
need to do something before it
gets out of control. Um, my
concern is that I've spent.
A great deal of my life, even as
a youth member of community
organizing, and I've seen that
so many of our solutions are
within our community, local
control is important, we know
best how to serve those are our
communities. My concern is that
this is also like a blanket it.
Reaches into public and private,
it reaches into urban and rural
and is it truly a one size fits
all. I say that because.
In my rural community, we're
looking at CTE programs to help
the medical field. We're looking
at automotive programs to help
automotive industry, like those
are real solutions that we know
that will help and that will
eventually.
matriculate into the field of of
nursing and.
And um even construction and
project management, right? And
so my concern is that.
How can we come up with more
collaborative solutions to still
give our.
Health organizations, the
opportunity to to perhaps follow
what their employees are saying,
right? Because your example a
while ago was that they were not
listened to their their voices
were not heard, but also be at
the table helping make those
decisions, I think that is is
powerful that helps provide an
incentive that you're valued
where you're at and that you
suggestions for.
Being a part of a thriving
medical organization that's
helping our community is, is
worth it. So I'm encouraging you
to make these types of
compromises with within this
because I know community
collaboration works. I'm a
product of it, but I've just
tapped out and that's why I'm
here now to help at a different
level and with a different
group.
And so, um, I want to hear what
your thoughts are on on local
control or local opinions and.
Perhaps expanding in that way
with this bill. Thank you.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
that's the purpose of the
statewide committee and that's
the purpose of the um the
diverse representation on the
committee. It brings together,
um, hospital administrators and
frontline workers to have a
conversation about what, what
the needs are for, for the
hospitals in particular. Um,
it's not a committee that's
gonna come up and say, OK, all
hospitals in the state have to
do certain things. They're gonna
have a conversation about what's
best for each hospital.
They're gonna have a
conversation about what's best
for the different units in each
hospital. Um, and you know, when
I've seen, um, especially nurses
come together they're definitely
very collaborative, they wanna
come up with the best solution
for, for their patients. But
again, um, we haven't had
anything like this, um, and.
The hospitals haven't approached
this in a collaborative manner.
That's why we're here today.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and.
Representative and your
Your uh witnesses and when you
say that they're not doing it,
is that all of them across the
board or is it just some?
Uh
Madam Cha
Madam Chair representative.
Everybody's awake.
Um
Oh, it was you.
Yeah, I apologize. You know,
it's very frustrating for all of
us, really dealing with the
audio and it's not fair to any
of the presenters, us or the
public to have to.
This is not the first time one
of these things I've lost my
train of thought. Where were we?
Oh, is this a problem in all
hospitals? Well, um,
I, you know, that's a really
good question. Um, I haven't
been in every single hospital in
the in the state, um, but I
don't know that there are um
hospitals that have put forth a
plan that is collaborative with
the workers, it's usually top
down.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative and your
guests.
I just wanna do final comment
that I have spent a day. No,
it's not significant, but a day
in my local clinic and then also
the hospital to see what it's
like to see the flow of
operation to get an
understanding, and this was
prior to me even knowing about
this bill, this is back before
it was even sworn in because I
wanted to see the needs of my
community and what was going on,
and I learned lots of different
aspects of it, but.
Those are my concerns and I hope
that my recommendations for more
collaboration with the local
group and with the employees
like some type of change in that
area, I would feel a lot better
with just a blanket policy for
private, public, urban rural,
it's a little difficult for me
to accept just because I've
lived in a small community, and
I know that sometimes the larger
policies don't work for us, and
sometimes they do, which is
great, but hope you take those
comments and concerns, but thank
you.
bringing this bill, and thank
you for looking out for our.
Medical field. Thank you.
Representative Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair, my
questions have been answered.
Representative Hoffman B. Hill
and then represent Spansy.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, sponsor of the bill. Uh,
thank you. Experts everybody for
being here, so, um, no, it's
late and now we're all tired,
um.
But I, you know, I just, I have
some.
I absolutely understand the
premise of the bill. I have
absolutely seen firsthand what
happens when we have overworked.
And under cared for nurses and
nursing staff hospital staff in
general, so I absolutely
understand your plight. I know
why.
I feel like this is, you know,
being brought. Here's my
struggle.
We know during the COVID-19
pandemic.
That we had such shortages in
nursing staffing that we were
paying traveling nurses.
thousands of dollars a month.
To come to just cover.
These placements that we
couldn't cover with our local
staff and that continues in my
understanding to be a practice
that we see to this day. So, um,
and we hear constantly in the
legislature, you know, about the
nursing, you know, staffing
shortages and we're doing what
we can to encourage our
educational institutions to, um,
homegrow, produce more nursing
and nursing staff and um.
So we're, we're working on the
problem from that end, but, but
my struggle is.
I hear all the time like we
don't have enough OBGYN, you
know, practitioners in the
state, we don't have enough.
Uh, dentists in the state, we,
you know, name any particular
practice and we don't have
enough of them in New Mexico and
so I think to myself what would
what would happen if we were to
bring a bill like this, it said,
you know, hospital A, Hospital
B. You have to have a certain
number of OBGYNs on staff.
And we know that we don't have
them.
And we can't find them.
So what happens then?
If, if we pass a bill like this
and we know that the hospital
cannot meet that mandate. Are we
then do they have to spend?
Thousands more dollars on
traveling nursing staff to meet
these, these, these ratios, um,
is that the problem or is the
problem really that the
homegrown staff does exist and
they're just not being put on
rotation.
In a way that would, you know,
make more sense for.
What it is you're trying to
accomplish, so that, that's kind
of what my struggle, if that
makes sense.
Um, Madam Chair representative,
uh, thank you for your question.
I think this also has to do with
like where hospitals are
prioritizing their resources and
right now they're not
prioritizing their resources and
recruiting and retaining staff,
um, you'll hear this anywhere
that you go, probably around the
country in hospitals. It pays to
leave, it pays more to go get a
job somewhere else as a traveler
than it does to stay and work as
a nurse where you live and where
your family is, um, and so
hospitals are making decisions
around staffing.
around pay and such things, um,
and they're not prioritizing
like incentives to keep their
staff, um,
So I think uh that's also part
of the reason that people are
leaving, um, is not only that
the, you know, the work
environment is not great, but
they're also not getting
incentivized to stay so I think
hospitals can make some
different decisions with how
they allocate their resources,
um, and their budget to to
address some of these needs and,
um, incentivize people to come
work here in New Mexico. Um, I'm
actually from Colorado and I
did, um, come to New Mexico to
be a nurse here.
Because, um, when I interviewed,
I asked what is the ratio?
What's the patient ratio? And
they said it was 4 to 1, um, in
Colorado, I had seen it was 5 to
1, a lot of places, and they
paid more here, so it's not
rocket science, um, if you want
people to come do that job. I
mean, it's, it's complicated for
sure, but um, there's ways to
make, um, you know, nurses
travel a lot and go where it
pays better and where it's more
pleasant to work.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair, and, and, and thank you,
um, for that explanation, but
then wouldn't it make sense just
to pay your staff more rather
than pass a bill that would
require a higher staffing ratios
cause they could just pass a
bill and still pay people the
same or less, and then cite the
fact that we now have these
mandated ratios, so.
How does that work?
Madam Chair Representative, um.
I, I'm from Oregon. I came to
New Mexico so I could get into
nursing school in Oregon, you
can't even get into the schools.
It takes 5 to 10 years to get in
some cases.
school in Oregon
So
Hey, we like money. If you want
to pay us more, we'll accept the
money, but there's always gonna
be a burnout aspect to that, um,
I don't think you know.
Incentivizing nurses with just
financing is going to.
Make all the nurses stay. I
think there's nurses that are
burned out and they just they
just don't wanna do it anymore.
When, uh, there was a um
hospital in Albuquerque that got
cyberattacked and had to shut
down, we took on a lot of
patient load at Presbyterian
downtown, and they offered $700
bonus shifts. There were a lot
of nurses came in and picked up
extra shifts, and it was one of
the first times I've ever worked
in the hospital where it was
sacked.
And it was beautiful. Patients
were being treated, they were
being cared for, they were, it
was adequate staffing and and so
we know they can do it, but they
are so they just need to
incentivize nurses in multiple
ways to get us to come in and
stay.
Otherwise, nurses do go, they go
to California, they are probably
gonna go up to Oregon, um,
they'll go to states that
respect them and respect the the
their um the job that they love,
we are nurses because we love
this job, I went to nursing
school and I would, it's not for
the faint of heart, nursing
school is very, very hard.
And I don't want to have to
leave a profession that I love.
But I can't continue at this
pace.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair, and thank you for that
answer, and I absolutely hear
you and see you and understand
you and each and every one of
you is a hero every day.
For the work that you do. I
almost lost my husband to COVID.
And just watching the care that
he received by frontline
workers, I mean.
Completely rearranged my life
priorities. So thank you very
much for that. I understand the
premise of the bill, um, I just
have these struggles with it.
I'm not sure where I am quite
yet, but I, I understand where
you're coming from, and I
appreciate the answers. Thank
you very much.
Representative Sapansy. Thank
you, Madam Chair, uh, and
sponsors. I just wanted to make
a couple of comments, you know,
it, it, um.
It feels to me, it's a little
bit of a chicken and egg problem
that we're having right now
where we feel that we can't
impose staffing ratios because
we don't have enough licensed
nurses, however, we will never
get more licensed nurses if the
working conditions are not
improved, um, and I, I.
I think it's a, it's a bit of a
conundrum, but I think this bill
is really getting closer, this,
this legislation has been
proposed.
Madam Chair, uh.
Many years, um, and I think this
is the best attempt that we have
seen so far to sort of balance
those competing processes and um
in Madam Chair and and
sponsored. Is it, would it be
accurate to say that that
nothing in this effort to move
this bill forward is really
about wanting any access to
care, to be um lessened or any
hospital forced to shut down
any.
part of their operation to, in
order to seek compliance with
what, what you're proposing here
is that
Accurate, Madam Chair
Representative, we have been
very consistent in that message.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, and
I just want to mention I know
that you all have been working
really hard to meet with um the
hospitals and I want to commend
the hospital association also
for being excellent participants
in those conversations to really
try to uh understand where each
uh uh uh aspect where where the
folks that are impacted by this
legislation are coming from and.
The balance that we're really
trying to strike, and I just
really commend the sponsors for
being so open to look at some of
the.
Um
The ways that we could make this
really workable. Um, I just
wanted to make a couple of
suggestions that I think maybe
we could do a little bit of work
on, um, Madam Chair and
sponsors, so on.
9, in section 5, we start
talking about um.
What constitutes a violation,
and I, I think the way that this
is worded is a little bit
unclear, so it, um.
It indicates that no hospital
shall.
deviate from the ratios more
than 6 times in a rolling 30 day
period.
But then it goes on to say each
subsequent subsequent.
deviation during the 30-day
period constitutes a separate
violation, I think.
It's a little bit unclear to me
if that means the 7th violation
is.
A separate violation or if each
of the six.
Our violations, um.
And then it goes on to uh on the
next page, um.
Section C, where it's, it's,
it's laying out.
penalties for each violation,
and so I think that that making
it really clear what the
violation is.
You know what constitutes a
violation could be really
helpful, um, so that we
understand exactly when these.
Penalties are imposed.
Um
And I also uh just did in terms
of another suggestion.
Um
On page 11, line 21, section G.
It talks about granting waivers
to rural or.
Critical access hospitals.
Uh, and Madam Chair sponsors, we
may want to define.
Which hospitals are rural or
point to a definition in the law
and then which hospitals are
critical access, so that, you
know, all of us as members know.
You know, does, does the
hospital in my community fall
into either of those categories
because we are offering.
Some way, some type of waiver.
Um, to hospitals in those two
categories and and so those are
just a couple concrete
suggestions, you know, I just, I
do think that there's a path to
finding this middle balance
where.
Uh, we are
Encouraging nurses to stay.
In the positions in which they
so critically serve.
Um
But also maintaining hospital
operations and so I, I might
suggest if um and I don't know
if the sponsors are open to it.
I know there's more discussion
for the committee, um, and I
apologize that I have to leave,
um, to deal with that parenting
thing, but um, I, I, I, uh,
just, um, would just encourage
that maybe we roll this and and
get a little time on maybe a
couple of these issues, uh, if
the sponsors were amenable,
thank you.
Madam Chair and I again
apologize that I have to go.
Thank you, Representative.
Madam Chair, we're fine with
that.
rolling the bill, OK.
Um, Speaker Martinez, you were
on the list.
OK. Very good.
So we'll roll the bill as you
sort some of these issues out.
Um, thank you for your time and
interest. I know this is an
important bill. Thank you, Madam
Chair, we'll try to do that
within the next couple of days.
OK, thank you.
once.
Yeah, you were right after Rena.
OK.
I'm, um, could everyone exit the
room who need to who are here
for the last bill. We have one
more bill and I'd like to get to
it promptly.
Um, could, uh, sponsors who on
the last bill could do um
Thank you.
We are on our last bill
supported decision-making Act,
House Bill 149.
All right.
Representatives
My recommendation and CBS.
Grief and to the point as
possible.
absolutely, chair. Thank you. My
name is Michelle Paulina Beta,
and I am introducing this bill
with Representative Ferrari.
It's titled House Bill 149.
Relating to the health, enacting
the supported decision making
Act, providing requirements for
supported decision-making
agreements, providing duties for
supporters, creating reporting
requirements, creating a
supported decision making
program within the Office of
guardianship and the
developmental disabilities
council making an appropriation
and chair, I'd like to have my
expert.
Witnesses introduced themselves.
Good evening, Madam Chair,
members of the committee.
Emily called him back and the
cabinet secretary designate of
Aging and long-term Services
Department.
And this is an agency bill.
Good evening, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, my
name is Alice Lou McCoy. I'm the
executive director of the New
Mexico Developmental
Disabilities Council. We have
the Office of Guardianship.
I'm representative Joanne
Ferrari and I've been a part of
the wings committee that um has
brought together um, judicial um
disabilities people, um, and the
agencies um as well as
legislative, um.
Or the the wings is the working
indisciplinary, uh, networking.
Maybe
Or is yours. Thank you, chair.
I'd like to defer to.
Excuse me, Miss McCoy right now.
Keeping it very brief, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee, support decision
making that the supported
decision making act is uh New
Mexico's.
Statutory answer to um the
question that many people
Living with disabilities have,
which is that do we have the
same rights as everybody else to
make decisions in our lives and
we say yes, and we have um this
bill that provides a process and
also protections for people who
want to exercise decision making
in their lives, but need
accommodations and other types
of supports in order to do this
well.
That is the introduction.
have a committee sub.
Correct?
Yes, ma'am I'm sure, that's
correct. And let me read the
number 230416.1. Is that right?
Yes, madam Chair.
Someone want to move the sub for
discussion.
All right, it's out there.
Free to discuss the committee
sub.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
uh, the sub is to clean up
language. There was some
confusion about the
definitions and so because this
is a process called supported
decision making. We wanted to
clarify that the parties to this
supported decision making
process are the decision maker
themselves and the supporters
that provide the help for their
decision making. And so the
decision makers and the
supporters. Additionally, uh, we
did remove, um, in section 10,
the
Liability provision for third
parties relying on this
agreement, but we left the
requirements that third parties
are required to
Uh, abide by this.
I didn't understand that
explanation of a third party.
Could you do that before we go
to the office? Yes, madam chair.
So, uh, in the original draft,
um, there was a liability waiver
for people, third parties who
get the agreements and are going
to rely on it and this
particular um sub removes that
liability issue, but it leaves
the section in that does still
require third parties to abide
by the agreement.
Madam chair, if I may expand as
well are we talking?
OK.
Yes, and page, Madam Chair, page
6.
On the
Wine
22. Yes, thank you.
OK.
Thank you. Now I understand what
you're saying.
Thank you.
Any other comments before I go
to the audience?
Those wishing to speak in
opposition to the bill in the
committee room.
Please stand
With the gentleman with the
microphone.
OK, I don't see anyone in the
committee room in opposition.
Those in online, wishing to
speak in opposition to the bill,
please raise your hand.
All right, those in the
committee room wishing to speak
in support, please raise your
hand or please stand up.
And speak one minute each and
I'm allocating about 5 minutes
to this.
Madam Chair, I'll go ahead and
follow your direction as quickly
as possible. I am an attorney. I
spoke previously Alex Cervantes.
Uh, I support this bill as
someone who represents
individuals with disabilities
because it prioritizes their
well-being and their
independence.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Oambaumi, Advocacy
director for AARP New Mexico. We
represent over 240,000 members
statewide. Um, part of our
mission is to empower
individuals to choose how they
want to age and lead their best
lives, and this isn't complete
alliance with our mission um to
give them the dignity and the
independence that they deserve
and so uh we asked you to to
support this bill and pass it.
Thank you.
Madame Chair representatives,
money for shot
I I have a kid, um.
I'm urging this bill to be
passed because um people with
disabilities, you know, um, um,
a lot of times they don't have
the advice to request what they
want to have be and do to in
their lives, um, another reason
why this is very important to me
because um
There are 29 states across the
country that.
Bill
And I believe in Mexico could be
the dirty.
The
The 30th state.
Um
In the past, uh, I'm sorry, in
the past, um,
I always have, um,
A
privilege.
To, um,
To
Make my own decisions.
And
For example, when I was in
school, teachers will go to my
parents to say like, you know,
um,
But that's for me, but today I
now make my own decisions, and I
now help others make theirs as
well.
And last but not least, explains
that um we need a law in the
Mexico where people
For with disabilities commit
their own decisions. If we
don't, then they will not have
the same respect andunities as
some of us do.
In the world.
Thank you so much, all of you
for your time.
Hi, I'm Mary Lou Poley. I'm the
I'm the attorney for Adult
Protective services under the
Aging and long-term Services
Department and collectively we
support this bill because it
gives older adults and adults
with disabilities an option or
an alternative to guardianship,
as well as giving judges an
option to not put people or not
keep people under guardianship.
Thank you, and we respectfully
ask for your support as well.
My name is Tim Gardner. I am the
legal director with Diselite
Rights New Mexico. One of the
things we do is provide
representation for people facing
guardianship or under
guardianship, and we have worked
with hundreds of folks over the
years, um, over the last couple
of decades, and I've been there,
and many of them have been
caught up in the world of
guardianship when they did not
need to be, and it complicated
their lives in so many ways
legally and in, in their actual
presentation and, and, and
manifestation of the decisions
they wanted to make.
supported decision making, they
could put the team in place that
would help.
Help carry out their their
decisions. So we very much
encourage your support of this
bill. Thank you.
Thank you, madam, Madam Chair
and members of the committee,
Ellen Pine's representing the
Disability coalition. Um, it's
latent in the interests of time
and because my predecessors have
said what needs to be said, I'll
simply register our support and
urge yours. Thank you.
Thank you, Ellen.
Um, let's go online, those
wishing to speak and support and
I'm gonna select 3 people.
Online who can speak and
support, um, Chris.
Leroy.
Yes, uh, thank you, Madam Chair,
and representatives in the
committee. My name is Chris
LeRoy. I'm the director of
advocacy at the Ark of New
Mexico. I'll just say that it
has been the top legislative
priority for the ark of New
Mexico, as well as the National
Ark of the United States to
support supported decision
making. We've had it passed in
27 states now, as well as the
District of Columbia, it is
passed bipartisan, uh, in states
that are heavily Republican.
like Alaska, North Dakota, and
Texas. And it is also passed in
every state that's an adjoining
state of the state of New
Mexico. I think it's about time
that supported decision making
be now adopted into law in the
state of New Mexico. Thank you
very much.
Thank you, um, Vicente Vargas.
Good evening, Madam Chair.
Members of the committee, uh, my
name is Vicente Vargas.
I am the executive director for
the New Mexico Health Care
Association in New Mexico Center
for Assisted Living, we are a
trade association that includes
membership of 7 intermediate
care facilities for individuals
with the developmental
disabilities, um,
For the reasons stated, um, and
the well-being and independence
of the residents in those uh
intermediate care facilities,
the New Mexico Health Care
Association and New Mexico
Center for Assisted Living
supports this legislation. Thank
you.
Thank you, and one last person.
Um, Esther Covari.
Good evening, Madam Chairman and
members of the committee. Can
you hear me?
Yes
Oh, thank you. OK. I'm the
mother of a disabled adult, 37
years old. He is very
independent, um, he works, he
lives by himself. Um he likes to
make his own decisions. However,
due to his intellectual
disabilities, he's easily taken
advantage of, and it's very
vulnerable. Um, I have created a
supported decision making
agreement with him via local
attorney, but I know it has no
legal force at this point. My
son has been the victim of
predatory car dealers, seeking
to sell him expensive cars.
Totally out of his price range,
lending him money to buy these
cars at exorbitant rates of
interest. Um, he has gotten into
terrible trouble um with this.
Also, he has been sued for child
support for his two children,
who's not really able to look
after. And again, he needs help
with these kinds of decisions.
So I really think this is a
great thing to pass. Thank you
so much.
So with that we'll go back to
the sponsors. Anything else
before we go to committee?
I'd just like to add um Madam
Chair and committee that um this
is something that will be an
alternative to going into full
guardianship for a lot of people
and make it so that they can get
the support that they need and
from the people they trust and
to um secure their dignity and
um power over their own um.
own lives.
And Madame Chari also uh like to
just say that I've been a, a
supporter for my elderly 87 year
old grandfather who's been in a
wheelchair and we practiced
this. We've practiced this for
years and uh while he does speak
English, Spanish and Navajo, he
still prefers that his
granddaughter be by his side to
explain his options and make
sure he understands them and
then he fully um decides on his
own and I support that. Thank
you.
Thank you, Representative.
I have
Speaker Martinez.
I'm sure.
You pass.
On the committee
So
I do not pass on.
House Bill 149.
But they do pass on the House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill 149.
Yes, so we, yes, we have a do
not pass on House Bill 149, but
a do pass on House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 149 motion made by Speaker
Martinez and seconded by
Representative Martinez, um.
Would you call a roll?
Thank you, Madam Chair. Call
rolls representative Abeta. Yes.
Representative Chavez, yes.
Representative Hall.
Yes.
Representative Hockman B Hill,
yes.
Representative Martinez. Yes.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen.
Representative Reeb.
Leader Sapansky.
Madam Vice Chair.
Madam Chair, yes.
Madam Chair with 8 yeses, you
have a do not pass on House Bill
149, and they do pass on House
Judiciary Committee sube Bill
149.
Congratulations, you aced it.
Thank you, chair. Thank you
committee. Thank you. All right,
it's late. We are adjourned.
I have no
words.
I know.
That's
apologize
