Need to be
Divided up is narrowly escaped
one population as possible I
mean that's what the loss of
this with the casting what the
the the Supreme Court is
determined.
But this plan court cases give
some some some Lee way they need
to get.
Have your your legislative
districts relatively equal
population but.
based on traditional
redistricting criteria or other
state policies.
You can have some some some
fudge factor on that the case
law indicates up to about ten
percent.
So to want to discuss our sort
of.
Of interest.
One of the case versus Arizona
independent redistricting
commission.
Which is five seventy eight U.
S. two fifty three.
Just a two thousand and sixteen
K. from this the United States
Supreme Court.
And in this case Arizona which
had a redistricting commission.
And what at the time of of the
that the this case covers under
pre clearance application of the
voting rights act which actually
in the Shelby versus holder K..
No longer exists but
nevertheless I think some of the
So the discussion of the case is
is still probably permanent.
And if so what happened was the
tradition can commission.
Had a total variation of total
population deviation among
districts.
In their final map of
legislative districts eight
point eight percent.
And then attacked is excessive.
Under the circumstances and
first tested prior said.
I think number one.
That we believe that a tax on
deviations under ten percent
will succeed only rarely.
And.
If that the case policy
incentives less than a ten
percent deviation is provocation
constitutional whoever's gonna
tack the deviation has got the
the burden of proof.
In in the reserves on a
redistricting commission K..
The court said the complies with
section five of the voting
rights act is a legitimate state
consideration the can justify
deviation from perfect quality
of of population.
Now whether the same would apply
under section ten.
We don't know if this this case
dealt with section five but it
seems to me that complies with
voting rights act issues is
probably illegitimate state
consideration are legitimate
consideration to justify
deviation.
Now another case it's also of
interest involving some of the
issues you're dealing with.
In the case two thousand four K.
if.
It was out of a three judge
panel of the Northern District
of Georgia.
Yes l'oreal's versus packs.
Three hundred federal supplement
second thirteen twenty.
And then it went up on appeal
and was affirmed.
At one twenty four excuse me
five forty two US nine forty
seven.
And the l'oreal's versus cops K.
at tech was made against a.
The state redistricting of
pursuant to reimbursement plan.
Georgia on state legislative
districts.
They had a total deviation of
nine point nine eight percent.
It was held in the circumstances
of that case by the three judge
panel affirmed by the Supreme
Court.
The violate the equal protection
clause.
And to be in constitutional.
Because basically there were no
Articulated reasons.
The justify the variation what
what was done and what what the
testimony was that was
introduced.
Is that the the pip seem to
Intentionally and systematically
under populate districts and
rural south Georgia in inner
city Atlanta.
And over populated districts and
suburban areas surrounding
implant.
And there was no particular.
Traditional redistricting
criteria could be pointed to.
To support the the rationale or
the reason for that sort of
variation the three judge panel
found it unconstitutional
affirmed by the Supreme Court.
There is no effort in that case
as I recall the case.
That suggested that the they
needed to do for the other
population in order to deal with
voting rights act issues.
So those are two cases that that
might be particularly interested
as you go about your business I
thank goodness Sanchez is a
couple of the cases she was
talking about.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee and and Mr Olson
but there's really just just one
I think that I want to focus on
and and and then we can see if
others come up if if there are
questions that are pertinent to
them but that yet the last case
I want to speak to is is called
Cooper V. Harris it's a Supreme
Court case from twenty seventeen
and the site is one thirty seven
Supreme Court.
Fourteen fifty five.
And this is a case where the the
district court the trial court
did find a racial gerrymander in
the way that North Carolina drew
two of its congressional
districts.
And that the case of did
eventually go up to the US
Supreme Court and they they have
funds that decision they agreed
that that there was evidence
there.
Jerry Mander and in this case
helps to illustrate one of the
kind of classic problems that
can come up in and when one of
districting is being challenged
under the voting rights act
which which is a phenomenon
called packing you may have
heard brain center of talk about
the phenomenon of cracking and
the phenomenon of packing right
so cracking is taking him of of
racial ethnic minority minority
population and splitting it out
into different districts thereby
diluting that populations
opportunity to elect a candidate
of their choice parking is when
you take that same population
and but put them all in the same
district together which then
makes that street district very
strong for them but deprives
that population of the ability
to influence or elect candidates
of their choice in other
districts surrounding it so here
in North Carolina there were two
congressional districts that
already had majority black
voting age populations in them
they were considered pretty safe
districts of for for candidates
of that populations choice
but when those lines were
redrawn they increased the
number of the the black
committee of voting age
population considerably in those
two districts and the District
Court found that that was in
fact a racial gerrymander that
race had been the predominant
factor in drawing the districts
that way and there was no
sufficient justification for
doing it in other words under
the the test the race can be a
factor and even a predominant
factor if there is a compelling
state interest in drawing the
lines that way and the when the
court for the evidence about the
performance in that district it
determined that those districts
had already been safe.
That they didn't need to have
the the voting age population of
black residents increase that
much and they also had testimony
on the record from legislators
stating that race was their
predominant consideration and
drawing the lines that way.
So that was that was the case
where the evidence was fairly
clear coming in that of the even
though those there were there
were two districts that wasn't a
vote dilution case in the sense
of reducing population but those
those districts were found to to
violate the section to the
voting rights act and it the
plan was not upheld.
So they're obviously number of
the other cases that we could
cover but we we also want to be
sensitive to the committee's
time this afternoon I think
we're happy to take any
questions as as madam chair and
and the committee may wish.
But I'm sure there's one that
creates some confusion as I talk
to members about what's really
going on with the voting rights
act of nineteen sixty five
because we hear.
Over the years that that's been
guided by the US Supreme Court
the distinction in the state and
Shelby Russians holder the court
said that the pre clearance
requirement of certain states
and I can remember how many
there were in on line and there
were counties in Arizona and in
in North Carolina but the states
had to essentially one there are
plans by for purposes of short
cutting at the department of
justice that is what the Supreme
Court said no longer exists and
I of our said that correctly
but section two which is what
we're talking about today still
applies so what we're trying to
do is make sure that we work
within the voting rights act of
nineteen sixty five anticipating
that if there were to be a
lawsuit that the redistricting
plans that we with that we have
developed for the Senate
Congress the house in PC are
consistent with that act and
that would ultimately be before
the court but I'm hoping that
explains it and madam chair I
can either introduced now house
bill eight or the court or I was
gonna say if the court if the if
the children like I can
your back to the chair and the
committee can ask questions
whatever the chair would like.
I think that I'd like to take
questions after we've had the
full presentation and public
testimony if if the internet is
consider with us okay let's do
that do you need the taxable
stuff Mr sent off of Mr sharp
Madam chair representative
your interest of time is that so
many of the members have already
climbed the technical
explanation either on the house
floor or in the prior committee
and I recognize not all of you
were in elections but it really
is up to the committee if the
committee would like to hear
from Mr Sander R. P. is here and
he certainly here to answer any
questions that you might have it
really is the the pleasure of
the committee and the chair I
think what I'd like sister sent
off Mr sharp to give a brief
explanation and then we'll go to
the public testimony I have a
list of all particularly LFC all
representatives of the tribes of
Palos and if I could madam chair
just as a housekeeping matter
what I'm gonna ask the committee
to do is is that is I'm
introducing in front of the
committee House Bill eight
there has been discussion about
substitutes everything else
that's all we're doing is just
house bill eight and so at the
end of Mr Sandro's presentation
the public should know that's
and Mr sharps that's what we are
going to be what what the public
should know about as house bill
eight which is online thank you
madam what
everyone needs to understand is
exactly also eight is because
it's not in the C. R. C. final
report so the genesis of this
version is important.
The.
To the genesis.
Okay
so madam chair just to start so
a brief description of house
bill eight what it is largely it
is the
there was in the citizens
redistricting committee I always
want to say commission committee
in in the committee's work on
the house bill's they had three
maps all of which got you know a
ratings from an independent
group the partisan
gerrymandering project and
professor from trial
the.
Well and I don't have my notes
in front of me but I can tell
you generally the maps were I J.
and you run
I think I have this right that I
was the all pueblo council
governments map J. was the
Navajo Nation map and then it
was essentially a composite map
without the consensus of the
of the of the tree of the tribal
interests so what would happen
was when.
Rep Ted in line.
What the citizens are
redistricting committee said
wise there was not a consensus
on the
of tribal interests and so what
they did was they put up the two
other maps we really couldn't
start with those maps we
couldn't start with either the
all pueblo council government
staff.
The
Mission map so what we did
instead was started with the in
one.
And then what happened and there
was really.
Tional from the powerful
testimony from the tribal
interests from the problem is
the Navajo Nation I think a
great Apaches yes I maybe the
Mescaleros I it was what was so
arresting about it was the
history of disenfranchisement of
native Americans.
And what happened in house bill
eight was instead of us telling
them.
What we would like to see they
told us.
And it was a consensus that
really was historic in terms of
all the tribal interests of
which there are many in New
Mexico reached a consensus so it
was a combination of the
citizens redistricting committee
that heard from over eight
hundred people had thousands of
people testify also what
legislators are with their
experience and background and
look at this and the tribal
consensus and all together that
became house bill eight.
There was discussion about
having a a substitute for house
bill eight four we done instead
is kept it intact
and that is what's before the
committee and before the public
and so we're trying to be as
transparent and thoughtful as
possible and fail and that's
what House Bill areas and with
that now I can turn it over to
Mr sent off and he can talk
about what happened thank you
thank you very much.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Brian said if
Michael sharp is fries present
research and polling.
really haven't prepared a
presentation I was can just
answer questions but quickly
research and polling.
Has been working really since
July August of this process it's
our job to staff the process.
I first worked for the citizen
redistricting committee traveled
the state.
Throughout the state.
In two different phases first to
collect information from people
communities of interest draw
some concept maps.
Show those maps again to the C.
R. C. members and to the public.
Then those maps and ultimately
the citizen redistricting
committee members by statute had
to recommend to you at least
three maps for hop Congress
house Senate and PVC so that's
what happened in the process
three maps were recommended that
a lot of those maps I've noticed
have been seriously considered.
by legislators as they tweak
them and drop the roadmaps a lot
of the work that was done in a
lot of what was heard along the
way I I think has been a benefit
you know I've been doing this
for a while now this is my fifth
rodeo.
Started in this building were in
my twenties
at a very young age
working on this so I times than
before the state Garcia it used
to be a legislative committee
that traveled around the state.
and accepted public input.
And quite honestly there were
times when there are more
legislators in the room then
there were members of the public
one thing that I was impressed
with with the state or state was
they have a limited budget for
the legislature to give a budget
and they spent quite a bit of
money on outreach to try to get
the word out to the public about
this meeting so I was shocked
how many people showed up and
will and soon or in person again
there is so the CRC process was
interesting and hopefully you're
taking it somewhat seriously in
all the work that you do and so
that that was the process then
what happened was we change hats
and then we begin staffing for
you for the legislature so
Michael Sharpe who heads up the
effort for redistricting we're
responsible for the staff work
any requests that you make for
draw up new plans to amend plans
working with the Legislative
Council Service during all the
prepping getting all these maps
that you have in front of you so
we're not we're just a little
staff we're here to help the
process along the way and and so
far that's been hopefully
running pretty smoothly we're
here today if you have any
questions about house bill eight
or or the process of where we
got to where we are would be
glad to to answer them.
Let me just
Mr sharp we're going to say
something.
I think madam chair members of
the committee in the public yeah
I just assume we're here to
answer questions thank.
It's hard to give a brief
description of the plan point
seventy districts
but if you wanted.
Thank you okay that's better so
if you want we can go over to
some I guess qualities or or
characteristics of the plan as
opposed to a more comprehensive
review of the districts or if
the plan that that on the floor
yesterday to be up to the wish
of the committee.
I think that would be a good
idea because one of the things I
wanted to point out is that
we've had the legal presentation
but Mr center of Mr chair our.
Drawing maps that comport with
legal requirements under the
voting rights act and they are
informing people those those of
us and maybe the general public
this doesn't work because of
section two and this works
because it it conforms to the
requirements of section two so
yes please go ahead and do that.
Thank you madam chair so I guess
we can all process this set the
stage a little bit
so did the two thousand ten or
excuse me.
Two thousand twenty census data
came out back in August and it
told us the count as of April
first twenty twenty and well we
ran the numbers against the
current house districts to get
the current the population of
the house six districts as they
exist today.
F. L. U. lated the districts and
said alright which districts do
not or above or below the the
allowable deviation so take the
state's total pop two million
one hundred seventeen thousand
five hundred twenty two.
I by seventy and so each
district should be thirty
thousand two hundred and five of
two hundred fifty people in a
perfect world that's the ideal
population.
I was mentioned earlier with
respect to the ten percent
deviation
means that we traditionally said
plus my five percent but
so we get close to that thirty
thousand two hundred and fifty
people if a multiple if there
districts that fall especially
outside of that ten percent
deviation maybe plus to enter my
is to and then we know for sure
that they would have to be
adjusted so the district that is
a plus eleven plus twelve plus
the turn thirteen percent for
example we know that that
district need to shrink in
population at the lose
population and vice versa
there's a district that same you
know negative ten or negative
fourteen you have to gain
population.
And some regions of the state
where they're groping to
districts for example the
northwest where when you added
up all the deviations of the
northwest all the districts in
the northwest as a region that
made up about half of the
districts that region the short
half of district or so it would
and then in essence out in the
region have to grow up at the
districts in the region would
have to grow on the flip side if
there districts accompanies a
districts that have a lot of
population that far exceed the
the the ideal population and
there and at in general those
areas that have to shrink and
the districts in those areas at
district as well.
Senate pose challenges
In the northwest part of state
the other factor we need to
consider is there are six native
American districts that make up
to that the majority of the
population legislation six
districts in the northwest
districts four five six nine
sixty five and sixty nine and
they were low in population.
And so the the challenge there
is how do we maintain the native
American adult native American
voting age population in those
districts while still trying to
to take into account the
population shifts in the region
so that's just one of the
challenges that that faces the
north west by the state in the
southeast that was it does the
opposite and we were in the
southeast experienced a lot of
growth so the districts in
southeast will need to
strengthen population in other
districts can come into this
office did not have enough
population to I guess award to a
brand new seat and the same
situation occurs on the west
side of Albuquerque Rio Rancho
significant population growth
and almost enough order not
quite enough for a brand new
seats some districts can shift
but so those are the in in the I
guess the extremes in northwest
as a region had to came to
population southeast and west of
Albuquerque had to lose.
And so we.
That's that is the big picture
with respect to the state of New
Mexico the plan before you house
bill eight and the north west
the the challenge there is a
said was to make sure that these
be maintained the six eight
Merican voting each district
sixty two percent or above
native American voting age and
so that was accomplished the the
deviations are no more than
negative six percent negative
deviation and the on the and so
that means for the rest of the
state that the deposit these P.
deviation is no more than three
so or or on the positive side
new district can be more than
plus three percent so we have a
total deviation of ten percent
in this plan so that means that
that ten percent deviation
criteria.
One of the comments that we
heard not just kind of go
through the Senator comments we
had for the plan.
The at the second so ciation
filters important in the north
central New Mexico felt it was
important this is comments we
heard through the C. R. C.
C. R. C. process I'm sorry to
know that close enough the CRC
process was to preserve the
representation of north central
rural New Mexico.
And in the plant in H. P. eight
districts in north central our
our maintain so forty one and
forty and forty two house
seventy they all state northwest
New Mexico is there another
number of plants that had some
of districts moving to
Albuquerque but we heard that
the committee also in south
western New Mexico there was
it's their comments that the the
consumer city and the house
districts that go into Grant
County splits over city is there
a way to take a look at the
districts in southwest New
Mexico and puts Silvercity in a
single districts without
splitting Grant County that was
a public comment that we heard
top around south so the next go
along the Dona ana and Otero
County border the COVID was so
that split in the Senate can at
least it would and regardless of
house Senate cand Senator being
a single district that was
accomplished in a house bill's
eight.
In Albuquerque.
A district in southeast
Albuquerque we had plenty of
comments to try to keep their
national district in a single in
the single district
Representative district and
Senate as well to keep that
community together in a single
district.
So this is the sum of the
comments that we heard.
So I'd like to do is I can go
around the state it's hard to do
this I guess without the map or
showing up on the screen.
but I can describe the northwest
and let's see here so the
statistics in the Martinez type
of Philly area one two three
district four is Shiprock along
with other chapters including
assisted to map
the collaborative down to
Burnham district five is another
and native American district of
Navajo population going from St
Asti down through Crown Point in
into Gallup district nine as to
is from the Mexican springs
chapter six part to Gallup
interbred springs.
District six starts and then we
took chapter west of Gallup goes
to Reina into requests in a line
and north into the little water
chapter.
District six which was it's
excuse me districts sixty nine
is another native American
district certainly valley
Chapter but it also includes the
taco cultural historical park
which is important to the public
health so governments to include
in a pueblo based district so
sixty nine includes that the
Chaco historical park and goes
through Gallup excuse me it goes
down into the Laguna Act money
as Taj Lee and the sort of
public.
House sixty five starts in Tomah
excuse me don't say in the area
and goes over into the
nomination workflow down to the
toilet chapters and picks up all
the Sandia county publicizing
cleaning Senator pueblo south
Bernalillo so this is yes the
northwest description again
districts four five six nine
sixty five and sixty nine are
all about sixty two percent
adults native American.
This is.
In the so I had to the and
getting told it might be a
little too much
so apologize for that police say
move on thank you there
hello take offense.
So what so provided forty one
forty two forty passionate
Mexico we still have a.
In in Santa Fe County for forty
five forty eight forty six
northern Santa Fe County and
Forty eight forty seven as well
forty three is as Los Alamos in
the Santa Fe
The.
What are the challenges on the
east side is that sixty seven
says impacts in other districts
within the side it had to extend
further into Clovis forcing the
district with sixty four which
is a COVID based object south
into the southeast pushing other
districts towards Hobbes towards
Lovington and towards Artesia.
And Carlsbad so there is an
impact within the southeast with
sixty six used to be a part is
district and now it goes down
into parts Artesia and Carlsbad.
With respect to some of the new
the Hispanic districts in
eastern and southeastern Mexico
districts sixty three fifty
eight and sixty one are all
major Hispanic.
As an example and.
See here so I want to also just.
Hit on Silvercity Silvercity is
no longer splits its in house of
thirty nine entirely without
thirty nine which includes a
piece of catching County.
Within Albuquerque.
Because of the growth in Rio
Rancho Rio Rancho was able to
get three full suits and so
would be twenty three sixteen
and fifty seven and Rio Rancho
crosses a primarily for across
the sixties the house forty four
primarily corrals one of the
change within Albuquerque area
is that because of this I did
grow it painted District gained
house district seventeen which
used to be in the south that
exceeded the north valley and it
move to the west side of the Rio
Grande so now seventeen is a
course districts that's a pretty
significant change
with respect to what you have
today.
And within it was back to the
international district that is
entirely within house nineteen
otherwise the districts are
relatively the same as what you
have today.
And what that madam chair will
stand for questions thank you
thank you very much and we will
begin with the representatives
of the tribes and pueblos
because this map has there
I guess.
Have endorsed this final match
and I have a list of individuals
and if you would like to go to
different order please don't
hesitate to let me know that but
I have Casey do not from Laguna
Pueblo first
The gentleman would you like to
move over and let those folks
take that space and then and
then we'll go from there you
will bring you back yes after
public comment.
What do I have cable cable and
and clean right channel so if
you want to join
Is it this time also do we have
governor vaio of off of that and
so we may want to bring him in
at this point is that if you're
able to do that that will be
just by audio is that how it
works.
Okay all right let's go ahead
with Mr Duma.
Madam chair it.
If I may request that if
governor while could go first
the governor to covers of the
governor governor by okay.
Somehow this happens.
Has more.
Where's Representative Lewis.
She's.
Also owns it No shoes on so yes
I have.
Should participate on soon as a
committee member.
What was just to.
Resolve our technical
difficulties.
With respect to that.
At.
With a couple of points with
the.
Small.
The.
That.
Engine.
Yeah.
Well for.
The.
This on.
Good afternoon.
Governor please proceed.
Thank you madam chair good
afternoon or good evening and
members of the committee my name
is Brian file and I am the
governor of the public come on
and I am here to express the
public support for house bill
eight as it does contain the
trouble consensus amount for the
house.
Of the map submitted under this
bill captures the wishes and
preferences of the sovereign
tribes pueblos and nations of
our state and we stand unified
behind the.
This is not an easy process
trying to reach a consensus
among several governments
however I believe that we have
achieved this I'm very grateful
that we have.
Come to this point in this
process.
The map underscores our greatest
desire and conservative that is
to protect the voting rights of
all of our tribal citizens.
We also make sure the map
protect several existing major
native American legislative
districts namely the sex in the
house.
These are all within the
mediation and maintain a major
update of voting age population.
We appreciate the fact that the
C. R. C. listen to the
preferences of tribal leaders
and their wishes to remain in
certain districts are to have
them placed of multi legislative
districts for better
representation.
We are also extremely cognisant
of the need to protect our
communities of interest areas
considered part significant and
in some cases to a group of all
those including Tropicana mount
Taylor and other sites.
Tribal leaders also want to make
sure that the candidates we
chose a responsive to our needs
and concerns which cut across
the broad array of issues from
education to employment health
care economic development and
infrastructure.
But more than anything we want
them to recognize unique
standing of our cultures our
languages our homelands and our
governments.
Lastly madam chair the majority
of the maps not only capture the
guiding principles of the all
public council of governors
adhoc committee relied on but
also reflects the highly valued
concept of self determination
the concept those deeply another
at the heart of tribal
sovereignty.
Thank you for this opportunity
to provide these reports.
Thank you governor.
We'll go to KC to amount.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Casey
dumont I am for the public of
the gonna Hey when attorney
representing the public going on
as well as a co chair of the all
public consul Connors ad hoc
redistricting committee it is a
pleasure to be here and good to
see some familiar faces from
from ten years ago I was a
member of
co counsel for the multi trouble
plaintiffs in the New Mexico
over redistricting litigation
and many lessons learned from
that process that informed the
public leisure ship as we move
forward in this redistricting
cycle of course this being a new
process with the citizens
redistricting committee we set
out to.
Inform the committee on the
interests of our tribal nations
the public nations have.
Undergone enormous effort to
contribute to the citizens
redistricting committee
informing them of our
communities of interest
informing them of the nature of
relationships that exist within
our communities that frame the
sovereign decisions of each
particular Pueblo as when
undergoing this process the.
All public council governors
redistricting committee has met
with each public.
often multiple times with the
council's governors and.
Going through this extensive
process of going through the
maps going through tribal lands
identifying areas of which
current districts of their lands
currently sit in as well as
prospective decisions on the
Matt boundaries is so tribal
leaders with very informed
through this process and through
the citizens redistricting
committee and we have Mr sent
off and Mr Michael sharp here.
They understand we we I think
our meetings were some of the
most well attended drug
discussing I think we extend our
time frame I think there from
one to four and sometimes we
concluded at eight o'clock at
night and often times that was
because of the high level of
tribal input that was being
provided at our C. designated
CRC meetings which we had at the
Indian public cultural center in
Albuquerque and so when we set
out to this engage in this
process one of the things that
was very important for us and it
ties into the discussion earlier
with the voting rights act in
looking at the dynamics of the
law looking at the.
The confines of what the voting
rights act requires we underwent
this analysis presented to the
citizens redistricting committee
the jingles factors that were
presented earlier we identified
you know the the cohesiveness of
our communities the pointed to
several lack the elections that
make up the block voting the
polarized loading and
consistently as we had ten years
ago there was a finding by the
court that racial polarized
voting does exist in our area
and that no the citizens
redistricting committee is that
under the other one it's report
you'll find in the report the
technology meant that through
this analysis that there are
those jingles factors that are
meant so what's taxes into why
these districts are created in
the matter there that you see
reflected H. B. eight which is
districts that protect the
voting rights of native
Americans and provide native
Americans the best opportunity
to elect a candidate of choice
and throughout our our
presentations to the CRC the
publication emphasize the
importance of self determination
of.
That tribal communities know
what's best for their
communities and so the maps that
you see presented that are
reflected in house bill eight a
combination of the months of
work that the tribal leadership
has put in and one of the very
important aspects that we saw
throughout the process was this
concentration on deviations we
heard a lot of discussion on
deviations on this morning and
and threw up several discussions
with that.
Okay because these are factors
we looked at as well when it
comes to maintaining a major
native American district that
percentage of native American
voters within that district is
very important to achieve a
balance.
And we didn't want to go.
The lower threshold of sixty two
percent.
Because that would jeopardize
the native American major those
districts what balance that out
and what provided the
opportunity to stay above the
water was those deviations and
we worked through many
renditions sometimes I
deviations were a little bit
higher than we wanted and so we
have to keep re working those
districts to get those
deviations within a more
reasonable number knowing the
fact that the ten percent spread
that we don't want to.
Leave little room on the
opposite end of that stress and
so that's the amount of
attentiveness Public
leadership's made in
deliberating on these maps so I
just want to highlight and
emphasize the amount of
contributions tribal leaders
made into the house bill eight
the consensus maps and Preciado
all of the time this morning I
said evening and the that is my
my comments today thank you
thank you Mr king.
Good evening madam chair
committee members thank you for
the opportunity my name is
Keegan king I serve with K. to
do more as co chair of the
public counsel governor's
redistricting committee
it's been an honor to work on
this project to serve our public
leadership
pueblo leaders governors have
tasked us with.
Creating renditions of maps that
Representative truly represent
our tribal communities their
communities of interest as
they've identified them as
they've worked with their tribal
councils with their
administrations and with the
community itself to to
articulate to us and to help us
to craft these maps.
Today we are proud to stand with
our brothers and sisters at the
hickory Apache nation and the
Navajo Nation in support of
house bill eight.
As Casey mentioned has been
significant progress over the
last eight months and building
renditions that take the best
thinking of all of these tribal
nations and put them into one
unified map.
These maps.
Support.
Safe safeguard our voting rights
in our tribal communities and
ensure that
our tribal people will not be a
disenfranchised and will have
the ability to elect candidates
of their choice.
The districts that have been
crafted also comport to
traditional redistricting
principles.
And also follow the
redistricting principles of the
all public council of governors
that there be no retrogression
in the six native American
majority house districts so all
of those native American
majority house districts
maintain a strong majority at
above sixty two percent as Mr
shut mentioned.
The tribes nations in pueblos
have worked hard to articulate
that community of interest it is
not just ethnic.
The affinity or or
shared languages but also shared
lived experience in many of
these districts you'll find
native pueblo tribal nations
alongside Hispano communities a
new immigrant communities and
tribal leadership has worked
hard to articulate what those
communities of interest are in
some cases this case you
mentioned they are sacred sites
that make up part of the fabric
of of our tribal communities.
So.
The taxation the public to stand
in support of house bill eight
and we're thankful for the time
today
these districts are going to
support
our communities for the next ten
years and ensure that we're able
to elect the candidate of our
choice thank you.
Thank you Mr chair no.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Khan which
no.
And I am the rich lobbyist for
the public of Aqaba and House.
And it's so wonderful to see all
of you the state and after
almost an eighteen month span
where we haven't been able to
see one another.
In person well partially
but I do want to thank the
committee for allowing us some
time to comment on house bill
eight
I too was a member ten years ago
of the.
Working.
Northwick.
Redistricting work group is what
we were called ten years ago and
course the process this time
around is quite different I also
I really want to acknowledge the
efforts of the of the commission
Urging the tribes to really come
together and get behind a map of
their choice
I also think sponsor for
bringing for this iteration of
the house map
the map really reflects the
wishes and the preferences of
tribal leadership.
One gauge demand them came to us
and expressed their desire to be
or to remain in the specific
district or to be a multi
district area possible for
example at expressed the desire
to be in a multi provided to a
Senate districts so that was
captured in this map
Act money has as governor vows
expressed you know this whole
notion of community interest
really plays a significant role
in the in the cultural will of
not only act more public but
other problems with strong ties
to places like Chaco canyon
the second Salt Lake near Zuni
Areas outside and beyond our
boundaries that could make
severity or repairs years so
it's not no
that we sent the term and toss
around toss around community
interest there really is some
meaning and significance that
makes that term so important
because of these sacred sites
as research upon as indicated
the the districts that we are
Want to express.
To protect our the six house
districts that really are with
deviation and
really.
I believe
is significant in that that
these
six districts are hopefully the
foundation and the basis for a
true representation in the house
of representatives
And hopefully the candidates
that we pick up that we are able
to choose.
Like to the the wishes and
desires of the tribal leadership
in the of nations and the tribes
in the problems of New Mexico
for those reasons madam chair
members of the committee would
ask your strong support for
house bill eight and and and
give House relate to pass this
evening thank you very much
madam chair members of the thank
you next I have Robert happened
after.
Thank you.
Is this is this thank you are.
Anyway.
Good afternoon madam chair of
members of my name is Robert up
without and I am the Richard
this for the he could be of
education in Pojoaque pueblo
also with respect to the
Jicarilla Apache nation along
here on that behalf of today the
present leadership the they've
been second means all the space
Senator apologies that they
cannot be here of us
my mic with me had mentioned the
he can patch nation
you have been working on these
maps since early summer with the
with the public in the Navajo
Nation they also fully support
the consensus maps house bill
eight.
And it was the.
It was a went through the whole.
process with with COVID the last
year and also with respect to.
The the the census which is.
The huge effect on the under
accounts for the Legislative
Education before all tribes in
general you of this this whole
process just feeds to the hole
The self determination for he
could be a pagination and all
the tribes.
In general so we he can be a
petition does fully support
possibility thank you madam
chair thank you Mr of accounts
that's a Travis is also Chavis
present yes.
Good evening madam chair and
committee members my name is out
to Chavis some of the members
Navajo Nation from some nasty
New Mexico and Cuba and the EDS
native education project to lead
the NM native census coalition
thank you for allowing me to
speak according to the US Census
bureau native American
communities were considered hard
to count areas due to their
formidable challenges such as
lack of internet access but
Rosen transformation to urban
locations for work and school
all but one of the H. T. C.
tribal communities in the state
requests for the census
questionnaires to physically but
delivered to their communities.
The twenty twenty census
reliance on and on online
internet strategy is its main
enumeration effort contributed
to significant undercount of
native American communities
except for those communities who
had their own broadband access.
Many native communities and
tribal lands in households
within urban areas do not have
broadband internet connectivity
connectivity or access the
twenty twenty census count of
native population was in many
ways to rail by the pandemic the
shut down of field operations
drop off of date leave in our
response follow up in response
to the need to social distance
created a huge obstacle that we
fought to overcome overcome and
every point.
Appropriations events happen in
March was pushed back as far
back as July and by April all of
the tribes had closed their
borders to safeguard their
communities this made delivering
the printed questionnaires
containing the twelve digit
unique identifiers meant to
geographically place these
hardtocount communities
accurately in the state
undelivered well many
communities with city staff at
seen were able to start replying
online in March census bureau
officials actually advised us to
tell community members not to
respond without those twelve
digit identifiers we were told
that enumerators would update
the geo code when the update
leave operations resumed but due
to the shortened timeline for
data completion we're uncertain
if those responses are actually
accurately added to the correct
communities.
These questionnaires were
finally delivered when field
operations resumed and when the
census bureau was able to
coordinate with tribal
leadership to drop them off
tribal partnership specialist
also stated that any tribal
citizen with also already
completed the census may had
would have to resubmit the
census questionnaire using those
accurate geo coded twelve digit
numeric numbers these
questionnaires begin being
delivered into the communities
in late August and September the
hickory Apache nations were
actually delivered on September
thirtieth which was the same day
that enumeration was set to end
but the day before on September
twenty ninth we're told that the
census enumeration period would
officially end on October
fifteenth basically giving them
one day to respond.
The confusion as to whether or
not they could still respond
with their a unique identifiers
in the late delivery left
hickory Apache nation with a
seventeen point nine internet
response rate and a nineteen
point nine total response rate.
When communities reviewed legacy
Rick redistricting data summary
files with us in September of
this year many tribal lever
leisure stated that the actual
populations were greater by
hundreds more than what the
census account reported for the
Navajo Nation it they had a six
point nine internet response
rate and a twenty two point six
total response rate meaning
there are tens of thousands of
Navajos that were not counted in
the state of New Mexico.
According to the twenty twenty
census seventy eight percent of
native Americans live in urban
areas many living in overcrowded
housing afraid to report the
actual number of residents for
fear of being affected by local
landlords issues faced by
homeless population include not
having a specific address many
sharing the same actress usually
where they get their official
mail.
Our transit nature of people
moving between reservations to
the city for for work and school
makes counting this population
difficult and in the City of
Albuquerque there was only one
day the enumerators spent
counting the homeless
population.
The ever changing messages from
the census bureau and
uncertainty of the end of the
enumeration period first in July
and in August September and
finally October fifteenth all of
these changes the lack of
broadband to rural and tribal
lands late deliver Brett bility
of questionnaires the rest it
date leave in our foo
appropriations and the pandemic
commuter true accurate count of
native populations unlikely.
Leading the NM native Census
coalition efforts across the
state has given us the insight
to state with authority that we
do in fact have an undercurrent
in New Mexico despite the growth
the native population we know
our populations are there
despite what the census data
shows so these under counts
affect this redistricting cycle
because of the increased under
count especially in the
northwest quadrant it was a huge
undercount of the rural and
native population there again I
mentioned the Navajo Nation had
a twenty two point five response
rate Horatian had create nation
the borders had the nineteen
point eight response rate so we
have an estimated seventy plus
percent of these populations
that were not counted meaning
that the data set that we're
working on as we work through
this redistricting process that
was meant to be accurate is
actually flawed so I wanted to
bring this to light because as
we talk about deviation this is
why we advocated in this
particular redistricting cycle
only for that floating deviation
range which allows us to make up
for those under counts in our
populations thank you.
Thank you very much Senator
Corman.
Good good good madam chair.
And members of the honorable.
Judiciary Committee that are
here.
My name is Leonard Gorman right.
The executive director for the
Navajo Nation Human Rights
Commission.
The Navajo Nation Human Rights
Commission is.
Authorized by.
Legislation.
Of the Navajo Nation government
to represent the Navajo Nation.
And activities associated with
redistricting.
In twenty twenty one and that's
the reason why I'm here.
My office became a member of
the.
Then redistricting task force.
those privately established.
And we participated in that task
force last year October November
December.
The recommendations that were
service.
By that task force involved the
establishment of the citizen
redistricting committee.
And other factors that a Navajo
Nation made recommendations with
regards to redistricting
activities that need to be
enhanced in the state of New
Mexico.
As an example of that.
The state of New Mexico through
the county system does not
respect.
Navajo precinct boundaries
Navajo lection boundaries.
Because often times those
election boundaries were
referred to as precincts.
Not conform with Navajo election
boundaries thank you may think
why why why is that important.
Because of the need for Navajos
to go to a single point in
place.
To pass a valid.
And in this case is to polling
places.
One point places where the
Navajo Nation election.
The second polling place on the
same day as the counties and
state federal election.
Out.
And unfortunately.
These two polling places or at
two different locations and on
average visit an hour and a half
drive.
Between these two polling places
thank you may wonder okay white
white white white bring this up.
The reason why is now closed.
We like to cast their ballots at
polling places.
We go to the polling place.
Unlike the metropolitan
citizens.
They may cast a ballot by
mail at the convenient etcetera.
And and we don't do that
because factors involved.
Whether we trust the system or
not we don't trust the system.
We like to see our ballot.
Have that banging sound.
on the voting machine we want to
see that that ballot is inserted
it doesn't come back out and
just accept.
We count that as a valid action
as a voter.
So that's the number one reason
why we don't go to the internet
we don't go to sites internet is
not available pretty much on a
Navajo Nation.
We don't mail our ballots.
That and those of the
fundamental part of why we go to
polling places.
And that's the reason why we
asked several counties on Google
come on to the Navajo Nation so
yes placing boundaries to
conform with Navajo chapters.
And the number one county that
we may consider number one.
Is McKinley County.
McKinley County immediately
adjusted its present boundaries
to conform with Navajo chapters.
Those great and we realized the
some of the chapters have high
populations and high voter
register voters we have a couple
of chapters that are split based
on decreasing founders Crown
Point the high T. eight twin
lakes.
to name but a few that are split
but the but the good thing is
that they're split with in the
chapter members not unlike the
way it was it was just how much
pot of money some boundaries
that is very confusing to any
any voter.
Also that's that's a good thing
that happened based on Senate
bill three four.
The past early on this spring.
The second thing that is also a
phenomenal difference the the
inmate as a legislature for the
twenty twenty one
redistricting activity is the
entrance to sliding deviation.
And we talk about the deviation
factors here.
Traditional is that plus I
negative five deviation from the
ideal population fact.
And created a sliding addition
where it will look it can move
around.
Understand I'm not a lawyer.
That that that factor as the
lawyers of presented here
pointed out the Supreme Court
cases allows for that
opportunity to move that sliding
deviation around in our case in
the state of New Mexico as I
understand it.
The current plan that we're
talking about in the house of
representatives is the scale of
positive three two negative
seven.
The still within the ten percent
deviation.
Now the questions that have
permeated and how can we
continue to be asked is why why
do we have.
They close to negative seven
deviation.
In the northwest quadrant of the
state in New Mexico.
The special circumstances that
exist.
And the specials circumstances
dictate.
The need.
To comply with the voting rights
act of nineteen sixty five.
The voting rights act as I
understand it.
Protects minority voters.
And there's a class of minority
voters are listed and I know
that MP twenty two thousand two
identifies five races.
Of those races native American
blacks Hispanics Asians
Hawaiians.
It's anybody that's not
classified as white.
Those are considered as
protected societies.
In those circumstances.
For those of us that are in the
in the northwest quadrant.
We've already set thresholds.
For the upcoming.
In addition to continue to use
so those thresholds we defended
in the courts in the state of
New Mexico for the past three
decades that threshold is set at
the minimum sixty two percent
native American good news
population.
So for.
Redistricting twenty twenty one.
We have to make every effort to
design districts.
That means that sixty two
percent native American voting
age population threshold.
That the negative I limitation.
What happens with that may I
limitation as we understood from
the Navajo Nation hello more
about it.
And during the passage of Senate
bill three four.
And which is why you designed
the the slide into the ocean.
And that is the special
circumstances that brought about
the need to accommodate.
The federal voting rights act.
Which is if you impose this
positive I and negative five
deviation.
You're going down track.
For violating the voting rights
act.
That means that for the
protected society the northwest
quadrant.
We are going to be facing.
Think tank creased.
Substantially decreased native
American vote voting.
H. population percentage.
Hello the sixty percent.
And to the fifty five fifty
percent.
No I may ask again why do we
need to sixty two percent.
The special circumstances that
has existed on Navajo land for
decades.
Think maybe even such as ever
since the state has been
established.
That special circumstances that
you take one hundred voting age
population of net Navajos on
amalgamation.
Just a moment eight.
All of us hundred of us
participate in all
activities.
Take twenty off the top of the
first round.
That twenty are not even
interested in casting a ballot
in where even for the Navajo
government.
So we left with a number of news
population.
You take another twenty off of
that eighty.
With with with sixty.
That next set of twenty.
R. confuse voters.
Principally because of the fact
that the last last November
third election in twenty twenty.
This was a situation.
In hopes.
Navajos think that some of us
think that we pass all of the
Pallister's necessary that date
when we only go to the Navajo
chapter looks.
We don't pass the other ballot
for the state county federal
and next because this is the way
to the number of different
locations.
So we're left with sixty voting
things popping these.
Taking other twenty off at
sixty four forty.
That in the final set of twenty
working age population they
don't have to give us money.
I don't have transportation.
To go to go out and vote on that
date.
This is the reason why.
Under section analysis of the
voting rights act on the Navajo
Nation you have to have at least
sixty two percent native
American women's population.
Bring about.
The standard of more rural
Americans having the ability to
to elect a candidate of their
choice.
Not fifty one percent not sixty
percent it has to be sixty two
percent.
That's the reason why.
We have that sixty two percent
standard so with that
explanation on record.
From the Navajo Nation.
We encourage you.
Two passed house bill eight.
We made Miller suggestions from
the Navajo Nation all the
distance middle back to the
Navajo Nation last in
populations so districts four
five six nine sixty five and
sixty nine.
Are the native American majority
districts thank you very much
Madam thank you Mr chairman.
Mexico close by list is there
anyone else present this evening
who wishes to state make some
brief remarks.
Either way.
Four or opposed to the bill.
Okay let's go back to this hello
Sir and the technical staff and
the attorneys are still here for
questions and let me go to
committee members of the hi.
Committee member all Mr speaker
every other member of the
committee introduced himself or
herself would you like to.
Give a brief introduction.
And I was Brian Egolf I
represent district forty seven.
I am the speaker of the house.
That is the privative with which
I hope to share comments with
all of my fellow.
Set of parameters set the
standard for privative venture.
I've just been informed and I
appreciate that that we might
have some public comment on
zoom.
So do we have anyone waiting
with hands up we have to okay so
much.
They were not at the voice that
we heard was not at full volume
as it was in state government
for over the next two or like
that.
We're ready okay go ahead.
My name is Kristen Sanchez madam
chair members of the committee
good evening my name is present
is.
For the state of New Mexico
recent last night I sent out on
behalf of the ACLU letter that
lays out the laws that are
intended to protect the rights
of native American voters and
laying out some of the issues as
whites absolutely critical to
the state legislature respect
those rights and of the way the
history of disenfranchised
American Indian communities in
addition to that letter though I
would like to just sat at the
ACLU is working to defend and
protect both the individual and
collective rights of indigenous
people New Mexico this includes
their right to vote their right
to have equal access to the
democratic process their
sovereign right to determine
what is best for their tribal
communities and ultimately their
ability to elect candidates of
their choice and so ACLU fully
supports the redistricting in
preferences of the Pueblo the
Navajo nation's of New Mexico
and it speaks volumes of the
tribal nations in the northwest
quadrant came to consensus and
agreement amount to a map that
reflects their collective
interests so we fully support
stand behind the tribal leaders
and representatives who are in
rural and are on.
Florida shooter to exercise
their right to self
determination and therefore we
fully support delay thank you.
Thank you Mr Sanchez that's one.
The manager.
My name is called along with a
number of those in the number
have a governor's office senior
as well as the tribal.
All of the above data also in
our representative about all day
lever believe the returning on
the way back to the we do want
to make sure that we do express
our support
for possibility as this is been
expressed any other tribal
leaders amended
for more more right into our
apartment was
we're we're talking salmon or
travel orders the leave that as
Representative our presenters
hello thank you for.
Okay anybody else have some of
those ones in.
All right okay I think we've
given them the opportunity to do
that so we will go back and then
I see I
We would like to ask questions.
Representative.
Mr speaker the question is would
you like a motion.
All.
Would you pass the motion right
now still have questions movie
do pass madam chair we've
referred to pass from of.
Speaker is office separate from
the vice chair Representative
Cadena.
Representative Nibert for
questions.
Thank you madam chair
Very probably knows I have a
number of questions a sporting I
probably won't go into some
detail that I went on this
morning that did have some some
members of I would like to go
through
Now the time to look at the the
number from this morning.
Madam chair and representative
You start.
Talk about the house bill we're
considering it as is of and my
question is
Right now so is there any
anticipation.
That with this thing.
Those to the for that there
would be changes presented at
that time.
madam chair and members the
committee Representative Nibert
I can only speak for me as the
sponsor I'm not anticipating any
further changes as it proceeds
to a house floor vote
thank you madam I just wanted to
to.
Some clarification on that
because as you know we've been
concerned about that issue for
twenty four hours now
I.
We discussed this morning hello
at least in my part of the state
to the southeast corner of the
state
This these maps were drawn by
people who.
Really in my opinion didn't have
a good handle on.
Southeast New Mexico because we
see some very strange
Covered by various districts and
all up there Representative
Townsend speak to his own
district but it just seems that
there's a few things in
southeast New Mexico that would
be a bit off from from my
perspective so the members all
worked out but the the just a
show them the various
communities of that are
split to
accommodate those particular
plans seems seems a bit odd for
instance house district sixty
six Representative portion of
rostral.
Yes a lot of money to.
Pace of Artesia.
I think it goes a little bit and
calls and gets down on both the
loving and that just seems to be
an odd concoction of of towns to
put together for New South Wales
New Mexico so I would
I have some concerns it is to
those things in southeast New
Mexico we're on with.
From this morning but my major
concerns involved the deviation
lot of deviation of warm
district.
But what we Representative is
essentially one quarter of the
state.
Has.
similar deviations for each and
every district within that
quarter of the state the
northwest quarters was presented
by one of the public speakers.
and in those deviations range
from
maybe seventeen hundred people
to to over two thousand people
per district.
And collectively the the new
numbers reflect that that
seventeen thousand.
this six hundred eighty five
people.
You have the deviation from
those nine districts seventeen
thousand six hundred ninety five
people.
That is sixty percent out of a.
District.
That's it all over half of of
the a district in the state so I
put this morning was was it you
know because of that
deviation.
The rest of the state's having
the to to make that up and and
if all goes back to this.
Primary objective.
Of all the cases that are side
of trying to accommodate the one
person one vote
requirement under our
constitution of the United
States as well as the voting
rights act and everything else
that we've we've we could talk
about of bills my goal is to try
to try to get to that point
recognizing that.
It's.
I'm live tweeting cabin exact
split although I have to commend
research and polling for the
congressional districts being
with them what are people of one
another that's.
Operable considering the
Our state and how it's spread
out and things like that but
I understand why we have
deviations but.
I'm concerned that we have a
whole region of the state.
And.
That I understand that member
out fourth by the nations are
tribes and pueblos.
We have some work to challenge
this map.
But might have a good equal
protection clause argument they
might have the ability to attack
that on that and and I think the
case
that was cited costs be the
letters
speaks to that issue.
And so you know we go through
this process but at the end of
the day I think we all want.
A.
Redistricting plan that will
number one meet constitutional
muster.
Number two meets the needs of
all citizens in the state of New
Mexico and to the extent
possible recognizes that.
That in the state of New Mexico
broke should be physical or
maybe they should be
Representative equally think
that's a goal
And I'm concerned the house bill
eight.
Could be
the subject to some
constitutional attack because.
Number one how was brought
forward and number two.
The regional not not the
specific district but the region
all of our efforts and our I
mean the numbers speak for
themselves our regional
deviation but overall amounts to
basically sixty percent of an
entire district
Those were were handed out and
you know that has K.
certainly something that has to
be considered with no that was
that was.
The the upper class
Procedures under the voting
rights act and then discusses
the **** we lose cation and
there's a couple things that I
just point out of the I think we
may have concerned with here and
and that's the District Court
findings that are on page ten of
of that case of.
I don't think we have that in
our case I don't think that the
the those plans.
but you can use have us as so
for phone what's being presented
today.
the the plan that the presented
by and the
cops the letters K..
I think the may be more in line
with what what we have for this.
From where I have most of.
All.
They
That were you know again stress
so one person one vote issue.
Found that in April clause
Protection clause violation
occurred in that case.
Then that it involved racial
gerrymanders
and it was in Georgia that cases
the money point nine eight
percent deviation which is.
Identical.
I believe identical to the
deviation we have.
In a house bill it I'm not for
if I'm not mistaken chairman and
Representative Mr etcetera all I
think I want to deviations
number was was accurate.
You might check for Malcolm but
I think it's nine point nine
eight.
I'm sorry nine point seven
percent in house district House
Bill Page diplomats correct.
What what what did you have to.
madam chair and of
Representative.
Mr center offers features is the
answer.
Madam chair representative nine
number nine point eight five
point at some I have strong nine
point eight so it would be the
exact same percentage deviation
that that occurred in the
letters K..
and in that case couple things
that they found that Georgia did
not do that did not consider
compactness they were not
focused on district funded a
but what I'm concerned with
keeping counties whole
and they could not escape the
conclusion.
And I quote that the population
deviations were designed to
allow Democrats to maintain or
increase the representative
representatives in the house and
then goes on
so.
That.
That concerns me if if we're
going to adopt House Bill way
that.
We may be opening ourselves up
to to some concerns and.
It was testified earlier Madam
chair representative that that
this.
Bill or this map is being
considered.
This is not.
A map that was voted on by the
Committee.
Yes maybe.
Thanks a lot of parts of it.
Was not one that was
specifically presented by the
committee that it was not
prepared by
research and polling and we've
contract with to to come up with
with plans as I understand it so
I remain concerned about those
things again I'm not going to go
through all the things that I
want to before but I think those
are some concerns that we all
need to consider as we look at
this particular bill.
As we have opportunity look at
some other bills and weigh in on
these decisions because
you know as Representative from
Bernalillo sat on the floor of
the house.
This is important and that
redistricting is representation.
And that every vote.
The people in the state of New
Mexico should be
basically pickles and I think
what these deviations employers
we may have some concerns of
justifying that not withstanding
some of the testimony we heard
earlier.
Without the madam chair all
you'll before.
Right yes madam chair I thought
when we discuss this earlier
that we were going to take any
votes today and we were going to
try to work on some of these
issues is that apparently
changed.
Madam chair are not anything
like that we talked about that
local government in in elections
but not Judiciary
the whole idea was
so long as.
We cap to
House Bill.
Didn't propose a substitute or
make changes to it that we would
keep the Judiciary Committee and
keep this going and I have about
I am not aware of any discussion
that we would never vote
Judiciary tonight.
We did we did anticipate a
potential committee set up and
that we were talking about we
weren't sure we would even have
it by today so but with the news
that we did not have one then we
and now it's the committee with
no preconceived notion
madam chair and Representative
Eli think that a lot of concerns
have been brought up
in this morning's meeting and
most everybody on this committee
is heard those concerns this
morning.
So I don't want to
sit here and take up committee
time on it right now.
I do think we need to address
some of those concerns
there's some minor concerns in
my district I think there's some
major concerns in other
districts.
And to go ahead and ran the
server is
I think disingenuous to the
population of New Mexico so I'm
gonna stop my comments at their
but
I'd I think that we have some
concerns and part of this is to
try and come up with the
equitable
legislation that satisfies most
students I think from the floor
and from our committee this
morning discussion we're far
from that.
And for that reason I don't
think this is ready for prime
time and that's why I'll be
voting against thank you.
Representative Townsend yes
ma'am thank you and thank you
for.
All the work and and ladies.
I am.
I continue to be troubled by
this man.
Right number of iterations.
One is.
That.
It is strikingly different.
Then the first for maps.
That.
You guys created.
When you didn't have so much
help drawing.
And.
I think that is very troubling.
What the legislature.
intended in the beginning.
And what.
I see this is I think very
different.
But sent off I ask you
The other day on the floor and
you did a very eloquent job of
of the issue normally due to
side step in the would you want
to answer the question but I'm
gonna try one more time.
Did.
In your professional opinion
with many years experience do
you see any signs of political
gerrymandering.
In this map that's being
presented here today.
Madam chair and Representative
Townsend.
Can you hear me OK I can't.
The statute that was written
by the legislature and that the
CRC had to follow.
Was that after
the C. R. C. conducted its work.
that they would hire an
independent expert to look at
the maps and determine whether
they were fair.
And there are various measures
of fairness that we don't need
to get into too
I understand the math behind it
and there are also other.
universities Princeton that had
a Gerry Mander
project that evaluated the best
of the didn't they didn't
evaluate house bill eight.
But house bill eight is somewhat
similar.
To the one revised it's somewhat
similar
very similar in fact and so.
In the academic world of how
they measure fairness and
partisan symmetry and the like
of they determined that these
maps were fair
and that was the task given to
them within the statute.
I've been disturbed thing for a
while.
Every statewide plan has a
district unit that's not as
pretty as you'd like because of
the way the mathworks of the
geography the state works and
you may have heard of one
district today I don't know one
map that doesn't have a catch
all kind of a district in it and
so that's my answer.
I did a very good job thank you.
But I'm gonna let you off the
hook that easy I love what
Princeton said I'm electors
other experts said but I don't
think there's anybody that I
know of.
That has more expertise in New
Mexico.
And then I'm looking at.
Ask you based on your.
Perfect your professional
opinion and your experience in
the Mexico.
Is that a question just rather
not answer to the question if
you I'm do you have an opinion.
Relates to.
You know this bill one pairs a
lot of legislators that.
And the traditional districting
principle.
Is that one can consider that in
the course of drawing up plans
the legislature set certain
rules for the C. R. C. and one
of the rules was not to pay
attention to the address of
where legislators live allow us
to abide by traditional
districting principles unless
you need to conform to the you
have a different set of rules
where you're not constrained by
the C. R. C. rules and
looking at and I'm pairing
legislators is a traditional
district principal so you are
allowed to do that under the law
and so there have been changes
made to these maps as compared
to the C. or C. there's no doubt
about it
I don't see any
legal gerrymander from these
maps as as to how I know the
law.
So.
What it does changes come from.
After
After you have completed the
after the redistricting
committee.
Madam chair and.
The details and if it's okay if
I can answer that so as we
talked about
after the CRC map came to us
then we set us the legislature
so specifically what the
citizens redistricting committee
set.
Was there is more consensus.
Between the all pueblo council
governments and the Navajo
Nation.
And so we would like the
legislature to work to achieve
consensus and as I've said many
times that consensus came not
from us but from the tribes
themselves which was historic in
an incredibly positive way.
And when that happened.
We did what this CYFD expected
and wanted us to do which is to
take the consensus and grafted
on to anyone which has Mr
Sandrock has already described.
was independently evaluated by
the expert Mr control my finance
chairman of which you have in
your notebook will this map
specifically in one the one that
was the baseline for the
combination of that in the
consensus of the tribes received
today and I madam chair and
Representative Townsend I I I
want to say this to you directly
those that project has also
evaluated maps from other states
so for example Texas.
That C. N. F. the Russian
Fresnay Appan one of the reasons
it didn't happen is because our
charge in Senate bill three oh
four.
To the central citizens
redistricting committee was not
to consider partisanship.
And that's why those maps came
out so well all of them did let
me ask kids who.
Yes it was sent back to the
legislature and then the
legislature worked with the
tribal communities to make some
adjustments.
Who in the legislature did that
so madam chair and
Representative Townsend.
Just understanding the process
speaker egolf at one point
became a more here but way yes
it is input in this this is
literally just for the answer
I'm not answering that.
Madam chair representative I I
am trying to answer the question
which is you've heard.
All of the participants.
Two agreement in one way or
another the consensus that was
reached have come before you and
I've talked about their
discussions so it is the tribal
members themselves is they have
careers is the all pueblo
council garbage it's the
individual pueblos it's the
Navajo Nation it is a cumbersome
months long process and they're
the ones that came up with a
consensus.
Representative at this point I
think I think Representative
respectfully I think present
houses us just a bill directing
question.
So the way this bill appeared is
representative of you like to
committee.
And asked for research a polling
to draft a bill it is Mappy that
incorporates a travel consensus.
That's how House Bill it came to
be.
And that's the only input that
was added to the maps that were
presented.
By the redistricting committee.
madam chair and Representative
Representative want to say that
the nineteen hundred and fifty
pre six seven we're precincts
that were directly affected and
I you know whether they were
part of the consensus or not I
can't say but if impacted by the
I think the right well I'm I'm
I'm a Christian and I but I I
have.
I have an obligation to right
I'm saying that.
This redistricting committee
presented the.
And then that Matt.
Sep the Legislative Council.
And the legislative your.
Action I believe that your
direction and there was it was
prepared on to a bill.
I get.
The twenty.
Them delivering the map.
And and and and I've Council
Service.
Working on that instructions how
the time was that.
You madam chair and
representative was pretty quick
because the consensus I don't
know the exact date on when the
consensus was reached among the
tribal entities but it was a
relatively short period of time
between when that consensus was
reached and the session started
and so what happened was but I I
am happy when we recess is to
get you an exact date and I can
certainly ask Mr Boller the
question but I can tell you is a
pretty short time for well that
they are just and madam chair in
and representative the thing
that is troubling me and
continues to travel may is that
what I look at those for maps
that these gentleman in their
team.
put together.
I mean you just look at online
there so different.
I mean the the.
The boundaries I mean what they
produce to us.
What the legislature asked for
the work they work concisely
with that tried to square up the
air the questions of area we're
dressed and then we get this
one.
And it just seems like that
there's a huge.
Change.
And so to me it looks like.
What of input from someplace so
question.
Madam chair and Representative
just so you know.
I I suspected I was going to be
the sponsor of the house bill.
I purposely stayed away from the
citizens redistricting committee
process the charge of the
legislature was that they would
do their work without.
You know without partisan
politics being involved hi.
I just I I make sure I have that
wall up and so now Madam chair
representative you're asking me
the question what they did what
happened I don't know that's the
honest answer I and I don't
think I should now what is
important for me to know.
Yes that that map anyone was
approved by the commissioners
and even more important and that
was then at all charge a bill
all of us voted on.
Was it independently evaluated
and received an a rating from
non partisanship under many
measures and now I've had a loan
terms like any partisan symmetry
and may be an inefficiency gaps
and all of that and it all goes
to are these maps and the answer
is yes and so if you're asking
me the intricacies of what
happened I purposely kept myself
away from that process I got to
tell you it's tempting but I
wouldn't do it I really did
because I want to make sure that
I could look into when questions
were asked and say done out was
part of my church shouldn't that
and so that's where we're at.
And I appreciate that and I know
that my insinuating the
representative Ely that you
use.
Metal in the process so.
But.
Representative the map back to
the redistricting committee for
them to
Approve.
Madam chair representative in
line.
I really don't know I really
don't I I I all I can do is when
I read the report and what
commission accordance talked
about because I think those
questions were asked on the
floor but I want to speak for
the commission and we find that.
Madam chair.
Madam chair representative I
cannot find out I'll get you
that information before we get
to the floor and madam chair
representative you're asking.
Who brought.
Whatever it was that became one
to the our committee assuming it
was somebody or entity if that's
information that you need and if
it exists I will provided to.
But that doesn't exist I got a
heck of a problem with that.
I I Madam chair representative
Raja I really I I just
implementing ignorance on this
process and purpose that but I
can get you that information.
So madam chair and
Mr center off do you believe.
That that could be created.
That more closely at the
requirements of the legislative
bill.
This map that's being presented
here today.
Madam chair representative
Thompson there are.
Countless maps out there and
I'll tell you.
What I've learned from this
process.
Is that different people have
very different viewpoints and
communities of interest and how
a particular districts should
look into the outlook and so
I'll leave it at that.
Madam chair and Center off the
you believe that those people
that have different views may be
political parties.
Madam chair representative sure
a political parties and general
system may all you know we
traveled around the state and we
heard you know maybe one to
point at which we should have a
with a particular ten other
maybe another view point of that
same town and so they are a look
at the congressional maps and
all the different concepts that
we see as we traveled the state
we heard from immigrant groups
some very compelling stories
about combining someone park in
Anthony with the south valley
and other people scratching
their head saying south valley
is no business being down south
it's part of Albuquerque very
very different perspectives
and I think oftentimes those
perspectives were then shared of
the different concepts that were
provided to the legislature.
And so madam chair and founder
off with knowing that different
parties.
Let us know Dahlen the eyes of
the beholder.
It seems to me that it.
That the.
If there was political
gerrymandering that occurred.
It was your own definition and
Mike concurrence.
That.
The changes that were made were
made under that guise.
And so I I.
I have real I've got some real
problems with this.
This Matt.
I have problems in the that is.
Particularly in my opinion
projects.
The most senior legislator.
And the house of representatives
that is a black female.
It troubles me deeply.
That we serve here and we said.
That we're gonna take the prior
month because it's so important.
And I believe it is important.
But back on an African American
female to spend in the
legislature more longer than
anyone else.
And we could fix in five
minutes.
We could fix that.
But we want to.
So.
About caring.
It's certainly discounted in my
opinion.
And madam chair I probably
adequate there.
Thank you Representative Alcon.
I
thank you madam chair and.
With your permission I'd like
that Representative Nibert one
question but a comment he made
because of the left me confused
but that's okay.
Well you know the rules.
Representative tak numbers are
going to talk about this fourth
with it for a whole what he said
is what he said Representative
Nibert I hope I I understood you
award right.
If you had a problem how the
bill will be brought for.
That that that that that so all
the kind of curious as to where
is the problem with how the bill
is brought forth.
Madam chair are sure to
concerned that if this is going
to be attacked by someone.
I'm not sure I'm not saying I
would but if it's going to be
attacked by someone I would be
concerned that we're putting for
the bill that was drafted by
the nation's pueblos and tribes.
That complex shows what I think
is well and it's a result that
they stayed with the family for
for their life and has a
substantial deviation amounts
came here and if I were
representing someone in that
regard that would be a concern
that I would have and and so
maybe need personally but if I
were looking at this and trying
to see where some weak points
are that would be one consent
because we're putting forth a
bill.
That was given to this body.
By well intentioned it's not by
research and polling.
By their own admission it's not
from the
The sales.
The plan that was developed by
an approved by.
The nation's rose and drops.
Accomplishes the result for
them.
And I would I would say at the
expense of three quarters of the
state.
I hope that answers your
question.
If you're taking a.
So it's still these McKenna
confused because I have no
problem with how the bill was
about four.
I mean they'll I mean the bill
is brought forth I don't think
That is the question for anybody
the reason bill for.
Forward but I leave it at that
thank you Representative for
your information.
At
one thing I don't want no to pre
record as a one time said that
we would have.
native American district.
That went through court that is
settled.
The native American district for
the people that live in the name
of the ability of the state
federal is in my vocabulary the
people that live in the native
American districts got together
they put together a.
A plan that would work.
For their districts.
That quarter to the state.
I keep effective that would and
that pulled up.
map concept the with I believe
it was the look at the being
discussed that was put up by the
CRC about correct.
Potentially E. one eight or I
don't have anyone.
Should now house bill
city of the.
Is house bill four I believe.
And then and then the the map
that overlays the tribal
consensus was house bill eight.
That quarter the
To the house concept.
I find health concept the three
by.
The tidal flooding the house
concept year one.
Because in my loss of four four.
Yeah madam chair and
representative I'm not sure what
you're looking but the baseline
for house bill eight.
Yes house bill four of bill for
yes Sir okay well we're looking
at the baseline we have
mentioned that that the concept
of a the redistricting
committees the deposit which is
the key yes Representative is
actually in your if you look in
your book it's called house
concept in one a seeking
modification of concept the.
And it is on page sixty six of
the booklet that you have and is
also available to the public so
as the public's watching it they
can now.
So what I wanna know what I'm
curious about I'm looking at the
house bill eight.
And I'm looking at the concept
that our front of the.
I'm here in.
That there is a good chance.
Other than that quadrant of the
state that we thought that I
talked about earlier which is
a native American quadrant to
the state.
Where is the big difference from
the.
The committees.
Concept the possibility.
I keep on hearing over and over
again that we did we didn't
follow.
The
redistricting committees.
maps that we made a whole
different map that's what I keep
hearing here on my right.
And that I just don't see it so
can you tell me.
Other than that part of the
state where else did we change
these maps to where they are so
different from what was proposed
by the committee that the this
committee that was decided upon
thirteen people.
That we have to have if we
couldn't do it ourselves to do
more.
What is the big difference.
Madam chair representative and I
hope I'm answering this right
for Representative Townsend I
had asked Mr Sandra because
again I wasn't familiar with the
entire process there were
initial maps that research and
pulling get they're not
contained in these reports they
are not in any of the house
bill's there were apparently
additional maps I couldn't tell
you what the process was after
that I don't know but they were
not the maps approved eventually
by the citizens redistricting
committee so the maps that you
have in your book.
And the maps that are part of
house bill's
let's see three four five and
eight.
Are reflected in
in front of you of the Pueblo of
map the nature of the Navajo
Nation map.
One that we've referred to and
finally house bill eight which
is the combination of one House
Bill three before and the tribal
consensus I hope I said that
correctly I think that's what
Representative Townsend was
referred.
I guess.
Do you live in the lead to
confusion as a state
representative did not only do.
Los but I don't see I don't see
the big change.
From the citizens redistricting
committee did but what we have
here I will see I guess I might
be wrong but I don't see it.
So with that Madam chair I'll
leave it at that I'm sorry but I
just can't agree that we the
legislature that anything.
But the committee.
But everybody wanted to do
wanted this job done.
Did that is different from what
is before us today thank you
madam chair that is that much
different I think.
Thank you very much
Representative Alcon
Hi that's all I have on my list
I have one question of the
attorneys and that will do it
for me I'm wondering
If you could distinguish.
The
K. pax the latter goes.
For us.
Just just a brief summary page
if you have concerns about the
deviation issue in a few of that
basis findings.
Sure madam chair members the
committee.
The largest versus **** K. the
total deviation was nine point
nine eight percent.
And then I think actually they
had a plus or minus five percent
that was set by the legislature.
But what what the Laura Firszt
**** case found is that.
The deviations what.
Or just for about a about a
traditional redistricting
criteria.
What just I I can't acutely.
What justified by compactness.
To me.
We're just far by keeping
counties together.
We're just I by maintaining core
of existing districts and the
voting rights act if you weren't
playing Klara's versus ****.
So that's what they found
there's just no justification
for whatsoever.
Director of.
Madam chair members of the
committee just to add to what Mr
Olson spoke to just another for
factual distinction between our
situation here and Larios he
**** is that here in if looking
at the northwest quadrant of the
state and the map in the under
populations of those districts
there were
not only some.
Not only some democratic the
districts that were affected but
also some Republican districts
that were under populated
whereas in the Larios K. there
really was a glaring just
distinction that it was
throughout the state where the
under populations occurred it
really only benefited the
democratic
districts so just in terms of
factual distinctions I think the
absence of voting rights act
considerations that justified
the deviations in where else as
well as the
the difference in the affect the
partisan the fact of the under
populations are both print
fairly significant factual
distinction.
Thank you very much you know we
got a copy of the terrorists
Decision and it talks about it
Lorino so I'm sure you're right
Florio's because today there are
more than one for the past few
years is record.
Okay that's what senator **** is
a three judge District Court
thank you for thank you so much
really appreciate it
so we are on a motion for a do
pass on house bill eight.
The clerk to call the roll.
Sir thank you sh Representative
Alcon.
Representative could help.
All.
Mr speaker yes.
Representative.
Representative Lewis yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative night.
Representative right.
Representative Townsend.
So.
Representative.
Yes.
Madam chair yes.
Madam is it too late to vote of
seven to four we have to pass on
health.
Seven forever got to I forgot to
say I'd like to explain my vote
I I think the vice chair wants
to as well so home is a send up
because we don't have to.
Madam chair thank you for the
time to just make a quick
comment I just wanted to honor
it and and name my humility in
learning a lot about New
Mexico's complex and sometimes
horrifying history of voting
rights and that's actually so my
has made my high school freshman
hurt New Mexico history teacher
is using what I understand the
be some sort of public
curriculum and throw listening
over the kitchen table as my
ninth grader has done her
homework I have learned just
like I heard when I was
listening the state government
the other day some of the
incredible history and legacy of
those New Mexico heroes and
those indigenous heroes like
those that came home from work
and fought for voting right so
maybe I could have been in high
school but I don't I don't think
I was and I was grateful that
first thing in the kitchen table
and supporting my little one and
her learning that she got to
teach me from incredible high
school teacher in my exhaustion
today I cannot for the life of
me remember his name and of
course she somehow not answering
my texts.
As teenagers often do we really
need them but just wanted to get
that shot up to I think I lost
because of high school and folks
that are looking around these
kind of curriculum so that
students can learn the complex
where we've come from and the
possibilities of where we have
moving forward thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
madam chair and and for the vice
chair there's an app the you can
get we're if you sent a message
to your child they can't do
anything with their phone into
the.
So I like that one a lot I just
want to sleep a vote.
We had districts in the
north was for the state as was
discussed the deviated
population it was done.
To preserve as much as possible
the strength of the the voting
strength of the native American
population the state of New
Mexico I think that is an
absolutely.
essential and noble goal to
pursue I was happy at the
invitation of governor Mitchell
to have played a part in helping
the sides come together on a
consensus I was very proud that
we had the consensus announced
on Monday it's I think it's
rather unprecedented for that to
happen and the gentleman who are
here also in play huge role and
make it happen and I think if if
the goal of of
given the history of
North America it be given all of
that our phone Mexicans have
endured for centuries and
generations I think the it is
entirely appropriate and a very
good effort to try to use this
process to protect the voting
rights in the body strength of
our native American
brothers and sisters so thank
you madam chair.
Thank you Mr speaker
I want to thank the staff for
being so adaptable Fassel and
moving so quickly to get this
meeting together and for working
on the technical difficulties we
really appreciate that and I'm
sure we will have another
meeting because we're going to
have some more legislation
but.
Appreciate everyone
cooperation and hi during the
speaker and thanking the
indigenous leaders of our state
to join us.
