The state Representative Akan
has joined us Representative
Ecker.
We have a quorum.
Okay go
Thank you very much members
we're ready to begin with the
Committee substitute for House
Bill for and I will turn it over
to our sponsors Representative
Lewis and Representative off.
Thank you madam chair I'll go
ahead and start and then I can
pass it over to Representative
speaker Egolf.
His witnesses for today.
Yes I believe the witnesses have
joined us but it will not if we
could get them on.
We we have Justice Boston.
And who else do we need Mr
speaker.
We've mark Baker is in the
attendee list.
Okay pro we are markup.
I don't know if we have
Maureen Sanders.
We do funding as well and Katie
right.
Issues there is hearing it in
the list.
Very good.
Go ahead Representative Lewis.
This is speaker.
Thank you madam chair House Bill
for is the New Mexico Civil
Rights Act it is proposed to
ensure that every New Mexican
regardless of their race or
background can have a day in
court if they would have their
civil rights violated in order
to give folks their day in court
to here we're doing away with
qualified immunity.
House Bill for is seeking to
ensure that every New Mexico can
refer receives fair and equal
treatment under the law.
And thank you madam chair for
allowing us to introduce the
committee substitute on Friday
I'll just briefly explain some
of the things that are included
in the committee substitute one
is a cap on damages at two
million holding entities
accountable while ensuring their
financial security this includes
the damages and attorney's fees
with an automatic adjustment for
CPI every year Senator damages
are still not under the
committee substitute and this
was in response to some of the
concerns that we were hearing
from the local governments.
next we are focusing on the bill
of rights and the New Mexico
constitution this limits the
bill to claim support the
deprivation of essential rates
in our New Mexico bill of rights
which it was created to ensure
that New Mexicans had equality
freedom and the rights to enjoy
and defend life and liberty a
requiring possessing and
protecting property and seeking
out training safety and
happiness also the bill of
rights insurers equality of
rights under the law regardless
of sex on legs unlike the
federal constitution.
next the bill limits the claims
to government agencies under the
Civil Rights Act substitute we
will focus on holding
institutions accountable to
compel the reforms we need at a
structural level and with that
madam chair I'd like to let
speaker eagle at anything it
like.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Lewis the
substitute before the committee
today represents our eight a
compromise piece of legislation
which made.
Many adjustments to its
provisions since we started
receiving feedback on the bill
as originally introduced as we
just heard of the bill is now
focused exclusively on the bill
of rights in the New Mexico
constitution in addition the cap
on damages we decided to change
the bill so that it is not to be
used in the public employment
context of the bill says that
you cannot use so Rights Act to
bring.
If we could not use it to bring
a claim against public employer.
Because there already are
numerous legal avenues for
public employees to bring a
claim relating to employment
with the public to do.
We have also decided that.
The legislation will bring
claims against entities of
government not against
individuals
the federal Civil Rights Act
referred to commonly you hear a
lot today section nineteen
eighty three.
The Civil Rights Act of eighteen
seventy one that is the vehicle
that citizens used to bring
civil rights claims under the
federal constitution because of
the eleventh amendment to the US
constitution which prohibits
individuals from suing state
governments in federal court
there is a legal fiction
developed where so rights claims
were brought against individual
state actors.
That is continue to be the
tradition in the hundred fifty
years.
Take a few months since the
rights activities everyone was
enacted of course we don't have
an illegitimate that
deals with citizen suits against
state government so we have
eliminated that legal fiction
you in the form of the mandatory
suit against an individual state
employee.
So the claim would be brought
against.
The the employing Pueblo H. T.
not just individual because
there are serious changes that
we've made here.
The two million dollar cap on
damages was a suggestion from
the New Mexico association of
counties there were those that
wanted to make sure that the
attorney's fees provision would
fall with in that cap which I
thought was fair reasonable
request.
We're coming forward with any I
think these changes were able to
have the bill more than ever
I'll be focused on the central
thrust of the the reason for
bringing it which is to give New
Mexicans their day in court when
they have suffered a violation
of their constitutional rights I
think access to justice is
critically important and I think
for every day New Mexicans to be
able to bring their claim in a
state court with a state judge
elected by their community are
familiar with the.
Really with the community is a
much more meaningful ability to
access justice and.
Pursuing a claim in federal
court in Albuquerque Santa Fe
Ross will work stresses state
course much more accessible to
the people of New Mexico in
federal court is the supporting
interventions for they're going
to hurt
closer to closer to home.
Finally when you suffer
deprivation of your rights and
to the New Mexico bill of rights
there's no meaningful
opportunity for.
For those rights to be
vindicated.
Everyone would agree that if you
have suffered
a violation of your rights you
should be given an opportunity
to have your day in court
unfortunately right now New
Mexico lots as you don't get
what.
With this bill we see change
that and make access to justice
and other Mexico bill of rights
a real.
Forcing a licensed Mexicans of
force for good force for change
in force for accountability.
Thank you.
Thank you very much Mister
speaker did you wish to.
Mr Baker Justice Boston the
Sounders or we see who else on
this right speak.
Yes I believe so madam chair I'm
not sure who is said you go
first
I'll leave that to all of you
okay.
Justice Boston perhaps.
You hear me now we.
All right.
Thank you Mr speaker
Representative Louis for
sponsoring this bill.
Madam chair and members of the
I'm sure you Judiciary
Committee.
I am Richard Boston retired.
Justice and Chief Justice of New
Mexico Supreme Court and it's my
pleasure to be here with you
this afternoon.
When I was asked by the
governor's office to be on the
Civil Rights Commission.
I accepted because I considered
it an honor to do something that
would help all New Mexicans.
Nolo's more fundamental in our
constitution and our bill of
rights.
Nothing is more important
that the right of citizens whose
constitutional rights have been
violated.
Must have a legal means for
redress of federal including
compensation where appropriate.
I've spent my entire legal
career in the belief that the
law it say to the success
ability to everyone not just the
rich and powerful is what
separates America for most of
the rest of the world.
And so I accepted the Civil
Rights Commission I was elected
the chairman's first meeting and
throughout the months thereafter
in September and October and
have part of November of this
year we conduct multiple
hearings hearing from numerous
numerous witnesses private
citizens are connected officials
so.
He's representing the cities and
counties and states.
Right and school districts
everyone with an interest really
and wanted to testify good so.
At the end of those hearings we
were asked by the legislature
grants or number of questions
which essentially were should we
have a civil rights bill what
should it look like.
And we took votes and the votes
were clear at the end of the day
there was a majority of the
majority decided to recommend
the civil rights bill modeled
after the federal civil rights
bill to this legislature I
admitted look.
Pretty much like the one that's
in front of your.
Bill which you have before you
represents the commission's best
efforts including the
modifications recently requested
a car for a those aspirations
NMAA The New Mexico
constitution.
Bill may not be perfect but it's
pretty good.
Deserves to be passed into law
by this legislature.
Representatives of the very
people for whom the constitution
was written.
Now some will say that this is
just not that important.
And other priorities come first.
Really.
I just don't get that way of
thinking.
Because what could be more
important in securing the
constitutional rights of our
citizens.
Others will say that we just
don't need that federal law is
good enough.
Really.
I say no for at least three
reasons.
First our state Bill of Rights
has provisions within it there
are simply absent from federal
law or are expressed more
expensively than in federal law.
The state provisions deserve
their own Avenue for redress
under state law in state court.
Second.
Why should constitutional rights
like due process and equal
protection of the laws you're
restricted to federal law and
federal court.
Federal courts as we all know
our law only located in our
urban centres most populous
counties which requires which
means that citizens from
everywhere else Representative
toner Gallup Silvercity Carlsbad
was travel hundreds of miles
just to get the federal court.
No idea put forward by some
state courts simply can't handle
these lawsuits simply smacks in
my judgment of the latest thank
you and is unacceptable.
Third.
Federal all regrettably as
becoming covered by judge may
doctrines like qualified
immunity.
That someone to import into our
will.
Don't let that happen.
What I just said qualified
immunity is a federal concept.
What a direct I devised by
federal judges dealing with
federal law it does not at
present even exist in New Mexico
state law and the state courts
when someone to imported from
outside and included in our
state law I am against that.
Qualified immunity as originally
conceived may have made some
sense.
Right now it has devolved into
something I can only describe as
an aberration and some would say
on a bombing mission.
It precludes unfairly a citizen
meeting getting to trial unless
he or she can show another prior
case almost directly on point
something that rarely happens.
It is clear that constitutional
rights were violated the victim
is unable to proceed without
their prior case.
That's what I call qualified
immunity an aberration I know of
no other area of law in which
the plaintiff the person suing
was proved not only reserves to
win and the defendant deserves
to lose but also there is a
prior case out there so more
directly on point it's simply
does not exist outside of this
area.
Qualified immunity in my
judgment does not protect the
innocent state actor the
projects the guilty one way has
violated civil rights but still
is immune from suit that's why I
call it simply an abomination.
The testimony before the Civil
Rights Commission was compelling
on this point and we are lots
and lots of.
So I qualified immunity to the
federal courts do not let it
contaminate our law led New
Mexico courts develop our own
doctrines are only go principles
in state court that we believe
to be fair.
In closing.
Let me say that this commission
on this legislature has an
opportunity here not only to
medical but to make history.
I urge you to brace that
opportunity and not let it rest
for thank you very much for this
opportunity.
Madam chair I think next we had
worried Sanders.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair Mister
speaker Representative Lewis and
Justice Boston for your remarks
I'm here to talk a little bit
today about
the objections to adopting the
New Mexico Civil Rights Act that
has been put forth both during
the commission hearings as well
as in the legislative process
thus far and most of the
objection has come from the
association of counties and the
municipal league and to some
extent the New Mexico public
School Insurance authorities and
I name them specifically because
I want the
the committee to understand that
these are the entities that
insure the
public bodies that are gonna be
brought in under this act and.
What I think is really important
about this act and makes it hard
for me to talk about the numbers
is this is really a bill that
would protect the people in New
Mexico and yes there are some
financial concerns but at on at
the very beginning of it I think
you have to think about it in
terms of as Justice Boston said
there's just list of
rights in the constitution The
New Mexico constitution that
have not been able to be
enforced by the people of New
Mexico and they ought to be able
to be in force in New Mexico
court the objection has been
that
if the New Mexico legislature
were to abolish qualified
immunity and
not have a cap that the there
would be sort of a it's been a
sky is falling approach to it I
guess and it the commission the
testimony was from one of the
reinsurer brokers was that if
there was no qualified immunity
and if there was an effective
damages then that would put
so much financial risk that they
would brief be perhaps on it
would be hard to get re
insurance for the entities that
would be covered by this act and
so the commission heard that and
decided that the and voted that
there would be no punitive bill
damages allowed under the
proposed Civil Rights Act and so
that has been the situation
since the bill got introduce
since the legislature has been
in this in session there is been
made more push back against the
bill based on what I frankly
have to call speculation because
nobody has.
Been able to say here's what the
financial impact would be if
this bill were passed and the
reason for that is that
insurance companies look at past
experience and so what they're
saying is well we don't have
past experience with respect to
a New Mexico Civil Rights Act
and that is true but I will say
that many many of the cases that
would be brought under the Civil
Rights Act or already being
brought today with a different
name either under the nineteen
eighty three under the federal
court of federal
Of the Civil Rights Act or under
the New Mexico tort claims act
and sometimes under both and
sometimes they start is New
Mexico tort claims act cases in
state court and after discovery
occurs under the to for claims
act they moved to the federal
District Court in order to
engage in battle about qualified
immunity and other doctrines
that are
restrictive in terms of being
able to bring cases in the
federal District Court and so
here we have a situation where
before the commission and before
the legislature in discussions
the introduce the insurers have
been able to give no evidence
that there will in fact be an
increase in costs.
And in the in the face of that
no evidence but in the face of
uncertainty in wanting to
balance the interests of New
Mexicans with the fiscal
integrity of the state and local
public bodies the sponsors of
this act now put in a cap of two
million dollars in order to show
up to make sure that the impact
of this bill will not be
something that will in fact
because financial stress with
respect to the local public
bodies.
This is an act that allows for
recovery by New Mexicans for
abuse of power and the push back
from the local governments is
essentially although they have
counts should in terms of fiscal
impact it is certainly some
element of it has an element of
not wanting to be held
accountable and you know this
act would in fact put them in a
position where they have are
held accountable for the
violations conducted by
their employees more or their
managers or whomever wind The
New Mexico constitution is
violated and so
this bill particularly with the
committee substitute that has
been presented by the sponsors
will in fact bring.
Ring to New Mexico inability to
protect our own as well as to do
it in a way that is fiscally
responsible thank you madam
chair.
And madam chair next to the we
have Katie right.
Okay there you.
Good afternoon.
Can you hear me.
Yes great.
Madam chair and members of the
house Judiciary Committee thank
you Mr speaker Representative
Lewis for this opportunity my
name is Katherine right I'm an
attorney in Albuquerque in the
fall I decided to research what
was actually happening and
federal civil rights cases I use
the federal case filing system
to search the dockets and
generate a list of all cases and
included a federal civil rights
claims that were filed or
started between January first
twenty fifteen and September
seventh twenty twenty the search
resulted in a list of one
thousand six hundred ninety one
cases filed or started during
this review period after
generating the list I looked at
each case individually and
scroll through the documents
that were filed in that case if
I can figure out what was
happening in the case from just
looking at the list of documents
or the names of the parties I
open the pleadings and review
them until I had the information
I wanted about the case I only
tracks though motions filed in
trials that happened at work in
the cases that were started in
the courts during this period I
learned that civil rights cases
are brought in three large
categories two of the categories
are cases against law
enforcement and cases about the
treatment of inmates or
prisoners and those two
categories together account for
sixty five percent of the total
number of cases or one thousand
ninety nine of the cases and
other cases accounted for thirty
five percent of cases are five
hundred and ninety two cases
these other cases were up came
in a variety of flavors.
Examples include twenty three
percent that also involved jails
and prisons but we're not about
the treatment of inmates at
fifty three cases total were
filed against schools or three
percent of the total cases
twenty one cases were filed in
CYFD one percent of total cases
and twenty six K. as were filed
involving the first amendment or
two percent of total cases I
also catalog the identity of the
governmental defendant in
federal civil rights cases filed
during the review period.
Twelve percent of cases were
filed against milk multiple
entities brought against more
than one defendant and in these
cases the claim was brought
against state for this for
example both the state and the
county or county and the city
and rather than double count I
do these cases their own
category cases were also brought
against that of the federal
government and tribes and in
some cases the pleadings were so
unclear that I couldn't tell
which governmental entity was
involved and those were counted
separately otherwise twenty nine
percent or fifty four hundred
and ninety one cases were filed
against the state twenty seven
percent or four hundred and
fifty cases were filed against
the counties fifteen percent or
two hundred and sixty cases were
filed against cities and two
percent or thirty cases were
filed against towns and
villages.
I wanted to know how many
qualified immunity motions were
filed and what happened with
them.
Qualified immunity motions were
filed in sixteen percent of
cases that were filed in the
review period or two hundred and
seventy five out of one thousand
six hundred and ninety one basis
when a motion was filed
qualified immunity is granted
fifty four percent of the time
but when qualified immunity
motions are granted they are
always the cases aren't always
dismissed outright those cases
sometimes subtle sometimes
they're sent back to state court
and at least one case went to
trial basis also settle well
qualified and motion needing
motions are pending or are sent
back to state court on on the
court's order or by agreement of
the parties.
Last only seven trials happened
in the cases filed during this
period so more than that number
of trials happens between twenty
fifteen and twenty twenty but in
the cases that I studied that
were filed between twenty
fifteen and twenty twenty there
were seven trials one jury
returned a defense verdict to
juries return plaintiff's
verdicts the highest building
two million dollars which
included a one million dollar
punitive damages award both
plaintiffs verdicts resulted in
the court assessing the
reasonableness of the fees and
costs risk request and awarding
fees and costs for other cases
were tried without a jury with
the judge as the decision maker
three had no damages and
resulted in an order requiring a
governmental entity to either
act or not act pursuant to the
constitution two of these cases
resulted in the court awarding
attorneys fees and cost and the
third had not resolved the cost
issue at the time that I
conducted my review.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you madam is hoping that
you can.
I just with that.
This is a really interesting
dedicated so I'd like to do that
but now I'm not I couldn't keep
up with.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair it is I
believe on page twenty six of
the report of the Civil Rights
Commission my memory serves
is that right Katie sure.
In twenty six to thirty six page
but most of it most of the data
was reported in the commission's
report.
And madam chair we also have
with this is Sylvia market is.
who wishes to make some comments
who we.
Good afternoon committee my name
is Sophia rural markets and.
My nephew is on line for Ella.
most of you I'm sure know his
story it's a very high profile
case I'm I'm here today.
Because I would love to see this
bill get passed and supported
because.
This system additional money if
you many ways.
And our family feels like.
We didn't receive justice yes
his parents were guilty but
there were also many systems
that failed him that constantly
could save this point.
And as we went through the
process of everything.
We had officers taken away from
us at one point we had officers
telling his parents just watch
what you say we also had judges
tell us there wasn't similar
cases like kids so that there
was nothing that they could do
and protected the system and we
never got justice for those.
That took part in had part.
Of his case.
So.
Bill like this.
Go through.
I'm hoping in his name it can
also make a change for some
other families
Because right now mori was
failed and.
I just wish there were agencies
in people that were involved
that would have been held
accountable not should depend
how to countable instead of
being protected and given the
right to move forward without
any kind of consequence for
their actions.
So please consider this bill
thank you.
Thank you miss Marcus appreciate
that Mr speaker.
Madam chair Representative Lewis
and I are ready to answer.
Any questions and we also have.
With this mark Baker who is the
vice chair of the Civil Rights
Commission he's available I as a
former assistant United States
Attorney federal prosecutor who
is with us to answer any
questions as well as a Justice
Boston miss Anderson this right.
I am thank you very much I
appreciate that what we have
quite a few people it.
The attendee list I'm going to
ask folks not to raise your hand
yet I'm going because of the ask
their of the three groups one
For the proponents of the
legislation.
Those who are neutral and those
who are in opposition so let's
start with those who are in
favor of the legislation
if you would raise your hand
now.
And then we'll get that.
Taking
Your.
Dr Santa will you meet yourself.
We're ready to hear you.
Dr Santa present yourself on
your end.
You're on your on your down are
and.
One is skip over you for just a
moment and go to.
Speaker.
I to me zero Romero.
Hello.
Representative so I'm Army sure
merry cover and I'm here on
behalf of doctor if you're not a
for profit growth section we're
here today to express our strong
support for H. before the New
Mexico Civil Rights Act we thank
the sponsors for bringing this
bill it's important that we have
a direct way to enforce
protections for civil rights yes
good has worked alongside many
other community organizations in
New Mexicans these last few
years and especially during the
summer to shine a light on the
objective violence and harm
inflicted disproportionately and
constantly on black indigenous
land nexus panicked and other
New Mexicans of color by state
institutions.
As an environmental justice
youth organization we know that
the white supremacism the dress
environmental racism is the same
force the drops and excuses
police brutality among many
other injustices that force must
be opposed on all levels the
elimination of the unfair use of
qualified immunity would mean
that will be better able to hold
bad actors accountable and to
uphold the civil rights of all
New Mexicans.
Thank you.
Please vote to pass.
Thank you Sir and as you may
have noticed members and members
of the audience we I think I
fell to say we're going to
people.
Two minutes to speak with want
to make sure people have
adequate time next let's try.
Dr Santa.
You will need your cell.
Many skip down again then
There is.
Your next.
Just yourself.
Yes good afternoon madam chair
Chasey members of the committee
my name's Barron Jones I am with
the ACLU of New Mexico we will
like to we stand in support of
the faced before and we would
like to thank the sponsor and
the panelists for bringing this
important piece of less
legislation in addition so some
of the reasons already stated on
we believe the New Mexico Civil
Rights Act represents that
graced a good government that
will benefit all New Mexicans
regardless of background and
will go a long way to help to
restore on the public trust that
has been rural route through
governmental use I'm also you
know we we think that we we we
hope that the legislators
legislature will you know make
public policy policies decisions
based on not just on financial
considerations but on on the
well being of New Mexicans and
we should not allow insurance
companies to dictate justice
here in New Mexico that's why I
encourage you all to support
this very piece of common sense
legislation and thank you all so
much for bringing.
Thank you Mr Jones.
Next we have Merioles back.
Good afternoon Madam chairwoman
and steam to committee members
my name is Maryland back and I'm
a former licensed foster parent
through the state of New Mexico
in my time as a foster parent I
have thirty nine children in my
care ranging from three days old
to seventeen and a half years
one of my very first basis I was
caring for a toddler and in the
five months that she was in my
home the case worker assigned to
her case visited my home only
once I was told by a supervisor
that's simply not possible it's
a legal case workers must visit
children in the home at least
once per month as a new foster
parent I didn't know any better
after an investigation it came
to light that not only did she
not visit my home but that she
had knowingly and intentionally
falsified three separate home
visit to my home and the CYFD
internal system known as facts I
submitted a complaint to the
AG's office and to the state and
what unaware she was
reprimanded.
My case worker knowingly and
intentionally committed fraud
multiple times in the wrong home
kind of put the child in her
custody in grave danger this
horrific concern came to
fruition with the heartbreaking
case and preventable case of a
recent arrests and twenty
seventeen this is the case of
the little eleven month old baby
that died in a car seat I'm
touch for over twelve hours
inside of the home Stephanie
Crownover her foster parent it
was the case inspired me to be a
foster parent.
The fact that have come out that
not only did that after the baby
died CYFD workers back dated and
falsified state documents again
knowingly committing the fraud
to cover that they had made
monthly required tax on their
baby I feel confident in the
amendments to make this
legislation even stronger they
are very good K. represent CYFD
the statewide every day they
make our children laughing love
then they protect them and they
keep our most vulnerable
children say today I stand
before you as the founder of New
Mexico child first network
dedicated to improving the lives
of children in foster care we
proudly endorsed this bill this
last set to address the bad
apples the most egregious cases
and we hope it does this.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Marshall Martinez.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I Marshall
Martinez the executive director
of equality New Mexico the
statewide LGBTQ civil rights
organization LGBTQ people in
this country have had a decades
long fight to achieve basic
civil rights recognized
constitutional rights and we're
not quite there yet well we've
had great friends in the New
Mexico state legislature and
have got done good work to
achieve some basic policy
protections are protections have
always hinged on the fact that
our government would step in to
protect us if we've learned
anything over the years
especially the last four it is
that we cannot simply rely on
the goodness and inherent
fairness of government's
national or local to protect us
from basic violations of our
hard earned Civil Rights.
Where entrance New Mexicans
across the state have stories
about our basic civil rights
being violated by law
enforcement officials and local
government entities and a myriad
of ways the New Mexico Civil
Rights Act if passed would be
one step closer to dismantling
systemic homophobia transphobia
and racism allowing us to
continue our journey toward full
liberation as LGBTQ New Mexicans
by giving us access simply to
our day in court we approach
this legislation not from a
place of hostility but one of
harm reduction we have long been
stuck in a David versus Goliath
situation when it comes to the
power of those acting on behalf
of our governments and we are
all we are asking for is to be
given an opportunity to fight
for basic civil rights all we
want is access to our day in
court thank you.
So I needed myself next I have
Carter Bundy.
Hi this is Kirti Bundy with
asked me I want to thank the
speaker and mark Baker and a lot
of staff people who worked very
hard to to put in this committee
sabar to do the amendment
they're very important for
members we have a lot of good
people who go to work every day
who don't want to live in fear
that if they do their jobs well
they'll be sued anyhow because
our members frankly tell people
know they have to take kids away
from homes they have to tell of
Texas person at a Texan who has
a second home in Santa Fe that
they can build a four story are
and they have to and of course
enforce our laws for public
safety we think this is a
balanced approach that threads
the needle between
accountability and allowing
divestiture ready workers who
just do their job well every day
for all of us on to continue to
do that job without fear we
stand in strong support of this
committee so thank you.
Thank you next we have run
County.
Ron you need on mute yourself
and then you're on.
Thank you madam chair chair
committee members funding was
Ronald Committee.
In nineteen seventy four I was
arrested in New Mexico in
Albuquerque for a murder I did
not come at I was sent
immediately to death row no
trial no motions no hearings
anything like that right to
death row I'm sitting there shut
completely shut uranium I'm
gonna die for something I did
not do.
Few months later we did have a
trial state medical examiner got
up on the stand for two days and
showed gory nasty pictures of
the murder scene he said when he
did the autopsy he found this
and that and that they took
pictures of it all.
Later on I re trial that medical
examiner would admit that he
lied that he never saw the body
at all some of the pictures to
put up there were not even of
that crime a different crime
scene.
At the trial my motel maybe got
up testified that she saw us
murder this guy.
We never saw her before her life
she later admitted that she was
completely choreographed grab
her speech testimony was
completely choreographed.
By the officers and prosecutor
she said she never ever sauce
and all that was a lie they
brought in prison snitches we
never met in our life.
A nine day for my education
today when a narcotics officer
was walking down the street said
he found Jesus and he confessed
to our crime.
In this confession he wrote that
hit the sheriff took the gun the
murder weapon to put it in a
safe two years later we got a
search warrant open the safe
sure that there was a search for
along with records from the
crime lab saying it was indeed
the the burger economic we were
never ever able to sue anybody
or anything what we did although
the prosecutor was disbarred and
three cops got fired.
Thank you committee members.
Thank you Mr Connie.
Next I have.
Doug Simon.
Mr Simon would you and yourself.
Yes thank you madam speaker and
the committee I'm a native of
Albuquerque I move back in
nineteen eighty one I've always
been very close to our Hispanic
people here in New Mexico and I
pretty quickly became aware that
we have a police department in
Albuquerque that's been violent
and out of control for many
years I E. R. I have a good
friend I'll just call in lower
and so and he was beaten so
severely by the police he's a
dark Hispanic young man with a
lot of tattoos very general
artistic guy and I wasn't there
I don't know what happened but
he was beaten so badly that he's
mentally damaged.
And of course Lorenzo is never
going to be in federal court.
What the expert witnesses have
said in the in the store Rights
Commission is so true normal.
Hispanic or or poor white people
or whoever doesn't have a lot of
resources is never going to end
up in federal court this is an
incredible piece of progress I
salute the committee the only
thing is of course this risk of
large judgments which you partly
taken care of the City of
Albuquerque is quietly paid out
millions of dollars over the
years and I believe if the
police union was also held
accountable that would make a
big difference so thank you for
your time and I just I'm so
happy to have a chance to
testify today.
Thank you.
Next I have Lucille the Campos.
Please send it yourself.
Chair and members of the
committee my name is Lucy let
cumbersome a policy associate at
bold futures formerly young
woman you made it.
As an organization led by people
of color and for people of color
we know the impact of policing
in cycles of incarceration and
systems involvement have had on
our communities we stand and
full support of HB for the New
Mexico Civil Rights Act and the
avenues towards accountability
that this bill provides thank
you.
Thank you next I have Nico they
can.
And present yourself correct my
pronunciation it's New Mexico
but I can thank you chairman and
members of the committee
I am for the Santa Fe and double
ACP the national association for
the advancement of colored
people and we support House Bill
for the Civil Rights Act not
just because people of color are
disproportionately suffer from
inequities in seeing justice
and.
Our issues but
Also because the accountability
to the public that is essential
for.
Protecting civil rights of
people and all people and we
thank you Mr speaker and the
Sanchez who brought H. P. four
forward and we strongly stand in
support of it and we urge you to
vote yes on this thank you.
Thank you next I have Rikki Lee
Chavez.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Rikki
Lee Chavez I'm here before you
today on behalf of the New
Mexico criminal defense lawyers
association we stand in support
of H. before we want to thank
the sponsors and the work of the
commission that went into
crafting this legislation this
legislation is needed to
counteract the devastating
effect federal qualified
immunity has had on New Mexicans
ability to protect and enforce
their constitutional rights
under the federal civil rights
law.
We support this initiative and
we supported the work of the
commission.
We appreciate all that has been
put into the bill and that
members are sponsors of the bill
have worked what are to create a
committee some we believe that
the bill as it struck as it's
drafted will assist in reaching
its desired goal we respectfully
urge you to support this bill
and its intent thank you.
Thank you.
Next is growing.
Madam chair members of my hat
yes okay madam chair members of
the committee my name is Hannah
Burlingham I'm president of the
league of women voters of New
Mexico the league stands in
strong support of this bill.
We believe that individual
rights should not be weakened or
abridged and we advocate against
systemic racism and for the
recognition that all people
deserve equal protection under
the law thank you.
I'm sorry.
Needed myself because my phone
was ringing Laurie Roberts.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members my name is
Laurie Roberts and I'm a state
policy advocate with the
innocence project
nationally fifty four percent of
wrongful convictions involve
some form of sexual misconduct
according to the national
registry in New Mexico we above
the national average with more
than sixty percent of wrongful
convictions in the state
involving official misconduct
you've already heard from wrong
tiny cocaine nine days from
education for a murder he didn't
commit thank you his
codefendants were framed by
Senator sheriff's deputies the
misconduct in his case so
egregious that those deputies
were were fired but because of
legal immunities including
qualified immunity run was never
able to hold those deputies
accountable for what was done to
him
thank you for is a creating
important legislation because it
will help stop cops like those
and run case because it
eliminates barriers to true
accountability when misconduct
occurs these civil lawsuits are
one of the few avenues for
victims of the police police
misconduct to get justice and
this is especially true in cases
of wrongful conviction because
New Mexico is one of only
fifteen states without a way to
compensate wrongfully convicted
people leaving exonerates like
Ron with nothing after proving
the government had stolen their
liberties and sent them to
prison wrongfully we've already
seen how large settlements
stemming from gross misconduct
need to systemic reforms here in
New Mexico such as the recent
changes to solitary confinement
policies after several multi
million dollar judgments made
the problem too large to ignore
or after or the changes to.
Practices in the Los crucis
police department after the
chokehold death of Antonio
Valenzuela I also want to
mention that after Connecticut
severely curtailed qualified
immunity in your state the
university of Connecticut
insurance law center found that
the policy change will likely
have no fiscal impact and they
stated quote we agreed that to
date no evidence has been
provided.
Sorry
Let's go to Brenda about meant.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Brenda
boatman a registered lobbyist
with Americans for prosperity
New Mexico we stand in support
of age before when someone
acting in an official government
capacity violates a citizen's
constitutional rights certain
laws immunities protected from
liability regardless of the
damage that costs New Mexicans
this undermines individual
liberties rights.
And allows wrongdoers to a state
count ability and leaves victims
with no way to address injustice
in court further it tarnishes
the reputation of the many
upstanding officers who
dutifully serve and protect and
you broke the trust between good
officers and the communities
they serve more than seventy
percent of officers themselves
say that poorly performing cops
are not held accountable H.
before would allow New Mexicans
that have had their rights
violated to have their day in
court it opens that Avenue to
allow justice for victims and
give strength to the New Mexico
constitution although some
recent changes to HB for could
limit the overall goals of the
legislation we still support the
passage of the committee
substitute bill to provisions in
particular raise concern for us
first no caps on damages that
include internet attorney's fees
could hinder appropriate relief
as these fees could amount to a
significant portion of that cap
for an for an individual thereby
limiting their appropriate
relief second the committee
substitute would potentially
immune government actors in
situations that the legislature
may not want or have unintended
consequences we hope this
committee really scrutinizes
what such a broad immunity would
entail overall we support the
committee substitute for house
Bill for New Hope you'll
recommended to pass thank you.
Thank you Keith nearly.
Your.
Yes.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Emily
and I am an attorney at the
institute for justice a
libertarian law firm based in
Arlington Virginia but that
mitigates cases all over the
country involving individual
rights and about holding
government officials accountable
and I wanted to express on
behalf of budget two points
today first is our support for
the work of the New Mexico Civil
Rights Commission and of the
members of this committee and
the sponsors of this legislation
we believe that house bill four
is an excellent step in the
right direction word holding
government officials accountable
and defending the rights of New
Mexico residents.
And the second point would like
to make is to offer an
opportunity to improve House
Bill for by including additional
language that would accomplish
two goals first permitting
cities and municipalities to
help mitigate their costs by
getting rid of the bad actors
and seconded by imposing
personal accountability on the
the bad actors themselves by
empowering cities municipalities
to terminate the employment of
those individuals part of
finding that they have violated
a person's constitutional right
not withstanding any protections
that they may otherwise
receiving under the collective
bargaining agreement we have
model legislation that
accomplishes that that model
legislation is entitled protect
everyone's constitutional rights
act or act roughly short and
it's available on our website at
W. W. W. dot I. J. dot org
backslash legislation.
We strongly support H. report
and we hope that you will
consider adding this additional
language to make it even
stronger thank you.
Thank you next I have Fernando
Trujillo.
Okay.
Can you please go ahead.
Yeah.
my name is that of non look
who's your I'm from Espanola New
Mexico are and I'm speaking on
behalf of myself and my
community in.
Almost four million cars rated
where she gonna and having grown
up in Espanyol I have seen the
uses and and humane treatment
inflicted upon my not just my
own people but my own family
friends loved ones and other
people of color whether they are
cops on the streets or
correctional officer they should
be held accountable in my County
jail people died from overdoses
and from which I was due to
medical neglect even though the
holding cell is right next to
the front desk people who are
also made in the streets without
anyone being held accountable
where entrance people and people
of color are more likely to be
abused by the system with very
little chance of justice coming
our way I have had family
members by Lee B. and by the
very people who are supposed to
be protecting the so called
public with zero accountability
well we have our monsters
emitters hiding behind badges
and official posts were never
held accountable this is common
sense legislation that must be
passed we'll get is one human
right the one who made the right
to kill that are highly another
human being without you will
consequences this is the product
of white supremacy and H. B. for
would be a step in the right
direction to dismantle a
prejudice and misogynistic
system of oppression thank you.
Thank you next time
Public Centria Taylor.
Go ahead madam chair members of
the committee thank you my name
is Alexandria Taylor and I'm the
deputy director of the New
Mexico coalition of sexual
assault programs where we lead
the state's efforts to reduce
sexual abuse and sexual violence
we support house bill four
because in addition to the
testimony and comments already
share today the New Mexico Civil
Rights Act also includes access
to justice for sexual violence
victims and educational sets
settings civil remedies promote
access to the single system
designed to provide victims with
the monetary resources to engage
in healing forms of justice and
having access to the resources
necessary to heal and recover
from trauma increases the
stability factors and decreases
the impact of generational
trauma on families this is a
public health framework to
access to justice for survivors
as we discussed necessary
criminal justice reforms and our
state and I want to point out
that this is a deeply
intersectional issue as others
have shared as black indigenous
flat next and other students of
color male identifying survivors
LGBTQ plus and non binary young
folk and those with disabilities
are most disproportionately
impacted thank you.
Thank you next Deborah modest
Baca.
It just under your stop.
Thank you thank you
Representative Chasey and
members of the Judiciary
Committee my name is from this
Baca and I live in Albuquerque I
volunteer with and
Representative today New Mexico
moms demand action I'm here
today to support passage of
house bill for the New Mexico
Civil Rights Act.
New Mexico needs to and
qualified immunity for public
officials and law enforcement
officers moms demand action
against gun violence in all its
forms including police violence
we knowledge that police
violence and brutality is
disproportionately directed at
black indigenous and people of
color.
Please violence damages
community trust and harms public
safety House Bill for will allow
New Mexicans to suit when their
constituents when their
constitutional and civil rights
are violated by law enforcement
there must be consequences for
police violence and misconduct I
asked the committee to vote yes
or do passed on house bill four
thank you so very much.
Thank you next I have Michael
Avery.
Years now.
Madam chair can you hear me now
we can.
Madam chair and members of the
committee my name is Michael
Avery I am professor emeritus at
Suffolk law school in Boston but
I live here in Albuquerque New
Mexico I'm speaking on behalf of
the national police
accountability project the
national organization of civil
rights lawyers which is strongly
in favor of HB for.
One of the things I do is to
write a thesis that treatise
called police misconduct law on
litigation which is used widely
by both plaintiffs and defense
lawyers and civil rights cases
every year I review hundreds of
cases from the courts of appeals
the federal courts of appeals
across the country in order to
revise this book over the past
thirty years qualified immunity
has grown like a cancer on our
constitution standing in the way
of citizens who are trying to
assert their rights and receive
compensation for violations of
their rights as has been noted
qualified immunity allows judges
to dismiss cases unless there's
been a previous case exactly the
same on the facts it also allows
judges to erode constitutional
standards for example a police
officers not supposed to be able
to make an arrest unless he has
probable cause to believe a
crime has been committed and
this person committed the crime
but under qualified immunity
judges give officers immunity if
they have something called
arguable probable cause and with
regard to other constitutional
violations these near misses or
approximations of meeting
constitutional standards allows
officers to get immunity even
when they can be proven to have
violated constitutional rights
this bill will stop that from
happening and I and my
organization are strongly in
favor.
Thank you next I have really
Irvin Vitela.
We don't see her anymore madam
chair sorry it.
In you
Madam chairman and committee
members thank you so much for
your time today and for your
consideration of this really
important legislation my name is
lily Irvin Vitela and I'm the
president and executive director
of New Mexico first and in our
town halls and community
conversations on a whole variety
of topics issues of fairness
axes justice equity our I'm
going elements of our
conversations with community
members across rural and
frontier and tribal and urban
areas in New Mexico.
last year we had a town home
health body mind and spirit and
we had unflinching conversations
about disparities in health
outcomes and this you know
what's being proposed with the
Civil Rights Act would give
access to justice and
consequence when systemic
disparities.
Our our forwarded by public
institutions and so
accountability is really
important and so New Mexico for
stance in strong support of age
before thank you.
Thank you next I have my cane
flirty.
Okay thank you my computer's.
Acting at.
We could hear you okay I'm just
pressing buttons and and getting
to my comment I'm sorry for
taking time madam chair members
of the committee thank you for
the opportunity to speak
I am with the Sierra Club Rio
Grande chapter representing over
thirty five thousand members
throughout the state and we
support each before this is a
common sense piece of
legislation and passage of this
bill would be an investment in
our communities to address noted
uses a major perpetrated on New
Mexicans from their civil rights
have been violated it providing
incentives for government public
bodies and agencies to adopt
better policies and procedures
that reduce civil that reduce
and prevent civil rights
infractions while being able to
hold these institutions
accountable.
With the elimination of
qualified immunity when they
have violated someone's rights
this bill is about fairness
justice and equal treatment
under the law and insurance
company should not dictate
Justice however we think
considerations against
eliminating students from
individual employees should be
allowed if their constitutional
rights are violated because the
our New Mexicans to so we
support eco all the comments
that we've heard before isn't
thank you to the speaker and
sponsors of the bill.
Thank you next I have Stephen.
Go ahead Steven and you're
still.
Hello can you hear me yes we can
good afternoon good afternoon
madam madam chair Mister speaker
distinguished members of the
committee my name is Steve
Torres and I'm here with my
lovely wife went up we are
speaking on what I'm in support
of this bill I am an attorney in
Albuquerque and I and members of
APD forward thank you for the
some of you may know is a public
advocacy group designed to try
and bring about reform within
our Albuquerque police
department but I'm here today to
speak not on behalf of that
agency or that group or its
efforts but as an affected
family member
I believe that the Justice
Boston and speaker egolf
adequately and thoroughly I came
for the arguments as to why New
Mexico needs the Civil Rights
Act but I'd like to speak to
you.
Personal perspective.
Ten years ago when our son's
civil rights were violently.
The tax.
We we reached out we we we
reached out within a couple of
weeks we reached out to the
mayor's office and the chief of
police in an effort to try and
bring about some kind of
communication trying to initiate
some discussion about reform
efforts we were ignored we had
no more choice but to file a
lawsuit in federal court in
state court just to get the city
to pay attention to us well as
soon as we did that of course we
became subject to all of these
arguments about well well our
federal court claims survive
because we're in state court
well the state court can we
proceed in state court because
of the federal court cases
pending we shouldn't have had to
play that game the our our New
Mexico laws failed us in that
regard.
Passage of this bill would
hopefully Expedia eight thank
expedite the process for
affected family members like us
and bring some streamlining to
the situation and accountability
and my wife and I strongly
encourage you to support and
vote in favor of this bill thank
you.
Thank you.
Next I have.
Hello I heard then.
This.
Please go ahead.
If you are muted I'm here and.
Sorry I couldn't find the in New
Mexico and
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name's Natalie
Hernandez and I'm a nursing
student at the university of New
Mexico in support of house bill
four I'd like to share my story
during my fourth grade year at
Fairview elementary and just be
on New Mexico I was a student
and Gary Gregor's class the
classroom setting was very
unique in that certain students
belonging to the council would
sit at a table with Gregor we
had elected president vice
president and the secretary as
part of the council we would do
things like create other
students papers and perform
tasks favors for greater in
addition we would also receive
gifts like candies and sodas and
some of us would receive special
gifts like teddy bears are set
and even personalize T. shirts
as an adult I can now see the
intent behind this arrangement
clearly not long after we
adapted to the way of our class.
As vice president I would say
next to greater enrolling tear
this is my cage I began to feel
greater resting his arm on my
lap his fingers tickling my knee
and roaming up my skirt into my
underwear this was a regular day
from in school as long as I was
present I began to use pants and
about and hope you it would
restricted access.
I was in a state of shock that
created so much for that I
didn't know what to do he was a
large six foot then I was a
little nine year old girl who
didn't know I had any power to
make him stop and based
education to us after class
during lunch and take me into
the closet with him where he
would hold me close and asked me
to kiss him eventually other
girls were also victims in class
and I went to the principal to
inform her of critters
misconduct to which her response
was coming to our classroom
telling us that he we shouldn't
lie about things like that she
claims she was her friend and
she wouldn't do something like
that I never told my mother I'm
sorry I never told my mother for
personal reasons and I was also
there and by greater if I told
greater have continuously
receive mutual recommendations
to work at different schools
after alleged allegations ten
years later I was able to put my
monster right and I just want to
say monsters are real and most
the time there for a familiar
face who we trust and care for
thank you.
Thank you very much.
Next I have cessation.
Hello good afternoon.
my name is physician at and
I'm here to talk about my son
rex Corcoran.
He went to jail for seven days
are missing out compliance
meeting.
And through this time I received
a call the following day from
him and the phone went dead
because he was in your panic and
he was terrified I never was
able to talk to my son ever
again after that.
through this time I kept calling
the jail trying to get
information on my son because I
knew something was wrong you
know the fourth.
Thursday he was there with his
son's birthday didn't get a call
from him every time I call talk
to booking or I talked to
the medical and this was at the
Santa Fe detention center jail
all they kept telling me was we
assure you ma'am your son is
fine well when he was to get out
on Tuesday I kept calling and
calling they finally told me to
call a case worker at St
Vincent's I called to tell me I
could go and see him now because
he was an incentive care by the
time I got there he was in an
induced coma.
That time then I finally got a
call from the award and Derrick
Williams and he tells me not my
problem.
My problem you know I see it my
debt is lying there.
To what I could touch a minimal
did but there was no way for me
to tell us how much I loved it.
Be the one
I support all.
One.
We
love them and I'm the one that
had to do this people need to be
held accountable for this will
never change never continues
over and over and over we need
your help please pass this age
before please.
You did it.
You're more than.
Thank you very much they're all
Madrid.
Thank you madam speaker in the
steam the committee members my
name is Daryl maturity and I am
the president of the overview of
the trauma secular Association
representing over twenty to
sixty as along the confluence of
the three of the trauma from
below average to dam to my
Community of Hope mandis and
we
as the president of our
association we fully support
both the merits of house bill
four however we want to
respectfully outlined some
concerns and some unintended
consequences that may result out
of this and that's mainly
because I seek is our small
political subdivisions and we
have no assets.
So there for own in the
litigation or judgments against
us would be dead devastating and
it could definitely
In danger of four hundred and
twenty year history of water
sharing so on.
I just wanted to point out you
know the unintended consequences
of of this bill that I really
would encourage you know the
committee to make some
amendments to protect on the
small the political subdivisions
that are are protected under the
same state constitution and
ethnologist under the state
constitution so on thank you
madam chair this is all I wish
to convey to the committee at
this time.
Thank you continue to target.
Is.
Service.
Yes my name's on to one of the
Vargas this my daughter's name
was Carmella departed she died
on November nine.
She was in the Santa Fe county
adult detention detention
facility early September.
She got sick in the middle of
September.
Throughout all that time that
she was asking for help she
never received it the guards
laughed at her the medical staff
refused to drive her or even
give her a.
of blood tests a simple look
this would have a saved her
life.
What bothers me is that
The.
The public safety director was
hired by Santa Fe County.
Commissioners.
He was fired from another Jonah.
A prison facility.
Where the guards and the inmates
were involved in drug
trafficking and
and Drug go on and on again
work.
And so because he has some
political connections he got
hired here.
Since he's been higher here
there's been at least four
deaths in that jail there is
rampant drug trafficking the
guards are involved.
I support age before because
people like that.
Need to be held accountable.
deployment
immunity.
Foster's.
The sadistic nature in some of
these people because they know
they're not going to be held
accountable.
They need to be held
accountable.
And the excuse that people that
is going to be hard to find
people for the job.
All you need to do is train them
better and better and better and
get better people.
Thank you very much Margarita
Santiago.
Go ahead.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is moderate
the study on on I represent
myself I was born and raised in
Roswell New Mexico and have
what is the our that have
stemmed from lack of
accountability and training in
our government entities such as
CYFD and the police departments.
For this reason I strongly
support each before because the
New Mexico Civil Rights Act
would act as an incentive for
government entities entities to
embrace the training oversight
and accountability and for all
other reasons stated to protect
our communities for this reason
I strongly support need to
support House Bill for and I
want to thank the sponsors for
bringing this forward and
everyone who worked on this bill
and again thank you for thinking
of all New Mexicans first thank
you.
Thank you very much.
Next I have eleven Masta.
Can you hear me.
Hello.
Yes we can hear you.
Okay hi madam chair and
committee members I am here to
urge the importance of house
bill for each of you.
Be more worried about the
insurance side and the possible
cost rather than the actual
violations that this bill is
aimed towards addressing is
absolutely absurd.
Right now with the current
standards that we have we are
sending the message to New
Mexican citizens that our
children and our children that
the outrageous and at times
horrendous violations of their
rights as acceptable we are
saying that these violations are
acceptable by standing behind
qualified immunity which has
been proven to be a shield of
protection to hide behind for
government officials qualified
immunity has been approved an
obstacle.
to justice.
For many people for a very long
time.
Each of you have the power to
give a voice to children who
have been harmed by those who
should have been there to
protect them not harm them and
to be the voice of the many
lives that have been lost in the
hands of those who are there to
protect and serve them not harm
them.
You have the power to say to New
Mexicans that we hear you and
we're doing something about it
is a concern New Mexican whose
rights have been directly
impacted with the loss of my
sister who lose Cerro I am
pleading that each of you see
the importance of this bill and
that you hear the stories behind
this bill and that you have
compassion as if it was your son
and daughter who's rights have
been violated the New Mexico
Civil Rights Act is about
fairness justice and equal
treatment under the law
regardless of class and
background we would not be the
first state to take.
This step in doing right by our
state that it sends call
Colorado had removed qualified
immunity and it was called a
landmark law by NBC in December
of two thousand nineteen.
House Bill endorsed about
standing for what is just when
it comes.
Next I wonder Rooney.
Hi can you hear me.
Yes we can right good afternoon
madam chair and members of the
committee my name is Sandra
Rennie and I'm the director of
public affairs for Planned
Parenthood votes New Mexico I'm
here on behalf of the one
hundred and fourteen thousand
supporters we have in this great
state planned parenthood's focus
has always been and continues to
be on the health safety and
dignity of our communities we
believe in community support
connecting individuals to
resources and building safe and
sustainable environments in
which everyone can thrive but
when our state's legal system
makes it almost impossible to
hold public officials
accountable when they violate
the rights of New Mexican that
is not fair or just and everyone
cannot thrive everyone cannot
thrive when they don't feel safe
everyone cannot thrive when they
cannot get their day in court
against public officials who
violate their rights guaranteed
to them under the New Mexico
constitution at Planned
Parenthood we believe all people
deserve justice when their civil
rights are violated as such I
strongly urge you to vote in
favor of passing house bill for
the New Mexico Civil Rights Act
thank you.
Thank you next I have Virginia
Hickman.
Please just on yourself if
you're ready we're ready for you
to hear you.
Virginia Heckman.
Are you still with us miss
madam.
Yes I'm here in the down one
there we go all right.
I'm really sorry I'm just a a a
Albuquerque resident who is in
full support of age before I
think it is very important that
anyone who all whether it's on
law enforcement official occur
with someone who's in the
correctional system anyone who
is violating our civil rights
should be held accountable I
think that full transparency is
so important and I think that
all we need are the the good
are people who are working with
our law enforcement system and
our correctional system ought to
not be on you know not trusted
by the average citizen because
of the
a group of people who are are
violating the civil rights of
the average Mexican citizen and
and are not being held
accountable in any way I had no
idea that I was going to be
speaking I thought that I would
just be listening but I I can't
That expressed more strongly my
position on this I think that
that basic civil rights of all
New Mexico citizens need to be
protected and therefore we need
full transparency and full
accountability by people who are
in law enforcement in the
correctional system all entities
governmental and introduce thank
you very much.
Thank you so much you have to so
the pandemic.
Hello madam chair members of the
committee thank you for this
opportunity to speak
full support of house bill four
and ending qualified immunity.
we have I'm tired of the horror
stories coming from our
community members and impacted
families who have suffered from
justice.
including those whose family
members should stories today of
Rex Cochran junior whose mom
spoke earlier.
Correlative Argos who left
behind a little boy.
and was way too young to have to
dive medical neglect all
incarcerated.
And another recent one was also
on the door to let the in Rio
Arriba.
County jails.
I'm also part of missing and
murdered.
Indigenous relatives task force
in the state and I can't help
but draw connections between.
You know what happens.
But the violence we're dealing
with.
All of all of our community and
it's just there's no reason why
we need to have statewide
alliance
Perpetuate these numbers for
communities and losing lives to
the point where the civil rights
as a ends in a loss civil rights
injustices in the loss of life.
And those impacts can never be
fully restored remediated so.
Yeah that's the time that we
have more avenues for
accountability for from impacted
family members and community.
And that we show future
generations that they are loved
and cared for.
at all levels of our society
thank you.
Thank you next I have Janet
Carter.
Hello thank you can you hear me
fine now we can hear you my name
is Janet Carter and I'm just
speaking as an individual I
would like to thank the
committee and especially thank
you chairwoman for allowing me
to speak I just would like to
just take a moment to speak in
support of this act H. before
because I feel it is crucial
that all New Mexicans have their
equal rights protected and have
equal protection and under the
law and I think that this is
necessary to do so I must say
I'm I'm relatively new to me as
a Representative resident of New
Mexico I retired here
approximately a year ago and I
came here one because I had
family and two because I just
treasure the beauty of this
state but honestly listening to
some of the stories that I've
heard about some of the
inequities in some of the things
that have happened to people's
a result of their inability to
be protected.
Equally under the law it has
been pretty scary to me and and
and.
Made me wonder about how safe
people are who live here without
their rights properly protected
so let's make New Mexico place
where all people can feel safe
and passed this law is the right
thing to do qualified immunity
is being used to protect those
who don't deserve protection
let's give everyone account
equal protection of the law and
make sure that our our officials
are held accountable and thank
you very much for your time.
Thank you.
Just three more people would
know I have far more people with
their hands up and then we'll go
to the next group
have Mauricio Isla Committee
that hello.
Please send it yourself.
Mody seal.
Go ahead.
We're not hearing you yet.
It looks like you're on mute it
on your end but you need to
speak up.
Let me go to the next person and
hope we can fix those technical
difficulties next discovery I
like I across.
Hi can you hear me.
We can.
My name is Gabriella Engels
thank you madam chairman and
members of the committee of the
meeting I'm so proud of HB for
my son's dad was murdered and my
child was abused sexually abused
by our perpetrator who was hired
by the department of justice D.
A.
BC yes and we're not held
accountable for their actions
wrongfully using not their
policies or procedures and I
just asked for.
You guys to consider you know
and pass this bill because you
know we are as a family are
affected by the people who are
supposed to protect us by hiring
awful monsters to help convicted
on drug charges and effective my
sign instructed me and and the
person is that because of it and
please he's passes bill H.
before thank you.
Thank you very much.
Are you still got it the lady on
again.
Actually.
But I may be.
His hand is no longer raised let
me go on then to Jonas Moyale.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Jonas Moore
M. the executive director of the
New Mexico cattle growers
association in the New Mexico
will growers incorporated worry
are a grassroots organization
Representative cattle and sheep
producers from across New Mexico
as we understand the merits of
house before and why it may be
needed.
But we worry that the bill would
negatively affect act of
voluntary agricultural boards
and further pas those interested
in becoming a livestock
inspector which is a loss which
is a law enforcement position
there's also some concern around
individual insurance policies
being increased as well as some
not being able to even be able
to obtain insurance policies are
based off the on the boards that
they sit on in the increased
risk that this bill may at
present but at this time we
would have to propose house
before would be more than happy
to provide feedback to the bill
and to the bill Sanchez thank
you for the opportunity provide
public comment.
KrisFlyer Jaga.
A good afternoon Madam
chairwoman Gail Chasey can you
hear me.
Can you hear me.
We can hear you yes we can hear
you okay sorry about that.
Thank you madam chairwoman or
Gail Chasey speaker egolf and
and honorable members of the
house and Judiciary Committee on
my name is Chris Lawton Jaga I'm
a member with the national
association of social workers
Committee New Mexico chapter and
here with you regarding House
Bill Page before Civil Rights
Act and specifically related to
qualified immunity I want to
expressed extreme gratitude to
Representative Gail Chasey for
her efforts on justice reform
and my condolences to you are
Representative could cut in on
her loss well I have personal a
personal connection to this as a
member of my family my uncle
Julian abated died in the mid
seventies in Santa Fe while
incarcerated police abuses
targeted people of every race
and class but members of
vulnerable populations in
minority groups particularly
people of color are especially
at risk this is why we support
removing qualified immunity as
this disproportionately affects
people of color impacts whether
the police are held accountable
finally we want to thank you for
including a permanent Civil
Rights Commission spell we are
going to solve the Civil Rights
slash social justice concerns in
the short term and the Civil
Rights Commission will hold our
feet to the fire to continue
these reforms over time we at
the NSW Northwich chapter
support removal of a qualified
immunity and SO and to add a
Civil Rights Commission thank
you madam chairwoman Chasey.
We have two more speaking in
favor the legislation president
grants flyers.
Go ahead.
Hello can you hear me yes.
My name is ray S. floor some
speaking as the president of the
Farmington officers association
I'd like to thank you for.
Everybody is participating in
this and give me the time to
voice a few concerns that we
have.
I'm president applaud us could
you wait because we're taking
comment in favor of the
legislation right now and I'll
put you on the those who either
are neutral or or have concerns
okay yes ma'am I'll be happy to
sure Karen Trujillo.
Thank you for this opportunity.
Mr Chairman representative to
the committee I'm Carol Trujillo
I'm president of the New Mexico
asik Association and also
president of the US bank
gathering the ease slight more
County we are concerned about
some parts of these legislation
we really have to explain I say
yes are really small community
based irrigation systems you
have perhaps members of and to
our maybe thirty members were
talking about maybe three
hundred acres three hundred
acres they do not have resources
to even buy insurance or defend
themselves in court
our our assets are it's Kate and
that which would imply that then
our way of life is at stake for
example we all know damn and
that that makes Wirth Senator
meet at million dollars and it's
owned in fee simple so we could
use that data we've already been
sued in federal court because a
person didn't that get water
rights said he thought he was
entitled to we have over six
hundred are sick yes across the
state that could be impacted by
this law so therefore we would
like for a second to be impacted
it would be a severe hardship on
our organizations you know this
is not academic to us this is
real we have dealt with civil
rights lawsuits thank you for
this opportunity by.
Last I have Nikki Gonzales and
Nikki are you speaking in favor
of the legislation.
You need I'm here.
I'm sorry yeah I'm in favor for
a I think I have.
We can.
Okay yeah I'm in favor for
expecting somebody should be
held accountable for more and
I'm going to my New Mexico.
I know it will not the meeting
is to be held accountable for
it.
Is.
Yes okay thank you so much
welcome.
Yes this time what I'd like to
do is go to those people who are
neutral on the legislation so
please raise your hand if you
have what would be described as
a neutral position.
All right let's begin with hello
Garcia.
It just under your spell all.
Contact.
All you just made yourself thank
you I'm here a good afternoon
madam chair and members of the
committee thank you for the
opportunity to speak on house
bill four we appreciate the
intent of hospital for to
protect civil rights and hold
entities accountable for
violations of civil rights hi
this is a broad goal that we
support and we want to
acknowledge the particle
testimony today we understand
there's a need to strike a
balance between the interests of
communities in the rights of
individuals
however we we are so that the
reason we're staying neutral
today is that we we want to
bring to your attention some
unintended consequences and
share some proposals for some
friendly amendments to this bill
these unintended quite
consequences for rural
communities especially for small
units of government are are as
follows most of our state is
rural where we depend on the
vital services a small political
subdivisions such as a second
flanker banks so my district
rural community water systems
for essential services these
rural institutions of them
centuries old are part of what
make you neck New Mexico unique
there's not a rash of cases of
civil rights violations
involving a second as
nevertheless were being swept
into these important reforms
that are being proposed in
hospital for that's one of our
leader said were being thrown
into a pop for we don't belong
the unintended consequences are
as follows
we think that H. before will
make smaller political
subdivisions more vulnerable to
litigation unlike counties or
cities that have attorneys to
to to represent them a small
units of government have the
resources for that purpose that
dramatically liability and
special viability could
discourage volunteers from
serving.
And if they can be for its use
to sue a second for difficult
decisions on water allocations
it could make us think is
impossible to govern.
This poses a unique risk to our
cultural heritage in New Mexico.
So we're respectfully asking
consideration around amendments
are the legislature has already
recognized that not all public
bodies are created equal.
Next I have Arturo to let them.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is our garage left and I'm with
the New Mexico land grant
council like to acknowledge that
land grants support and
recognize the importance of this
legislation our communities have
for generations known first hand
what it means to have a rights
infringed upon by government
action.
Nearly all land grants like
other small government entities
have very limited financial
resources and are completely
dependent on what are
essentially volunteer elected
officials to conduct stated the
business provide community
services manager protected
natural resources committed
facilities and infrastructure
most land grants have annual
operating budgets of less than
ten thousand dollars there for
just like a secular as a small
mutual domestics most land
grants would not be able to
afford the legal costs
associated with defending even
against a spur of the lists of
rights lawsuit.
The land grants another small
units of government are required
to utilize our limited financial
resources legal defense it comes
at the cost of keeping the
lights on in the community
center protecting the natural
resources of the community are
providing safe drinking water in
the unfortunate event of civil
rights violations do occur land
grants and other small units a
government could be forced to
sell community assets in order
to pay for legal fees or for
damages assessed against them
therefore we ask that the bill's
sponsors in this committee
consider amending the bill to
create a sliding scale on the
cap for damages that is
proportionate to local
governments ability to pay that
with the remedy for one
injustice is not create further
injustice for an entire
community unlike larger
governments land grants do not
have access to guarantee revenue
streams that allow for the
purchase of legal services or
liability coverage to protect
those community assets if the
cap remains the two million
without a sliding scale we ask
that in tandem with this bill
the legislature established a
fund at the risk management
division to provide small units
a government assistance with
covering the cost of tort and
civil rights liability coverage
premiums finally you asked that
in conjunction with this bill
the legislature commit to
funding the community governance
attorney act in order to provide
Land Grant acequia including a
communities access to pro bono
and low cost legal services
thank you madam chair.
Thank you next I have.
Your call will.
Presented yourself yes madam
chair can you.
Yes.
Yes madam chair and members of
the committee thank you for
reading for this legislation
again to echo the testimony you
just heard from my colleague and
drive that the with New Mexico
language council I just
encourage the committee to reach
out and grab the second
communities and consider some of
the unintended consequences
again these small political
subdivisions run with volunteer
leadership and volunteer staff
for the most part so this bill
can have the unintended
consequence of discouraging
local activity discouraging
people who volunteer to put in
their evenings weekends and and
really give so much of
themselves to the community and
okay can to do it can discourage
them from serving on these
boards of trustees
you know these these fall to
Carmen don't have legal
departments we don't have the
abilities to defend against
these types of cases and so even
if I was lawsuit one that we
might win will absolutely empty
the coffers of the a second or
Land Grant and even if we we
would want a lawsuit fossel that
legal fees would force one of
these communities to start
selling off assets and repeat
the the legal fees so I just
encourage the committee to
this bill by by considering how
it'll affect us smaller
governments thank you I think
you could.
All right.
Good afternoon madam chairman
and the Mr speaker and members
of the committee Paul Ritz mind
the chief general counsel for
the New Mexico Human Services
Department
in in we have a number of
concerns on behalf of Medicaid
related to this legislation the
definition of who can be sued
for acting on behalf of under
the color of or within the
course and scope of the
authority of a public body we
interpret that to possibly
extend to every one of our
Medicaid providers and a lot of
our contractors a lot of state
contractors and under under
section nineteen eighty three
the federal civil rights statute
most people would not be acting
under color of law of state law
that's the standard under that
act so we're we're very
concerned about having all of
our Medicaid providers and all
of our contractors and all of
our behavioral health providers
sort of brought into this act
and potentially being held at
least liable through the Human
Services department for alleged
civil rights violations we think
that just takes this
much too far in the
In this bill and the other thing
I just wanted to mention is
having been in Colorado before I
came back to New Mexico
certainly Colorado did away with
qualified immunity just for
police officers in a very
restrictive that you wish and so
this legislation seems to go
well beyond
any other state in the nation
and we're specifically concerned
about the scope of who could be
sued under this up under this
legislation thank you very much.
Andrea Padilla.
Well yes thank you madam chair
can you hear me.
Yes.
Okay thank you very much so
madam chair and members of the
committee up my name is on the
up with the and I am the current
president of the New Mexico land
grant process consent form which
again is a grassroots
organization that helps land
grants throughout the state and
I just want to reiterate what
they have said before about
small units of government such
as land grants and the secular
are primarily run by boards that
are volunteer basis all we
Representative the communities
that in the past have had their
what their rights violated
several times over and over with
the stealing of our land that
kind of see a land grants today
in the second they are trying to
fight to get those lands back to
regain our rights and this bill
I hope I have I agree with the
intent of that but again if we
are allowed to be sued that is
going to destroy the land grants
it's going to destroy this
seconds we will lose our ability
to fight for the rights of our
people which again are minority
of primarily Hispanic and native
American groups and if if I
would just pray that you guys
can add something to this
amendment that either exempt
from this law this bill or
provides us with some kind of
legal money to help us deal with
whatever lawsuits come up so
that we can continue our work
trying to defend and and retain
the rights of civil rights of
our people thank you very much.
Thank you next I have and re gay
role metal.
Thank you madam chair can you.
We can't thank you my name is an
internal matter on my the
director of legal services at
the New Mexico acequia
Association and I just wanted to
to add to some of the comments
that of public or CEO or
executive director mentioned and
also just to suggested that
there could be some amendments
to to the bill that would
address many of the concerns
have been expressed today
regarding a small political
subdivisions as it has been
mentioned today not all public
bodies are created equal and the
legislature has already
recognized this fact in a couple
of ways one by providing
narrowly tailored exemptions for
small political subdivisions and
by providing funding mechanisms
to assist the small political
subject.
With complying with legal
requirements what is it was
examples is already found in the
New Mexico on an act a section
twelve six three provides a to
reporting system are based on a
public bodies annual revenue so
for example tier one public
bodies with less than ten
thousand dollars in annual
revenue are exempt from
submitting and filing quarterly
reports and so we would we would
recommend or suggest a friendly
amendment that would account for
the four of the annual revenues
of small political subdivisions
provide or the or have and then
finally in the exemptions for
specific political subdivisions
in the New Mexico tort claims
act and finally there is in
forty one that would be found
section forty one for thirteen
and it's forty four twenty three
there's actually a public
liability fund dentist and set
up to help purchase tort
liability and so we would
respectfully request that you
know and the amendment to this
to account for the fact that not
all public bodies are created
equal some are of smaller size
and has been mentioned before
this bill may have unintentional
consequences but there is
already some authority in law to
provide for some amendments.
Thank you next I have Debbie
Hughes.
Yes Madam chairman members of
the committee thank you so much
let's listen to the entire all
the testimony and I understand
that there is some need for some
changes in law but I represent
the executive director of the
New Mexico association of
conservation districts so I work
with the soil and water
conservation district here the
state and the mandatory attorney
fees of ten thousand dollars I
don't see any way to districts
could pay that they.
Early get a little bit over two
thousand dollars a tire state
funding we also are unpaid board
members are elected I think
there's gonna be a lot of folks
don't want to run to the sports
anymore if we have this
liability there's no way in the
world that any of them could pay
up to million dollars they don't
have assets they don't have
anything what these districts do
is help to bring assets to the
state they help to get these
farm bill programs here for more
federal programs and state
dollars of course not everybody
usually happy I mean sometimes
people don't like the way those
are range even though they're
done very fairly so we could be
reasons for you know but you
know I think what we need to
remember here the small
political subdivisions like us
that are trying to help get
water on the ground and
conservation on the ground the
saying about whiskey's for
drinking water for fighting we
open this law up I think it's
just going to be more reason
that people come after those of
us are trying to help with the
natural resources and water
issues here in the state so I
also ask that you do some kind
of amendment that would keep the
small political subdivisions out
that are working with with
landowners to help help them on
land thank you very much and
appreciate the time.
Last I have doctors Santa.
Looks like maybe that has went
down so now I want to invite
those who wish to speak in
opposition to the all to please
raise your hands.
And I'll begin with Rudy mata.
Good afternoon.
Madam chair members of the
committee.
First and foremost I have a
strong interest ensuring that
the qualified immunity protects
police officers when they act
recently in accordance with
clearly established law.
In addition I'm interested that
the courts qualified immunity
decisions are consistent with
the use of best practices in
officer training and conduct.
As many people criticize and
seek to transform the policing
professions this criticism
criticisms are not based on
reality or fact.
With that it is true.
You situations police officers
have made serious errors in
judgment the result in
unwarranted and inappropriate
death of individuals.
However the vast majority of
police shootings across the
United States have involved
armed individuals who presented
a significant threat to police
officers.
Many of the so called an arm
basis the legislation
specifically resisted arrest.
You must be remember that in
every situation involving a
violent physical confrontation
between an officer and a suspect
at least one firearm is it is
present.
And that's the officer's
firearm.
There have been extremely well
in counties with law enforcement
officers and criminals just this
past week we lost eleven police
officers to include New Mexico
state police officer Garinger.
Yet another reminder of the
deadly encounters law
enforcement officers experience
every single day.
House Bill for is a reaction to
what I believe is what we
witnessed last summer the
merciless and injustice killing
of George Floyd is true and
we're addressing in a rational
manner but to paint the entire
law enforcement profession with
the broad paintbrush is not a
collaborative approach to making
policing better.
There are hundreds of thousands
of police interactions every
single day and the vast majority
are positive interactions with
the community.
The inaccurate a narrative that
is being betrayed creates an
emotionally driven approach with
no solution there are several
areas of agreement.
Next I have Victor Rodriguez.
Can you hear me madam chair we
sure can't thank you madam chair
and committee members as a
commissioner appointed to the
New Mexico Civil Rights
Commission I believe this bill
does nothing to improve
producing in our state which was
a principal reason why the
commission was created the
majority of law enforcement
officers are ethical
professionals doing the job for
the right reasons in addition to
the federal court remedies for
the civil rights violations our
state legislature wishing
recently enhanced the tort
claims act by revising the
definition of a law enforcement
officer and created the ability
to file constitutional crimes
against police so that that
police actors could be held
accountable please remember that
out of the nine member
commission for members descended
and participated in the
dissenting minority report so
I'd encourage everyone to please
read it the majority of the
information presented to the
commission focused on the law
enforcement profession and the
civil rights violations of but
by the please get this bill
affects every public employee
and employer so my question to
you is where the problem the
answer to this question was best
summarized in recent are a
broker the journal editorial
board article which type of this
bill is a solution looking for
the problem.
Where lawyers are the winners
and taxpayers are the losers
qualified immunity is being
limited in this bill get this
bill in section ten reserves
absolute immunity which is
another traditionally created
drive and protecting any bad
judge prosecutor or legislature
from any liability the
commissioners unanimously
recommended true creation
strategies as part of their
legislative report that would
improve the law enforcement
profession in the law
enforcement academy also I'd
like to mention that myself in
another commissioner as law
enforcement professionals not
just commissioner submitted
additional recommendations to
madam chair Tracy that would be
all that would improve policing
corrections after we testified
before the corrections of the
courts corrections and justice
committee the the solution is
simple implement the recommended
law enforcement training and
accountability strategies to
include adequate funding and
stop creating ineffective causes
of action I encourage each of
you to please oppose this bill
thank you for your time.
Stand rounds.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee my name is Stan
rounds I am the executive
director of the state
superintendents association and
the New Mexico college of
education leaders this is my
forty eighth year serving public
education in New Mexico I've
spent about thirty of those
years as a superintendent of
schools in various towns in New
Mexico I'm in New Mexico native
and and a lot of the before you
today as often Mr speaker and
madam chair I'll bring the voice
of the practitioner to the table
just for men and then
fortunately we still even though
you work is excellent on the
subcommittee subs to bill there
still other issues we raised yes
they with advocates for this
particular legislation among
those are the Martinez Yazzie
case which is both in your
playing field and ours is one
that we were unable to pull
part and provide a sufficient
relief that we would not have a
tremendous exposure in that
regard all this is a pretty good
bill using chief justice's
comment about a which I don't
disagree I would like you to
know of when it unintended
consequence and it has to do
with the cost of potential
claims and cost insurance your
committee should have the drive
for the New Mexico public school
insurance authority which under
the last time reads that they
would reasonably anticipate
substantially more on claims
which would eventually
necessitate higher premiums to
its members claim values and
settlements could reasonably
trouble based on the attorney's
fees in the provisions so for
those and other reasons we look
forward to working with you we
unfortunately have to propose at
this point in time thank you.
Thank you have a.
Hi thank you.
I'm here to speak in opposition
H. before but also to address
the things that I've been
talking about all fall as I've
testified in front of your
committees on the things we can
do right that actually will make
an impact on please so first of
all I I I was troubled that was
about an hour and fifty five
minutes into this hearing before
we heard officer Jared's name
mentioned at all he was killed
four days ago first New Mexico
state trooper killed in thirty
years he was not a bad apple
he's not a fallen hero concert
heroes when they get shot cops
are heroes for what they do
every day and although I agree
there are many problems in
policing this bill is not going
to solve them and is going to
distract from what should be
being done we have the chance
here folks you you in particular
have the chance to make New
Mexico the state of the art in
police training we can fully
fund the law enforcement academy
it's a thirty five to forty
percent of staffing right now
that's not training cops to do a
good job the second thing we can
do is we can have a fund for all
the small towns and throughout
southern New Mexico in
particular that you're hearing
about today so that they can get
the training they need they can
have the use of force policies
from national experts they can
have their their supervisor sent
to command school which costs
about ten thousand dollars per
supervisor these are the basics
of improving policing it's
having good policies it's
training to those policies it's
holding them accountable in the
last stage of that then the
accountability you have to fix
the law enforcement academies
boards handling of the
certifications that process is
very cumbersome your backlog
over a hundred if we're talking
about to accountability there is
where it starts let's commit to
making New Mexico the state of
the art for training police
officers to be home we want them
to be because the reality is
they're great men and women
protecting our community thank
you.
Thank you to have a A. J. fort.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee AJ forty with the
minutes pulling
thank our concern with the bill
in this and technical issues we
don't know if this is in
addition to the tort claims act
but most importantly thank you
have you just stated there's no
reform in this bill there's
nothing on the front end to help
violations from occurring in the
first place far larger cities
even a two million dollar cap
because the frequency of claims
it's going to get very expensive
for smaller cities let's keep in
mind of a hundred six
municipalities twenty six under
ten thousand.
In their annual budgets this two
million dollar cap is it far
exceeds their their annual
revenue.
So will be forced to cut.
What services or increase taxes
they just don't have the revenue
stream to deal with this type of
cat.
And as a pool.
Most of our larger cities are
self insured and they're also
the reinsurer.
So when we evaluated claim we do
it with our members because we
are members and it always comes
down to what is best for the
community it's not about a
dollars and cents argument.
Again we're gonna ask for a
holistic approach give us the
tools on the front end to train
our officers and have better
accountability the law
enforcement academy maybe it's
three million dollars today and
we're talking about a cap of two
million.
Per incident or per occurrence.
We ask for a change to P. but
it's balanced so that we can if
there's about officer we can
move them along we need to be
more bounce than what's
currently in the public
employees bargaining.
We do we completely agree with
the editorial board the came out
last week.
We.
We need more front end justice
on this and as I listen to.
The supporters and the
opposition to this bill the best
justice we can give victims is
the assurance that our laws
change in ways that ensure.
Others don't meet the same fate.
Thank you madam chair.
Martinez.
Thank you I'm an attorney in New
Mexico and for twenty five years
I have Representative
governmental entities across the
state of New Mexico and I can
assure you that this bill with
its attorney's fee provision is
just an invitation to see you
New Mexico governmental entities
New Mexico here city American
rule that each leg is
responsible for their own
attorney's fees and that is in
contrast to the English rule
that means the loser pays.
The system the hope was that it
would decrease frivolous and
unreasonable litigation but
under the American rural America
decided that we didn't want to
our access to justice so each
litigant is responsible for
their own attorney's fees.
How do we know that this bill
will increase the cost of
litigation the ability to
plaintiffs attorneys we now
because the Legislature enacted
the whistleblower protection act
which includes an attorney's fee
provision.
That was a lower protection act
I have not only seen an increase
in litigation my practices now
fifty percent claims brought
under that act and in addition
I've seen lawyers from other
states bringing suit against
governmental entities this act
is designed to benefit plans
attorneys will increase the
litigation and bring lawyers
from other jurisdictions into
our jurisdiction there was a
discussion at this is meant to
just protect insurance companies
governmental entities in New
Mexico aren't insured by
insurance companies they're
insured by their collaboration
in various entities and the
increased cost of litigation
will affect all governmental
entities and their ability to
serve their communities which
will be fewer roads your
programs for children less
access of people to to community
services and so this bill is is
is wrong for our state and I
encourage you to vote against it
thank you.
Robert pardon robin Howard.
Hello my name is robin here were
understandable county attorney
Sandoval county commission
passed a resolution in
opposition to house bill four
this bill does nothing to
correct police misconduct which
would you heard most of the
supporters talk about problems
with police as you all are aware
during the special session the
New Mexico legislature added
police misconduct claims under
the New Mexico tort claims act
to be filed under the New Mexico
constitution so what we're
really talking about is
increasing the caps to two
million claim as opposed to per
occurrence there's no guarantee
that
are the claim with limited to
per incident so that if there
were an incident which I people
involved I plans that could be
ten million dollars in addition
this bill does not address
whether or not it's in addition
to the New Mexico tort claims
act which should therefore at a
minimum we could be three
million dollars but as of.
Martinez just said the most
problematic portion of house
bill four substitute is the
attorney's fees attorney's fees
drive up the cost of litigation
and do nothing for the victims
attorney's fees are as shown in
the
the Civil Rights Commission are
there was one case that to has
been paid out in federal court
in which the damages or fifty
thousand dollars actual damages
but the attorneys fees were
close to five hundred thousand
dollars Mexico taxpayers should
not be punished to pay the
plaintiffs bar you should.
If you're going to pass out of
the Civil Rights Act limit the
attorney's fees to zero and we
will have the merits of each
case heard by itself not to line
the pockets of New Mexico New
Mexico's plans far thank you.
Chris Phillips.
I thank you madam chair members
of the committee my name is
grace Phillips I'm general
counsel for New Mexico counties
and I want to thank the sponsors
for their efforts to address
what they've acknowledge our
legitimate concerns about this
legislation but we're in a
rushed Environment and I think
in the rush to craft the
substitute what we still have it
is a bill that needs significant
work I I've listened to the
supporting statements that I can
hear the high hopes that so many
people have for this legislation
but those hopes and expectations
really don't match the words on
the paper and and I think I
think we need to fix that I just
want to make a couple quick
points as robin hammer just said
we're concerned about the way
the cap language in this
substitute is drafted is
ineffective it does invite
multiple claims which would
staff the which would staff will
double caps it also suggests
that you can collect under the
tort claims act and the this new
bill which would again
multiplied the dollars at at
available second there's no
requirement of a culpable mental
state and what I mean by that
and I'm looking at page two
lines eighteen to nineteen more
actor omission no deliberate
indifference is required as
drafted and what that will do
would mean that even inadvertent
violations would have create a
cognizable claim so when you're
talking about traditional
property claims car accidents
property damage so on and so
forth and we get hundreds of
those claims
would would under this as
written the considered
constitutional basis complete
with attorney fee awards
seventy percent of those types
of low level property complaints
are currently solved without
litigation as written this bill
would encourage lawyers to bring
them to collect their fees on
top of the compensation
available to their clients.
Thank you.
Gregory Shaver.
Gregory Schaefer you need on
your cell.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Greg
Shaffer on the Santa Fe county
attorney and director on the New
Mexico county Insurance
Authority board of directors and
then C. I. A. is the entity
created by New Mexico counties
to self insure and ensure risk
by pooling their resources thank
you for the opportunity to speak
on three areas of concern with
the house Judiciary substitute a
lack of pre litigation notice
requirement the three year
statute of limitations and
potential unintended
consequences for indemnification
provisions and third party
vendor contracts.
Unlike the tort claims act the
house Judiciary substitute does
not require notice of potential
claims to be given within ninety
days of the underlying
occurrence notice provision is
important it allows government
to investigate the occurrence to
see if remedial efforts are
necessary to avoid future harms
to others.
It also ensures that relevant
evidence is preserved most audio
and video is preserved for far
less than three years under
established records retention
policies we're talking about
lapel video dashcam video jail
video and jail phone calls often
the most critical and telling
evidence with regard to an
alleged claim.
Without pre litigation notice
critical evidence may therefore
be destroyed in the ordinary
course of business based upon
established records retention
policies.
The proposed three year statute
of limitations is to my mind
both unnecessarily long and
inconsistent with limitation
periods and other significant
state statutes two years is
ample time for a claim to be
processed generally in addition
to years is also the statute of
limitations for whistleblower
protection act tort claims act
and contract actions against
government.
Finally on the other side of the
ledger with regard to the
statute of limitations adding a
year to the statute of
limitations will increase the
risks that governments and self
insurance pools must carry on
their books for this new
untested cause of action for all
these reasons I would submit
that a two year statute of
limitations is more appropriate
at least initially until we have
a track record with.
President respondents.
Yes ma'am thank you for letting
me speak before you.
We have of the forces HB for
which of we believe is
interesting but it does nothing
to deal with the topic at hand
I am the president of the
Farmington officers association
I represent some of the best men
and women in law enforcement
today now notice I didn't say
perfect we do have the best
women and men in law enforcement
here in Farmington.
And the the our basic guy and
what we're seeing here today is
we're trying to reinvent a wheel
with a flat tire legislators
this is in our court right now
we let the air out of this tire
and we did not make sure that
this we always rolling forward
we have already put things in
place that don't require is much
money is the could potentially
be involved assistance gets
passed from all different
parties.
We've put checks and balances in
place we've put management
people in place to deal with
these issues however we have not
been accountable on our own to
make sure that this will is
still rolling.
All we would need to do is put a
little bit more air to this tire
into the things that we have
already put in place and let's
get this will rolling again.
Those are the basic checks and
balances that we can do I would
I would request that everybody
listening to this on the
legislative panel that we
consider this it isn't just
everybody else's fault I do
believe with you there are
issues that we need to address
we need to improve on but we
need to do the basics if we
cannot do the basics we're just
gonna keep spending flat tire
thank you for your time I I hope
you make the right decision.
Thank you Clinton hard and
welcome.
Thank you madam chairman how are
you and thanks for recognize me
for.
Total disclaimer or.
I am a registered lobbyist
Representative you County quay
county the cities of to compare
implied having said that I am a
former executive branch cabinet
secretary and retired state
senator.
I am against this bill for many
other reasons that have already
been stated and I'm gonna have
to hurry I think that the
qualified immunity the liability
Ruiloba that is available for
our law enforcement agencies
perhaps needs to be looked at is
my understanding that the courts
are the ones that decide whether
that particular qualified
immunity is is proper not what
concerns me though is that this
this bill is so broad that it it
captures all of the public
bodies conservation district
says it was already mentioned
Small counties just the whole
damn it it takes way they're
qualified immunity which is
something that even the Supreme
Court has discussed I'm also
Jeff to the three year statute
of limitations which was also
mentioned not may have changed
but when I was secretary of
labor and have oversight of the
human rights division that was a
hundred and eighty days statute
of limitation
I just think that this is a
broad net that's been thrown out
there in the water to capture
some really bad actors and I
have some great empathy for
those individuals that have
testified about members of their
family but I think the next two
broad and I would like for the
sponsors to consider other
amendments thank you.
J. Billington.
Yes thank you madam chair this
is JD Bullington speaking on
behalf of the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
which sincerely appreciates the
Sanchez efforts to amend the
legislation matters that affect
the fiscal health of our state
and local government affect our
economic climate our tax
structures and investments in
infrastructure and public
services maybe our state
government local governments the
chamber of commerce is siding
with the city's county schools
law enforcement agencies and
others who still have concerns
with this legislation as
substituted the chamber still
believes this bill would open a
new gate of costly lawsuits
against public agencies and
shift money from Corpus
Services.
toward lawsuit payouts instead
the chamber of commerce also
believes the standard on state
civil rights claims is too low
and citizens who believe their
civil rights have been violated
already have an existing Avenue
to seek recourse and contents in
federal court and the chamber is
apprehensive this act will make
it harder to recruit and retain
police officers.
Madam chair of the chamber hopes
these concerns can be further
reviewed thank you.
Thank you Andrew Johnson.
Thank you madam chair members
I'm going Johnson.
I think you needed yourself
again Mr John.
Okay I promise I'm not touching
anything.
I'm Sandoval County manager and
I'm here to also.
Oppose this bill on behalf of
the San Juan county commission
we see it is largely unnecessary
the scope is too broad it covers
everyone from a crossing guard
to a social worker to a teacher
to code enforcement officer
every county city state agency
and yes as we've heard over and
over again Seki Association land
grants every government entity
the three year exposure is more
than just a little prop
problematic and the two million
dollar cap is too high since its
per claim you can see that
easily belong to four six eight
million or more and
accountability we've heard a lot
about that today and this bill
provides no accountability for
individuals who are bad actors
in only for attempts to provided
through their employers I don't
know how many of you have ever
tried to remove the bad apples
from a public entity but it's
not a simple exercise so this
bill doesn't give us the tools
that we need.
To actually do what it says it's
intended to do.
So we urge you to vote against
this our at least find a better
bill because I don't think
anybody no one single person
that is testified on either side
of this or any side of this is
ever said that they're
interested in not providing
accountability for public
employees but how you go about
it is critical to the overall
objective success of the
objectives of this bill please
consider some revisions thank
you.
Thank you next I have Andrew.
Please I need your self and your
thank all.
We need to hear you talk now.
Andrew are you ready.
I
think we might be having some
technical problems because it
looks like he's unmuted but he's
not speaking so we're gonna go
to lily may Ortiz.
Good afternoon madam chair can
you hear me.
Good afternoon madam chair can
you hear me now.
Yes thank you madam chair
members of the committee billing
more T. Simon the legislative
liaison for the New Mexico
school board association or
membership maintains up
membership eighty nine school
districts throughout the state
of New Mexico NMAA BA
understands very much
appreciates in value to protect
an individual civil rights one
of the NMAA BA's top three
guiding principles that we use
in evaluating legislation that
affects publication is focused
on eliminating unfunded mandates
and must be opposes any
legislation that then it school
districts undertake me programs
are committees without providing
the necessary financial
resources to address the cost
that will result we believe this
legislation has such far
reaching effects on financial
resources of our local school
districts and it creates an
unfunded mandate for districts
statewide and may have the
effect to reduce already limited
resources we also believe that
this legislation may school
districts more vulnerable to
litigation and creates
additional
legal exposures for litigation
and as a result insurance
premiums and settlement amounts
will undoubtedly increase for
these reasons madam chair
members of the committee and
many of the concerns that have
already been articulated NMSA
opposes this bill and we request
that as and if the school moves
forward that educational
entities specifically public
schools be excluded from this
act thank you very much for
allowing us to speak.
Stewart.
Is Kim Stewart still in the
queue.
We go to the next person Terry
Fortenberry.
Please under yourself.
Okay can you hear me yes.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Terry Fortenberry and I'm a
former mayor of a small
community and a retired police
officer hi Rick I represent the
New Mexico fraternal order of
police and I've been a member of
this organization since nineteen
seventy seven.
This what I would like to do
first is to correct the what I
feels misstatement by the
sponsor of the bills speaker
Egolf in the last previous
committee.
Hearing that this bill is not
about law enforcement.
Well I strongly disagree.
Has been said by this members of
the Civil Rights Commission and
the people testifying for and
against it's all about law
enforcement.
That's what they want to do they
want to get even with law
enforcement.
This bill should not be called
the so.
I'm gonna ask you not to argue
was someone's motives or impute
a motive just talk about the
bill is not about the motives
for the sponsor.
Yes ma'am I apologize
Law enforcement officers are
hired to enforce the laws that
are enacted by our legislature.
And to take away some of their
protections.
Because of other mistakes other
communities have made or other
states have made.
It is wrong this will put law
enforcement in a terrible spot
in this act should not pass
thank you.
Can Stewart.
Kim Stewart are you present.
I think that can be moved down I
have a list Matt madam chair
okay there's consider college
eyes madam chair thank you for
giving me this time committee
members I am the sheriff of Dona
Ana County I was at the center
of the Civil Rights Commission I
propose bill even and it's
amended form let me be clear it
will do nothing to rectify
wrongs committed by so called
governmental bad actors this
bill is misnamed and gives the
impression that if you were to
vote against it that you are
against the full rights nothing
could be further from the truth
don't fall for it I beg of you
Dona Ana County board of county
commissioners is tomorrow
considering a resolution
opposing this bill and we will
make it public if indeed they
voted to oppose it thank you
madam chair for at the time
today.
Thank you I don't I don't know
that my list at rental Pettigrew
have you spoken yet.
No madam chair okay go ahead.
just to disclose everything I am
currently a representatives in
the in the house hi
Representative district sixty
one.
I'm speaking specifically from
the ten different communities
across the state that I've
received communications on
asking me to oppose this bill.
Personally and echoed madam
chair some of the comments from
the chair I generally will
oppose any legislation that does
not provide a solution only a
penalty.
And so I don't manage business
that way and I don't think that
this bill goes to that yes.
We'll say that before let's just
before we started
our session this year I sent
through a qualified immunity.
Zoom meeting that was hosted in
part by the Cato Institute.
I felt like I was attending a
meeting where we talked about
being able to hold government.
Person accountable.
Do we let the.
Major almost ninety percent of
that meeting.
That night.
Was a complete attack on our
police and law enforcement
agents.
And I cannot support anything
that does that and I've been
asked those are sent over to
communities across the state to
speak in opposition against us
thank you madam chair.
Thank you committee.
Thank you next Michael S. woman.
Madam chairwoman my name is
Michael actually I am the
Otero county attorney I am also
a chairman of the county
attorney ability to the county's
Association.
my commissioners will be
considering a resolution opposed
to this bill the meeting on
Thursday and if it passes I will
distributed to you much of what
I would say it's already been
covered by others I would
particularly like to associate
myself with the comments from
robbing him or Sandoval County
grace Phillips from the county's
Association I would particularly
like to endorse the use by
Victor Rodriguez and the other
AJ for today and the others who
called for improvements at the
front end.
we need to improve the law
Enforcement Academy of the
certification process.
I would also like to one point
if no one else is brought up I
spent a year as a public
defender in Hobbs and over and
over again I saw people with
mental illness that we're not
getting treatment that should
not have been in jail.
But it's been spoke about the
large judgments in done any
county against my own county
that involved people who should
not about ownership they should
have been in some place like the
state will hospital Las Vegas I
have one client who was the
schizophrenic he was not
dangerous but he would go in
also ups or stripes and open up
a gallon of milk or open a
package twenties and we had an
order banning the property so
they would call ring a cops in
if you go to jail you always be
funding confident when I had the
showman's K. it was the forty
fifth case the public defender
Representative the film about he
kept going to jail it was never
getting treatment so one thing
that should be done is more
money for mental health
treatment.
We suppose this bill and work on
the initial by the end issues
thank you.
Wakefield.
Hello.
Go ahead.
My name is Helen Waite sale and
I am a.
You've transitions questions now
Boston connections specialist
with the state of New Mexico
CYFD in Roswell and I am
speaking on behalf of YTS and
foster connections specialist
that we are subject to all types
of react retaliation especially
the repeated threats of lawsuits
one particular instance was when
I just started with CYFD and two
nine twenty nineteen and a young
man on my caseload had just been
transferred to me the young man
aged out decided to move to
Texas with his mother I'm no one
knew that all of a sudden you
decided some of.
His in the movie the lost or
didn't take is vital our records
being his social security card
is birth certificate and the
like and the first thing that is
mother said and this was the
mother whose parental rights was
taken away but now he's an adult
you can go back to them every
wishes is that I'm gonna see you
the entire state of New Mexico
CYFD and you so with that being
said the death of grass people
who wish to sue us just because
is so broad and I believe that
if the passing of this bill
would go for that not only I
would be subject to a lawsuit
but everyone in my continue
Department in the light because
anybody knows I'm a good
attorney doesn't only see one
person a suit any and every one
that may have types that
particular case or be involved
in that particular
because of the action I thank
you madam chair and I would have
called you.
Thank you Sean will be.
Yes ma'am thank you madam chair
can you hear me.
We can hear you thank you ma'am
my name is Sean will be in the
president of the Albuquerque
police officers association in
Albuquerque New Mexico we're
gonna ask
For you to oppose this
legislation and there's a
million reasons why.
In Albuquerque we know a thing
or two about reform I hear a lot
of speaking about reforming and
holding individuals or bad
actors accountable we have
literally spent millions upon
millions of taxpayer dollars
trying to reform the Albuquerque
police department we've been at
it for about six years and it is
no secret that we have a a ways
to go.
The problem with this
legislation it is desert it does
not accomplish the intent or the
spoken intent of the bill how
are you going to accomplish
increased training or increase
for for more having the right
amount of individuals to do the
job in an entire system that is
breaking down if you're
frivolously taking money right
out of the same budget that's
expected to pay for all of these
other things that have to go on
if you look at every single
attributes of of state
government city government
county government in this entire
state the criminal justice every
arm of it is broken from CYFD to
probation and parole to did too
the defense bar to prosecutors
in this state they are
underfunded they have way more
work than they can handle we're
triaging everything to include
calls for service in law
enforcement to try to get to the
highest priority I don't think
we do anything very successfully
in the state of New Mexico we
have a lot of work to do on the
front end and I'll give you one
example.
I only got thirteen seconds if
you constantly put all of your
money in responding to an issue
but you're never actually
putting money into the actual
issue it's going to recreate
itself every day we ask for you
to please oppose this
legislation.
Last I have Jason.
Yes can you hear me.
Can you hear me yes please
enter due to fears that are.
Yes.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee of education
billion deputy for three orange
police department I propose a
house bill four in lieu
servicing that we all want
accountability for law
enforcement
you know a lot of people think
that is something we don't want
and is the first from the truth
but this bill makers believe
that there's no protection for
people that are there for their
rights violated in the unity
that that government employees
currently have those not
protect in certain areas when we
needed not apply is not applaud
during personal injury bodily
injury wrongful death property
damage resulting from assault
battery false imprisonment false
arrest malicious prosecution
abuse of process libel slander
defamation of character
violations of property rights or
deprivation of rights and we
lead people to believe that we
are protected from misconduct in
these areas and we simply are
not and I just think that it's
agency Representative not
necessarily intentionally but I
think we need to educate
ourselves a little bit better in
that area of people currently
believe that over the regards of
what we do that we are protected
it's simply not the case
I always tell our officers if
you secretary step outside the
umbrella of protection basically
meaning the policy the state law
the and you get out there so far
we can't reach you we basically
can help you we hold our people
accountable we expect that they
operate within policy of the law
and this bill will lead people
to believe that there is no
accountability for law
enforcement is simply not true
for those areas I just mentioned
and all of the contest ocurrir
there simply are covered should
they fall in one of those
categories thank you.
Thank you so that concludes our
public comment and we will
return to the
Our our committee if you want to
take the time were down
The screen that would probably
be helpful.
I think I don't know if Deborah
Georgia if you could just
completely go back to the
regular.
That would be helpful and we
this right now madam chair so
you should be able to
rearranges.
Right okay.
She.
All right.
Senator here I want to give
Representative littlest and
speaker egolf an opportunity to
to
respond to the public comment
first.
Thank you madam chair I'll defer
to speaker Egolf.
Madam I want to thank everyone
for taking the time to.
Participate and I certainly want
to note that we had nearly a
hundred it nearly two hundred
attendees your.
Openness and transparency we've
been able to bring to this
session and a rather
unprecedented way
I think I probably would like to
see to sort of take up responses
to the critics.
As we go through questions from
the committee that we were sure
we're addressing any issues of
concern to the committee members
I will just say it's a threshold
matter that.
I think we we didn't really hear
from the critics.
Much if anything that would be
in the form of sympathy for
concern for those whose rights
have been trampled or for those
who lost their life.
As a result of the Civil Rights.
Violation certainly dollars and
cents.
Our in this conversation.
But we hear from the critics.
Sure histrionic claims that
community centers are going to
be for that or that governments
will be.
You should down and public
services will be canceled I
would just point out that every.
Look employee.
It affects every governmental
entity in the state of New
Mexico right now from the state
government level all the way
down to a mutual domestic is
subject to suit right now in
federal court under section
nineteen eighty three.
Of the Civil Rights Act of
eighteen seventy one damages can
be awarded in federal court in
in and unlimited amount.
To include punitive damages as
we heard from his right million
dollar punitive award has been
awarded by jury last five years
in New Mexico.
And that
federal law has no cap.
On attorney's fees either.
All three of those features are
not found in the New Mexico
Civil Rights Act that is
proposed to the committee today.
There is a cap on damages.
In this bill there is no
punitive damage possibility in
the bill and attorney's fees are
caps as well.
Even with this federal law in
place we do not see a rash of
lawsuits against small
governments I would submit to
you that many of the small
governments that we heard from
especially as sick is our and
land grants are in effect.
Judgment proof of the fact that
they don't have resources are.
It is you may be a part of that.
We also don't really see a lot
of opportunities I frankly have
a hard time.
Imagine how a storm water
conservation district is going
to commit a violation of
someone's rights and under that
New Mexico writes it seems
somewhat far fetched
and I also want to point out
that if chair to members of the
committee that I've spoken at
least every three days with
folks from the New Mexico
association of counties.
As we have been attempting to
make changes
four of the bill to become more
acceptable to them.
Of the issues that we heard from
the association counties today
are new issues that I heard for
the first time I just this
morning with regard to this will
Sixtyeight settlement
possibility R. as well as the
other issues in the race so
those are new issues the two
million dollar cap.
Was offered or suggested by the
association counties so we've
done quite a bit to try to
accommodate their concerns and
try to accommodate concerns for
the counties I also note that we
are from Santa Fe County today
I took note that among their top
legislative priorities for the
session is legislation to
promote.
Racial justice and racial equity
in New Mexico.
And I can't think of a better
way to do that and for the
county to changes position and
decide to support the Civil
Rights Act Mexico with that
madam chair and happy to answer
any questions is our this is our
panel of legal experts with me
and Representative.
Still here talking to myself
first to have Representative
McQueen.
Thank you madam chair
Chair Mister speaker.
Use the bill to the.
The violations.
Rates privileges immunities
secured person to the bill of
rights constitution and New
Mexico the federal bill of
rights is fairly discreet and
well known could you.
The.
Just outlining it is the New
Mexico bill of rights a.
is a known quantity and what
does it entail.
Madam chair thank you The New
Mexico Bill of Rights has twenty
four sessions.
it includes
the right to bear arms
include a descriptive precision
proportions.
To really control of the armed
forces quartering of.
Military personnel now that's an
analog of course the federal
constitution search and seizure
freedom of religion trial by
jury the show we know excessive
fines no cruel and unusual
punishment there's provisions
dealing with the procedures for
obtaining indictments and the
grand jury process there's a
prohibition on some
communication and jeopardy.
Our federal analog
assisted freedom of press.
you will protection due process
The New Mexico constitution has
equal rights amendment so there
is unlike the federal
constitution there is a bill of
rights provision in in New
Mexico
he.
Prohibiting discrimination on
the basis of sex.
there is a provision dealing
with eminent domain
and there's a provision about
the the rights under the treaty
of Guadalupe Hidalgo in those
right here your authorized
are some aspects of it
Our federal right this way the
New Mexico Civil Rights Act
would allow them to be endorsed
for the first time in our
state's history.
Madam speaker health
That's listed did did I miss the
the administration of
discrimination with that being
under a.
The court right to due process
that is not yet so.
Madam chair.
Representative McQueen this
right so
the
It like the federal constitution
you cannot.
Equal protection and due process
in there we've got the Civil
Rights Act that make that is
what prohibits.
Discrimination on the basis of
race color religion or national
origin so in New Mexico we would
look for equal protection and
due process and then the.
As you look at the Human Rights
Act.
For prohibitions on
discrimination on the basis of
race religion color national
origin there's more protections
under New Mexico law for sex
gender identity
that actually marital status of
the things so we would have some
additional protections under
state constitution.
Thank you madam chair Mister
speaker Madam speaker just one
more question we heard from a
number of the.
Excuse me smaller political
subdivisions of the state.
so have.
Assets.
In the form of you know a
community center or traditional
common lands
but the little or no income.
with those with their shared
common assets the the.
The subject to attachment if
they were to lose the civil
rights lawsuit.
No and I can fly to.
Madam chair representative.
one the siege at thirty three C.
J. S. on education section forty
two states.
That.
What is considered general
doctrine needing no statutory
sanctions that the land and
property of the state or is
agencies or political
subdivisions is not subject to
seizure under general education
in the absence of the statute
expressly granting such right.
With
is.
The judgment against for example
I think you were against.
A.
Land Grant the landed property
owned by the state or the Land
Grant cannot be seized the
satisfaction of any judgment so
whether it's a damn Water works
common lands and the land
grants.
You any property in the land of
a political subdivisions cannot
be seats
cannot be used to satisfy any
judgment.
In the New Mexico Supreme Court.
Is this specific to make
requests to the state press one
we carries over to say yes.
Is.
Raylene.
Really verses New Mexico
cultural properties review
commission.
The site is twenty fourteen New
Mexico Supreme Court six
paragraphs forty one to forty
three.
where they're talking about.
The land grants land
Is
Hello inviolate
It is the plan
We we think that there's really
no way for it to be subject to
education we also see this of
course in our general obligation
bonds in New Mexico the bond.
Usually.
Your what is on.
This.
Authorization.
We discussed with the CGS.
Thank you
Mr speaker chair thank you
actually so that was my last
question I should said that this
is my last question
Donor captives other ply.
incident per claim so for
example say at a family is
unlawfully detained with each
member of the family have a
claim subject to the cap with
the incident.
The subject to the cap.
Madam chair I'd like to see if
one of our.
Legal experts you either Mr
bakery miss Anders would have an
answer to that question is we're
getting into an area all right
practice so I I don't want to
give the correct answer.
Justice Boston.
We're dealer.
I would like to take the the
Mark arena Justice Boston.
Looking forward.
Thank you madam speaker
Okay good morning I am here the
language in the act
Representative McQueen is in any
action for damages against the
public body and so it's
It sort of depends on how the
action is brought what the time
sometimes the courts say well
that's to repetitive of somebody
else's actions so it's all in
one cap but this would be
you know each if you tend to
each individual just like under
the tort claims act each
individual that is harmed has a
claim under the damages amount
we tend to the tort claims act
actually I think most of the
time four hundred forty five.
A hundred four and fifty
thousand it's not a million
dollars
and so with each person that is
injured by that also say that
that's the cap but as miss raise
research showed there are very
few claims that get that high
when it comes to violations of
constitutional rights.
Mr speaker madam chair thank
you.
I'm next to have representative
Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Sanchez and experts and and
the public comment
you know that would this is
often talked about this is just
a matter of police and that's
the driving force but I spoke
during the interim when we heard
of this and earlier that I
recall cases at for Baird when I
was secretary of aging where
residents of four bear got all
were harmed and or ended up
dying and the department of
justice federal department of
justice stepped in and had a
claim against the state and
entered into a settlement
agreement and I would.
I would
Just point out that had one of
those residents or families
brought a suit we may have
prevented a whole settlement
agreement all the attorney's
fees all the.
result in costs if we had if for
more had then pulled up short by
one suit and and cleaned up it's
and I would think that that.
When applying a lot of cases so
my question is how much would it
cost.
If our no one's constitutional
right was violated.
Madam chair representative that
would be zero dollars zero
dollars right thank you and my
last question is regarding
attorney's fees and I would like
to understand why they were
included in the two million
dollar cap is it if in my
correct on that and
why they were included in not
separate.
Madam chair representative to
question we included within the
two million dollar cap because
we were endeavoring to give to
local governments political
subdivisions.
I'm the type of certainty
predictability that they were
asking for during their.
Committee earlier this
afternoon.
In in that that's a simple
reason it was we were asked to
all inclusive cap and and that's
what we did.
In hopes of you brought me
lessening the concerns of the
opponents.
Of the bill we also went back
and looked just for a little bit
context actually.
I see we I mean Katie right went
back and looked at five years of
judgments settlements by the
state twenty fifteen to twenty
twenty.
All settlements and judgments.
In that case were under two
million dollars except for one
and in several of the cases in
which there were no damages to
remember when you're for the
members of the committee to.
Amber or understand.
When you have a violation save
free speech or freedom of
religion we have a violation of
your right to keep and bear arms
the the those violations don't
result typically and monetary
damages.
And so you will only have an
award of attorneys fees in this
case and your contrary to some
of the critique we heard before
about it attorneys
are you getting a windfall to
this bill what I would say is
the Congress of the United
States recognized one hundred
fifty years ago.
That if you have someone who
suffers a non monetary
violation of their of their
rights under the constitution
like a prohibition on speaking.
A restriction on freedom of
religion.
Unless you are wealthy and can
afford to pay a lawyer to three
or four hundred dollars per hour
for a year to litigate the case
you need to have an attorney's
fees provision in order to find
a lawyer and hire a lawyer to.
Help defend your rights.
And until defense counsel.
Chooses to work for free I don't
think it's fair or appropriate
to ask the claimants counsel to
work for free.
If there's there's legal
services on both sides of the
equation and I it strikes me so
much.
Disingenuous to say that only
the defense lawyers should be
paid for the work that you want
to K. especially in the
constitutional rights context
when we want to give life to and
make.
Given by the bill of rights to
make sure that those rights to
be respected.
Thank you thank you Mr speaker
and madam chair I think that's
that's all I have I just wanted
to raise those a couple of
points thank you.
Thank you Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair
I certainly appreciate the.
The substitute bill of.
It went a long way of addressing
the number of issues that we had
with respect to the original
legislation that we worked out.
I where's the this legislation
have an all inclusive cap what
I'm concerned with.
Section three he.
That says that the remedies for.
This are not exclusive and shall
be in addition to any other
remedies and so my question is.
Will someone be able to staff.
A tort claim action.
With a violation under this
legislation.
To.
Increase the so called cap would
that be possible Mr speaker.
Madam chair Representative no
I'd like to ask if I may madam
chair Mister Baker to give a
more complete.
Madam chair speaker Egolf.
Representative Lewis and
Representative Nibert now and
this is a common issue an ally
you can bring oftentimes a
complaint will start out with
twenty because of the action and
at some point you're only
allowed to recover once for the
harm stop and so whether it's
pre trial or reference to the
question tribe or whether it's
in the point at the end of the
trial it is absolutely never
allowed for you to recover twice
coaches don't do that I think
this is important with a lot of
the issues that have been
laughed you know a lot of times
bills are passed to don't define
every single possible.
Occurrence but that's because
clients are interested in
reasonable interpret the law and
this will be expanding into a
set of criminal law that
prohibits double recovery.
Madams.
Madam chair and and Mister Baker
I'm looking at one respond page
number page three.
Winds nine through twelve and
I'm just wondering if if that is
the case sure the language in
lines nine through twelve B.
maybe a little more clear so
that some of the questions that
were asked I believe I miss
Phillips with New Mexico
counties have brought that up
and maybe some others to make it
more clearly are reflective that
it's not the legislative intent
to allow recovery under of both
the tort claims act and this
legislation.
Madam chair I think maybe I'd
are just a Justice Boston to
weigh in because I I think this
I think the issue falls.
Squarely into just completely
settled law again still recovery
but if we alter language then
you would risk prohibiting
a person from us for injunctive
relief
during the pendency of the Civil
Rights Act claim so he I think
you're heavy right in there is
unnecessary because you would
just be restating the law about
double recovery you don't want
to bar someone from see you in
junction on the basis of the
rights of the bill of rights and
that's madam chair Mister
speaker that's that's not the
that wasn't the question the
question where should we have a
language that reflects the
legislative intent that would
result in what Mr Baker just
just testified to.
Sure let me let me just Justice
Boston if you would.
Educate us on the state of the
law in New Mexico.
Share this is
Representative Ely on that
point.
I.
I want I've always wanted to
interrupt to justice so I get my
opportunity to do that now.
First opportunity
yes election of remedies that's
what we're talking about lost
very clear on that if we start
messing around with that in this
piece of legislation we can go
back and look at everything else
but the common law is very clear
you can't have a double recovery
that way you've got to be able
to lecture revenues that's what
Mr Baker's talk about but I'm
now I will gladly
yield to the justice but that
was way fun I've never been able
to do that I just want to take
that opportunity thank you madam
chair thank you go head Justice
Boston.
Well I've already noted my
objection to Representative be
like the.
I'm.
I think I think the point seven
well stated by the speaker and
by.
My good friend and vice chair of
the commission
markup mark Baker very smart
young man.
It describes a larger The New we
simply cannot recover twice for
the same injury.
There is some overlap with the
tort claims act there's a lots
of areas where there would be no
overlap there is recovery do not
involve law enforcement they can
only be recovery one of the
Civil Rights Act where there
would be an open overlap
you played under both theories
but.
When your case you prove damages
if there's any doubt the judge
clarifies that.
There's only one you don't cover
twice for the same injured.
Should you restated to make it
clear well that's not that's not
a legal question that's a.
More question for this committee
but I I don't think honestly
there will be any confusion on
that point that someone will try
to recover twice in the same
injury that's my best answer
thank you.
Madam chair I'm not sure that
somebody would want to try.
I would just hope that the
Supreme Court would would agree
with my my colleagues are the
speaker and and the
representative Representative of
all county as well as.
The former justice but
You know I I do think we could
make that a little clearer to
reflect.
If that indeed is intent my next
question involves section.
But that's over on page four.
I have a couple questions with
respect to this provision.
First of all it's been awhile
since I Senate member greater
the Wall Street journal and and
I know that it has changed
significantly and what it
reports today and I'm just going
to show my ignorance I'm not
sure that they report the prime
interest rate on a daily basis
like they used to but if we're
putting that in this legislation
somebody should check that point
and make sure that that the Wall
Street journal continues to
report that data daily because
we're set up here I I have the
current Barron's which is also
about job publication and it
reports the weekly rate and
Barron's but I'm not familiar
with the Wall Street journal
whether it continues to report
the daily our prime interest
rates because it has basically
omitted reporting even the daily
closing stock prices in its
units journal so somebody audit
check that point out my second
point regarding interest rates
is in line.
Eleven and twelve.
It shall be computed daily.
From the date of entry of
judgment and.
Madam chair Mr speaker.
Is this provision intending to
compound interest daily.
Thank you again we're we're are
you looking.
A line eleven.
And twelve.
We were on page four.
And it says enter shall be
computed daily is it your intent
to set up a a compounded did
first daily on the on the
judgment amount.
Madam chair representative your
the state
there is a general statute about
there's a generally applicable
statute dealing with interest on
judgments that applies to the
state and its simple interest
and compound interest is not
allowed against against the
state or.
That that madam chair and and
Mister speaker will what what
are we trying to accomplish.
By putting that language
Madam chair representative I
believe languages from
similar statutes the deal with
pre and post judgment interest.
If there's if there's one of our
expert witnesses the nose
are the issue that I'm happy to
defer to them Representative
this month it's my understanding
that this is language that was
brought for the statute.
Madam chair and and Mister
speaker most of the interest
rates that I'm familiar with
generally referred to maybe the
federal reserve rate or or
something else.
We somebody may take a look at
at that and see how that
compares with with existing
statutes on on judgment rates of
interest
and I'm concerned that that
language may require somebody to
calculate our interest
compounded daily which.
In are usually interest is
compounded monthly quarterly or
yearly not not daily if you're
Representative members let me
just remind you come there you
compound interest is not
available against the state or
any political subdivision.
And again if it's not then them
I would suggest the language be
altered slightly there.
So the next question involves
the statute of limitations in
section seven which is on page
five.
Where.
Madam chair and Mr speaker what
is the intention with respect to
when the statute of limitations
commences I read the language
but tell me what the intent is
there because Shelby commence no
later than three years of the
date a claim can be brought.
Explain to Amman litigator what
that means.
It means that Madam chair
representative if you separate
deprivation of your rights and
the New Mexico bill of rights
you have three years from the
date of the deprivation.
In order to file a claim.
And so you've got to have it
completed violations of those
rights and so whatever that
claim insurers there's for your
car starts to.
And madam chair and Mr speaker
might my concern is that a claim
could be brought.
You know three years after the
event.
So does this really again you
may be a six year statute of
limitations because three years
plus the three years that it
could be brought
it I just and and really young
players and haven't seen many
statutes of limitation recommend
that fashion it seems like the
the statute should commence the
day that the action occurred
that violated the person's
constitutional rights.
And and therefore you have a
date certain you can easily
count three years from from that
day but having language of
service shall be commence no
later than three years from the
date a claim can be brought for
the deprivation of rights I
think interpose a some some
ambiguity into it and
That I'm a little concerned
with.
Madam chair my last question
deals with the.
The question that Representative
McQueen asked in New.
I'm wondering if.
A public body gets sued under
this.
Bill if it becomes law.
Share the judge Matt our
creditor them or the camera
person enforcing the judgment
endorsed the public entity to.
Raise taxes to satisfy that
judgment or undertake some other
mechanism that would allow the
recovery of that judgment.
Madam chair representative at no
is the short answer I don't know
if Mister Baker has ordered if
you would like to add to that.
madam chair
speaker Egolf Representative
listen Representative NABARD so
I focused my review of this on
the issue of the sale of land
and it's abundantly clear that
you can't force a public body to
sell its land
so
when you get into the issue of
having to raise taxes and the
like
you know I I think that that
comes into a policy question
that the body would have to face
if they ended up in that
situation but I would turning
back to the nature of the
committee substitute what I
would emphasize here is that
with the substantial concessions
that the that the committee
substitute includes the
likelihood of ever ending up in
that situation seems
I fetched in the
to a high degree given that for
example the county self insured
up to two million but then have
coverage for anything in excess
of that well we're not even
getting into whether insurance
coverage steps and with the
concession with the cap that's
been imposed and I was not even
hoping that that would bring
along some of the public bodies
I think it seems pretty clear
from today and the answer will
remain there opposed to this
plan are what concessions are
made maybe I'm wrong about that
I hope I am but I think that you
are dealing with compromises
that protect the public fest.
Madam chair and and Mister Baker
up I thought that there may have
been a Supreme Court decision
that that dealt with that
particular issue it at some
point in time again this is way
outside of the areas that are
practice and I'm certainly would
not the more the venture into it
but I was under some question
that maybe there have been some
decision by the Supreme Court on
that
madam chair
Mister speaker.
I.
We appreciate the efforts to to
try to address some of the major
concerns
are you still think that there
ought to be some some additional
cleanup language year there the
statue limitations seem to be
much clearer in the original
version here and
I think we can deal with that
and then clarifying that the.
Cap would apply to the of that
and not allow maybe a staff and
I I still see that as a
potential issue but anyway thank
you for the opportunity to ask
questions thank you for or
addressing many of the concerns
that we express last time thank
you.
Next I have Representative all
gone.
Thank you madam chair Mister
speaker Representative you all
Louis.
Yes.
Hearing over and over again when
I heard the opposition.
I'm just going to verify this
thanks days world.
If somebody has a.
They claim against the local
government for civil rights
violations.
That person has to file in
federal court in my correct.
Under this legislation.
Madam chair and Mister speaker.
Just now filed in the state
court correct.
Madam chair representative it's
okay so basically Madam chair of
the speaker what I'm thinking
there is.
The road.
Justice for a somebody who has
been harmed.
There's a lot of smaller when
you go to your local court
house.
Rather than going to the federal
court house which I don't even
know where it is where it is in
Albuquerque under them but if
you die and I mean I don't do
and dairy you look in that
building.
So.
What.
In this legislation.
If I want to I'm gonna use
myself as an example okay if I
were to file a lawsuit in
federal court.
What what I have in federal
court.
That would be different from
what I would be clean in the
state court in this legislation
would pass.
That's a good question I think
you would have
expanded ability to.
Protect against discrimination
on the basis of sex.
You would have expanded
protection for any rights that
might have accrued.
Under the tree although I think
our search and seizure
projections are somewhere we
were.
Protective then the federal
counterpart.
And.
In.
Thank you rights amendment that
is in the state constitution you
will find that the federal
constitution that's as part of
the right so I I think there's
there's some ability to have a
broader range of.
Rights protected and you'd be
able to State and federal.
Thank you madam speaker what I'm
number one thing that I like the
speaker and madam chair was at
the.
It makes it easier for someone
who has a claim.
File in the state court I mean
if you're going for.
The judges the general of the
northern community more than
anything else.
Your chances of something
settling a lot faster and
a lot better.
Of the other question that I
have of course is now.
We were looking.
And I mean I hear law
enforcement come in really
strong about how they'll those
worries me more than anything
else because they oppose this
legislation so for only.
Is.
One of the words
if self the county or the city
we're gonna step out of the our
one million soon but not the
police officer Mike correct.
Yes Madam.
So therefore.
In today's world.
What is wrong by a police
officer.
Madam speaker and the speaker
and madam chair.
If somebody is wrong or or has a
claim.
The federal court this
legislation passes they would be
able to file and say exactly.
In state court.
But
that's about the only difference
other than.
This is doing this what New
Mexico does allow that the
federal government does not but
otherwise.
Other than the short stay in.
To go to the local Gordon
started to the federal court.
Is the only they can see what's
happening in today's world
correct me if I'm wrong.
Madam chair representative
Oakland I think you're exactly
correct.
No judge okay to some Madam
speaker and Mr speaker and madam
chair.
Behind the bench turn on
sleeping at home when the I
think my mom my dad my son used
to say and then you're not the
judge of home.
That would have been all of.
And so with that in mind I I I
just I think okay this is
service are you.
Really like the idea.
To be able to file.
The state court instead of
having to go all the way to
federal court which is really
solution
to
is Albuquerque or US cruisers
ally correct for federal
courthouse.
It's Albuquerque there's a small
courthouse the Santa Fe and
the Roswell has a courthouse but
I don't know if there's any
federal judges that sit there.
Every day kind of basically I
think you can rotate through I
heard you say crucis once the.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
for your responses to lie.
Questions.
Okay thank you thank.
Representative Eli.
Thank you madam chair speaker
I'll be brief because I know the
hours late and I'm not looking
for long answers this point I
mean I guess I start with a bias
that if you have constitutional
protections you should have some
ability to recover form I don't
do this kind of work but you
know you got a choice you have
the constitutional protections
you don't and if you're gonna
have them and they're going to
be meaningful there should be
the right of people to recover
for violations so I guess my
question goes to the over
arching issue that was raised by
the people posing the bill yes I
can I'd like this is rob madam
chair Mister speaker or your
experts to respond to this is
this gonna open up the
floodgates timeliness is gonna
open up taxpayer checkbooks and
all that stuff that we've been
hearing
that's really what the critics
seem to be saying and so I
wanted to give you an
opportunity to respond to that
thank you madam chair thank
speaker chair representative I
absolutely not again I and I I
mentioned before we went to the
committee questions.
All the ways in which the New
Mexico Civil Rights Act is more
limited than the federal Civil
Rights Act all the ways in which
recovery under this especially
with the caps are going to be
far lower than under the federal
statute we don't see I believe
it was over five years I believe
there is an agency right and
jump in but I believe the worst
about sixteen hundred fifty
cases filed over a five year
period from twenty fifteen to
twenty twenty.
Under section nineteen eighty
three which is a tiny tiny tiny
fraction of cases that were
filed at that time in federal
court in New Mexico.
So I don't and I don't believe
that.
You're gonna see much increase
in
claims I think you have by one
estimate from the specific
counties it was something like
two hundred or two hundred fifty
potentially new cases per year
statewide which is immeasurably
small increasing cases to by way
of context a single district
judge in the district right
anyone time as between twelve
hundred fifteen hundred cases on
the judge's docket here and
there's I believe nine judges so
if anyone times well over ten
thousand cities and just in the
state and if the state District
Court.
Two hundred fifty or even five
hundred cases spread out through
the state
It doesn't make any measureable
difference caseload
is I I just I don't think that's
a real issue and I do see that
there will be spread out
throughout the state because the
venue statute requires the
pursuing a County you have to
sue the county in the in that
county so you couldn't come to
Santa Fe you can't sue quay
county in Santa Fe District
Court you can't sue the county
in Bernalillo county you got to
Lee County in Lee County and we
are also the state.
Yes I did get a call from a law
enforcement officer last night I
happen to be friends with his
parents and he was concerned
that
they were that individual
officers would have to pay
judgment or litigation costs for
attorney's fees and I assured
him given the language of the
bill that that's not true the
entity would be responsible not
the individual that I advise him
correctly I hope Mr speaker
chair representative yeah you
absolutely do and then the last
question I have is on attorney's
fees
because a lot of discussion
about attorney's fees more I'm
assuming and I I'm not done this
that you don't just go into the
court and present your
attorney's fees and court has a
stamp out and says approved and
you're done and you go off is
there some kind of process by
which attorney's fees are
awarded to the prevailing party.
Absolutely madam chair
Representative Eli.
The lawyers for the prevailing
plaintiff in a federal civil
rights case will give the judge
a list of all the things that
the lawyers did most by that by
an hourly rate and federal
judges typically will look at
it.
The column to I think it's least
twenty percent right off the top
of the look at different things
that were done and make a
decision line by line if they
were reasonable and necessary
and if they weren't reserve on
this year they get tossed out so
it's very very very common
for attorney fees petitions to
be reduced in federal and in
state court I've seen it happen
Myself.
Mr spot madam chair Mister
speaker thank you very much for
bringing this bill and I fully
supported that's all the
questions I have thank you.
Thanks Representative right.
Thank you madam chair
A couple of questions on it the
madam chair and Mr speaker so
there was a discussion about
there's not federal judges in
every or
In New Mexico or every county in
New Mexico how about district
judges are their district judges
and every county in New Mexico.
There's a there's a district
courthouse in every county in
New Mexico I know that some
districts with especially low
populations will have judges
that right circuit so I know
that in.
County much of the legal.
Judge you madam chair I think it
be like to ask Justice Boston to
get the answers I.
I I'm sure there's some counties
don't have someone every day
mortality as a judge every
single day
madam chair can we just should
just Boston if you know the
answer the question.
You've got Justice Boston.
Chairman Mr speaker and
Representative Rehm
I think the speaker got it a
pretty right there we do not
have the district judge in every
county there are multiple
district judges.
Senator one district in every
district in the district
includes.
In Albuquerque only one County
other smaller areas three four
counties and usually there is a
district judge in almost every
one of the counties I couldn't
put a percentage on it what is a
high percentage of counties have
a district judge located at
least one New Mexico.
Thank you madam chair for the
clarity I just want to point out
it's kind of like the federal
judges they're floating around
the state you know that they're
not needs County but Madam chair
in Mr speaker I'd like to go to
page two wine it eighteen and
nineteen and when I look at this
it says due to acts or omissions
so.
Just a simple negligence support
a mistake by an employee I'm not
talking about police talked
about it didn't issue a
permanent
you know it didn't process it
timely
put it in in the wrong location
and it be you know something
like that I could see that could
lead to litigation.
Is that the intent.
Madam chair it wouldn't lead to
litigation is not the intent and
if we may I'd like to ask Mister
Baker to.
The answer this question.
Madam chair speakers offer
presented Rehm this caught my
attention when the counties were
representative of the counties
was talking this idea that all
of the setting of the statute
there were more than municipal
league that there would be
liability for any mission
without a requirement for more
and that would just up and the
basics of constitutional law
constitutional law claims are
held to some of the highest
standards another act
under to win under the eighth
amendment of the federal
constitution you have to show
malicious and sadistic conduct
to went on a due process claim
you generally have to show.
Conduct that shocks the
conscience and judges frequently
step in and determine without
letting the jury hear at that
something is not severely severe
enough to a qualifies conscience
shocking other areas you have to
show specific intent to
discriminate and the government
gets the benefits of of the
doubt on most of those sometimes
there if they can get any
rational reason for the decision
there the contact is have
constitutional and so that our
clients are suddenly going to
train.
Alleged constitutional
violations under a statue or if
it was just an oversight or a
misstep
I see no reason to believe that
that ever would occur and
nothing in this bill would lay
the groundwork for that in fact
our quotes are under instruction
that is devoted that they should
begin their constitutional
analysis in the New Mexico
constitution by first at least
looking at federal law for
guidance and so there's no
reason to believe that this is
going to become some kind of
free for all where someone backs
into someone that's a
constitutional violation and
those types of things this is a
this is going to be consistent
with Conlogue across the country
and in federal court.
Thank you madam chair and Mr
speaker would you have a problem
with putting in the word
knowingly of before the before
all that language.
I would because Madam chair
representative.
As Mister maker just said we
don't want to.
Raining.
Terms that are used within the
run of the mill.
Negligence cases into the
statute
The law is developed over the
hundred fifty years the federal
civil rights activities one.
Should instruct us in how we put
this lot together with language
in the in the federal statute it
is very broad very little is to
provide yeah we've seen over the
years different.
Intention different men's raha
standards developed for each of
the various constitutional
rights in the very in a very for
good reason.
And we do have yeah we're
talking about the violations so
Rights Act would be when a
person deprived another person
of the rights privileges or
immunities secured by the bill
of rights.
The constitution
that implies some.
Sir you can't deprive someone
without intending to do it.
But I don't want to.
Certainly on the fly.
Ring.
The standards that are used in
the run of the mill tort law K.
into civil rights bill it's just
it just doesn't fit.
Thank you madam chair and Mr
speaker but I I think we ought
to tighten that up to be a
little.
here it is so that we don't end
up with cases that are just a
mistake but let's go ahead and
move on in page three one twenty
one we're talking about
mandatory attorney's fees so in
this committee has.
For ever stripped out mandatory
attorney's fees and I'm
wondering why we're placing them
in here.
Madam chair of this committee is
not a strict out.
Attorney's fees as a matter of
course in fact I would I would
direct madam chair
Representative read your
attention to the inspection of
public records act.
Which
publications like the
Albuquerque journal frequently
deploys when they're trying to
get access to government records
and
Frequently seek out attorney
fees award under the New Mexico
section public records.
The New Mexico open meetings act
has attorney's fee provision as
does the fight against taxpayers
act in the whistleblower
protection act all of which went
to this committee and all of
which were passed with equipment
returns she's provision.
Madam chair and Mr speaker I ate
I agree with you and my memory
of the inspection of records was
is or make the daily fine a
hundred dollars for not
supporting them and but they
they attorney's fees was if you
will the office at.
Why don't we make this section
is say the losing party you'll
pay the attorney fees.
Madam chair and and
Representative I I cannot I
would not support
it provision that would could a.
A citizen one of your
constituents possibly raise your
good faith claim in defense of
the constitution of the hope of
having to pay for the
government's lawyer that would
be contrary to the public policy
that has developed over the last
century and a half in this
country and.
State federal law because policy
makers understand it's.
Well I think madam chairman Mr
speaker I think it kind of cuts
both ways Madam speaker are
madam chair and Mr speaker let's
go to page four one one and they
were talking about limitations
on coverage in a particular
online I it says for each claim.
So.
which and we've mentioned police
officers a lot here let's say
that he stops the car and he
conducts a search that leads to
the arrest of an individual so
can you make a claim that there
is an illegal search let's say
that the court throws out the
search so he makes a claim that
the legal search and then he
makes another claim for another
two million dollars for the
false arrest.
Madam representing let me let me
back up to the previous question
and I'll just read the attorney
fees provision for inspection
public record act this is
Fourteen dash to dash twelve D.
like David says this is current
law under the under it for a
quote the court shall award
damages costs and reasonable
attorneys fees any person who's
read request has been denied it
is successful court action to
enforce the provisions of the
inspection of public records act
close quote so that is that is
that mandatory attorney's fee
provision the only course fees
to the plaintiff and would not
give the state the authority to
claim fees state prevails such.
Going madam chair next to your
question about search and
seizure was pulled over and
senator thrown out I think you
have to look at a couple of
questions first one.
Someone is Bruce is the subject
of.
You know it improper search and
seizure you got a look at you
know just get to like say give
me two million dollars and then
you know this Madam very comes
down from the sky and gives away
a check right you gotta prove
damages in court you got it
Jareth see what your damages
work that fence
twelve of your peers on a jury
that you suffered two million
dollars in damages I think it be
possible to do that if it was
just a simple traffic stop so we
we've got to keep in mind that
that is the cap on damages.
And we have to keep in mind that
the state level over the last
five years only one case went
beyond I would be on so I I
think it's you gotta keep your
keep our feet on the ground we
were contemplating your
different scenarios that could
arise.
Under the New Mexico Civil
Rights Act it's an act.
I don't we need to include
meeting they want but just
making the claim doesn't mean
that there's a likelihood of
succeeding in that claim or or
getting what you're asked.
Thank you madam chair and Mr
speaker but going back to the
attorney's fees we've always had
the discussion about the English
rule versus the United States
rural and and that was where we
had
remove that paragraph if you
will out of most of the
legislation but moving back to
our current question.
So
If an individual is stopped and
he makes it and the police
officer makes a search and
that's where determined by a
court that it was improper.
The evidence is thrown out and
it was that search that led to
the arrest.
Is that now one case or is could
that be two cases under this
legislation.
Speaker you're muted.
I'm sorry start with that limit
chair representative Mister
Baker to answer this user former
federal prosecutor
and is much more familiar with
the contours prosecutorial
immunity and I am.
If you need that might.
A part of this but we asked Mr
Baker to respond.
madam chair speaker golf
Representative Rehm to start
with in this part of your
question I think goes back to
the double recovery concepts so
no matter how many different
causes of action you bring in
the complaint he would be a
professor of the harm he
suffered to the jury wants and
that would be the only damages
you would be able to recover and
so in your example if it was
that tied to the initial search
and then the arrest the only
harm you would have suffered is
the one harm
It's interpret Representative
that I as a claim regular in the
context of insurance contracts
and other areas and so there is
a body of law that helps under
that out if you do get into the
rare circumstance where you
could be pushing up against the
caps but the other thing I would
say is in your hypothetical if
those search was thrown out for
one reason but the officers to
have probable cause to make the
arrest there's no second claim
for false arrest anyway.
So I am not sure which the
emphasis of your question has
been a try to tackle all three
pieces of it.
Madam chair and that's Baker I
greeted the rest wasn't thrown
out but as you know a lot of
times when the evidence is
thrown out the.
Poisonous tree comes in and
everything diminishes.
So are.
When we move on and kind of the
same subject and I don't know
madam chair and Mister Baker
maybe this rules more to you
So let's assume that that
officer made a search he made an
arrest.
It went to trial alright well
let's back up which changed just
a little bit.
Let's assume that an officer has
probable cause that he believes
to go ahead know that there's
whatever evidence hidden
somewhere and it goes to a judge
obtains a search warrant.
Executes that search warrant
arrest the individual and a good
now goes to trial.
And the trial judge agrees that
the search warrant was good that
the arrest was good and the
person is convicted.
It goes up on appeal.
And now it's on appeal and the
higher court overturns the
search warrant.
And therefore the arrest.
So now that they have over turn
down.
Who can be sued in that whole
chain.
So that no one
to perfectly honest because and
effect on the right of a back in
law school so money rather
working through your fact
pattern all issue spot and then
try to knock them down so to
start with the fact that a
magistrate judge independent
assessment that there was
probable cause Roach off officer
from liability unless it officer
lied to obtain the warrant in
which case you have what's
called a Frank's violation
the judge.
Because under absolute judicial
immunity the judges acting as
such and therefore could be
soon.
And the prosecutor presented the
case and where it could be soon
because that would have been
prosecutors acting as such and a
common law doctrine of absolute
prosecutorial immunity they
would be in the.
So off the cuff that's my best
assessment of that
The master got some officer
misconduct misled the magistrate
judge in issuing the warrant
you'd likely have no civil
rights claiming that factor
that's my take another panelist
may have a different view but
that's my take.
Thank you madam and Mister Baker
that's all my questions.
Thank you Representative
Townsend.
Yes thank you madam chair
Mr speaker madam chair before we
get started.
Did you call it the first of
this or not.
No I did not.
Okay I thought I remembered you
did that with this and.
Keep on the straight of Mr
speaker on the page.
For money eighteen I see that
you're not adjusting the CPI
you're only increasing.
in in for you know which sets
the base is there any particular
reason for that.
Madam chair we.
I don't believe that any of that
statute.
We can go back to work but I
think we're trying to keep it on
line with other statutes where
we have your statutory leaders
with.
Yeah hi yeah we don't
for example with our public
employees we don't have their
retirements reduce in the event
that there is deflation in the
economy I either states fighter
goes up so we can get on with
that.
Okay
I know.
I lost the case want I am on
pipeline chairs because I was
going to set only increase and
not it just and so I I would the
from that for consideration the
other thing is I was looking
through my notes and confirm yet
I think in if you'll go back and
look at yours I think what the
association to counties wanted
was.
The limits that at that point
nine level which is about one
point oh five million I believe
not I think the two million is
for their insurance kicks the.
so that was their request is
what they're telling me was the
matching their of matching the
point nine level so
if you would look at that I know
this will go forward and we can
work on it from there but that
was their request to say tell me
madam chair Mister speaker thank
you.
Thank you.
Representative total.
Yes ma'am that's it thank you
very much
IT.
It Representative October second
time.
I'm sorry to do this but
Representative Eli and
Representative you re not
brought this up.
And I just have to have this
question you finally cases in
federal court are you able to
get compensated for attorney
fees.
Madam chair representative yes.
Thank you that's all I wanted to
know thank you.
Thank you very much I don't have
any also this I have a couple of
questions.
Very briefly.
We heard one of the opponents
are from law enforcement say.
Which is what qualified
immunity.
Our new my allergies are back to
protect law enforcement officers
when they're acting within the
law.
Interacting with the law.
Are they going to be subject to
a civil rights claim.
Madam chair no for two reasons
one.
You know.
If if if there is a violation of
civil rights there will be a
successful claim but also we
this committee substitute
reminded committee that we have
specified that you can use the
Civil Rights Act only again
state public body so you cannot
use the New Mexico Civil Rights
Act connected to bring a claim
against an individual police
officer or an individual
public employees only claims
against a public bodies.
We heard a very
dedicated law enforcement people
that this doesn't do.
They want to reform law
enforcement so I'm what would be
your response to that Mr speaker
Representative Lewis.
Your.
yes certainly I think that there
are there should be multiple
tools in the toolbox of public
safety and law enforcement for
four Year we've got the work
that we've been doing on forced
a cavity that needs to continue
we've got the justice department
involved in Albuquerque of
course with the PED we've got
multiple fronts on which we are
trying to improve public safety
and help with workforce with
that.
Increase in and this is on
funding for community oriented
policing are we've also.
Attempted to.
What law enforcement claim
prosecutors judges focus on more
violent offenders by reducing
penalties for nonviolent
offenses that let's resources be
directed where the.
Can be best used to keep our
streets safe and keep our
communities safe.
There's multiple.
Into the front we're also
encouraging and providing
funding both federal and state
for all manner of law
enforcement training I take
issue with the municipales
comments that there's nothing
done to it on the front end for
police reform I would say quite
the contrary when it comes to
retention requests that we put
into the long when we talk about
cops grants for community or or
H. policing training I want to
problems is not permanent law
enforcement agencies take up
these opportunities for
additional funding for the
Kaiser training your doctor the
state risk management as well as
risk management operations
municipal units association
counties are in play to try to
help reform police practices but
you have all the tools are
performed front and supportive
accountability at the back and
this is not again just about one
first yeah we talk about federal
civil rights victories for brown
versus board of education all
the way through the civil rights
struggles of the nineteen
sixties to present day all of
our major store rights victories
have been through the court
system or average everyday
Americans I went to court to
defend their rights in the
constitution succeeded and we
all benefit from.
Thank you Mr speaker I really
appreciate that.
I want to involve disclosure
wearing Sanders was my professor
for insurance law and I'm she
actually is that based on.
The one I tried to.
During the interim
Committee.
One time four eight New Mexico
Civil Rights Act.
And
I think Maureen was reminding me
that my cart and Maureen were my
expert witnesses and I did
turnover and right answered down
Representative Armstrong
question is this isn't going to
cost anything if no civil rights
are violated right and
my professor said right.
It really tend to agree with her
that.
Because of her insurance
expertise is that what you did
you the committee said is to try
to allay some of the fears
around insurance buyer
On it and really now the
opposition is based on
speculative sure.
I have been during the interim
when we heard this and we were
given just astonishing costs
attorney fees realized after the
fact for for states of this
nature in the past thank you.
Was it just about plaintiffs
lawyers it was about the.
Risk management attorneys who
were hired by governmental
entities to defend against
these.
This is not people getting rich
as plaintiffs attorneys who had
civil rights claims this was all
of the millions that the cities
and counties in the state had to
pay the risk management turns so
if in fact this will be an
incentive the training and
accountability and really better
acting on the part of those I'm
I'm really off for it so I'm.
I am concerned hello
with
the sponsors of the bill that
there was not a lot of there's
an sense of this is an attack
instead of a sense of that some
rights maybe it needs to be
realized by some of these
victims and we need to improve
the way we're doing things in
this state and in this country
so I will support John the the
committee set up and I'm going
to call on Representative Eli
thank you.
I now move and do not pass house
bill for a do pass the house
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill for.
Thank you very much and I will
second that motion.
Say no further discussion will
the clerk please call the roll.
Representative Akan yes.
Representative Armstrong.
Yes.
Representative Cook no.
Mr speaker yes.
Representative Eli yes.
Representative Lewis yes.
Representative McLean yes.
Representative nine.
No ma'am.
Representative Rehm no ma'am.
Representative Townsend no
ma'am.
Thanks.
Yes.
Madam chair yes.
Eight to four we have a due
pass.
We have a vote
We have a due pass on the
Canadian side so the committees
that yes and I want to thank
everybody for this hearing
I think.
We'll do a five minute break
before we begin bill.
Fourteen.
Okay let's take I.
We'll be back here thank you
madam chair thank you members of
the committee yes I thirty five.
Vice chair are you ready to go.
Do we have members chair here.
Yes.
Okay.
Rested hydrated and watered I
thank you madam chair my
expertise Kim Chavez Cook with
the law office of the public
defender see if she's.
Okay we'll get her in.
Okay thank you.
Looks like just because when you
go right ahead.
Was about to say good afternoon
committee but we've made it to
the evening hours good evening
Committee members madam chair I
look forward today to presenting
house bill one fourteen this is
a pretty straightforward piece
of legislation I'm gonna talk a
bit about its design and our
intentions and then pass it to
misc Kim Chavez Cook but the
office of the public defender's
to walk us through the mechanics
of this legislation
overwhelmingly what I understand
and so many of you all know that
there are too many families in
our state that struggle.
With generational substance use
of poverty and incarceration and
in my line of work I've bumped
into so many New Mexican women
and families that have done
everything they can to interrupt
the cycles of use and often
through many times becoming
survivors of trauma this bill is
designed to move our criminal
justice system toward
individualized sentencing in
place of mandatory sentencing
we're very specific and focused
and how we'd like to do that and
specifically we've designed this
legislation to eliminate the
mandatory habitual offender
enhancements for what we're
defining as simple possession so
basically convictions that are
about trafficking or
distribution and and more than
the position of of substances
for one's own use so in that in
that way we eliminate the
additional hundred has been
completely in that area and then
beyond that we move to allow the
judiciary to practice more
discretion when deciding whether
or not it's appropriate to
impose a habitual offender
sentence at the either one for
eight year mark so for every
other kind of conviction we are
instead of
leaving the mandatory piece to
set we're moving that over to
the judiciary again for me and
this essentially the essence
part of this bill is about
approaching substance use in our
state as a public health issue
not a crime so with that madam
chair I'd like to turn it to Kim
Chavez Cook to just be concisely
about how we've drafted this
legislation.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee thank you madam
vice chair and concisely indeed
I know it's been a long
afternoon for the committee
essentially as the sponsor
mentions this bill is designed
to move away from mandatory
sentencing and towards
discretionary sentencing so what
we've done is added language
I'm sorry strict in the language
that is currently in statute
that says the judge may not
suspend or defer and enhancement
period we have not changed the
duration of the enhancement
period we have not changed that
it would be available to the
judge to add it to a felony
sentence we have only given them
the ability to suspend the
enhancement time if they would
like or choose not to impose it
if they feel that would not be
in the interests of justice that
as the base year also mentioned
we're keeping the available time
so for a second offense where
there's one prior you have a
your available per felony in a
single case for a third offense
where there's two priors the
available time is four years
perfect persons per charge in a
single case and then if it's
someone has three or more prior
sixty years so that scheme stays
the same it's just that the
judge can say you know what I
think that you need treatment
not prison or I think that you
know your you would be better
suited to a probated sentence
where you can try to get your
life back on track even if it's
not a drug crime maybe someone
committed a property crime
because of issues of poverty and
substance use disorder and the
judge can recognize that take
that into account and and decide
not to impose that sentence for
the simple possession pieces
that Representative Cadena
mentions we have removed simple
possession from the statutory
scheme entirely so that is not
new that doesn't fall within
judicial discretion this bill
would say that you cannot impose
habitual offender enhancements
to a simple possession of
offense for all other felonies
and becomes judicial discretion
a little bit of background I
have submitted to the court to
the court sorry happen Fourth
Amendment to the committee that
through the committee staff a
couple of handout that talk
about and it won't go repeat
everything that they stand there
will probably repeat anything
that Senator frankly but one
from the American led to.
Slated exchange council.
Going on and on with data about
why mandatory sentencing it
makes costs unnecessary dollars
and does not make us any safer
and similarly a shaped by the
sentencing project that goes
over a lot of data about
How we how we sort of miss
apprehended the utility of
mandatory sentencing in the
early days that it was provided
and how we sort of learned that
that's that's not actually
useful so I think with that I
will close on a very small
little anecdote which is a sort
of a judge's perspective there
is a bit of an urban legends
that Dan judge Jean Frank you
need who eventually rose to the
Supreme Court as a justice back
in nineteen eighty one had a he
was very anti mandatory sentence
he wanted to have it as a judge
at the discretion to impose the
appropriate sentence and
actually encouraged a defendant
he had to impose mandatory
sentence on to appeal the issue
lost the issue and the rumor
goes that he resigned in protest
from his seat so judges really
do want to have this discretion
and so that's what we're trying
to give them I will leave it at
that thank you madam chair
members.
I was around when justice judge
later justice thank you did
that.
So it's a true story.
So I'm let's are you ready for
me to go to the audience that.
Yes madam chair thank you.
You madam chair.
When I do that.
So I'm gonna go to the audience
and I'd like to take the
opposition first so it looking
at that has raised but if you
have your hand raised and you
wish to speak it's not required
that you just say.
If you wish to speak
at opposition I'd like you to
raise your hands now.
J. Martinez.
You may speak immunity under
yourself okay can you hear
correct yes okay hello my name
is Jessica Martinez I am the
deputy District prosecutor in
the thirteenth judicial district
is which is in Sandoval county
New Mexico I it I am opposed to
this this legislation as a
career prosecutor I've seen so
many times
At the press for it's it's
actually extremely hard to get
to you to get someone convicted
on the first official there is
often times that in that
individual has committed crimes
and it's of.
Reduced down to a misdemeanor
and then the commit another
crime and it's they're given a
conditional discharge actually
in between that they'll commit a
another crime and they're at
given our pre prosecution
program so by the time we
actually have to to convict
someone on a first official
fence they've already committed
three crimes after the other so
I think that giving
Giving judges the discretion
is really dangerous I think that
they need it should be a shell
because these these a lot of
defendants have already had more
than three chances more than
four chances more than five
chances
and oftentimes I've seen judges
have the discretion and not give
jail time which is fine of the
problem is is I think that
victims feel a lot more safer
when they're founder is in jail
and they know that they're not
going to come back for him for
them and taking that risk.
we should be taken out of the
judges hand.
Thank you.
Thank you.
See any other hands then have
those people in favor of the
legislation please
race happened and first I have
Rikki Lee Chavez.
Going.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Rikki Lee Chavez
on behalf of the New Mexico
criminal defense lawyers
association I wanted to we want
to offer our support for H. B.
one fourteen this was a priority
piece of legislation that we
identified during the interim
individualized sentencing madam
chair is something that is a
novel approach to addressing in
our criminal justice system and
is a great way that we can work
towards positive criminal
justice reform our criminal
justice system has a one size
fits all that just really does
not work and we've seen it not
work especially for communities
of color as well as women
especially does not work in our
public when we address public
health issues such as substance
abuse through a criminal justice
lands so we would encourage you
to support this piece of
legislation I know that the
committee has been sitting here
for a really long time so I just
wanted to note for the committee
that NMC a coalition of over
thirty associations aimed at the
make you Mexico state court for
our communities and a great
legislation has given this piece
of legislation and a great that
report card is available on our
website and I believe it's been
distributed to members of this
committee if it has not I will
personally make sure that that
is provided to you thank you
madam chair members of the
committee for an opportunity to
speak and support.
Thank you next I have Barron
Jones.
Please send you.
Yes main screens open and madam
chair members of the committee
on my name is Barron Jones and
I'm with the ACLU of New Mexico
the ACLU of New Mexico is also
proud member of New Mexico safe
coalition the ACLU stand strong
support for this piece of
legislation on our two thousand
eighteen blueprint for reducing
mass incarceration state cited
additional offender enhancements
as a driver incarceration stated
we believe that this legislation
as of are some steps to sort of
starting to roll back some of
the damage caused by our over
punitive system and our tensions
were incarcerated people I I
really I really appreciate and
think Representative cut and the
and and miss Kim Chavez Cook
bring this important piece of
legislation thank you.
Thank you next I have Lucille
the Campos.
Good afternoon chair and members
of the committee my name is most
people's I'm a policy associate
both features New Mexico
formerly known as young women
United.
We support HB one fourteen
because we believe that it moves
us a step closer to addressing
some of the key components of
the criminal legal system
reform.
I live in Albuquerque but I grew
up in was raised in the Espanola
valley.
And I've seen how many of my
community members have been
criminalized as they walked
through the journey of substance
dependence recovery.
We know that for many that
Germany doesn't begin with
eliminating the use immediately
it begins with reducing use
we truly believe that people
should not be incarcerated for a
health issue or face harsher
sentencing greater penalties
simply because the charges are
being stacked upon.
We know that each case is
different and the circumstances
that bring people to cry my
unique as we work towards eight
and as we work towards a
criminal legal system reform we
believe that judges should be
allowed to have that discretion
as they look at the individual
in front of them and the
progress that they're making in
their journey we are due to
support HB one fourteen thank
you.
Next I have Jonathan Leon.
Go ahead and get yourself ready
to hear you.
I just got the on mute thank you
chair and members of the
committee my name is Jonathan
he brought a public defender but
I'm a former prosecutor for
nearly twelve years and a former
District Court judge I just
wanted to say two things really
quick one having been a judge I
can't imagine a circumstance in
which we should think it's a
good idea to take discretion
away from judges and that that's
what they're paid to do
sentencing is the hardest part
of being a judge but that's
that's literally the job and we
should give them the opportunity
to do that the second thing is a
quick anecdote when I was a
fairly new public defender I had
a case where as a technical
violation on probation and the
prosecutor on the case was
seeking to to impose some strong
habit to offender time on the
clients and we actually had a
meeting with him another
prosecutor and the judge and
that prosecutor said that he
knew that everybody else in the
room thought he was wrong but he
was still wanting to impose this
time and it and it's true the
other prosecutor in the room to
judge everybody thought this DA
was wrong for trying to send
this person to present a
technical violation ended up
taking a month for us to work
out something where it was last
time you spent there but it's
all because it was all in the
hands of an unelected assistant
district attorney I don't think
that's where we should believe
the power we should leave the
power in the unelected ADA's
hardly strictly that the power
of the elected and appointed
judges so thank you I think we
should support this bill thank
you very much for your time.
Thank you Emily Kaltenbach.
Chairman of the committee
We are advocating that people
who are struggling with
problematic drug uses our access
to treatment social support
affirmative action not our.
We think this bill is a step in
the right direction as Mexico
also weighs the benefits of
development that the hello.
Of all drugs for personal use.
based on the premise that
individuals with multiple
connections not be rehabilitated
and higher resolution right the
communities safer we know that
the data doesn't work
in.
To address root causes of repeat
offenses such as mental illness
substance use and Poverty.
Will actually conditions.
Thank you madam chair we urge
the committee to support this
important.
Thank you next I have George
reviewing.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee
I've been public defender for
the last eight years of practice
around the state and currently
based in Roswell New Mexico in
the eight years that I've
practiced as a public defender I
have never once seen additional
jail time.
Effectively address the public
health problem of drug addiction
and that's what it is is a
public health problem not a
behavioral problem
I think that the addition of the
removing rather the.
Prior simple possession
convictions is from eventual
offender status is an
outstanding first step in
helping address those drug
addiction problems properly
moreover I think it's important
for the committee to remember
judges can and should be trusted
their job is to do justice not
to rack up ammo to warehousing
cage human beings thank you.
Thank you and the last handout
is Margarita Soriano.
Good evening madam chair members
of the committee I am moderate
the study on on I'm with the
ACLU of New Mexico we understand
how mandatory habitual offenders
sent sentencing for simple
possession and traps are people
and punishment and deprivation.
We strongly support H. B. one
fourteen because this will
resolve the issues by giving
judges discretion on individual
sentencing and will hopefully
force expansion on resources
that address the underlying
issues of substance abuse our
fate our state bases for this
reason I strongly encourage you
to support house bill one
fourteen thank you.
That concludes our public
comment and
I don't.
Over to you want to make any
more
remarks before I go to the
committee no madam chair look
forward to going to the
committee thank you all right
Representative the claim.
Thank you madam chair
Madam chair representative at
the.
This this two things.
And the first thing I'm totally
on board with in the second
thing I'm concerned about the
first thing withdrawing that the
possession offenses from the
felonies.
You're eager to vote for that
that's that's that should be
done.
But then the bill goes further
and takes away the special
thunder time for for violent
felonies.
And I wondered if you could
address that if you could
explain why that's included in
this bill.
Madam chair representative this
is certainly a consideration we
spent a lot of time with and
just again to clarify and
reassured we affirm we're not
taking away the official thunder
enhancement we're changing it
from a mandatory enhancement to
moving that sentence at the one
four eight year mark back to the
judiciary making sure the that
that judge with the information
in case in front of them can
make the right decision for that
situation us so there there may
be other legislative efforts
that eliminate mandatory is
completely this is not one of
them it did they they will still
have the rumen authority to
impose these mandatory of these
excuse me these of visual
offender enhancements it just
will no longer be mandatory.
Okay Madam chair representative
thank you for that
The way that the mandatory
minimums are written it's sort
of that also is a bit of a two
step process it's currently
eight shall and then there's the
the added.
so shall impose it and then the
added a restriction that they
can't be suspended or deferred.
In I wonder if you considered
keeping the shall but then
allowing suspension and deferral
I'm good with that provide
judges with
the flexibility but also it and
and I'm don't not a criminal
lawyer at thank you suspended or
deferred sentence would mean
that yes the offender doesn't re
offend the surgeon give about
time they don't serve that time
but if they do then that
sentence is that imposes could
you address that and then if I
misstated please correct me.
Madam chair representative I
thank you for the for the follow
up in the question again this is
something we can continue to
consider we were of course in
conversation and and in
partnership with the law office
of the public defender's but we
did reach out to AOC and others
to to sort of way in what I'm
this judicial on the due to show
up question here to really
consider whether this was an
appropriate place to bring the
discussion back to the judiciary
I'm going to ask Miss Kim Chavez
Cook to speak for as we went
back and forth would certainly
different different drafts and
and different amendments ready
and different room to make this
right in consideration of the
immense responsibility also it's
a different players have from
the prosecutors to the public
defenders and of course the
judiciary so we we discussed it
we obviously landed here and I'm
gonna turn to ms Chavez Cook to
again articulate why we made
that final decision.
Thank you representative madam
chair and Representative McQueen
the as as the sponsor mentioned
we did consider that but
ultimately if the judges are
going to have the discretion we
wanted them to have all the
discretion and to clarify part
of your question if this is
sentences suspended and someone
is placed on probation instead
they can have that suspended
sentence imposed for something a
lot less than re offending any
violation of their probation
conditions would result in the
possibility of having that time
imposed so
you know and it doesn't always
actually it's not always
appropriate or in the interest
of justice to have that link the
suspended sentence hanging out
there certainly if their
underlying sentence for the
felony itself is suspended that
would be there regardless so if
they're on probation for third
degree felony or a or a you know
a second result whatever it is
that sentences that suspended
will be there regardless it
would just be if the judge chose
we're we're removing the shall
if the judge chose not to impose
the enhancement time they would
still have the felony sentence
as well as any other charge in
you know people often are
charged with more than one prime
minute time so they would have
that whatever the total of the
available sentences was to them
and as far as that the public
safety piece I I get that the
distinction between a you know a
violent felony or and non
violent felony and I think it's
safe to say that really of any
category of felony there are
root causes to be addressed
that can be done without
incarceration and the studies
that we have looked at have
found that increased penalties
don't deter prime and don't
actually increased public safety
because longer sentence because
longer sentences can actually
increase recidivism rates and so
we're trying to be smart about
things and look at the fiscal
impact look at the data and.
Evidence based research we're
looking at all seems to suggest
that longer sentences aren't
always the answer and that we
should trust in the judiciary to
impose that sentence for someone
who they can tell from their
record from the evidence they
review during their trial or
whatever other information we
have at sentencing if this is a
person who's going to go back
out and hurt somebody the judge
is going to give them the prison
sentence that's the system that
we have to trust.
Thank you for that madam chair
residents can data first.
I'd like to volunteer
clarification of when you said
you reset to AOC you're
referring to the administrative
office of the courts not
everyone might understand.
You madam chair Mister McLean
thank you for bringing me to a
smile to my face I was not
referring to AOC in the land of
Twitter as R. as a congresswoman
from New York I was officially
referring to the administrative
office of the courts as we wait
this important question about
where the discretion shall lie
as as we move away from the
mandatory sentencing on these
and towards the individualized
sentencing thank you for
allowing me to clarify this for
so.
What might all
Madam chair representative
neighbor we heard you okay.
I don't know what happened I got
kicked off of all my computers
out here.
It appears that there isn't
internet outage for a minute at
the roundhouse so we are waiting
for the webcasting to go back up
and everything else to come back
in order it was you and and
several others we did stop right
away and and hold the meeting.
Madam chair the webcast.
So we're going to.
I understand the webcast is
backed up.
So we can proceed Representative
McQueen are you finished with
your questions.
I am.
Okay next I have Representative
Nibert.
I just thought it was because I
was coming up.
Thank you madam chair.
I do have several concerns and
and I'm may be expressing my.
Our ignorance as to how this law
became a factor in the beginning
but I recall correctly there
was.
Here now Friday statewide.
That.
Occurred after there were some
fairly horrific incidents and
one of which I believe was a.
Do you why.
A crash involving some
fatalities.
Which prompted
The legislature to.
Try to tackle the issue and I I
I wasn't here at that time but
it.
If I recall correctly there was
a massive outcry statewide that
at least I'm a drunk driving
situation.
There was a demand that that
people who continued to drive
while intoxicated and I think
the the incense was maybe over a
dozen times at the stop
and why didn't the state do
something about that and and I
think that some of this may be
the reaction to that here now
right so it concerns me not so
much with the simple possession
of France.
But it does concern me that we
would be taking out
do you why.
Yes we have people who are
driving on our roads under the
influence of alcohol and.
Have shown.
Repeated.
Repeated.
propensity to not.
And here to
of the demands of a not dry and
they have of the.
Those things have resulted in
some horrific deal so that
that's my first concern.
Representative McQueen touched
on madam chair touched on a
couple of bye bye other concerns
that
If we.
Give the judges some discretion
maybe it ought to be at the back
end of not the front end and so
the word shall.
Your appears to me to be more
appropriate and then may be
allow some flexibility at the
back end with the suspension or
deferral
but I understand that's not what
you're trying to do here I would
point out that there's several
comments in the FIR is that hit
home with me and and the first
one is I come from a part of the
state and I judicial district
that I believe is pretty well
known as being a little tougher
on on crime and then some of the
other districts and and so the
Responses.
The we're prepared by the
corrections department says that
by doing this you run the risk
of creating sentencing
disparities disparities by
judicial district and or the
particular judge assigned to the
case and that there's going to
be some.
Result that may be despair over.
The state in this regard is
there any response Madam chair
representative.
As to that occurring if you give
judges discretion on this
eventual funders.
Madam chair and representative
I'm gonna start with you at the
beginning and hopefully I was
able to keep up with you and if
not please let us know but on
your first point about the do
you I. D. you eyes D. W. eyes we
are not actually making a change
there because D. W. eyes are
separate self enhancing crime so
we don't change what's happening
in that section of law so just
wanted to clarify that thank you
miss Kim Chavez Cook can expand
further if you'd like to hear
more on that piece before we
move on.
Madam chair representative yes
on on page one line twenty four
it was my understanding that
section sixty six dash right
that's one or two was the.
The Y. statute and my
misinformed on that point.
Madam chair representative
not part of that is that do you
I statute you will note that in
that section do it already and
last
that DIY statute as offenses
that cannot be used as priors
and this a clarification in
section a by adding it there is
codifying case law that has
already used the prior reference
and statutory construction to
determine and hold as a matter
of current New Mexico law that
do you I. felonies are not are
totally exempted from the
habitual offender sentencing
scheme.
Madam chair I'm sure that the
there's a number of people in
the state that would like to
know that because I think
they're under the impression
that it would be okay I'll I'll
buy that one.
Madam chair representative
neighbor it to your second
question race in the FIR
potentially by the corrections
department about having a
different sentencing happening
any judicial district certainly
when Representative McQueen at
with previously us we tried to
cover the basis of what we're
thinking here what is real is
that there's a human element and
making these decisions and what
we're trying to do is move New
Mexico towards public safety and
and a smarter criminal legal
system criminal justice system
what evidence has continued to
show across the country is that
additional penalties have not
done what we might have expected
in as a way of deterring crime
or improving public safety so
the intention of this is yes
indeed to remove the image
offender enhancement completely
from simple possession and then
given that the judiciary the
discretion whether or not to
impose the sentence what I
explained earlier is that I am
concerned often about bias in
sentencing and bias in
courtrooms and bias within our
system if we were going in the
opposite direction about looking
at imposing a harsher sentence I
would be concerned about having
this left up in the air and I I
would say with that I I tend to
agree with the questions
private.
Different offenders will get
different sentences that's the
truth today that's the truth
yesterday it's probably
unfortunately going to get the
troops tomorrow I'll be that use
tomorrow our legislation doesn't
fundamentally change that but it
does give opportunity in
particular cases so that someone
sitting on that bench can make a
decision that relates to the
information the facts the
evidence in front of them and
decide whether or not to add to
this enhancement as a tool
within their their tool belts
are there possible resources
would seem appropriate for that
situation.
Mr this is just something you
and I.
Madam chair Representative Kevin
and Representative Nibert I
think that covered I feel like
we did address a lot of those
issues talking in in response to
Representative McQueen question
and I'll just reiterate my may
sort of conclusion there which
is that if we wanted to avoid
disparity by giving everyone the
same maximum sentence we take
the justice out of the justice
system I think that disparity is
a natural consequence of
judicial discretion and I think
that we all we can do is hope
that most of the time that
disparity will be appropriate
that the person who's getting
the longer sentence should be
and the person is getting the
lesser sentence should be and so
that's that's the fate that I do
have in our judiciary if we were
to if this body were to pass
this legislation.
I suppose that the Madam chair
of the I suppose that the whole
idea between or behind the Vigil
of offenders to statutes is that
your generally dealing with
people who.
You know have have not learned
their lesson have continued to
to go back to a course of
conduct that is not.
Viewed by society as being
proper conduct to live in a
civil society and therefore the
legislature in this case said
that if you're going to our.
Commit these types of crimes
over and over and over again
you're going to have to serve
these extended sentences and so
the legislature in essence
imposed are those are those
additional sentences and so we
are we're we're taking at again
out of out of the Legislature
chance of putting a fact in the
court to our user discretion as
part of their overall sentencing
I have great discretion in the
original sentence are generally
provided by sentencing
guidelines one other issue that
the the.
FIR is borne out this is from
the attorney general's office
madam chair is that are section
thirty one dash eighteen dash
twenty.
Requires
and it uses words shall report
shall sentence them to
punishment as prescribed in
section thirty one dash eighteen
dash seventeen if the defendant
is the same person that was a
fact convicted of prior crime so
we have a one statute that says
they shall impose these
additional sentences and now
we're going to change says but
we make it discretionary so how
do you how do you rectify that
shall of the one statute that's
not being changed with the.
Changes that you're proposing in
this bill that that might get
holy discretionary.
Madam chair representative they
were amended to into miss Thomas
cook for this yes thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative neighbor thank
you for the question I just saw
that in the FIR as well and was
sort of puzzled I I don't think
there's any conflict there at
all I think one is saying that
the judge needs to turn to that
statute and read it and follow
its provisions and then impose
the sentence in a way that
conforms to that statute I don't
think it's mandating that they
impose an actual prison term
only that they impose the
president that the sentence
whatever that sentence maybe in
accordance with the provisions
of the habitual offender act so
I think at that point then the
judge would have the discretion
that the habitual offender Act
provides so I I don't think
there's a conflict there but I
did notice that in the FIR as
well and I appreciate having the
opportunity to address that.
Madam chair and and as
javascript I think that may be
I would read that as they shall
sentence them they have to do
something they can't completely
obviated but they could reduce
it to a fairly short period of
time but they asked they would
have to do something our anyway
that is something pointed out by
the Attorney General.
Yes the real the real crux of it
is is one of how how we view of.
Incarceration and.
I guess what I'm hearing is is
Madam chair representative that
that.
The testimony is that there's no
believe that these Vigil of
thunder are enhanced penalties
are producing.
Better.
Outcomes when the person
alternately gets are released
from from the prison system.
And I guess I would say this
person has already proven
themselves to be in a cycle that
does not allow them to live in a
society that the that they'll
follow the rules and the social
contract that keeps us us all
together and so.
For more one stance.
You know the people already
proven they're not willing to to
abide by that what you're saying
on the on the backend the
additional time in jails not
working because they're going
back to their old ways and it
may be a chicken and the egg
thing but seems like after
somebody gets arrested for five
times for for serious crimes and
and I'm I'm not talking about
the possession stuff but for
some serious crimes that we as a
society need to seriously
consider whether that person
Is is set to resume at a place
in society without some
substantial
Measures are being excluded from
society for a period of time and
and
I think that's what these Miss
Vigil fender laws tried to do
was make sure that consistently
across the state the people have
shown themselves to fall in this
category that they were going to
be up against some fairly
significant periods of time and
and I guess you that was if you
go out and committed again
you're looking at double the
time next time maybe double the
time to time after
but this.
This this one are.
I am generally for judicial
discretion but this one seems to
make sense when you have people
committing crimes over and over
and over again and having to do
some minimal.
or having to do extended time
because of their.
Course of conduct so we may just
greed to disagree on this on
Madam chair representative thank
you.
Madam chair and representative
thank you
okay I'm I'm I need to get
But see who's on the who's on
the call right now I need to
have Representative Cook made a
panelist.
It got off by accident.
So I'm just gonna take somebody
I thought it's just easier to
make.
I'll do that.
I I I do hope that somebody from
the criminal justice reform
subcommittee cannot invite
Representative night or to one
of our meetings so we can hear
about all the red states that
have done away with mandatory
minimum.
Because they don't want to build
anymore prisons so with that
said I'm going to go to a member
of the criminal justice reform
subcommittee instead of anything
along the lines I just mentioned
Representative green madam chair
quickly I've I've made a mistake
at the late hour I was supposed
to offer that we sent to
committee set up to the
committee secretary last
Thursday it is not a substantive
celebrate and our analysis is up
on the share file and I've
checked but just wanted to
explain there were dress analyst
asked us increases to put the
statutory references right in in
the bill in a way that we hadn't
previously so we've done that
for them and then in C. packet
analyst encourage us to clarify
what's happening with out of
state felony charges and and how
they intersect with what we're
doing here so we've done that as
well so my apologies madam chair
we prepped for this for this
presentation several hours ago
and by the time we got ready to
go I missteps in not naming that
right away my apologies but we
did get this out last.
There's not a problem with the
the time frame because we the
analyses are on the committee's
top so we just need to be
talking about it as a committee
not right okay so
got some time we'll move it
committees that.
Okay thanks for letting me know
that Representative Rehm.
Thank you madam chair and
First of all thank I don't have
a problem with the intent.
That what you're trying to do is
seek treatment for low level
drug abuse you know and and and
I think alcohol abuse also.
So I think that if you had in
here shall be sentenced to a
drug rehab or alcohol rehab you
know I would be a lot more
comfortable about
how how this legislation is.
So you know I want to share a
couple stories with you you know
it's like a eight.
DWI offense the guy that I
arrested and I won't say exactly
the language but when he was
refusing to take the breath test
and I was explaining that he was
going to be added to a year to
is suspension he described that
how is the judge gonna stop me
isn't going to cut my arms off
and that goes to the problem.
You know when these individuals.
when they only seek out.
either drug rehab or alcohol
rehab if you will when it there
against the wall be it the court
be at their family leaving them
the whatever and
I agree we need and and I'm
gonna hear from Mr Kirk that
there's not enough we have
places but I think that's where
we really need to spend some of
our our resources and direct
people into their year end for
mandatory treatment annual be
released after you've completed
that or whatever the sentence.
Part of having a determinate
sentence is deterrence and I
think that that's important.
When I would arrest individuals
many times they could tell me
what the law was.
Meaning that penalty and what
the plea bargain would end up
being and these are the guys
that are the frequent flyers
that worked all.
So I think that someone it's up
setting that we don't have D. W.
are high in the statute that
were excluding that.
Wait let me madam chair and
representative well me and this
will be more to miss you have a
question Representative Rehm.
Yes I do I'm getting okay I
really wanted to stay on
questions instead of the stories
okay thank you it's just late
we've got another bill after
this okay.
Well.
madam chair and representative
We have a three strikes a
statute that was referenced it
was on the books in nineteen
ninety four how many people have
ever been prosecuted under that
statute.
Madam chair representative frame
that's not in the purview of the
legislation we're introducing
here with H. B. one fourteen I
don't have that information in
front of me.
Thank you madam chair but it was
a discussion earlier about we
already have stiff penalties
zero no one is been prosecuted.
Madam chair and Representative.
Purpose of of imprisonment is to
go ahead and rehabilitate people
beer deterrence and then we
bring them back into society
that's what we have and this is
part of it if they're re
offending in a short period of
time they're not
They're not rehabilitated.
So madam chair and
representative I don't have the
committee set up I've got the
right one one so Page three line
line.
When Wesley in ten years has
passed.
So what crimes are beyond ten
years a person may be in prison
for and so when they come out
because it's lasted ten years
you can't look back on their
history what crimes are let's
say ten years or more.
Madam chair representative I'm
not sure if I understand the
question we're not changing.
The time within that section.
Madam chair and representative
that Representative Rehm excuse
me the committee sub is in the
Here file I just checked.
Or very well I'll try to log
into it in a moment anyway madam
chair and representative the
crimes that are beyond ten years
that you're not including our
like murder kidnapping rape
child abuse armed robbery and I
think those should be included
and when we're looking at these
most violent.
With that madam chair I would
make a motion that we strike on
the of page three one nine with
less than ten years and I think
we would have to make that
instead of have has spent.
Representative Rehm if you don't
have the the committee so you
don't have the right line item
page.
Okay I'll just get off and I'll
come back on in a minute.
Will say.
Thank you okay did you I'm.
This.
Did you.
I think you had a response about
those crimes thank you madam
chair members of the committee
and in response to the
Representative brings reading of
that that I I was I have both
the older versions of the
committee steps I saw where he
was referring to
and that ten years doesn't refer
to the duration of the sentence
so I actually don't think that
they had that the
Premise of the the the
suggestion is Techni technically
correct the ten years in the
bill refers to the time that has
passed since the person
completed serving the previous
sentence and this and and the
time that they're now being
considered a habitual offender
so it's about how old the prior
felony is not how long the
sentence for that prior felony
what so just to make that
clarification thank you madam
chair you madam chair
Representative either way we're
not changing the ten years.
In anyway.
Okay so I have Representative
Cook on my list.
Madam chair is just raise my
hand to get back in the meeting.
Welcome back to the meeting you
Representative ****.
Representative Akan did you have
your hand up.
Before.
I did and then I just changed my
mind but I do have one common to
make and it's basically of
course our for Mister Taos cook
you'll slide when there is a
mandatory sentencing litigation
takes a lot longer than when
there is not.
Madam chair representative Akan.
Question and yes that is
something actually that in our
agency FIR on this bill is the
reality that when there's
mandatory time on the table
defendants are more inclined to
fight the charge so that they
can in the hopes of beating it
so that they don't get the
mandatory time and there does
tend to be more litigation more
often going to trial and that
can increase the the resource
requirements of the judiciary
the public defender and the dust
so thank you madam chair I just
want to bring that up because I
know that when I was magistrate
judge amended the mandatory need
W. I. sentencing I mean what a
I was in doubt it one to you was
in cross we ended up in
litigation trial on everything
and actually what is this was in
a lot more cases and we would of
is there would be mandatory
sentencing.
Because as a matter of the
dismissal for students or
students so I'll just leave that
at that thank you madam chair.
Thank you very much.
Okay Representative.
Rehm.
Madam chair I log down tried to
log back into outlook to get to
our shared files I can't do that
so we'll.
We'll just deal with that later
thank you okay thank you very
much already.
Okay.
Are there further questions from
committee members.
Well so I'm I said a little bit
the interior looks.
Has her hand up but it's over
her seal so it's hard to see.
All I see yes let's do it now
and I never took representative
neighbors hand out let me do
that.
You want it back up again.
Right Representative Armstrong.
Madam chair I just when the time
is right going to make a motion
to do not costs our house bill
one fourteen and do passed
committee substitute for house
bill one fourteen.
What I can take that motion now
and then we can still continue
discussion so we have a second
for representative Ely.
So we have a motion for
representative Armstrong second
Representative Eli
Representative are you have
another question.
No ma'am not a question is just
for my own education I went to
the Canadian website to try to
get their share file stuff I'm
at a loss as the chair file stop
and anyway I think I've figured
out you don't go to the Canadian
website on in M. L. E. G. I. S.
you have to go through to.
The the share files going
directly right to to pull this
stuff up what happens is that
you get an email from from the
committee assistance and then
you click on it and then you log
into it and it's not.
All of House Judiciary in the
file and then by date it's got
every single bill and every you
can download the entire file so
that you've got it you can go
between documents which help.
The only ones that I had
recently were from state
government and it was kicking me
over to their staff.
I I I'm just telling you are
still not very proficient in
dealing with this share file
stuff but it's a different
procedure than going on the
committee website.
Madam chair representative
Armstrong go ahead.
What about with you yeah without
the email you can get to it
directly by amendment legis dot
ShareFile dot ago.
And if you registered from for
share file before it will bring
up all your committees and then
you can find on this committee
this state and this bill.
And I'm like just out share file
that go.
That's good to know because I'm
I have internet that way I just
always the responding to an
email and so I ended up in it
but that.
That's good you know it might be
good to have a little Sheet�.
Typed up for us so that we can
Email that to folks and have a
little reminder about how to
navigate it.
So I'm not sure who's listening
here who if you don't.
To
take care of that George.
Okay.
Okay good deal so just let me
know if I can if you need
something while we're on and
we'll get Representative
Armstrong explained it to us.
Representative brings question
madam chair it's age right line
line is the line that he was
referring to on the Committee
substitute regarding the ten
years.
What what was explained is that
it wasn't about the sentence it
was about the length of time
since the.
Previous sentence so I think
that actually sort of a moot
point.
I understand correctly.
So I'm I just wanted to
Mention that
you know I I heard the sentiment
about
deterrence and how certain
things are deterrents but what
the research has shown is that
generally speaking the only real
deterrence in criminal matters
as with white collar crimes
where someone actually plans a
crime and is thoughtful about it
and extremely deep.
So but I I would like I really
really would like for more
members of this committee and
the legislature actually.
More from some of the folks we
heard from clear back in twenty
thirteen from Texas South Dakota
we hear from North Carolina.
hopeful.
A lot of red states that are
getting rid of a lot of the
mandatory sentencing because of
the fact that it's proven to
actually make communities less
safe and I'm in the simple way
they talked about it to us that
are.
Thank.
Representative night was that
what we really want to lock up
people who make who are very
dangerous to us and we want to
punish the other people in a
different way now you can argue
if they're violent crimes share.
We certainly want to take that
into consideration but a lot of
those states just made the
decision that there did want to
keep building presents because
when you do bill presents you'll
take that that's where your
money goes for education.
And then you kind of prepare to
and cycle so what there's in
fact there's a national
conservative organization called
right on crime that Karl rove
was one of the co founders for
page Karl rove was one of the co
founders and there really are a
lot of places that are trying to
be a lot smarter about this in
in a way I think this bill gets
it done and so that's just my
little plug for it here but.
In the.
We're interested in hearing from
actual states in laws and the
and the results like in North
Carolina for example so maybe we
can get you invited to one of
those things sometimes.
And we do I don't see other
hands up we have a motion for do
not pass on that
house bill one fourteen in a two
passed on the committee some so
let's take the role now thank
you.
Representative Akan yes.
Representative Armstrong.
Yes.
Representative Cook pass.
Please keep.
Yes.
Representative Eli yes.
Representative Lewis.
Yes.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative night Burt no.
Representative green no.
Representative Townsend Here.
By Jessica Benham yes.
When you know go back to
Representative Cook before you
got the vice chair or the chair
now Representative Cook now.
Madam chair.
Madam chair.
I'm sorry I said yes but I guess
you can say it loud enough.
By a vote of eight to four we
have a do not pass on house bill
one fourteen and a to pass
on committee substitute for
house bill one fourteen.
Thank you all very much
We we still have one more bill
this evening folks
So we take a five minute break
or you want to just go.
madam chair subcommittee I'm
ready to go but obviously get
some rest the committee I'm not
speaking for the committee.
Okay let's go ahead and go back
Representative Eli.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee house bill seventy
five does one symbol thank it
removes hospitals from the
patient compensation fund in
order to restore it to its
original purpose to protect
patients and their physicians in
nineteen seventy six the New
Mexico legislature responded to
the crisis of positions not
being able to purchase
malpractice medical malpractice
insurance and created the
patient's compensation fund
which provided compensation to
patients who have been harmed by
medical errors physicians paid
money into the fund and patients
were in turn restricted as to
how much they could recover in
compensation for the harm.
In two thousand sixteen the
superintendent of insurance
Franchini this is the prior
superintendent acting on his own
and without any crisis or reason
to do so took decisions away
from the jury in determining
what harm to patient could
should could be compensated and
instead gave hospital
corporations and by the way
mostly multi billion dollar
corporations you a sweetheart
deal
I would even call it a smoking
hot deal by allowing them to
enter the patient's compensation
fund and restricting what they
compensated harms patients.
Hospital corporations CEOs
admitted that they're making
millions of dollars every day
off of New Mexico patients and
that every day the Sweetser
money profits back to their out
of state corporate headquarters
we are pleased to have the
support of house bill seventy
five of more than four thousand
New Mexicans the senior citizen
Law Center New Mexico Center on
poverty in addition seventy four
percent of New Mexicos when we
pulled what the patient's
compensations Fund to be
restored to its original purpose
to support New Mexico doctors
and patients not to protect big
corporate hospitals from paying
their fair share to harm
patients madam chair I've asked
everybody to be brief given the
late hour but we have a number
of experts I want to start with
turning right markets are if you
could include rate Vargas and
let me just for the purpose of
the
of the access the following
people I'm gonna be calling
rave Argus Dr barber mac in any
annectens dollars make I'll just
say for and finally answering
cherry Spencer if all of those
could be included as panelists
that would be great and then
we'll stand for questions but I
want to start with reporters
thank you madam chairman Mr.
I'm thank you very much
Representative it looks like
they're all with us on the
panel.
So go ahead right.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee the original
purpose of the patient
compensation fund was to protect
physicians and their patients
not to protect corporate
profits.
Restoring the patient
compensation fund to its
original purpose we can make
sure that the fund remain
solvent in the long run at the
same time make sure the patients
are protected when physicians
make mistakes.
When superintendent Franchini in
the prior administration let big
corporations in and they did
this incident only in a back
room deal when they made this
backroom deals and let these
large corporate hospitals in
they set the patient
compensation fund on a path of
destruction.
If the goal is to keep
physicians and protect patients
no big corporation would have
ever been let into the patient
compensation fund unless and
until they provided basic
information about their claims
history their losses.
That data could have been used
to properly assess the risk in
letting them in and to properly
assess the surcharge to cover
the losses of those risks.
All the need to provide was nine
years worth of basic information
such as total payments of for
malpractice suits total loss
expenses the number of claims
that were closed with payment
the number of claims closed
without payment in the number of
open claims.
None of that information was
provided to the patient
compensation fund when these big
corporate hospitals were let in.
As a consequence appropriate
surcharges were never assessed.
It allowed them to increase
their profits while widening the
deficit in the patient
compensation for.
Incidentally the patient
compensation fund didn't always
run a deficit well back in two
thousand and nine before the
very first hospitals ever let in
it actually had a two million
dollar surplus however after the
first hospital was led in the
patient compensation fund
comedian we started running at a
deficit.
We don't even know what the
large corporate hospitals pay in
surcharges because there was no
transparency all this was done
in secret.
What we do know though is that
the patient compensation fund
has developed a growing deficit
continues to grow as these
corporate interests are further.
Of the twenty five hospitals in
the patient compensation fund
twenty three are owned by multi
billion dollar corporations what
I say billion I mean with of be
the remaining two hospitals are.
Worsen the hundreds of millions.
Again if the purpose of this act
was.
Was to make insurance available
to physicians because physicians
were having a hard time getting
insurance having these multi
billion dollar corporations be
subsidized by the physicians
does not for that purpose.
Experiencing common sense who
showed us that since these large
corporate hospitals have entered
the fund the deficit has grown
and the surcharges on physicians
has been raised multiple times
what that means is that
individual physicians who are
supposed to be protected by the
patient compensation fund are
being victimized and are paying
to subsidize large corporate
interests most of who are out of
state corporations that take
their profits out of New Mexico
and to places like Brentwood
Tennessee.
House bill seventy five restores
the patient compensation fund to
its original purpose providing
protection to physicians and the
patients they treat and it stops
the growing deficit in the
patient compensation fund that
was clearly caused by the
inclusion of big corporate
hospitals in the funds thank you
for your time and I'll be
available for any questions any
of you may have.
Representative Ely and feel free
to call your next I'll just let
you handle this thank you thank
you madam chair Dr barber mac
and you should be more.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Barbara
mac in any I am a former
president of the American
medical association and of the
New Mexico Medical Society but
I'm speaking for myself I am
president CEO and a cancer
doctor at New Mexico cancer
center practicing in Albuquerque
and Gallup I was also the lead
plaintiff in the medical
societies lawsuit against
superintendent Franchini
opposing the admission of
hospitals to the medical
malpractice act as mentioned the
PCF had a two million dollar
surplus but also no increases in
our search charge between two
thousand and two and two
thousand and nine then the first
hospital was let in and did not
follow the three claim limit or
pay their share in twenty ten we
have a ten percent increase as
more hospitals were allowed in
not paying their share because
of flawed actuarial studies we
have had a forty nine percent
increase over the last ten years
now with the hospital's
unlimited basis we have a fifty
five million dollar deficit and
the position church surcharges
for twenty twenty one is to be
another ten percent increase the
hospital claims have depleted
the fund and they're trying to
get the legislature to make the
independent doctors pay for it
we are short of doctors of our
state especially in rural New
Mexico where the big hospitals
have limited interest
independent doctor practices are
small businesses we pay taxes
and we hire locally it's been a
hard year for independent
doctors with COVID and the ten
percent increase in that matter
decrease cut in the Medicare fee
schedule now we're threatened
with another increase in our
premiums and pay.
In compensation fund surcharge
to cover the cost of hospital
lawsuits it is not true that
removing the hospitals will
bankrupt the fund the doctors of
New Mexico manage the fund
before the hospital sneaked in
and we can do it again if you
will pass this bill and remove
them I urge you to support house
bill seventy five thank you.
Madam chair I'd like to
committee next year from the net
consolidates.
Madam chair and members of the
committee thank you for hearing
me this evening my name is and
that that is all of.
And I am the eldest daughter for
a loose Errol my mother was a
very happy and energetic person
who love life she was the wife
of fifty six years a mother.
Nana and great nana we were
raised in a close knit family
and saw each other almost every
day as our mom prepare dinner
for all of us all every evening
after work.
All quality gatherings were
always that moms barbecues Fredo
pies for Super Bowl thanksgiving
with Turkey and all the
trimmings and Christmas was
breaking the school treat those
possibility those and a full day
of tamale making.
In December of twenty fifteen
mom was complaining about pain
on her right side at the E. R.
she was diagnosed with an
aneurysm in her aorta.
From there she was transferred
to a hospital who prides
themselves in being the best
when it comes to cardiac
emergencies.
She was admitted in the next
morning we met with the
cardiovascular surgeon in this
meeting her doctor showed us an
X. ray and explained that to
stand needed to be installed.
He told us that it was a very
common procedure and that he had
performed hundreds of all mom
agreed to the surgery and it was
scheduled the afternoon on
December thirtieth.
Her surgery went as expected and
mom have done very well and was
expected to be released the very
next day where she could bring
in the new year at home.
This is where our lives would be
forever changed at six AM mom
called my sister Patty telling
her that she could not feel her
lakes Patty called me and we
arrived at the hospital shortly
after seven the nurse tending
mom couldn't tell us anything
except that her doctor had been
informed in that he.
How do you know we're still in
the room as for doctor examined
her this is when we learned.
That is CSF of CSF during was
placed during the surgery in
mom's line which require close
monitoring to keep the fluid
levels within a certain range.
It turns out that the nurse
assigned by this hospital to
care for mom in with.
Was not familiar with this type
of tree nor had she have
received training.
So instead of asking for help
she decided to clamp the during
shut the fluid levels got.
So extremely high that her
spinal cord was suffocated
causing permanent paralysis from
her waist down.
I can still see the look on my
mother's face.
When her doctor told her that
she would never walk again and
to this day those were taught me
in my sleep.
After this mom was in and out of
the hospital with one
complication after another and
two surgeries all related to her
paralysis five months later mom
passed away on the morning of
Saturday may seventh the day
before mother's day in the home.
Where we grew up and where we
always get.
And why.
Because the hospital failed maam
why not providing her they're
met by not providing their
medical staff with the necessary
training to provide proper care
to their patients.
How how does this happen I will
never understand it and for that
there must be accountability.
Our family does not want to see
another person suffer as our
mother did and another family to
suffer the heartbreak as we have
so today I am my mother's voice
and I pray that you will support
this bill.
Very quickly I'd like to show
you a picture of mom.
This was my mom flora and my
granddaughter Alyssa they were
sitting in my mom's family room
where she was reading her book.
And.
This was my mom for a.
Thank you so much.
On madam chair now we'll hear
from Barbara and makayla shaper.
But first.
On I'm sorry I said Barbara but
it's Britney in the final issue.
Okay great hello folks thank I
madam chair person and members
of the committee thank you for
allowing me to share my story
with you today my name is
makayla shaper and many of you
may remember my daughter her
name is Sherrin Eriksen and she
was a TV reporter at Kael be TV
in Albuquerque he was just
thirty years old when she died
for medical malpractice in
Albuquerque hospital Sharon's
life was cut short due to a
series of medical errors that
should never have happened.
I'm a master's prepared nursing
critical care and trauma with a
PhD in ethics in biomedical
research I retired from the Air
Force is a full colonel after
thirty years of service during
my time as a civilian and
military in mice million
military career I taught
leadership and ethics and was a
director of nursing a commander
of surgical services and a
commander of a level one trauma
center or I oversaw both the
patient safety and the risk
management committees I only
tell you this is the is the
foundation upon which I say as I
watched the events of my
daughter's death unfold.
Your cardiologists explained you
could upgrade her pacemaker
which had been placed for an
over active vagus nerve yeah
sure this is an outpatient
procedure and it had very little
risk and they were prepared for
any eventuality the last time I
saw my daughter alive she was
happily giving me her famous
thumbs up as she wheels was
wheeled into the cath lab.
Shortly after things began to
unravel while sitting in the
waiting room I watched a man in
scrubs burst out of the cap lab
running frantically out of the
front door later that same
amendment came back looking
panicked holding medical
equipment that should have been
in the cath lab to address the
unfolding disaster.
Time passed I heard a chilling
voice over the loudspeaker
calling for code blue I knew
what that meant and I
immediately felt bad for the
family of that patient little
did I know I was that family it
was my daughter dying as they
waited for an operating room.
Is the the cardiothoracic
surgeon required to be on
standby in case anything went
wrong and started another case
as a result neither he nor the
operating rooms were available
to repair the car the terror
insurance are.
The cardiologists also neglected
to type in crossmatch for blood
prior to the procedure and they
were negligent institutional
processes that delayed the
release of emergency blood.
These huge delays because
Sharon's chest to fill with
blood dropping her blood
pressure and depriving her brain
of oxygen.
Karen bled to death literally
awaiting a quick meant an
operating room and the flights
you desperately need.
He had no vital signs by the
time the surgeon open her chest
eventually the cardiologists
came out and told me and this is
a quote if she is gone and it
was her time to go and god would
welcome her home I could not
believe he was blaming his
negligence and that of a
hospital on doc.
I'll never forget walking into
the ICO for the first time
seeing my daughter hooked up to
eighteen ivy's heart pump and a
ventilator laying lifeless on
the bed.
My heart broke with her
anesthesiologists called me and
said it was such a mess in there
and everything went horribly
wrong.
I repeatedly asked what happened
but I never got answers and in
fact the hospital refused to do
an autopsy and did not report
her unexpected death which is
required by the joint commission
to the court I was forced to
notify the coroner myself and
that autopsy was eventually
done.
Only when I pressed for
information did the hospital's
patient safety officer confirmed
that a series of devastating
errors that occurred over four
hours where she could have been
saved caused her untimely death
I knew I needed to see sure
start but the hospital refused
and I was forced to hire
attorneys to find out what
actually happened.
My precious daughter died due to
medical malpractice no one is
immune not you not our family
and that anyone you'll hear from
today if medical malpractice can
devastate my family it can
devastate your I do know for my
professional experience that
institutional problems in
hospitals do not change unless
there are sufficient
consequences for negligent
negligent actions thank you
becomes more important when
breaches in care are tied to
monetary consequences that
adequately compensate victims of
medical malpractice artificial
caps on damages don't improve
hospital safety ever because
changes are not made and patient
safety errors will continue to
be the third leading cause of
death in this country.
In my personal and professional
experience I believe it is
important for hospitals to take
responsibility for the
negligence and damage they costs
and ensure that the horrible
loss of hearing and the
overwhelming grief that my
family continues to experience
does not happen to anyone else I
ask you to support H. B. seventy
five thank you for your time.
German finally as Richard
Spencer.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you thank you
for your time I I know some of
you through my professional life
where I I talked to about about
the stories of others but I'm
here tonight to talk talk about
my story and.
I found out it's much harder to
tell your own story but it it's
important to me and I want you
all to hear thank you thank you
for your time
J. and J. set out to start a
family like so many others and
struggled struggled with
infertility for for about five
years
What do multiple procedures
several different IVF procedures
until until she became pregnant
with twin girls and and early
two thousand and fourteen and we
we were of course terrified but
also felt blessed to to be
welcoming a family funding
Our.
Our second daughter Effie was
was a in the bridge position the
the entire pregnancy
we sought out a doctor that was
a specialist in twin pregnancies
we sat on a hospital that
specialize in burning.
And we trusted we trusted them
and and we we surrender
ourselves to their care and and
you know told them our our sole
priority was was bringing to a
girl's home and and a healthy
mother of course as well.
To work at the end of the
pregnancy there is the Maisie
who is our our first daughter
her for growth begin to taper
off and they decided it was it
was time to induce labor all
along they had they had not
confident that the safest method
of of birth was a vaginal
delivery of of both despite the
fact that our second daughter
was and in the breech position
We went to the hospital sherry
was induced she did she did she
did not progress well through
the induction she ended up being
in labor for about forty eight
hours our first daughter Maisie
was was born without without
incident it was it was beautiful
it was perfect we had we had
requested to be in the in the
operating room we requested that
sherry have that but they're all
so that so that a C. section
could be could be conducted
without delay.
We have been told to expect our
second daughter at the to be to
be born within twenty minutes
after missing.
Three hours passed for three
hours
Multiple doctors many nurses
stood by at in an operating room
in the biggest city in New
Mexico and attempted to deliver
a breech baby that was over
seven pounds.
After forty eight hours of labor
by at.
From a twenty.
It was the most violent.
Thing I have ever witnessed in
my life it was
it was X. exceptionally violent
in troubling.
C. section was eventually
performed.
It was far too late our our
daughter was revived after her
birth.
She lived for five days she had
she had no brain activity and
was removed from life support.
And I can tell you I can tell
you that your child is passed
from one to the next is is truly
something you cannot recover.
You know I will never be the
same
from that experience hi.
I lost my daughter my wife lost
her daughter my twin daughter
lost her twin sister my daughter
lost her entire life dialect.
And it's just
it's irrecoverable.
And to make matters worse I
think I think a couple things I
need to make clear is that that
this legislation is not about
doctors is not about nurses it
is not about attorneys it is
about all of the New Mexicans
who have been victims or will be
if it comes to to medical
malpractice and I also need to
make clear that we're not
talking about accidents we're
not talking about complications
done about gross negligence and
the current system.
Provides no mechanism for
justice no mechanism for
accountability.
You know we're in an operating
room full of doctors full of
nurses no one said a thing in
fact one person said a thing.
Surgery tech the lowest ranking
member of that medical team said
why are we not doing a C.
section surgery tech was
subsequently fired from
hospital.
So we're talking about we're
talking about a system has no
way to correct itself when we
asked through our case for the
policies and procedures in place
to try to understand how do we
make this better how do we make
sure this never happens again
how do we make sure another
family member feels powerless
protect their family we were
told there are no policies and
procedures.
We're talking about a
corporation that owns hospitals
dozens of hospitals and multiple
states and they have no policies
and procedures in place yet when
you go to states with row with
without these caps in place you
find robust policies not only
around what's supposed to happen
but also empowering and training
every team member to have a
voice to speak up to make sure
these things can't happen and
that patients can get the best
possible care.
The last thing I want to hit on
just briefly is you know I in a
previous committee it was it was
said that these are these are
the one percent of cases these
things just don't happen that
much and I and I hate to tell
you that for every person here
from today there are thousands
more at home we just don't have
the access to tell their story
who don't have we don't have the
ability to tell others who just
can't lay themselves bare in
front of all the to do it so I
just want to be clear that this
happens.
Too frequently we found out that
the doctor involved in our in
our case had set I think seven
previous cases of malpractice
have been brought against and
and the thing that breaks my
heart is he's had one since that
also resulted in the death of
the contract.
And so I'm asking you today to
please please give our daughter
of ways
you know let's let's all learn
from from the mistakes made in
her very short life I would also
like share to have a chance to
say something very quickly so
thank you all yeah so first I
want to share a picture of
median appy
at the is obviously the the baby
with the tubes
but I did want to share a couple
of things I wanted to add that
you know while
Really while we were in the
hospital when you really
realized
How scary the situation was I
think was when
I couldn't get access because of
what happened to me I had a lot
of stress I was also injured I
have lifetime injuries
and I could have died what they
chose to do could have led to me
dying as well but I have like
ten injuries and while we were
there I couldn't breast feed
needy and
they didn't have lactation
specialist to help me they
didn't have a counselor grief
counselor to help they couldn't
even get us a priest the
appropriate amount of time to
baptize the baby girls together.
I'm but they could bring the
bill they brought the bill to
our room even though there was a
do not disturb sign at our door
and they stood and they waited
for us to pay that bill and
that's really what I understood
that all we met to them was
money and and potential risk.
Because I forgot to add because
they also sense risk management
to our route twice.
I'm so really to me I just felt
I was really scared we will
still there our daughter was
still in the queue and she
wasn't expected to come home we
are hoping but and we were still
there with our other daughter in
my own injuries I'm all we seem
to be was money and and
potential risk and they were
supposed to be continuing to
provide me care.
And my daughter's care.
Thank you thanks for
Madam chair with that we would
stand for questions except we
have a simple amendments should
be in front of the committee on
the effective date if this
becomes law this was at the
request of the superintendent of
insurance for a superintendent
toll yes number two one nine
seven zero seven point one.
And it would move the effective
date of the bill if passed to
December thirty first twenty
twenty one.
Thank you very much
What we'll do is take the public
comment and then we'll amend the
bill I got was that simple and
in fact we were made aware on
thank you very much
Representative.
Thank you we'll sample questions
madam chair.
I just want to say that really
sorry.
These are really hard stories to
hear for all of us.
I'm so gonna go to the audience
in a minute don't anybody rates
have you at I'm going to start.
Representative.
The
Those who are opposed to house
bill seventy five and.
We are going to limit the time
to a minute piece and so we're
going to begin now and I will
take those who are in opposition
first.
You can raise your hand research
here in opposition.
Okay Dion good want.
Good evening madam chair Mr
speaker members of the committee
my name is Mr gallant and I'm
the current president of the New
Mexico Medical Society I'm here
to speak in opposition to house
bill seventy five on behalf of
the New Mexico Medical Society.
First I just like to recognize
the committee members in their
stamina in a very long day and
the bravery in the pain shared
by family members who gave
testimony we all agree the PCS
is the safety net that protects
patients As You consider this
bill and others effective PC off
the medical malpractice ask act
please ask yourself if the
proposed changes protect the PCF
and thereby protect patients
superintendent hole has
concluded that hospitals should
say in the PCF to protect the
PCF and to protect access to
care in the state of New Mexico
that's because the surcharges
that hospitals pay to belong to
the PCF help fund the PCF
hospitals removed surcharges
will go down the deficit will go
up and the doctors will be
forced to cover that gap.
Next I'm Linda Siegel.
Madam chair members of the
committee Linda Siegel
representing various to nursing
groups and I appreciate in value
the work of our trial lawyers
their job is to go after the bad
actor providers what bad actors
are such a small percent of all
the doctors nurses that are out
there on the frontlines risking
their health and sometimes their
lives to save us sometimes
providers make terrible mistakes
and some are even negligent but
the vast majority of providers
and hospitals do their very best
to help all of us when we are
patient this act and the PCF
exist make sure that they're
when the lawsuit is successful
that those patients receive the
on going medical care that we
need hospitals need to stay and
the act instead of financially
devastating the PCS and leaving
the physicians of our state to
pay for it with dramatically
higher assessments we need a
comprehensive react rewrite of
the act as the superintendent of
insurance has recommended.
Find Clark.
Thank you madam chair and
committee money was Troy Clark
on the president and CEO of the
New Mexico Hospital
certification.
And first I want to.
Extend my apologies and
condolences are to those of
testified it is a tough
situation our emotional and
painful stories that we know you
have gone through.
and from that we hear a
consistent message that we don't
want this to happen again and
that's what we do at the
hospital association all our
members want is we want this to
not happen again however house
bill seventy five would
eliminate hospitals from the
medical malpractice act yet they
have been included in the act
since its inception so going
back to its origin they were
included removing from the ads
from the hospital would undercut
patients from the patient
centered protections of the
patient compensation.
It would create more barriers to
access to quality healthcare
system and it would exacerbate
the solvency challenges and the
patient compensation for.
We encourage questions to be
asked to Representative
superintendent told us prepared
report addressing the many.
Here in Carson.
Good afternoon or good evening
madam chair and Mr speaker
committee members I know it's
been a long day I'm doctor Karen
Carson a pediatrician from
Roswell New Mexico I'm part of
BCA medical associates the
private pediatric practice my
practice employees ninety two
people and we have thirteen
providers we care for children
from all over southeast New
Mexico and our population is
mostly Medicaid insured every
day we save lives we administer
over twenty thousand vaccines a
year we start giving COVID
vaccines to our community
tomorrow HB seventy five will
devastate our practice removing
hospitals from the fund will
ship to huge cost burden to
private practitioners that like
us that will be on manageable we
will be unable to continue to
provide care to the children in
our rural community and these
children who are already
suffering from poverty a lack of
resources will lose critical
access to local care please vote
against this bill thank you.
Nancy right.
Good evening madam chair my name
is Nancy rights I'm a medical
doctor and I'm also a
pediatrician I've been in
practice in Las Vegas since two
thousand two I'm on the active
medical staff and L. W. Ste of
regional hospital and have been
since I started my practice I am
the immediate past president of
the New Mexico Medical Society
society today I'm speaking for
my medical community hospitals
and some rich guy in a business
suit in Tennessee rather a
hospitals a community of nurses
techs pharmacists security Sheth
plus doctors and we are all
deeply committed to the care of
our patients house bill seventy
five will not make the
businessman in Tennessee care
more about L. W. said or Las
Vegas instead it will attack the
professionals in my community in
my hospital who have bravely and
bravely Care for the people of
San Miguel County during the
hardships of the past year.
This bill is bad for New
Mexicans and will worsen access
to care particularly in rural
areas like mine.
And Michael rely.
Good evening madam chair person
members of the committee thank
you for allowing me to comment
this evening.
I am a maternal fetal medicine
specialist at and as a board
certified obstetrician as well
as maternal fetal medicine
subspecialists time the current
president of perinatal
associates of New Mexico one of
the largest practices that cares
for complicated pregnancies
throughout the state we have
over a hundred and twenty staff
for physicians thirteen nurse
practitioners three genetic
counselors and we have offices
scattered throughout the state
in so many many small towns HB
seven the seventy five will not
affect the change it is
anticipated to check to do it
will injure the already fragile
health care ecosystem in New
Mexico we take maternal
transports from all over the
state to large facilities in
Albuquerque.
I know the system and prenatal
care will not be.
In the at helped by this bill it
would only be injured if we care
about patients we need to
maintain that PCF as it is today
please vote against HB seventy
five.
I don't see any.
In addition.
One more.
I'm not sure if these.
K. R. William Ritchie.
Madam chairman my name is
William Ritchie I'm a past
president of the New Mexico
Medical Society an orthopedic
surgeon in Albuquerque New
Mexico and I've been here for.
The five plus years.
And
work closely with the the
medically will community
About this exact.
Point and the PCF Fund and the
way that it started which was
very inappropriate bringing
hospitals in however now that
they are in we are in.
Still dire straits with proper
funding the PCF and maintaining
access to care for patients in
the state if we.
Way with that the house was in
the PC of how do we continue to
fund the PCS and how do we find
the liability that they brought
in with them if they are then
gone also how do we fund and
maintain liability for the
patients.
And the positions in the state
who work in the state were from
the state so I please ask you to
vote.
Santa.
Yourself okay good.
Madam chair and committee
members Dr that's to Santa I'm
the chief medical officer for
what was health system I was
born and raised here in New
Mexico train turn New Mexico I
have a large family that is here
still using our medical systems
this bill would definitely harm
our ability to commute continue
to have access for patients
across the state or to give you
three points one you can't
separate hospitals for doctors
most of our positions in the
vast majority of them are now
employed number two we have
invested millions hundreds of
millions right providers braid
and thirty six providers new
technology and we are working
with the state actively on COVID
doing things like vaccinations
drive through testing taking
care of COVID patients please do
not remove hospitals this all
the negative impact across all
of New Mexico on their health
and their.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Now I will take testimony in
favor of the
House bill seventy five and we
will also keep that at one one
minute please.
I'm David Hotmail.
Yes madam chair can you hear me.
Yeah.
Yes thank you madam chair
members of the committee I'm
some of you know me I and David
Hotmail and I'm testifying as
the New Mexico lifelong New
Mexico and and a lawyer whose
practice in the area of medical
malpractice for over twenty five
years
the acronym the PCF has been
used multiple times tonight
agency remember to report to
this committee remember that
that stands for patient
compensation fund and it's
limited compensation based upon
a cap that is now over forty
years old that was never
intended to protect corporate
hospitals from Tennessee who
place profits over the safety of
New Mexican citizens it has
nothing to do with individual
doctors and providers who will
be provided protection it has to
do with corporate responsibility
in profits over safety and
limited compensation to victims
thank you.
Thank you.
Tantra what's.
Is it yourself.
Thank you so much can you hear
me now.
Yes good evening thank you so
much for taking me I'm on.
April of two thousand twelve my
husband was complaining of chest
that we can all consenting
on a stressed I took him
immediately to our local
hospital in southeastern New
Mexico where they determined
that they thought that he had
pneumonia at that point they
start putting up stairs for
monitoring at six thirty in the
morning we have what's called a
Widowmaker heart attack at that
point I was told that the
cardiologists was on vacation
and that there was no
cardiologists on staff there was
nobody to.
Help in the cath lab and they
have no plan in place to get him
airlifted out of this area he
was airlifted to.
It says and it damage was
already done he has a thirty
eight percent ejection fraction
rate which means that the amount
of oxygen and blood to go to his
organs are not what those of you
and I.
I've another time.
I was going to let you finish
would you go back to this.
Go back.
Are you willing to come back.
This.
I didn't want to stop people.
Can you raise your hand.
Speaker can.
Madam chair her hand is raised.
Patricia Cantero I think okay.
There is okay if you could just
finish this yes now I will
finish with that the damage was
already done once we got to love
it his his heart had been
deprived of so much that is
muscle the muscle have died they
put a stent and was later
determined that he would have to
have a peacemaker and a big
delay not to live day to day but
just simply get him from this
area to somewhere that could
take care of him it is hard
killed him but it's not as hard
it's going to fail it's going to
be the lack of oxygen that all
of this other organs are being
deprived because of the amount
of time that it took for them to
get him from here to there and
and this happened in two
thousand and twelve he was forty
eight years old he was healthy
otherwise
What's this the rest of our
lives and unfortunately I don't.
Think it's going to be a part
that tells them it's going to be
the rest of his body because of
a lack of oxygen and blood flow
to the organs and if they would
just have a cardiologists on
coal or someone operate the
council.
We can do this I want you to be
talking to speak to a lifelong
thank you so much thank you.
Care less.
Nicholas part of a.
Madam can you hear me we can.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is
Nicholas court of a I'm gonna
turn it the New Mexico Center on
Law and Poverty.
With all these for breaking
stories in mind and for the
reasons stated by the sponsor we
support this bill.
This is a serious issue in New
Mexico patients were harmed by
serious medical errors Fund
themselves and their families
financially devastated from the
ensuing entries.
We agree it's only fair to
update this law these large
corporations can pay their fair
share so patients can seek
compensation commensurate with
their entries thank you and I
urge you to support this bill.
Thank you I'm.
Dominique we can see what's your
last name is.
Go ahead.
Yes I'm here can you hear me.
Yes okay great good evening
everybody my name is Dominique
to Paul and I'm a native New
Mexican born raised and
currently living in Albuquerque
I'm sorry support of health bill
of the five years ago my husband
and I decided to start our
family we had a wonderful
pregnancy and I went into labour
on my daughter's due date.
The story start.
All of a sudden I was
experiencing unrelenting back to
back contraction which deprive
my baby's brain of oxygen for
about twenty long minutes until
she was born.
My daughter Josephine and I do
Paul was born life lesson with
me only taken to the newborn
intensive care unit questions
but the first time with the pro
life.
We my husband I we had no idea
what was going on or what was
why there wasn't normal it
wasn't until several days after
her birth that we learned about
the great medical error occurred
and that occurred and not
because my daughter's
permanently New Jersey.
We learned that I was given an
extremely large dose of and it
sorry in an accurate of the
danger of medication that then
because my hyper contraction
eradication of the non label
back which was a complete
reaches fifty protocol we later
discovered that there were deep
years of systemic failure the
pop at all and that the failures
were risking the lives of many
of their patient patients and my
family what the unfortunate one
that fell victim to the
pervasive negligent.
My daughter.
Your goal today she is with us
but you have durable property
and cannot walk by ourselves and
required for everything and
every aspect of her daily life.
Asian of lifelong and it wasn't
her fault it wasn't my fault it
was a hospital Paul and it
really one preventable.
I hope the tragedy never happens
to anyone else and that large
corporations like the hospital
where she was born are held
responsible for their actions
thank you.
Thank you.
We.
Thank you.
My name is pretty require I'm a
licensed mental health counselor
with the specialty and trauma
informed counseling and it is
not by chance that I landed in
the spill.
My sister shared with most
vibrant wonderful person and
what every kid sister dreams up.
Losing my sister felt like
losing a part of me siblings are
often referred to as a silent
Gruber's because so much focus
goes to the parents of a lost
child.
It is so important to understand
that death in the family it
affects every single person in
that family.
The only member do malpractice
has severe consequences the
surviving family members not
only a lifetime or project but
for generations my two wonderful
boys lost the chance to meet we
spoke about current chairman and
even though they know so much
about her to her every night
while looking at the moon.
My heart aches for the lost
connection.
We know there's nothing that can
be done to bring back wonderful
sister it is important for the
lost big knowledge and for the
family to be treated fairly.
I urge you to respect all the
families that continue to grieve
for loved ones.
Do you
support HB seventy five thank
you.
Thank you.
Good evening madam chair members
of the committee my name's
Felice rail and I'm here as a
board member of the senior
citizens law office an
organization that is dedicated
to advocating for the rights of
New Mexico seniors we support
house bill seventy five because
we believe the patient
compensation fund should be
restored to its original purpose
which is to support New Mexico
doctors and New Mexico patients
not to produce protect billion
dollar out of state hospitals
from paying their fair share to
harm to patients.
The elderly caps on damages
disproportionately reduce
compensation to elderly victims
because they're
disproportionately the people
who receive medical care they're
also more likely to be the
people who suffered non economic
damages because they're not wage
earners they often care for
loved ones we need to make
medical malpractice less
prevalent not less expensive
thank you.
Thank you.
Last I have Michael Radtke.
Good evening madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Michael Radtke and I am
calling in from Missy in New
Mexico and in twenty thirteen us
twenty five years old and I
experienced compartment syndrome
in both of my legs when I went
to the hospital I was a.
Not diagnosed for over there for
three days and by the time I was
diagnosed it was too late in my
compartment syndrome henge.
Because under repairable damage
where they had to remove my
lateral muscles.
This happened because
of negligence and following this
chain of command you'll find
that the hospital that's
actively was responsible for you
know ensuring the communication
necessary to ensure proper care
and that didn't happen hospitals
aren't always at fault when they
are they should be held
accountable and I'm here tonight
asking you to support hospital
seventy five thank you.
Thank you very much
no we will go back to.
Representative Eli so that you
can either address the.
Comments now and then the bill
whenever you're ready to do.
Madam chair just a couple of
points to respond to the
comments that were made and all
the amendment
first of all
one witness mention this was a
trial lawyer issue it's not I I
don't I'm not involved in legal
malpractice I sue lawyers for
living I'm not in a medical
malpractice for thirty plus
years don't intend to do it this
about patients in independent
doctors and the fact is is that
hospitals were not included in
the initial lactate somehow
nobody knows why they were
dropped in nineteen ninety two
our fifteen years after the
original medical malpractice act
was adopted as a result of a
crisis on medical insurance that
crisis did not exist when
superintendent Franchini but the
hospitals and the doctors that
are tested by thinking that's
gonna somehow be helpful to fund
it's not the R. the the
surcharges that were issued on
the hospitals
are not based on any real
information claims information
as we get into the questions I'm
happy to talk about that these
actual studies are based on St
that's what's happening in the
longer the hospital stay in the
deeper the whole is going to be
done that eventually independent
physicians are gonna have to dig
out and they're going to be in
real trouble and so the sooner
we get the hospitals out the
better and with that madam chair
of I would move the adoption of
amendment number one which is
our number two one nine seven
zero seven point one and what it
does is it who's the effective
date of the act to December
thirty one twenty twenty one
this came at the request of the
supertech current superintendent
of insurance R. Russell told not
the former superintendent
features that I've been talking
about thank you madam chair.
Thank you very much just bear.
I'll second madam madam it is
their discussion on the
amendment.
Junction to be amended by any
committee member so if you could
let me know.
Okay we will adopt that
amendment.
Is that a lie and the first
person or a question is
representative Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representative and I want to
first really thank all of the
families that have spoken out
today and
It's going to be a little hard
for me as well.
because I share your pain.
my daughter was a victim of
malpractice as a child.
failed to diagnose and as a
consequence twenty years later
she has cancer in her.
Rain and then her long sending
her bones and her liver.
That could have been prevented
because the original can't
cancer was a very slow growing
cancer.
So I and and on her behalf as a
parent I would buy was
appointment in the system.
So I I under I understand and I
want to thank you.
For speaking your stories
because it's really hard.
but I do have a couple of a
couple of comments and
questions.
I'm I do want to say it's not
all on doctors and hospitals
should have responsibility
because as you have as some have
Testified to hospitals have.
Our policies they have systems
they have support staff and
variety of things that are out
of the doctor's control that are
within the hospitals control of
how services are delivered so
they are distinctly different
and potentially liable for
malpractice claims in my
opinion.
I think it was wrong to bring
the amendment it in the way that
it was done and of.
And I think they should be
separate.
I do have expressed some concern
about.
what happens when the hospitals
are out in the claims come in
with that within the statute of
limitations and those claims are
higher than any of the funds
that the hospitals have put in
which puts it on the back of
providers I would assume the
individual providers.
to raise the funds to cover
those claims I assume on I'm
going to it
yes the representative you to
clarifying just in just a
moment.
but I've seen some of the
figures about how the
the assessments so the providers
have gone up and up and yet the
deficits have gone down have
increased since the hospitals
have been and so I understand
the argument that the longer
leave then the bigger the whole
gets.
But Representative I just I have
to ask this question I don't
know if it's even technically
possible I don't know but is
there a possibility hasn't been
any discussion about a
possibility or would you
continue talking to folks that
would now and think about the
possibility of some kind of a
tail provision or reinsurance
provision paid for by the
hospitals to cover their claims
that might be more than what
the hospitals have contributed
to the fund over the next few
years and which there's a
statute of limitations that
claims can be brought so madam
chair and representative
Armstrong I I appreciate you
give me a heads up about that
question so what I'd like to do
is is have Mr Vargas answered I
know he's thank you some thought
to this question thank you madam
chair alternatives to ours thank
you representative Ely madam
chair representative Armstrong.
The ability to get any benefit
from the medical malpractice act
including the ability to pay
claims from the patient
compensation fund.
Is tied expressly to your status
as a qualified health care
provider.
What house bill seventy five
does is it removes the hospitals
from the definition of a
qualified health care provider
in the act itself expressly
states that someone who is not a
qualified health care provider
may not access any of the
benefits of the Act including to
patient compensation for and we
have appellate cases
interpreting that provision that
have affirmed that very
principle so by way of example
if the hospitals were removed
tomorrow he claimed that would
arise day after tomorrow.
Would not be calling upon the
patient compensation fund for
payment and with respect to your
question about the tail
provision I think the thing that
no one has mentioned here and
that I have learned was my
experience as a medical
malpractice and an insurance
lawyer is it every one of these
large corporate hospital systems
has insurance coverage that is
one used because they've been
getting the benefit of the
medical malpractice.
everyone that I need to
Presbyterian Christus all of
them have claims made policies
that will insure them for
medical liability some of them
have limits up to a hundred
million dollars by way of
example in addition to that
this material is one of the the
hospital chains that will be
affected by this but they're
required to file their tax
returns on their tax returns
they disclosed in the most
recent filing they held back a
hundred and fifty one million
dollars to pay cool professional
liability claims they have the
ability to pay these claims they
always have.
Just getting subsidized by
physicians right now and the
idea that the physicians will
have to continue to subsidize
them when they're out is not
supported by the statutory law
or the case law.
Thank you thank you
Representative and Mr Vargas for
that clarification and and just
so that I'm I'm sure I'm sure it
so once they're out
patients that want to bring a
claim against the hospital can't
turn to the patient compensation
fat Fund even if it occurred
while the hospitals or in.
That's my understanding and my
reading of the statute okay.
Okay in my my only worry is that
yeah and I I appreciate that
they are that the hospitals
probably have coverage and
resources I I just don't want
patients to be on the out
but thank you for bringing this
and I'm I'm going to support the
bill I think it was wrong to
have them included together.
I think they should be separated
that if there's another bill
that I know there's a I haven't
read it I know there's another
bill on the Senate side I'm
I I have to tell you I'm open to
them staying in but being
totally separate with totally
different funds and totally
different limits on how much how
many claims can be brought also
they're not tied to the
physicians of that so proposal
I'm open to it because I think
there should be separate.
but thank you and again I.
the families that spoke to today
again I can't tell you how
touched I am by your stories and
how much I can relate thank you.
Representative Townsend.
Yes thank you ma'am and.
I would.
Echo the sentiment so wall
Representative Armstrong and
many others.
The staff the stories are.
Chart ranking and
In trouble.
But with that the.
Madam chair I understand
Secretary of insurance is in our
audience today and has some
information that we should
ponder on would chew up.
Which you call on him ma'am so
he can related the committee yes
thoughts as the superintendent
of insurance for the state of
New Mexico.
Representative I'm going to
leave that to the our members
present.
Hello.
Okay.
Representative Eli.
Let's see let's make sure madam
chair I I think he's here yes F.
R. Representative Townsend wants
to ask a question I guess you
your I try to respond
superintendents concerns.
Okay.
Thank you.
Andrew this is named.
R. Russell told madam chair yes
and it's got its hand raised.
Okay.
Go ahead Mr told.
Can you hear me OK now yes thank
you very much madam chair.
And representative Ely and
Representative Townsend
I just want to let the community
know that we did issue a report.
after doing close to a year long
study on the.
Malpractice act now it's worked
and what hasn't worked let me
say first that I completely
agree.
With all the comments that have
been made that the manner in
which the hospitals were
admitted into the patient
compensation fund was
inappropriate
You they were not just for the
level of information that we
needed
and and that has present some
ongoing challenges but I do want
to say that the issue of whether
the hospitals should be in or
not we clearly said in our
report that this from our
perspective is a matter of
legislative policy making.
You know what the.
well we favored more
comprehensive review of the
malpractice act.
said quoting here now these
matters are critical public
policy importance which are
brought impact on New Mexicans
and we recognize that the
ultimate decision on how or
whether to update the MMA a boat
that's medical malpractice act
does belong to the legislature
and governor.
I would like to know if I may.
Madam chair.
Make one thing clear while the
PCF the question compensation
fund has the does have limits.
On the.
The.
The penalty if you will the
committee or payment that could
be made there are no limits
whatsoever on how much the
participation compensation fund
will pay to cover ongoing
medical expenses.
The malpractice act doesn't
establish one thankfully.
And the DCF from our perspective
at least under my ring is
primary goal is to make sure
that people who have been harmed
through no fault of their own.
That they get the compensation
that they need to ensure their
future medical expenses can be
addressed.
So superintendent
Just to be clear.
Are used in support of this
piece of legislation and what it
would do to the to our
patient compensation fund or is
there a better way to do it that
protects
New Mexico citizens.
Madam chair Representative
Townsend I don't think it's an
either or.
As I said this is really a
legislative decision
legislature's decided to needed
to be able to be safe and the
legislature should make the
decision as to who should not be
in the same.
And I don't really think it's my
role to say do this or don't do
that there are certain
decisions that have future
impact on the state they really
belong with you and your
colleagues.
because they're purely policy
matters.
You know we can administer
whatever the.
Legislature instructs us to do.
Well absent the hospitals.
From.
Representative Townsend I just
want to remind you please go to
the chair yes ma'am I I
apologize you madam chair and
and superintendent Kyle absent
the hospital's participation.
What is the outlook of the fund
of in your opinion.
Madam chair and Representative
Townsend the funds as others
have noted has a significant
deficit right now.
without contributions from the
hospitals
that deficit will increase and
had to be borne by those who are
in the fund it may discourage
physicians from participating in
the fund.
and.
We were some other choices
however I think it's also
important to note
that the majority of the
physicians in the state are now
employed by.
The hospitals and the hospitals
make a contribution to the fund
for those positions how that
will be handled going forward is
something we would have to sort
out if the hospitals come out
of.
And Madam chair representative
let me add to that.
That right now the problem is we
don't know what here's what we
do here we know that the
hospitals have not provided the
claims information the last
several years the superintendent
would need to have in order to
determine what the claims
payouts going to be in the
future.
So for example when and and I
can have us Mr Vargas talk about
this as well is that when you
purchasing guided insurance the
first thing your insurance
company wants to know is have
you been state for auto
accidents have been another auto
accidents one of the paying out.
Should have that information and
so without that with these multi
billion dollar companies and
twenty one of the twenty five
hospital corporations there in
this act right now a multi
billion with a B..
Are in this act being subsidized
by patients and by independent
position and going forward that
poll just gonna get deeper
there's major claims made
against these hospitals the
patients compensation one is
going to activate it and
ultimately the premiums and
surcharges charged into
management positions gonna go
away I and our position or
stopping what the
superintendents John US that's
our job that's not.
Thank you madam chair thank you
up and I didn't know madam chair
Mr Vargas want to add that but
if I said that well Mr Vargas
madam chair.
Chair representative yes I think
you articulated this sentiment
very well in today is.
Okay.
Asian compensation fund started
a cascade of deficit.
And it is continued and it has
grown and the question for us
becomes are we gonna let it
continue or we gonna stop it now
that we recognize the problem
and there will be some pain
associated with stopping it now
but you'll just be paying
allowing it to continue will be
fatalities.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you madam chair and
representative that I might
asked Mr Vargas to describe that
pain as he sees that.
Thank you madam chair
representative Allison as we
everyone knows there is a
deficit in the in the fund it
has been running at a deficit
since after the first hospital
was allowed in in two thousand
nine at some point we presume
claims will come to the point
where they have to be paid and.
We'll have to be paid by future
pick surcharges as we've been
doing and and I don't mean to be
flippant or crude but in the
business well that's referred to
as a Ponzi scheme.
And.
It's difficult to make up the
shortfall but it will have to be
made up at some point and we
believe that making it up now
will be far less difficult in
the future when it's so large
that it's not even possible to
make a.
Madam chair representative I
think
if you want I think that the
superintendent can confirm what
I just said.
Madam I'm happy to turn over
superintendent all.
Madam chair that's fine if it
further
Describes and delineates the
issues before so I think that's
perfectly.
madam madam chair
Our deficit for twenty nineteen.
In the fund is sixty five
million dollars and that has
grown significantly over the
past few years and I.
Also want to say that it is
quite true as I suggested
earlier that when the hospitals
were lead and we did not get and
I have not received the kind of
information one would normally.
Want to see before making a
decision about admission.
I can apologize on behalf of the
agency now but of course we
weren't here when that decision
was made.
but obviously we're concerned
about that and what the
potential exposure.
To the funding says Mr Vargas
suggests we are meeting our
obligations now on the hopes
that additional monies come in
this is not the way.
We should do business.
I madam chair I appreciate that
Mr partition Mr hello I I
appreciate it thank you
representative
I will continue to listen thank
you.
Your muted madam chair.
Madam chair your muted I just
realized I'm sorry I was trying
to keep myself from.
Speaking at the wrong time
Representative night for your
next.
Thank you madam chair.
I'm.
A little bit confused so I do
have several questions
I I just heard Mr Vargas say
that in two thousand nine the
first hospital with them
so was the medical malpractice
that Amanda M. two thousand
nine.
Madam chair I'm gonna let Mr
versions that question he is a
better administration I am Madam
chair representative that's okay
thank you madam chair
representative
The act was last amended in
nineteen ninety two and it made
two changes it raised the
Economic cap from five hundred
thousand dollars to six hundred
thousand dollars and it added
hospitals to the definition of a
qualified health care provider
from nineteen ninety two until
two thousand and nine the
conventional wisdom was that if
we follow the statute and
required a proper risk
assessment before letting a
hospital into the patient
compensation fund that we would
find that the surcharge was far
more than the cost of private
insurance however in two
thousand nine under
superintendent Franchini the
statue was not followed in the
first hospital was let in with a
severely inadequate surcharge
again and I believe twenty
sixteen a whole slew of
hospitals we're let in in the
same manner and that has led to
the problems that we're
attempting to address today.
So the the statutory history of
this is that the medical
malpractice act goes back to the
nineteen seventies.
And the statute was amended in
ninety two to allow hospitals to
the part of this
Patient compensation fund this
is that what are I heard from
your testimony Madam chair
representative that's correct.
And so prior to to nineteen
ninety two hospitals or not one
of the
list of of medical providers
that would.
Receive the benefits under the
medical malpractice at is that
correct Madam chair
representative I believe that's
correct thank I will contest I
was only four years old when
that happens the I don't know
first hand but that is my
understanding from for research.
Well this is certainly an area
that I haven't done any
statutory.
History on the the the the the
claims are made that that that
something happened and and
stripper Jennifer and Katy did
something and.
I.
I don't recall superintendent
Frank Katie being in the
position that in nineteen ninety
two could you help a lab right
your prior testimony with the
the nineteen ninety to date.
Madam chair representative what
my testimony was that he did not
properly follow the statute when
hospitals were let in the statue
was amended when when the statue
was amended to allow hospitals
to become a qualified health
care provider they also created
a separate scheme for letting
them in and by separate I mean
the doctors have one way to get
in and the hospitals have a
separate from the hospital
separate scheme is a requirement
that a full risk assessment be
done before they'd be let in and
before their surcharges
determine what superintendent
Franchini did is failed to do
the proper risk assessment and
therefore we don't didn't know
what the risks were and we
didn't know what the appropriate
surcharge was common sense and
history has shown that the
proper surcharges we're not
applaud.
And if I recollection serves me
right in two thousand nine when
the first hospital okay then
superintendent Franchini was not
the superintendent at that time
either was the.
Madam chair representative I
don't know when when Mr Frankie
first became the superintendent
he certainly was when the slough
hospitals or land in twenty
sixteen and seventeen.
Okay so so let me
let me write the state down the
the.
The medical malpractice act well
as
Came in the building and what
the mid nineteen seventies.
Representative let me let me
sure I can go through with you
real quick in nineteen seventy
six is the medical malpractice
and hospitals were not included
in nineteen ninety two for
reasons that we don't know
hospitals were included.
In two thousand nine Madam chair
representative that from the
first hospital was let in.
At some point between two
thousand nineteen ninety two and
two thousand sixteen hospital
started become huge businesses
multi billion dollar multi state
businesses with hospitals around
the country.
And in two thousand sixteen
superintendent Franchini let us
log up.
So that now twenty one of the
twenty five hospitals are multi
billion dollar come.
madam chair and representative
that that does help.
And it kind of goes to the some
of the issues that have been
testified to
I have a little bit of
experience coming from ROZ will.
with respect to some of this
time frame in the late nineteen
nineties our.
We have to hospitals and Raul St
Mary's and eastern New Mexico
Medical Center St Mary's was a
private hospital it was
purchased by eastern New Mexico
Medical Center which was a
county hospital.
Our in the late nineteen
nineties the county sold eastern
New Mexico Medical Center and
both facilities to a private
corporation that continues down
it to this day so that the.
That that timing
reflects maybe a a number of
things in the timing of this
time line nineteen ninety two
hospitals included two thousand
nine first hospital admitted the
the whole our delivery of
medical services has undergone
drastic changes in the last
twenty years and I would
certainly concur with that from
from my experience and and my
community of serving on the
county commission.
So.
It when when the testimony first
the.
Or when we first heard the
testimony it sounded like there
was an immediate.
Big change but looking up the
timeline that may not be the
case nineteen ninety two Las
bills included two thousand nine
first hospital allow them and
then the slug in two thousand
fifteen or thereabouts
So.
In the last.
Fiber if you go back to two
thousand nine the last twelve
years the last dozen years last
five years six years
we have hospitals now taking
what I would.
Strong word but would take
advantage of the medical
malpractice act if I understand
the testimony.
And.
Those entities.
According to the testimony madam
chair is that.
Maybe they were allowed them
without going through the proper
vetting them and determining
what they should I am so so my
my question is.
Who sets the right payment that
the hospitals make in to the
Patient compensation fund who is
the person that's that
determines Hospital aids going
to pay X. amount.
Chair and representative before
I turn to Mr Vargas to ask ants
that I I do try to be accurate
and what everybody's telling me
is is that in two thousand nine
when the first hospital was lady
and that was not actually
superintendent Frankie that was
superintendent chop us so I just
want to make that correction
but then I'll turn it over to Mr
Vargas to answer your question
thank you madam chair
representative I.
As soon that in two thousand
nine supercenter Frankie was not
assume that.
Madam chair representative
answer your question it is the
office of the superintendent of
insurance that sets the right
presumably based upon the risk
assessment is to be performed.
So madam chair if I could ask
the superintendent.
Told to maybe help tell us.
Sensei is a one that sets the
rates how is the.
Compensations that for the
various hospitals into this
patient compensation fund at the
present time.
In terms of Representative
neighbor
We are required to do an
actuarial assessment of the
appropriateness of the rates
every two years.
but it's also true that we can
accept or reject those and give
you a specific instance.
The actuarial port they came in
most recently.
The to take effect in the
current year said well we don't
have enough claims experience to
make a good estimate on
hospitals so we recommend you
decrease their surcharge that we
have formally rejected that.
For the very reasons that you've
heard here and we will be
increasing the surcharge for the
hospitals.
May for one.
And so madam chair of the the
superintendent of insurance has
the ability to to set those
rates based upon I guess a
variety of factors.
And so over time the deficit
that currently exist would it be
the plans of the superintendent
to bring that into at least a a
balance situation.
Madam chair and superintendent
Mr.
Nighbor certainly it would be
that.
Madam chair and representative
understand that that's assuming
that we're gonna get a accurate
information from hospitals and
don't forget that this is going
to be on the backs of New Mexico
patients the people that you've
heard from today they are going
to be limited in terms the
recovery when these hospitals
can go out and in fact as you
heard from Mr Vargas already
have private insurance so in
effect what's happening is these
harms patients are subsidizing
these multi billion dollar
companies currently I'm wrong
it's not twenty one of twenty
five is an updated list of
twenty three twenty five why are
we having New Mexico citizens
subsidizing these hospitals
these people with these tragic
stories with babies that are
going to live the rest of their
lives with real injuries that.
All of the damages that they
would be entitled to from these
hospitals because these are not
hospitals that are fleeing the
state of New Mexico quite the
contrary they have these huge
business models where they send
their profits to these out of
state headquarters why are we
subsidizing then at the end of
the day that's what this is
really about it's about doing
this on the backs of these
patients and potentially on the
backs of independent doctors
because don't forget hospital
hospitals because the nature of
the beast it could be not just
one claim at a time it could be
a bunch of clips because the way
the hospitals work if there's a
system failure and a bunch of
people are injured that funds in
trouble no matter what the
superintendent us so the idea of
risking the fund and putting on
the backs of these independent
doctors and patients in New
Mexico that have been harmed
through no fault of their own
strikes me is the real answer to
this question hospitals should
not be protected by the
patient's compensation fund
there is no crisis there no
reason to keep them at thank you
madam chair representative.
Madam chair and representative.
We're certainly going to
disagree on on that because I
believe that that New Mexico
citizens are going to pay the
price one way or the other and
yes the we enact public policy
that causes are.
A shift M..
The way but services are are
paid for or the risk or anything
else ultimately at the end of
the day people are going to
choose to either do business
they're not do business here
find X. Y. Z. Services or not
provide X. Y. Z. Services and we
already heard the testimony from
doctors expressing concern for
their very practice and and so I
don't think it's just a simple
we'll take these folks out and
all of sudden everything well in
fact I think the testimony is if
we take hospitals out of this
pool they could have some
devastating impacts in the
future and madam chair and and
what one of those impacts may be
of.
May be may be the future
payments that are made to the
very people who are supposedly
protected by the patient's
compensation fund and that is
their continuing medical
requirements for the for the
rest of their lives so so the
hospitals are not paying into
this fund now how are.
How is the Fund.
Going to continue to pay for its
existing obligations to patients
who need those additional or
lifetime medical
benefits under these the under
that fund Madam chair
representative before I go to
that question you raise
something else in your model and
I'd like Dr McEntee to answer
the question about independent
physicians if we could bring her
up madam chair.
Dr mac in any.
Yes madam chair representative
Ely and Representative neither
thank you very much I also am
very concerned about patients in
the future having adequate
future medical expenses.
I think one of the issues that
isn't being addressed when
people worry about pulling the
contribution from hospitals out
of the fund is that by pulling
the hospitals out of the fund we
also pull their cases that
require compensation out of the
fund and so in those cases back
to where they were in the
privately purchased insurance
that hospitals have the new law
currently allows each of us to
have three cases per year very
few physicians have three cases
per year almost all the
hospitals have way more than
three cases per year and
therefore they
disproportionally pull money out
of the fund Furthermore when the
actuarial studies that Russell
toll was commenting on and that
we looked at during the time of
the lawsuit against
superintendent Franchini the
data provided was completely
inaccurate and under estimated
the number of cases the
hospitals would have in fact the
actuarial basis the actuarial
company was hired by the
American hospital association or
the New Mexico branch of it and
provided that data which is why
as plaintiffs in that lawsuit we
felt that it was really an
adequate so the other issue that
needs to be considered is that
when I have of medical
malpractice premiums I pay for
my physicians during through the
frontier I pay for my nurses and
a separate.
premium and a separate insurance
company the hospitals have
included their nurses in the
cases that are depleting the
fund so more than three cases
really big big cases as you
heard from those unfortunate
souls who testified earlier and
inadequate actuarial
Data that are properly set the
fees for the hospitals if all of
those things were removed today
or at the end of the year what
would happen is the cases which
have not yet come to pass would
not be eligible to pull money
out of the Fund and it would be
possible for the physicians with
their smaller number of less
agreed just basis to be able to
maintain our premium level and
our our surcharge level.
Madam chair representative let
me add something that you may
not know there's no way for you
know at Roswell but I would be
happy I'm sure she did find it
to provide you with Dr Macanese
resume miss one of the finest
physicians in the state this is
not somebody that we just picked
up off the street and you're
gonna find this somebody with an
excellent reputation so we're
talking about independent
physicians this is somebody with
a voice and so I just want to
make that clear there's no way
madam chair representative for
you know on that and I wanted to
make sure that I made that point
clear and if you'd like for
resume or CV I'll be happy to
get it for you.
And then Madam chair
representative
I know Dr Carson fairly well and
she testified earlier she's from
Rossell she has a substantial
practice that touches many lives
in southeast New Mexico and I
certainly of believe that she
provides excellent care to to
her patients and and comes to
the comes to this the debate on
equal footing
but madam chair I would like to
ask the doctor one question.
By what legal theory would the
hospitals if they are removed
from this poll.
By what legal theory would that
now be responsible for paying
for continuing benefits under
the patient compensation fund.
Madam chairman Representative
Nighbor the there is a clause in
the law and I can't quote you
the verse but I suspect Mister
Rogers.
That says that if you are not
following the law the act in in
its entirety that you were not
entitled to the benefits of the
act and not following the act
entirely includes having more
than three cases per year and
having nurses who are not
covered practitioners under the
act included in that settlement
so it's those two things that
make it so that the the
hospitals would not be able to
do that in fact hospitals never
joined the act for many many
years because they knew they had
more than three claims every
year and therefore the act was
not a very much value to them
because it would only cover
their first three claims that's
why they have always had other
insurance prior to this being
allowed.
I also am very concerned as an
independent physician.
With a practice that serves
Albuquerque and Gallup.
That if we have more and more
expenses to where we cannot
afford medical malpractice
insurance the ability of people
to remain independent will
decrease and if I sold my
practice to a hospital tomorrow
though every patient would be
charge double if they were on
Medicare Medicaid and sometimes
trip along commercial insurances
just because of the different
fee schedules so if we in this
state wish to have affordable
health care for all of our
patients we need to preserve the
independent practitioners across
the state thank you.
Current law for.
Why do we why do we need this
bill yes what the doctor says is
true Madam chair representative
if they're not complying with
the.
Work.
We're.
Please go.
He.
Did but you didn't go through
the chair.
I believe I did madam chair no I
said madam chair.
Why do we need this bill if the
hospitals are compliant and they
and they are the hearing to to
they are.
Into the bargain under under the
medical malpractice at.
They're not part of Madam chair
representative the reason I was
trying to interrupt you is
because you asked the question
and I'd like both the doctor and
Mr Vargas to answer and I think
you might be able to answer your
other question as well so that
we can get to the questions and
be done with this first madam
chair.
Madam chair representative Ely
Representative neighbor
what did the doctor mcity said
was true and that is in section
forty one dash I dash time see
if they're no longer a qualified
health care provider they no
longer get the benefit of the
act of and that was affirmed by
the New Mexico Supreme Court of
appeals in a case called choir
is what is the Nelson founded
two thousand three NMCA zero one
one and the reason we need this
bill is that the superintendent
is not empowered to just kick
them out once they're in.
And without this bill drive
mechanism has litigation pending
but we know how litigation goes
it's three or four years down
the road before ruling
definitive ruling happens we're
is U. S. legislators have both
the ability and the
responsibility to fix this
problem today thank you.
Madam chair of.
You still have the floor
Representative.
Thank you.
Madam chair the all.
Medical.
The industry
I I certainly have my my own
opinions on on.
Whether it's moving in the right
direction or not but but
obviously something occurred and
in two thousand fifteen and I
suspect and madam chair
Representative correct me if if
by.
Supposition is incorrect but I
suspect that in two thousand
fifteen or whatever your was
that you have this influx of
hospitals is because.
They range the conclusion that
it was better for them
economically to to provide or to
have the protections under
medical malpractice act then it
was to continue to rely on their
own private.
Insurance and so we saw a big
ship.
Would that be an accurate
statement.
Madam chair representative do
one Mr Vargas to ensure that of
course if they get a smoking hot
deals they're going to do it and
and we've already talked about
Vigil superintendent Franchini
did not do is due diligence and
so the hospitals got in on the
basis so we're going to pay all
this money but no claims from
page and we're not going to give
you the claims information but I
would like madam chair I would
like Mr borders to answer that
question.
Madam chair representative Ely
Representative neighbor.
Of course it was economically
better for them to join at that
time they were paying for
private insurance prior to that
the conventional wisdom was if
an appropriate risk assessment
was done and therefore a
course funding appropriate
surcharge that surcharge would
be way more expensive way more
expensive than the claims made
insurance coverage they were
buying on the private market.
As Representative Eli pointed
out when.
Superintendent Franchini given
the quote smoking hot deal
didn't do a proper risk
assessment didn't collect enough
and surcharges suddenly it's
like Hey I can get all this
coverage in all these benefits
and pay almost nothing for.
Course they're going to do that
unfortunately they're doing it
at the expense of patients and
New Mexico.
And again most of these
corporations including the multi
billion dollar corporation that
owns your hospital in Roswell in
eastern New Mexico Medical
Center took their record profits
out of New Mexico in that
hospitals K. to Brentwood
Tennessee and they continue to
make those record profits
because they're being subsidized
by New Mexico patients and not
paying the appropriate
surcharge.
Thank you Sir.
And so madam chair.
What I just heard is that it
took him twenty years to finally
tumble to the fact that they
have a much better deal under
this and they had under private
insurance and and I think the
hospitals probably have a little
bit sharper pencil in that
and if there is it if all the
sudden they place all these
things earlier by the
would have done that but maybe
maybe the thing in two thousand
fifteen.
Was not done properly they came
in.
But moving forward from two
thousand fifteen forward
we've heard testimony that
there's this deficit.
But I also.
I am under the impression that
may be.
That deficit.
Well it may increase in terms of
dollars the percentage of the.
Deficit as to the whole may be
decreasing do you have any
information regarding that the
Representative R. or Mr Vargas.
Madam chair representative
never.
We're only three to four years
are almost well we have about
three to four years into these
hospitals gaining this is what I
call the honeymoon period where
they start paying in premiums
but their claims don't star
rising we are now reaching the
point where those claims are
going to start arising and we're
going to see that that deficit
is going to increase both as a
dollar amount and as a
percentage exponentially once
the claim start hitting and they
are going to start getting this
year.
And so madam chair and and Mr
Vargas.
If those experiences
come to fruition the
superintendents already
testified that he has to.
Determine those sayings and
setting up future rates and so
if he wants to maintain solvency
and as you stated try to get
back to a balance where there's
no deficit then it's going to
require payment of the people
experiencing these these higher
incidence of of malpractice to
pay more which is gonna be the
hospitals not not the the
doctors of have one or two
claims a year.
And I'm really concerned that
maybe the we are.
Not allowing the superintendent
to to look at this carefully try
to bring it into and the balance
and it looks to me like this is
just a away to number one get
hospitals out of the medical
malpractice act which would then
remove the caps and allow the
the plans.
Plaintiffs attorneys and the
people
of who train those actions to
not have limitations on coverage
but on the other hand not have
the of.
Protections that are afforded by
the patient compensation fund
and it seems to me that the
this.
Idea of a patient compensation
fund was a a balance between the
needs of of people who are
harmed by medical malpractice
and at the same time tried to
weigh that against the the needs
of society to have
good health care professionals
that the provide the very
services because you know it's
one thing to throw rocks at a at
a hospital say the hospital
committed malpractice actually
malpractice is committed by
people a person commits
malpractice it's a doctor to
nurses it's and and the
representatives line of work
it's it's maybe it's a lawyer
commitment practice
institutions
Don't make those those types of
decisions I guess I could have
some policies that might the
might contribute but.
I'm I'm really concerned about
this bill and for those reasons.
I'm not sure I'm ready to
supported I understand there may
be another bill that so similar
that may have the support of the
superintendent of insurance and
and maybe we can get a look at
that one of these
Committee meetings in the future
thank you madam chair.
Thank you very much
Vice chair good.
Thank you madam chair
I appreciate everybody's
patience it's been a long day in
a long night as I said with this
and just tear us as we listen
again and again it's been
repeated this is really a policy
question and up to.
Us as legislators and elected
policy makers to decide whether
or not the hospitals belong in
MMA and specifically the PCS so
I've certainly been considering
this question over months now
and more intensely with you all
circling over the last week but
I really think for me there's a
secondary question that is of
utmost concern in priority to me
how do we protect the integrity
of the PCF.
sitting through today's public
comment was harrowing to hear
The stories about agree just
mistakes made about incredible
loss and trauma and harm.
And when I show up in the sea
I'll be at virtual and I show up
in this office and ready to take
these folks I'm trying to show
for New Mexican families and I
want to honor that tonight.
But I continue coming back to
this question in the long run we
certainly do have to decide if
it's appropriate to hold the
hospitals within the PCS.
But I I'm concerned tonight
about how we protect the PCS as
its operating today.
I hope I'm a little bit rusty
I'm trying to I try to pull up a
superintendent tolls report on
my cell phone lines in here too
that I don't have a hard copy
but I I read that report the day
it came out and as it happens I
had the opportunity to check in
with superintendent told several
times over the previous year and
ask for updates on the
stakeholder meetings that we
asked him to convene.
And I just I'm a little bit
confused frustrated tonight
because we've gone through the
record of all the
superintendents that maybe acted
out of line whether it's
Franchini or whatever Thomas did
in two thousand nine but this is
for intend that.
I would say in many ways are
superintendent he came in with
this administration his
nomination was supported by a
speaker IAAF's appointment to
the nominating commission like
we all watch closely and we're
ready for fresh energy and
expertise and insight to live up
to the potential in the thirty
of what OSI is.
So I believe in that I trusted
that I worked a superintendent
toll as an expert on a couple of
my bill so far so when I read
that report something struck me
right there at the top that the
the first recommendation and and
please correct me if I'm wrong
was that twenty twenty one was
not the session to do something
on the MMA or the PCS.
And I remember I was probably I
don't even remember you know
what there was a month ago or
getting ready to come the Santa
Fe I skimmed to more synopsis
and more wrecks
eight eight I do remember that
one pretty clearly and I I found
it again on page three
and as I seem to say that no
like legislative action shall be
taken.
They then go on to explain the
extensive stakeholder meetings
they've had that the trial
lawyers waited in hospitals and
other providers trying to get in
on this mess but that point was
made front and center and that
is what has guided me as I
started to imagine where we look
at this bill and whatever's
coming out of the Senate.
On page four section do point
eight they talk about whether or
not Hospital should remain.
and it said here that OSI should
review the process of admission
to the PCS and that that seems
to be a recommendation coming
from the trial lawyers so it's
it's not in this report the
hospitals be removed but just I
should get better at this
process we've extensively talked
about that relates to how people
get into the PCS.
On page seven again we note with
more detail that the report
reads the hospital should
remain.
As participants in the PCS to
prevent adverse outcomes adverse
impact I'm sorry entry my
scribbled writing here and I
just first madam chair I'll have
more questions but madam chair I
would like to confirm are we
talking about the same report
here because what I'm reading
seems that the superintendent
offered us a very clear
direction don't do anything yet
we're working with stakeholders
there's a lot of decisions that
we don't have consensus on yet
but for now the hospital should
remain in the funds might you
confirm that madam chair
representative Ely or others in
attendance madam chair and
Representative let me turn over
to me Mr Vargas he knows quite a
bit about this the strikers you
madam chair representative the
issue is with the final report
and I think it's a good
knowledge in there is that to
the extent.
The superintendent obtained new
actuarial reports those reports
themselves expressly admit they
do not have enough information
to adequately assess
inappropriate surcharge.
Degree of reliability that they
say is essentially fifty
percent.
There's a fifty fifty chance
that if we raise surcharges
we're gonna get it wrong.
And it's not likely that we're
gonna get it wrong in favor of
patients it's more likely that
we're gonna get it wrong against
patients and the longer we wait
to fix this problem the bigger
deficit becomes and I understand
the recommendation to not do
anything right now but I also
having lived here my whole life
having done this for almost
twenty three years and seen the
changes to the patient
compensation fund over those
twenty three years no.
Historically that we can't wait
any longer because this problem
is already reaching a fever
pitch one that we can't manage
four four and one that frankly
are patients can't afford so
every year that goes by that
this problem gets bigger it's
the snowball running down the
mountain it gets much better
thank you.
Madam chair representative
I want to make sure we get it
right when we move hello I'm my
apologies was that
superintendent total Madam chair
representative can also confirm
our offer anything on on my
understanding of the report I
see is name appear on the
screen.
Madam madam chair and the.
Representative Eli you you
certainly characterize our
report correctly
that we called for a
comprehensive look and and
changes to be made and now goals
the.
Our office is in ministers the
PCF.
And our process for sorting
surcharges and all the rest of
that.
I do want to go back however I
to say that this really is a
legislative decision.
Our job is.
Not to rights statutes.
But what statutes and have for
a.
The legislature decides in its
wisdom to remove hospitals then
that's something
you know obviously we will
implement the other part madam
chair that I would have wanted
to make earlier is that a
statement was made that the
hospitals are limited to three
occurrences.
and that is not accurate
physicians are limited to three
occurrences but there is no
limit.
None on the number of cases that
can be brought against us built
into the patient compensation
fund.
Which is something we pointed
out in the report.
Chair representative.
Madam chair representative it
sounded like he had a quick
finish this thought I wasn't
sure if you got cut off but I
appreciate that so.
I the card is important and I
appreciate the insight from
superintendent total and and our
expert Mr Vargas here but I want
to make the right decision and
madam chair representative Ely
is I've heard you say.
I think you said an addict
though before we issue insurance
we want to understand why who
were issuing insurance to and I
keep hearing that the hospitals
have it provided the right kind
of Intel and information and
insight in their in their risk
assessments so it it makes me
wonder you even hear Mr Vargas
says madam chair representative
we have a fifty percent chance
of getting it right in a fifty
percent chance of getting it
wrong all we've heard tonight is
examples about the missteps in
setting up an MMA and PCS that
is truly going to protect
patients I don't want to get it
wrong I don't want to go on a
fifty fifty and it makes me
wonder what would it look like
for us as policy makers again
holding the weight of of of as
superintendent toll said madam
chair representative deciding
whether or not the hospital
should be in place here we it
makes me feel we don't yet have
that information we haven't seen
those details.
What would it look like for us
to take that may and that and
understand what we were actually
doing.
And then move forward on
something like this and and I
guess that leads to my question
madam chair representative in
these wrecks and maybe the
report got it wrong it did look
like the trial lawyers asked
that OSI get better on their
process and admitting hospitals.
If that was what was shared in
the stakeholder meeting how did
we get from let's do our jobs
better let's use the authority
of us I better let's use
actuarial studies better and do
this right to eliminating
hospitals what happens in the
last quarter to to change that
position madam chair and
Representative audit to that
question minute but you talked
about percentages let me tell
you a hundred percent just a
hundred percent is twenty three
the twenty five companies multi
billion dollar companies are
going to continue to be
subsidized by injured patients
that's a hundred percent a
hundred percent the patients
that you hear from their injured
by hospitals that otherwise can
purchase private insurance and
are doing so currently and can
fully compensate patients are
going to be able to do it on the
backs of patients so a hundred
percent of those patients are
gonna receive limited recovery
if there damages exceed the caps
in the act so it's always going
to be on the backs of the
patients and a hundred percent
of the time these multi billion
dollar companies are going to be
able have already have prior to
the inclusion of the act have
private insurance they're always
going to happen so it's not like
that system is going to collapse
Presbyterians not going anywhere
neither are any of these other
multi billion dollar companies
they've been here for years
before so we talk about the
risks the risks are all on the
patients the risks are on the
independent doctors that's the
fifty fifty but all the patients
is a hundred percent hello like
Mr Vargas to answer your
questions as well Mr Vargas.
Thank you representative Ely
Madam chair representative.
I will tell you that I have been
told by trial lawyers that.
They did not believe that they
did in fact contribute anything
to that report and made that
clear to us superintendent pool
I know there's someone of a
disagreement about the
communication I am personally
not aware of anyone conveying
that they think that the
hospital that the.
Procedure for admitting hospital
should get better I think that's
a bit of an overstatement or
over education to the travelers.
Chair representative I do just I
clarify next my next question I
I'm not worried about the
collapse of the hospitals I
stand with you in that
absolutely I I'm not worried
about their profit margins are
how they bring home.
To their stakeholders and their
shareholders I am worried about
the collapse of the PCS and I am
worried that we do not have
enough information to determine
whether or not the hospital
participation in the PCS is
something that contributes to
the viability of the fund or
seeks the viability of the fund
to that I just want to ask one
or two more questions chair
representative
Did you consider.
Legislation this year that would
require.
Actual risk assessments of the
hospital student to to require
more of aside whatever it is so
that we can have.
The landscape needed to make a
more informed decision when we
take on a policy issue like this
I'm not sure we did consider but
I I thought Mr bars that point
must be tired Mister Marcus
probably better answer the seem
to have more energy at this time
if you.
Chair representative.
I think the discussion of that
was that any such legislation
would be superfluous because
there already is language in the
statute that requires it but as
we see time and time again both
on the state and national level
when a local government tries to
compel action by a multi billion
dollar corporation Dave you it
as voluntary.
Whether we have a statute a law
or not they get to do what they
want and frankly that's what
they've been doing in this
process they have not given the
information required to properly
assess their surcharges and it's
very basic information.
Madam chair representative I
don't think we need to go in
circles but I just to have one
last question for the evening
that continues to sit with me as
we heard public comment and
actually I snuck in and and was
a a nosy gossip where she's most
watching C. pack when they also
heard and debated this bill and
voted on this bill last week I I
believe I continue to hear go
back to this idea that that here
is about sustaining providers
and protecting patients I want
to be with you I want to get
there I want to get it right but
it is real that the medical
society lots of different
nursing associations and
provider groups and otherwise
are standing with the hospitals
and hospitals so ciation against
this legislation.
Where is that coming from Madam
chair representative Madam chair
representative I can answer that
question.
Most of the doctors are now not
independent anymore these are
these are hospital doctors these
employees of the hospital who by
the way you're gonna be
protected regardless of what we
do what we're asking is go back
to prior to two thousand
sixteen.
Make the fund solvent based on
the independent physicians go
back to an active work for
twenty five thirty years go back
to that act we can do that the
idea of continuing to have
injured patients and potentially
the independent physicians
subsidize these multi billion
dollar companies should act
superintendent toll has sat this
is our decision for me the
answer is incredibly clear you
have on the one hand on the one
side of the equation your these
multi billion dollar hospital
corporations on the other side
you have these injured patients
and these independent doctors
that want to stay independent
actually you're hearing from
your hearing from doctor Mack
Committee so when you ask Madam
chair representative why are we
hearing from these organizations
because they're conflicted
because they work for hospitals
because the hospital employees
because the hospitals themselves
want to steal they want to
continue to be subsidized by
patients and my independent
positions let's go back to a
time prior to two thousand sixty
that's what makes sense this
fund was solvent then enter the
solvent again but the
independent doctors in the
position where they control
their own destiny and not having
to rely on hospitals to find
information as of today they
have yet to find which is the
claims that have been made
against pretty simple they have
And that and you know what
they're going to fight this for
ever to do it and it's time we
say as a legislature get him out
of this act and let's get back
to business thank you madam
chair I'm trying to get out of
this act and get on two of my
business but I just have one
final question and I just again
want to honor and appreciate the
incredible your last question
you said the last.
I'm getting really tired okay.
I for real I just wanted to
Daymon honor all these New
Mexicans years you're holding my
heart and I want to continue to
commit to getting this right no
matter what but I take this
night tonight but.
Madam chair representative I I
heard you Representative say
that that these provider groups
are conflicted and I worked at
the Medical Society for years
including the session on one of
my very controversial bills HB
seven and in their testimony
they offered as a medical causes
IT they are conflicted on what
it means to protect access to
abortion but they still came
forward in support because
fundamentally they were
communicating their position on
that legislation as a matter of
policy and I want to honor that
the medical societies likely
doing that again today they
maybe conflicted they work in
different places they work
independently they work for
hospitals but I don't want to
discount that the medical
society of New Mexico has
concerns that this will
undermine the PCS their means of
having affordable coverage and
continuing to show up in our
communities providing health
care but my last question really
is that I I again just read the
toppling of that report why why
did the superintendent want to
delay and I'm not sure if you
have any Intel and not madam
chair or representative but
that's my last question of the
night that's what first got me
into this debate that report
that we ask for names that right
now is not the time to do this
and if if we can wrap with that
madam chair I swear I'm done
thank you I mean the meeting
itself Madam chair
representative because the
superintendent is in a position
where unless the legislature
acts they've got to say all
right let's take a break let's
see what happens that's what
they're doing but as the
Legislature comes in and says
we're going to changes act we're
gonna get these hospitals out
here
that's what we get to do and
that's what the legislature to
us Madam chair representative.
I don't know how else to answer
that.
Are there any questions from
anyone who's not to answer asked
a question.
Representative Townsend I'll go
back to you I hope it's short it
will be short I believe this.
Madam chair and representative
in it it seems counterintuitive
to me to take twenty one twenty
two multi billion dollar
corporations they can't come out
of the plan when you're already
in a money deficits that what we
ought to be doing is is we
should not be allowing our
superintendent of insurance to
tell this tell us that this is
the legislative problem this is
a management problem of the
process and he should separate
the hospitals and the doctors
have the hospitals rate based on
their risk have the doctors rate
based on their wrist and get
this plan back in the solvency I
am not going to support the
process that you have put forth
but because I don't believe
checking those guys out of it is
in our best interest is going to
put all of our doctors in rural
New Mexico and private doctors
like once I'm looking at year
is a heck of a disadvantage and
so I'm about getting that that
the patient.
Process back in place and I I
just don't believe what you're
in my opinion based on what I've
heard and I don't believe you're
on the right track so I can't
support it but madam chair I
appreciate it very much.
I appreciate you just have the
one comment thank you.
Okay we have an amended
house bill seventy five in the
US but the pleasures of the
committee.
I will move it to pass.
I'll second you passes Amanda.
Yes yes okay what to call the
roll.
Representative Akan.
Yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Cook now.
Mr speaker.
Yes.
Representative Eli yes.
Representative Lewis.
Yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative night Burt now.
Representative Rehm now.
Representative Thomson.
Representative Thomson.
No.
Thank.
No.
Madam chair yes.
By a vote of seven to five we
have a two passes Amanda.
Thank you madam chair thank you
members the committee.
Thank you everybody I appreciate
I really appreciate the
testimony of the your witnesses
Representative Eli that's very
difficult.
For that I now and I know that
we all want to support our have
a healthy health care system in
New Mexico so.
It's it's a grueling
Strobel.
He.
And thank you all for a very
long day and your attention
we're tired.
But this.
About that bill.
