Representative Rehm.
There.
Representative Townsend Here.
Thank.
I'm here.
Madam chair.
Present to and we have a quorum.
Welcome everybody to House
Judiciary.
We have a housekeeping
issued to take care of first
thing.
And that is Representative
Hochman Vigil.
House Bill to fifteen that we
saw the other day.
We added
Representative Nibert and
Representative Eli thought that
there needed to be new material
inserted in a temporary
provision.
And so we voted on the bill with
that.
Amendment which then we were
going to have Council Service
prepare.
However
Amy Chavez Romero in the council
service explain to me that.
Statutory option actually does
not call for us to do that when
it's a temporary provision so I
didn't want to just prepare new
committee report without the US
percent of the committee I did
email Representative at by and
neither in our ranking member
is to be sure that you all knew
that the council service had not
prepared about amendment our
house bill two fifteen.
Are are there any questions
about that.
Madam chair I had sure.
I don't care what what words
they use but somehow they have
to draw our attention to the
fact that that is not existing
statute.
That that was my concern I don't
care what language they use but
usually we're looking for under
lines of things like that and so
that would be my comment back
Amy is that they need to figure
out.
What mechanism they draw our
attention to the fact that this
is not existing law it is added
in this bill that's being
brought forward.
So I'm I think.
Representative Nibert I copied
you on her email right
to you.
Let's read why don't you respond
to all in that email and just
make that point we.
Thank you my response.
You but I'd be happy to respond
to everyone.
Okay and I don't recall seeing
your response but I have to tell
you right now I have three
hundred and sixty some emails in
my.
Got to some it may be more
important in on point.
And if you were there I'd be
happy to talk to our agency
Romero directly chair just
related my pots there.
Yeah you can talk to a doctor.
Madam chair representative you
know what what you have a
Representative Nibert and I was
okay he can contact
Amy and then we can work
together to see we bring
something back to you I I don't
want to hold this bill up I
understand so and we say that
because we have a lot breakfasts
were there tomorrow.
Okay so Committee.
But not to the committee report
on house bill two fifteen I'm
not sure to ask about that Ellen
or
I know L. it will okay is there
then I okay them but I'm not
sure who prepared that.
Are you not prepared that but
I'm not sure who
has the committee report at this
time I have.
You do yes I did I did it that
day but I just did it with the
two oh two number but I held off
giving it to anybody tell that
was resolved.
Okay so what was the vote on
that bill.
It was twelve to zero two zero.
So the only.
The only thing we would change
in the committee report is that
we're not going to amend it to
put new material in.
Is there any objection to
reporting it out that way.
Madam chair okay all right so.
Yes Representative yes I'm a
little fuzzy on the details were
there other amendments no.
So we.
So it's just a do pass it's a
new path thank you madam chair
okay so when the management in
there the.
Yes because we did a roll call
vote on the amendment.
But the and then what was just
the New.
It was a number we have the hat.
Are you saying there was another
amendment to the bill yes which
we took a roll call vote on
which was also twelve zero.
Okay so the only thing we would
be changing in the committee
report would be that we're not
adding new material part of the
amendment.
I don't have a way to do that.
Something that.
Right.
I'm let's let's stop because we
have another role Representative
Dow has asked us not to hear
house bill two eleven today so I
think we'll have a little bit of
time and we can find
I wasn't prepared to go back and
review the bill and the
amendment at this time so let's
do this before we adjourn today
okay.
Madam may make one comment just
about the redistricting bill
very briefly.
Yes.
Thank you madam chair so just
for the information the members
of the committee you might not
know this already Senate bill
fifteen is moving now in the
Senate and is addressed I think
a number of the fatal
constitutional flaws that were
in.
House Bill to eleven and I have
become the primary house sponsor
on that bill and hopefully we
will get it over and you can
bring that before the committee
as well but I just wanted to
flag for you know members of the
committee here that that bill
appears to be.
I gaining some traction is
constitutionally compliant and
could be on its way over here
with the support I understand
of.
Quite a few if not all of
advocates that have been pushing
for house bill two about so
there may be some some positive
developments there.
Okay check thank you Mr speaker.
First on our agenda yes
Representative Lujan with
hospital to thirty five.
Go ahead Representative Lujan in
members I've
been turning off my video to get
better
a little bit more broad been
done.
With so.
It doesn't mean I'm not
attending to your Representative
Eli I'm thank you madam chair
you madam chair members of the
committee thank you for giving
me the opportunity to present.
Those House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill two
thirty five to you today this is
an important piece of
legislation for the insurance
consumers of the state that
nicely balances that the
interests and needs of the
insurance industry that serves
New Mexico.
The bill is to update the
insurance code to eliminate
outdated or conflicting
provisions by updating terms
have it reflect legislative
changes on such such things as
audit date.
It's excuse me in your
provisions of the state's
contracting statutes the
increased H. four dependents are
the the more provisions from the
and the model provisions from
the national association of
insurance commissioners which
governs the accreditation of the
office of the super intendant.
Insurance.
Those I. has made a great deal
of progress is here in addition
to strengthening its consumer
focus it generated sixty seven
million dollars in savings for
New Mexicans who have auto
insurance with a second round of
savings to come.
And reduce the health insurance
premiums for those who purchase
their coverage on the New Mexico
health insurance exchange and
for the first time.
The side is ready rules on the
laws passed by the legislature
to improve the provisions we
adopted.
I also I didn't transparent and
inclusive matter which the
agents agency is doing its
business.
I take particular pleasure
announcing that last month this
reserve for intending outs
Department of its first women
looking as their deputy
superintendent.
There is one you provision in
the bill that provides a
statutory authority for it
superintendent of insurance to
take actions to ensure the
availability of insurance during
any governor declared public
health emergency
his by his advise me of the
incredible level of Corporation
insures provided at the start of
the pandemic but also noted the
existing insurance co does not
provide statutory authorization
I read that this needs to be
fixed.
The committee substitute for you
is the result of intensive
negotiation with the insurance
industry.
Thorough and sincere effort has
been made to resolve their
concerns and I'm happy to report
that the insurers do not oppose
the bill.
My experts you to present the
bill is a superintendent of
insurance research Russell
Crowe.
Thank you for your.
Other questions this Brian
drop related to code information
and general counsel of the
department madam chair can you
Mr told Mr Brock.
Certainly I checked with you are
they already in.
I'm not sure okay we'll get them
on that George is the one who
always knows.
If we have the.
Okay.
There here now so superintendent
and Mr rock.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee.
it's a pleasure for me to be
here with you today on this bill
that's been in the works for
some period of time and I've
shared a number of these
provisions for the number of the
committee members before.
The insurance code as you
probably all or where is.
nothing any of us would draft it
is a complicated and there are
many instances in which it has
outdated references for example
to the insurance department of
the PRC.
It does not have the current
dependence age coverage that's
our money to the affordable Care
Act.
it has the incorrect contract
length an audit due dates in the
so even though it's a sixty
three page bill
did most of it is very
straightforward one new
provision as Representative
Lujan appropriately noted is
that we've added in there.
what advice of counsel the.
General powers and duties of the
superintendent during an
emergency I want to tell you
that with this is been the
subject of great discussion and
if you were to look at the bill
as it was originally introduced
and what is in front of you and
the substitute you'll see that
there are about a number of
limitations and put on the
superintendent wherever it may
be in terms of what they can do
how they can exercise their
authorities and their length of
time that authority it's just I
do want to emphasize one other
point and that is even without
that authority just protest
bring almost a year ago now.
If the insurance industry in the
state was just incredibly
cooperative with making the
changes that we ask them to.
And we were able to get
insurance reductions not just on
automobile insurance but on
business insurance for those
whose insurance was tied to
their payroll of their
operational hours or business
volume or anything of the sort.
And we also got great
cooperation for the health
insurance industry and making
sure that they responded
appropriately and timely to the
A. R. COVID emergency.
And I'm pleased to tell you
we've.
Had very few issues come up with
the insurers not doing right by
the consumers who have been so
negatively impacted by this
conduct I mean by this are COVID
the.
Provisions are in here we can
talk about in more detail but as
you can see through our
explanation.
Know what we tried to do is just
to update where we needed to.
So we call for electronic
service of process removes
references to the service
representatives which do not
exist or not licensed and are
not recognized by the national
association of insurance
commissioners we've cleaned up.
With the support of the industry
the inducements provision.
we've removed.
Sections of the law of the code
that are no longer relevant.
We raise the.
From age of dependents
A few other things that are just
no longer reference the
emergency care definition that
we've put in here updated is
completely consistent with both
federal and state law that was
not the case we have numerous
references in the CO two
individuals who are handicapped
or had mental retardation.
And as everybody in this
committee knows.
Those terms of art are no longer
acceptable by us by the health
insurance committee.
Health services or health
insurance industry or by the
medical community.
Those are the main things
Mr brought crews are.
General counsel can you answer
any specific questions that you
may have about.
The provisions and madam chair
if I may one of the call out to
representative Nibert what you
have in front of you is a
greatly improved bills from the
first draft and we're proud of
the effort that went into that
and we strongly urges adoption
so we can take this to the
floor.
So do I understand you to say
that Mr box not to speak now but
he's available for questions is
that right.
Yes madam chair that's correct
okay.
And Representative Lujan are you
ready for us to go to the
participants for the that this.
Yes.
It this time.
Okay for those of you who are
with us and are interested in
this bill if you favor the bill
please vote yes if you are
propose the bill please vote now
and we'll have a pullout for
about fifteen seconds.
Okay we have
Ten in favor one opposed.
So we will now go to
Public comment.
Let me see who we have here we
would like to speak on either
side of this.
Abstain.
Go ahead
hi madam chair members of the
committee on drive market
staying on the CEO and president
of true health New Mexico health
insurer here in New Mexico we
appreciate the great work of
aside it keeps the level playing
field among the carriers as well
as providing in next part
consumer protection for
enrollees in members across the
state this legislation is
proposed before you today
provides simply important a
reduction of the complexity and
improvement of the
administration and oversight of
health insurance both for the
carriers myself included but
also for OSI resulting in a
lower administrative burden and
also a cost for both the website
and carriers involved which
ultimately translates to budget
for the consumers so we are in
at as to helping Mexico we
support this piece of
legislation thank you.
Thank you.
John Anderson.
Okay can you hear me madam
chair.
I can all thank you so much
madam chair members the
committee I am John Anders.
I represent the medical
insurance pool are there a
number well actually there I
sections in this bill that were
included much to the need of.
Getting the bills basically to
recognize that the ACA had
passed many years ago and we
were still basically a still
operating pre ACA so we've made
a number of changes in here that
we thought were crucial the
superintendent is chair of the
medical insurance pool board and
with his input and that up to
our board which includes that
of former Dr Stewart clearly
clearly still drive but Senator
Hickey who had served on the
board at the time we put this
bill together with the help of
the superintendent we have made
our act the chili state.
something that will follow the
edict of of post ACA so we very
much support this bill and that
you have enjoyed very much
working with the superintendent
I must say that it is been.
Sorry John
We see if we have anybody else
here let's let John Anderson
finished what he was going to
say just we don't have very many
people trying to make public
comments now.
We're not as much of a time
crunch.
So I'm going.
Hi can you hear me now.
I guess my my only point was
that there should thoroughly
bins that are bored and as I
said our board basically is
chaired by the superintendent of
insurance so we very much
support the bill in its entirety
and in particularly those
sections that and and the high
risk pool thank you very much.
Thank you Marlys show.
Madam chair members of the
committee model shows registered
lobbyists for procrastination
New Mexico.
We are here in support of house
bill two thirty five and
appreciate superintendent hole
and OSI's involvement to ensure
that our comments and concerns.
Considered and incorporated
thank you.
That looks that concludes our
public comment so let's go back
to the committee.
First did you wish to say
anything further Representative
Lujan.
Chair thank you we will stand
for questions now thank you
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair first of
all I just need to disclose to
the committee that I'm the
executive director of the
medical insurance pool is so the
superintendent told the chair in
is mistranslations said the
lobbyist for the pool and I just
need to disclose on the
executive director so but the
fixes are technical in nature to
bring the some technical things
up to date with current practice
and I support that so I don't
otherwise I have comments on the
on the pool portion but support
the the rest of the fixes in the
modernization thank you.
Thank you representative
Armstrong Mr speaker.
Thank you madam Mr chair and Mr
superintendent can you explain a
little more about section nine.
That talks about you approving.
Advertising.
I don't know that I've seen that
before and I it just struck my
curiosity and wonder if you
could just give me a little more
information about that.
Madam chair Mister speaker the
end the committee substitute the
provisions on advertising or
removed.
but I do want to just note for
the record Mr speaker that we do
have regulations on advertising
that I've been in place my
understanding is since two
thousand nine but one of the
things that we had a
intense discussion with the
insurers on because they did not
like.
The original provisions on
advertising.
We were educated.
Read more maybe understand what
the concerns were particularly
as it relates to those who have
national campaigns going on
so those provisions have been
removed if we need to make.
Changes to our regulations unit
has the advantage of going
through the normal hearing and
And seeking input from those
affected by the regulations so
we can be appropriately
responsive.
Okay I I was confuse our our I'm
sorry madam chair our committee.
Analysis shows updated today but
the.
The part of the analysis dealing
with the substitutes all the way
at the end of the year and then
all the analysis of the original
bill is still there so I.
That I apologize for that okay
the manager.
Thank you Mr speaker except
Representative divert.
madam chair I really don't have
a discussion I was going to move
the committee substitute for
discussion at that there's no
other discussion all group a do
not pass on house bill two
thirty five and to pass on the
house Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill two
thirty five seconds.
Madam chair second.
So we have two seconds am the
proper motion.
Thanks for calling to my
attention that we didn't move
the committee separate
discussion purposes.
Representative Nibert I'm glad
we got that squared.
Is there for the discussion on.
House bill two thirty five.
Okay click to call the roll.
Representative.
Representative Armstrong yes on
the committee sub.
Representative Cook.
Mr speaker.
Yes.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Lewis yes.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative night.
Yes.
Representative Rehm yes.
Representative Townsend.
Yes.
Thank.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Yes.
Ten two zero we have the do not
pass on house bill two thirty
five and a do pass on Committee
substitute for house bill two
thirty five is amended.
Thank you very much good work
everybody.
Madam chair there were no
numbers through the committee so
now.
The superintendent you have your
hand up I just want to say thank
you to you madam chair of the
members of the committee this
really is an important piece of
legislation so thank you very
much thank you it's good to have
you here today
We were going to go into the
third item on our agenda house
bill one ninety nine
Representative Hochman Vigil is
and the Senate Judiciary right
now so we will.
Begin with one ninety nine is
anyone else read the language of
the bottom the the script that
comes out.
The names.
Are pretty funny the last one as
Representative Nibert as.
Something for.
Were.
Well.
Need to get Representative
Ezzell she's here all well she
her pick her her bleak picture
is here okay well she's bell all
over again okay thank you.
Madam chair that.
Zoom translation services is
good but it does create some
funny.
Very funny things we were on a
family zoom in we're talking
about take out that we got from
one of our favorite places in
Albuquerque Vietnam rest
Vietnamese restaurant named folk
Cup.
And there is pretty funny to see
how that was translated by zoom.
Yes.
We.
I find myself distracted by it
and sometimes I'm smiling
looking at it when there's
nothing funny going on.
If you if you click on them that
if the button is called live
transfer.
If you click on it you then have
that option to hide the subtitle
okay and it in it won't it won't
show it is so be there pros
wanted that you want if you're
on your screen.
There we have it I know that we
we use that the other day we
were having difficulty with the
translation services because
We were actually hearing the
Spanish translation so I looks
like we have Representative
Ezzell with this now.
Representative Ezzell.
Madam chairman a chairman thank
you very much I'm sorry I was on
my Appropriations Committee and
they informed me I was up so
thank you all for being patient
while I got on Madam chairman
members of the committee today
I'm presenting.
Excuse me.
House commerce and economic
development committee
substitute.
I hope you can hear me okay.
Okay what.
We can just teasing house
commerce and economic
development committee substitute
for house bill one ninety nine
and madam chairman I do have an
amendment for that bill.
Representative Ezzell will be
amendment affect the public
testimony.
If so what did you tell us about
it now and then we'll take
action on it after public
testimony okay that'll be great
minute madam chair what it would
be a.
We wanted everybody's every
track in the state of New Mexico
to be able to have the ability
to use their.
Cathrynn.
Us I'm sorry the.
Sip code to be able to benefit
those certain tracks and Mr
madam chairman I think Jeff true
is on here and I think he will
attest to that there was
negotiation and that a good
agreement was reached and that
this is what this does and
I think everybody is on board
with it madam chair.
Are you ready for me to go to
the audience now or did you want
any of your experts to speak
madam chair Madam chair of I
know that we submitted a list
with your secretary with your
legislative assistant and
joining me today as of.
Let's see I'm looking around to
see if they are on here.
Joining me today will be
Obviously Jeff true the
executive director of the all
American Ruidoso downs we have
Mister Richard Ehrhardt the
executive director of the New
Mexico horsemen's association
and I don't see your name unless
she's on the next page merry
barber who is the executive
director of the New Mexico horse
breeders association also and I
think they may be on here is
senator Pete Campos and Senator
crystal diamond because they are
presenting the similar bill on
the Senate side.
And I do see miss barber on here
and if they if Mr tree would
like to respond at this time I
would like to of have you call
on him.
Mr true if you would like to
make some opening remarks that's
just fine go ahead.
Thank you madam chairman and
Representative Ezzell in
response to the question about
the amendment out there was some
language in the amendment that
we need to adjust in order to
bring all five racetracks into
support of the bill and it
really related only to the
distribution of funds and the
basis for the distribution of
funds to the racetracks from the
passage of advanced deposit
wagering so we had the previous
bases on race states we now have
the basis on on track handle
reflecting a better
view of the market potential for
each of the racetrack so the the
amendment I really reflects the
entire New Mexico horse racing
industry support for the bill.
Your.
And Mr Erhard.
You need there you go.
Yes ma'am madam chairman
but it was Richard a hard the
executive director of the New
Mexico horsemen's association
and I represent we represent
nearly four thousand of.
Owners and trainers of resources
in the state of New Mexico and
we will note that the board of
directors of the New Mexico
horsemen's association is in
full support of house bill one
ninety nine thank you ma'am.
Thank you Representative you
ready for us to go to the
audience.
Madam chair do you want are we
going to be discussing just the
amendment or the bill itself.
What I suggested is that you
just tell about the amendment in
case that would affect the
public comment.
Public comment they will come
back and talk to them and being
told by one of the members that
we don't have the amendment in
our share file yet.
So
I can check on that for us.
Madam chair this amendment was
submitted to your committee on
February the seventeenth okay.
Well.
But just we just wanna be sure
everybody has access to it I
understand thank you madam
chair.
Let's go to the audience now and
we will do it in second all if
you are here in favor of one
ninety nine yes if you are in
opposition please vote now more
federal forests I said fifteen
seconds.
Okay.
Fifteen seconds are up we have
six people here in favor and
eight people here in opposition.
And I will take the
I'll take those in opposition
first.
so if you've got your hand up
and you're in favor would you
mind putting it down real
quickly.
And let me tell you that I think
we may have a.
Just a.
Miscommunication about terms we
don't have an amendment we have
a committee sub is that correct
Representative is that.
Madam chair what you're viewing
and I hope that if this is
correct you do have the
committee sub but I also have an
amendment and that was what Mr
true explained just public okay
so I we don't have that and when
we we don't ever amend a
committee order so we just got a
point to version out but we can
still go ahead and hear about it
when the time comes I just
wanted to bring that out because
it might affect some of the
public.
Okay I'm.
First on the list in opposition
JD Bullington.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee this is JD Paul
intent speaking on behalf of
looking at about corporation I
had a very up.
Respectful polite conversation
with the bill sponsor yesterday
so she knows with the position
of the gonna development
corporation as
I think we're at the point where
we need to all come to the table
and have a serious discussion
about internet gaming I don't
think it's something we can
ignore anymore unfortunately
this bill crosses that line and
indirectly legalizes and gaming
because it when you use an
electronic device to make a
parimutuel wager you are having
to use some component of the of
the internet some part of its
inner structure infrastructure
and that puts you into the realm
of of internet gaming the other
issue with this bill is that the
gaming compacts with the tribes
clearly states that permits
awaiting can only occur on
location at the racing tracks
thank you.
Thank you concrete you know.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is coverage you know and I am a
registered lobbyist for the
proposal back then house and we
also believe that this form of
off track betting is a form of
internet gaming the legislation
before you calls.
For using electronic devices as
well as the internet to place a
bet from anywhere your home your
car your office and has a has
been shared with you H. B. one
ninety nine does affect the
twenty fifteen gaming compact
which only does allow for
parimutuel wagering to occur at
a race track and for those
reasons madam chair members the
committee we oppose the bill.
Thank you
and president
We are yes you are of the
Mescalero Apache tribe.
Thank you thank you madam chair.
Our ourselves Mr patchy tribal
poses Bill we agree with the
other two that propose but
besides us to to discuss it
adjustments to the compact allow
internet gaming by eight six
exclusivity provisions of the
compact the secretary of inter
noted that allowing internet
gaming what violate XP seventy
one the two thousand fifteen
compact was approved the tribes
and states submitted to two
thousand fifteen compact to the
secretary of internal for proof
as required by the federal
Indian gaming regulatory act the
secretary took no action on the
compact which affect DTR
resulted in approval what the
secretary's not action means
that there are there may be
provisions of the compact that
are invalid and at the tribe's
can challenges provisions at any
later date.
These were the reason the
secretary took no action was
protected because section
seventeen and internet gaming
the secretary stated in the no
action letter that are states
permitted non Indians to conduct
into gaming it would breach the
state's promise of exclusivity
two tribes that pay revenue
sharing to the state in exchange
for that extra six seventy thank
you we propose.
Thank you Jessica Johnson.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members Jessica
Johnson with animal protection
voters with respect to the
sponsor of the bill and the
individuals who make a living
with resources we oppose house
bill one ninety nine because we
have serious concerns about the
state's horse racing industry
and whether an industry that has
been plagued by corruption and
has been responsible for the
injuries and deaths of many
hundreds of courses can be
regulated effectively terrible
injuries and deaths to horses in
racing have concerned the public
for many years and it's been the
subject of investigative
reporting and federal rates
related to drug cartel activity
unfortunately when our
organization has raised concerns
about the inhumane treatment of
animals at public hearings these
concerns were met with strong
resistance to fax transparency
and accountability by some
members of the industry and the
state racing commission so we're
concerned that despite efforts
to regulate the industry these
issues will continue to plague
of the sport we urge you to
consider how expanding this
gambling opportunity will only
perpetuate of volatile industry
thank you.
Guy Clark.
Can you hear me.
Yes we can okay.
The gentleman Chasey a committee
members I'm doctor guy Clark
chairman stop predatory gambling
New Mexico we are strongly
opposed to house bill one ninety
nine besides the fact that it
would cost the state about
eighty million dollars once
revenue churn missed cut off we
have made issues with online
gambling this is on line
gambling bill
we have
we know that once the tracks
were able to get her mutual
gambling legalized online they
would push to have a full scale
casino gambling online the way
they had written in to house
bill one or one that would be a
major catastrophe.
Chairman JCS committee members
online gambling has been
recently legalized in six states
in this country and it's been
legalized for over ten years in
the U. K. Senator university in
governmental studies have
determined that online gambling
is the most addictive form of
gambling and frequent
participation is likely to turn
a person into an addict even
more troubling is the fact that
in all instances are mentioned
gambling promoters target teens
and pre teens with advertising
promotions and social media if
you just take a look at the ads
on television your mind radio
cartoons and and the information
directed at young people urging
them to gamble although the
gambling industry claims they
have security measures in place
to prevent teens from Grambling
the teens in the U. K..
Gamble in the hundreds of
thousands and the effect on the
youth this is catastrophic as is
demonstrated in the following
year council reduce related a
couple according to the U. K.'s
gambling Commission study four
hundred and fifty thousand new
Kate children aged eleven to
sixteen bit regularly more than
those who have taken drugs smoke
or drink alcohol according to
the London Daily Mail
researchers found more than half
of sixteen year olds in the UK
have gambling acts on their
smart phones two years before
their own legally allowed to
place bets but they get around
the restrictions placed the
bets.
Your.
You know you've got a little bit
over here so and I want to keep
going that I minute let you stop
payment you off at this time I
think we got that message R.
Robert dot com.
Yes madam chair members of the
committee Robert up with Dr on
the registered lobbyists for up
walking Pueblo
I submitted a letter on behalf
of the governor Janelle Roybal
to the committee indicating
opposition of this bill.
And for some of the reasons
mentioned earlier of just
violation of the compacts with
the tribes in the state of New
Mexico so we do stand in
opposition I believe
Some members of walkable maybe
you know of the online also so
thank you madam chair.
Thank you those in favor please
raise your hand.
That
Wells.
I didn't hear.
Go ahead.
Madam chair you were breaking up
they might not have heard to I'm
gonna turn my video off again
Larry Nichols.
Good afternoon madam chair a
commission and my being heard.
Yes.
Thank you agrees madam chair and
commission members for the
record I am Larry Nichols at U.
K. USA stables Dona Ana County
New Mexico.
I've been associated with racing
for forty two years always an
owner and breeder.
But during that time I have
maintained a membership in New
Mexico our readers Susan.
Hello New Mexico horsemen's
association to include a tenure
as a past president.
Several of them some incidents
and dilemmas.
What about over the years to
challenge to Mexico racing
flooding fires economics
recession about COVID nineteen
pandemic is added to the list in
the past New Mexico our my
Commission a commission have
been able to find means to
overcome our resolve these
issues.
The racing industry has
prevailed in the past and will
now.
But and enabling strategy to do
so is needed urgently need.
A strategy the seventies New
Mexico racing by enabling a
rebuilding rather than resuming
previous outdated
appropriations.
The provisions of house bill one
ninety nine would provide a
means of rebuilding New Mexico
horse racing industry.
Cancelling curtailing a
controlling racing operations
excessively and repeatedly
that's devastating to this
industry and New Mexico economy.
Representative of formula for
ending organized right in New
Mexico and heritage that has
been in a woven into the culture
of New Mexico.
I urge you.
Jason Thompson.
Thank you madam chair near me.
Yes we can thank you madam chair
members of the committee
ministries and Thompson on the
register lobbyist for the New
Mexico horsemen's association.
I would like to thank the
sponsor Sanchez for bringing
this bill forward and all the
stakeholders involved in this
process and I appreciate all the
comments that have been made a
man's of time I'll just touch on
a quick couple of things why
this bill is important at mainly
this bill is going to be a
monetization tool that's used to
bolster the industry and provide
the opportunity and modern a
mechanism that's necessary to
keep this industry viable as we
all know this industry been hit
pretty hard like many others
have during this pandemic and
this is just a tool to modernize
that and keep the economic
viability and at.
Contributions to this
initiatives makes to the state
and just a touch on the gaming
side of it on our perspective is
that it's talked about this
being a a gaming related issue
prepared mutual wagering is
separate from gaming and are
statutes is not having to do
with internet gaming in terms of
thank aims at a casino this is
the period mutual domain which
is statutorily separate from our
gaming statutes thank you for
your time.
Hans Jensen.
Yes this is Paul Jensen every.
Yes we can't.
Thank you I I'm a veterinary
surgeon the state of the art
surgery in hospital for horses
and one of our biggest
challenges since moving to New
Mexico is is attracting educated
and qualified veterinary doctors
for our teachers to come to the
state so our our solution has
been to find a place to train
for high school students and
technical students veterinary
externals.
We.
We see three hundred hours of
training in accordance with our
school requirements veterinary
interns receive a year of
training and we try to promote
local used to go on to higher
education in hopes they would
return to New Mexico.
And our industry has been hit
pretty hard by like comment and
this bill would directly benefit
horses and be just a little
boost in the recovery steps to
to our industry as as well as
benefiting other in this
business Mrs that brings young
professionals.
Back to New Mexico.
Thank you.
All.
Yes my name is Lynette Baldwin I
am a licensed owner trainer I
live in Lincoln County I support
this bill of.
Because.
It would help our racing across
the board the horsemen who badly
needed and it would provide a
generated income for the
management so that they could
find racing for the horsemen
possibly adverting what happened
last week when someone park was
cancelled we have no place to
race if we were to have another
form of income such as advanced
deposit wagering we would
probably be still running
because it would be another way
to generate income there was
just an article published in
southern California that that
those race tracks have had a
boom in their first increases
and then they're handled with no
spectators in the grandstand.
Mainly because of a D. W. we
badly need this bill of the
pueblos don't fall underneath
the governor's health order they
are sovereign we are not and we
need help I appreciate a yes
vote on this bill thank you.
Okay thank you that appears to
conclude public comment before
we go to the committee I'm going
to allow the
I'm going to go back to this
monster and her experts to
respond to make a statement and
then I'll I'll explain to you
where we are.
Madam chairman thank you very
much.
It is very clear in our horse
racing Act under article one a
section sixty dash one eight
dash two it states the
definition of period mutual
right wagering also that same
definition does take place in
the gaming control act and madam
chairman.
This in no way affects at all
the Indian couldn't.
Hello excuse me the Indian
gaming act.
What this does it will only
affect the location from which
in New Mexico resident combat on
in state horse races and it will
allow the New Mexico racetracks
to have a system for New Mexico
residents.
Wanting to bet on horses if they
are not physically present at
the track it does not create a
new type of waging wagering as
parimutuel wagering on horse
races is already permitted madam
chairman.
This industry.
Contributes close to nine
hundred million dollars to New
Mexico's New Mexico New Mexico's
economic output it supports over
thirteen thousand jobs that are
I racetracks in New Mexico madam
chair whenever the governor's
emergency order went into effect
last year read all American
Ruidoso downs and the downs at
Albuquerque stepped up and they
conducted live race meets and
reduce the downs was not allowed
to have any participants present
for about the first three
quarters of the meat.
Representative out the downs at
Albuquerque New the people that
are up there Mr Blanchard of
they stepped up to help the
horsemen out to Madam chairman.
This industry was hit hard but
I'll tell you what through the
efforts of our race tracks and
the owners and general managers
whenever I hear comments like of
was previously stated on one of
the.
People that were speaking in
opposition to the bill we have
repeatedly as those people to
come to the tracks to go to
those of farms for these horses
are being trained Madam
chairman.
These horses.
We're bred to race.
Whenever the tracks whenever the
the governor put out her order
last March.
These horses were subject to
stay in the barns.
Our concern there was and all of
the other racetracks throughout
the nation understood that list
these equine athletes we're not
allowed to trying.
They would remain stalled and
they did stand to call again die
or if racetracks were allowed to
open up without these equine
athletes being able to work out
on tracks.
That they would break down our
concern is for the equine
athletes to be able to go ahead
and.
Perform through.
The ability to be able to work
out on the tracks.
Mr madam chair and.
Members of the committee Mr
truth talk to in the first
committee where we presented
this about know your client and
madam chair if we could just Mr
tree to define what they go
through to be able to even allow
somebody to be able to
participate in advance wagering
deposit.
If that's permissible at this
time madam chair I would like
for him to explain that.
I'm going to give all of your
folks an opportunity to respond
correctly.
Mr true.
Thank you madam chairman and
Representative Ezzell committee
members.
Simply answering the question
that to Representative Ezzell
brought up.
If this deposit wagering is a
twenty year old wagering channel
and so the proper processes and
procedures for advanced deposit
wagering or well honed their
well established there are three
dozen states that participate in
eight in what we refer to the
acronyms eighty W. each eighty
W. operator.
Most.
Enable a person to open an
account to apply for the opening
of an account and then
application requires the person
to give their their name their
address at least the last four
of their social.
So that the eighty W. operator
can then go to a third party
information service invalidate
that they are who they say they
are they are that they live
where they say they live in that
there are proper age once that's
established in the account is
opened that customer must then
deposit cash instruments into
that eighty W. account in from
that account they wager on horse
races the budget debit the
winnings accrues and is very
transparent.
service whereby we know what all
of our customers are doing at
any given time with respect to
that eighty W. account is highly
regulated in many states there
are multiple multi
jurisdictional states which
provide for wagering hubs and so
the issue of of know your
customer is a very important
element because obviously to Mr
Clark's point we don't want
minors wagering and because it's
a state by state mutual the
environment regulatory
environment we can only regulate
those people that are New Mexico
residents so the know your
customer parts of signing up for
an eighty W. account for well
established in legislative find
a lot of transparency I do have
madam chairman when it's
appropriate a a broader
discussion of this bill and the
eighty W. section
of the industry so whatever
you're ready for that I think
the the committee staff person
has the power point just a few
slides to go through Madam okay
okay
Mr Erhard.
Did you want to speak now well
yes ma'am thank you madam
chairman members of the
committee I appreciate the
opportunity to speak again I
would just note that as a
Mr Thompson had indicated and
also as Mr true has indicated
eighty W. invest deposit
wagering is only a means to
facilitate their mutual wagering
usual wagering is not defined as
gaming
it is deposit wagering is here
mutual aid during through
electronic means and and that's
all we're talking about here one
of the maze in major reasons
this bill will be beneficial to
the state of New Mexico as well
as the state of horseracing
industry it is just it will stop
what's considered that poaching
by large out of state for profit
advanced the blood with the
three groups with this killing
place New Mexico citizens will
have the opportunity to do that
or New Mexico horseracing
content is something that they
is currently unavailable to them
so again directs our runs
Association and it's four
thousand members strongly
support and urge your support of
house bill one ninety nine thank
you we appreciate the on.
This barber did you have
anything to you want to say in
response to the public comment.
What are.
Here in the members my name's
merry Barbara need seconded
director at the New Mexico
legislators associational and
our association is a hundred
percent and support of this bill
and I believe has the support of
all stakeholders in our industry
our industry is the third
largest industry in the state of
New Mexico and this would be
very beneficial to us and also
to the state of New Mexico
that's deposit wagering has been
in use across our country for
some time now New Mexico is way
I might be heard before the
pandemic has been really
devastating to us and yet other
jurisdictions around the country
that actually don't pretty well
because they have those
available to them
this would allow online wagering
on our racing oval and does not
include any other types of
Rachel and is only offered by
the racetrack operators to all
of the bill.
Thanks to eligible people and
it's not typically attractive to
children.
We hope you will vote in favor
of this bill and I thank you for
your time.
Okay I'm.
So.
Representative Ezzell is going
to go to the committee but I
need to tell you.
We have been searching our files
and we keep careful records we
do not happen and the committee
was for the commerce committee
so you could have ended.
We're prepared for us but we do
not have it I don't know where
it was delivered on the
seventeenth at my Committee
assistance do not have that the
analysts do not have so I think
we're going to need to get that.
in advance and we can certainly
deal with that later but let's
go ahead and and left the
committee members ask you
question okay okay first I have
Representative.
You madam chair so I mostly have
comments because I don't have
the committee substitute as well
so I can't really ask questions
that until we have it but the
list we have it is a committee
stop from house commerce okay.
The stock we don't have the
amendment for the committee stab
at that Representative Ezzell
thought we did.
Okay.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative so I just
want to say first of all that
I'm really sympathetic to the
situation that the pandemic has
called to all businesses within
the state of New Mexico
including the range acts
you know I I do understand that
Indian tribes are different and
are not subject to the state of
New Mexicos public health
emergency where businesses
really you know where we're
we're.
At a disadvantage and all
businesses throughout the state
of New Mexico because but we
were trying to do in the state
was really by this pandemic and
ensure that people were capped
healthy and safe so I I do not
know where the racing industry
but for all businesses in New
Mexico madam chair because
and and to their to their cries
for help but let me just kind of
walk through this and and and
and other terms and also before
I do that also note that the and
Indian tribes that operate
gaming facilities voluntarily
closed their tribal casinos
again to bite this pandemic and
a lot of them aren't still open
I know the Pueblo of action that
who spoke earlier there because
you know hasn't opened I don't
even think that day since the
public health emergency started
so I just want to let folks know
that tribes are looking out for
the healthy and safe safe day
the health and safety of the
public as well.
So I I I wanted to point that
out there.
I think also to you know we are
trying to address this in a
creative way really what we're
doing is we're opening up wagers
that don't have to be conducted
in brick and mortar facilities
were open it up so now we can do
it you know at home at school
really anywhere
I know there's geo fencing so
that we could probably track it
so that it doesn't go outside of
the state but really that's the
big issue here.
What this bill is intending to
do is to regulate this in a
civil manner.
And I will tell you that you
know we only heard from a few
tribes and I haven't reached out
to the tribes that haven't spoke
because I think what will happen
next is that because point
betting is allowed for Indian
Indian tribes pursuant to the
Indian gaming regulatory act
that then we will be authorizing
sports betting from mobile
devices as well.
So I want to set that out for
folks to think about because
this is a serious issue that
will also affect the Indian
gaming compacts I think that it
needs another referral to the
appropriations and finance
because and tribes can argue
that the exclusivity that they
have had regarding the compact
is now being broken
as we know the gaming compacts
are a government to government
relationship that is comparable
or that is negotiated between
the Indian tribes that are
gaming in New Mexico and the
state governor so
that out there because of based
on federal Indian law there's a
lot of other things that we have
to look at and I know as I think
we have four other members apart
from me that are on the state
government elections an Indian
Affairs Committee when however
there is an issue that is
affecting tribes tribes come out
and they talk about it I think
here we might have subscribes a
new people because and we're
gonna open up other issues that
could lead to litigation and
also other avenues of really
just opening up gaming so that
folks don't have to visit those
of brick and mortar facilities
anymore so that's it for now
madam chair and I'll await those
amendments thank you.
I'll call.
Thank you madam chair as.
Yes.
One question that I have is.
Representative Ezzell
Gambling is not legal in New
Mexico I mean it's probably
happening but it's not legal is.
Madam chairman Representative no
absolutely not it's not legal in
the state of New Mexico.
Okay thank you.
The only reason that I'm
wondering is this we can go I
can go to my computer here my
house.
Deposit money from my
My.
The card I use all the time that
they take all my money away with
that I spend all my money would.
My ATM card one money into my
computer thing screen here.
And
And then on that horse race is
that correct.
Mr chair madam chairman
Representative about current no
right now you cannot you cannot
buy it on if you are in New
Mexico you cannot bid on a New
Mexico race madam chair at the
as was stated by Mr true earlier
on there are other companies of
twinspires just one there's lots
of these companies right now
that people can get account set
but that money doesn't stay here
those accounts are wrong our.
Up and running throughout the
rest of the United States there
are only two states in the union
that do not allow advance
wagering deposit that is
Minnesota in the state of New
Mexico we can bet on Minnesota
and Minnesota combat on New
Mexico but we cannot bet on our
own horses and less we are at a
track in New Mexico.
I hope that answers your
questions.
Well it the yes it is indeed.
So basically is so.
I'm here yet okay he goes.
Cool thank you cool.
So.
And this is if we pass this
legislation.
The legal for us.
Yeah we both.
Through the internet all right
to our faces.
Madam chair representative
outcome.
Right now parimutuel wagering
parimutuel betting is already
permitted in the state of New
Mexico.
It is in statute that we are
already allowed to bet on Karia
mutual to bet param pair mutuel
wagering.
All we're allowing what we're
wanting to allow is to be able
to have an account where we can
do it if we are not physically
at a track in the state of New
Mexico as you know there are
five tracks in the state in New
Mexico I'll start from down
south to go north we have
Sunland park in Dona ana county
we have C. part that is in Lee
County we have rid the all
American Ruidoso downs in
Lincoln County we have the downs
at Albuquerque and Bernalillo
county and we have sun right
park in San Juan County those
tracks are very far apart and if
you happen to have a horse
running or the one that you're
interested in following and you
live in Dona Ana County that
that our was running.
In Farmington.
You might not have the
opportunity to to go up there to
Sunray park to be able to watch
that works run in person unless
you happen to be.
At the track at Sunland park
with the New Mexico races being
run you can bet on that horse.
Mr Chairman like I said before
Karia mutuel wagering is already
permitted in the state of New
Mexico we saw whenever the
pandemic yet that those handles
drop.
Unbelievably because there were
no was no participation.
At the tracks I binge and
previously.
Until the very last part of
their meet these tracks stepped
up add to help those.
Forsman.
And allowing.
Those parameters to be able to.
Allow those horses opportunity
to run into maintained the jobs
that these tracks to contribute
to Mr chairman that's all we're
doing here mutuel wagering is
already permitted in our state.
I hope that answers your
question Representative outcomes
Madam chair representative noted
my question was about the the
end of December okay I know how
always races run a building to
our face food items it would be
to local action window wagered
and I've never collected medical
officer would know I was going
to take it in the trash but
anyway so anyway.
Do I what I'm trying to get to
in the analysis okay and one of
the very beginning.
This is a horse racing that will
allow exams the Bosso wagering
that's what I understand which
is.
Defined as a means of parimutuel
wagering in which an individual
in the process of money in the
account was authorized slices
and use the income they for
parimutuel wagering on horse
races made by electronic means
made by delek trolley.
So.
Thank you to my original
question.
Is a gamble human through the
internet legal in New Mexico.
Madam chair representative back
out I got a buzz in my ear I
don't know what was going on
there madam chair if this bill
is passed it will only be
applicable to pair mutuel
wagering.
That's the only think it is we
are not trying to open up the
Indian gaming compact we don't
want to go down that route.
Your mutual wagering is already
allowed in our state we just
want to be able to have the
means.
To have have.
To move to move New Mexico into
the twenty first century.
That's all we're asking.
So we're doing this by doing
this madam chair representative
Jim Miceli we're bypassing the
fact that.
Internet gambling is not illegal
in New Mexico but we are
allowing the.
Because now we can do it because
now we can have an advanced
account somebody has my money
the leading stated my Monday
afternoon in your account.
And what about it is after I
believe money in your account
and I spend it so that you can
five percent with whatever you
want with that.
What you're seeing everything
because we haven't I have a bill
in the legislature that allows
for internet gambling so we're
my best in this.
Right this way.
Mr chairman that's not right and
of I know that Mr true is on
here Mister tree would you like
to step in and explain to
Representative outcome that that
five percent does not come out
of your account it is based off
the wager you make out of that
account if you open up an
account and you don't bet we do
not take any money thank you.
Loan chair representative you
yes of course so I'm not a
hundred Bucks.
Okay.
My account a little bit.
And here takes ours out of my
money because I've been done a
million dollars.
Out of my account.
So I.
Course is not really I'm.
I will I wish and hope our
raising would be happening I
would love to go to the to the
horse races and I you another
fifty sixty Bucks to go home
out any money but
Yes the way I see this we are
bypassing something that we have
not allowed to happen because we
are funded invited invited.
Where we do not have internet
gambling in New Mexico and
people are going to their
computers and their.
They're spending money in Vegas
this for the money all over the
place people from New Mexico yes
we do on the internet but not in
New Mexico they're not spending
the money in New Mexico to spend
and and other states but we are
bypassing that dual.
In the horse races.
That was my concern.
Madam chair.
Representative al cone right now
there is not a track a live race
meet in the state of New Mexico
these parameters and all their
help an older horses are racing
out of state if they are still
in business this comment has
shut down a lot of the
parameters in there for a lot of
jobs left a lot of these horses
are no longer on the tracks it
is hurt our breeders association
tremendously and Mr Madam
chairman and Representative al
cone.
The New Mexico bred industry.
Always had a sale in the state
in New Mexico and breeders would
come from all over the world.
To bid on New Mexico bred horses
because they understand what
quality horses are being raised
in the state of New Mexico.
Madam chair representative al
cone this past year.
In New Mexico bred for sale.
Had to be held out of state.
That's what COVID did Madam
chair representative al cone.
I am here in Santa Fe mile the
horses that I the few horses
that I do have.
On the tracks right now are not
in New Mexico they are out of
state but I would like to extend
this invitation to
Representative outcome.
Whenever the route tracks do get
open and running if there is a
race that you're interested in I
would be glad to help you.
As far as maybe picking out a
winner.
I.
Let me tell you the money to the
government for.
I love that we're in the right.
They can do with our.
Life is and same thing with
going to the slot machine for me
on the line dollars shoppers you
they still committed zero.
That's just my luck but that is
my main concern mining concerns
we have played bassoon something
that we have not allowed anybody
else to in the state of New
Mexico because we just haven't
been able to legislative.
Internet gaming.
We are losing out on the state
of New Mexico itself is losing
out big money on it because our
people are spending money
everywhere in the nation in the
world but he's.
Is gaming.
And the.
We are doing this for the sake
of our faces which is fantastic
I like horse racing million
wrong.
S. is using our races.
You have your own horses.
So they do have.
This is allowed your horses
would be allowed to raise of New
Mexico and you would be able to
get a first out of this is a win
right.
Mr chairman I don't know if you
can see that are not.
Mr Chairman I I went into
partnerships with a very dear
friend of mine who is a real
advocate of he is a top notch
equine veterinarian Dr Leonard
block.
Owner of this our it's right
here behind me mine that bird he
won the Kentucky Derby at fifty
to one odds Mr Chairman I have
worked through the years.
We are now racing the horses
that my has been and I have.
Raised.
We understand the importance.
This our right here Mr Chairman
sister Sophia she won the state
fair derby.
Mr chairman there was stated
earlier three one of the people
that is against this bill.
Of the horrors of horse racing
any.
Our owner any horse trainer that
is worth their salt understands
the importance of a healthy.
Viable.
Equine athlete that does go out
there and hit the track.
And that's what they are bred
for Mr chairman Madam chairman
and Representative outcome I am
very proud of the product that
my husband and I and ninety nine
point nine percent of the
breeders and trainers and owners
in our state have.
Because we understand that for
our horses to be able to compete
they have to be healthy they
have to follow up follow the
guidelines that are set forth by
the New Mexico racing Commission
and all the statutes we have we
understand the that every our
every track management does
conduct rigorous testing of
these horses because if somebody
is playing.
Listen fast we don't want them
competing in the state of New
Mexico madam chairman
Representative al cone New
Mexico racing Commission follows
and falls under the guidelines
of the international rate of A.
R. C. I. association of racing
commissioners international
testing guidelines are very
rigid if there is somebody
racing using illicit drugs in
the state of New Mexico and they
are banned from racing in the
state of New Mexico they cannot
but of race in any other
jurisdiction that is covered by
a RCI.
Misters Madam chairman and
Representative al cone we are
proud of this industry we
understand what it does for our
tourism economy we understand
what it does for the
agricultural sector whether it's
a farmer out there battling the
high or the feedlot the tourism
industry right in regards to
restaurants.
Hotel excuse me I I'm very
passionate about this of
opportunity that we have here in
New Mexico and I will not
tolerate somebody that
continually put it down whenever
the invitation has been put out
there for them to come visit in
the track important breeding
situation whatever the case may
be.
And.
I would extend the courtesy to
you to come visit us in either
red does so downs the downside
Albuquerque in the of the tracks
but I would love for you to be
able to visit the backside and
be able to see what actually
does take place at any time.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you thank you madam chair
thank you Representative Ezzell
just a comment additional life
when I came in the mail for a
that would benefit veterans to
other rooms the one one veteran
veterans faster that means few
because they might be
From the bill that was just my
question that's all I have thank
you madam chair.
Thank you Representative thank
you for
all clone you know I forgot that
one of your experts as to share
the screen to show us a very
brief some brief video.
Madam chair that would be
executive director Jeff trying
from all American rid us to
dance he has a short power
point.
Mr Evans do you have that.
Yes ma'am okay if you're.
Thank you madam chairman and
Representative Ezzell and and
committee members at.
I'd like to do a reset here
we seem to have strayed off
topic a bit and I had I will ask
The committee secretary to if
Vance slides.
As we go along but I want you to
focus on the the bottom couple
of lines here we are digitizing
the parimutuel horse racing
domain with house bill one
ninety nine.
And when I say that I point that
out because the the pair mutual
domain is separate from the
gaming domain it's separate from
slots it's separate from
requests for any other type of
casino gaming our racing is
completely separate horse racing
is not gaming an eighty W. is
not internet gaming.
Eighty W. is currently to a
betting on horse racing and so
if we can advance to the next
slide I'll try to get through
the slides quickly but they're
they're important as
Representative Ezzell mentioned
we have a huge economic impact
on the state with over eight
hundred million dollars in
annual economic output thirteen
thousand jobs we drive tourism
entertainment the agricultural
economy just as an aside read
also downs also has a for sale
company the best of its kind
that we are direct to market
operates a direct market sales
facility for people that
resources right here in New
Mexico a very labor intensive
and capital intensive project.
We commit more than seventy
million dollars in direct gaming
and wagering taxes annually.
And that's an important point
the last ten years we've
contributed almost three
quarters of a billion dollars
directly to the state.
Your wristbands we have the
Triple Crown races for quarter
horses the wrong on live TV the
three million dollar all
American futurity is the biggest
race of its kind in the world no
other place in the world we race
to roll for three million dollar
purse and as representatives of
mentioned mine that bird the
some part during the our.
And on to the Kentucky Derby
will move on to the next slide.
The current issues facing New
Mexico our racing industry is.
Requires an understanding of
what the business is.
Forces are bred and raised on
land that's purchased and
improved for that purpose this
is again a very intensive and
labor intensive and capital
intensive process those horses
are raised.
With the expectation that they
will run for purses in purses
are the money that's paid out
for winning.
So it's it's purses that have
to.
Be at a certain level and and
and at a certain level determine
the quality of horses that are
raised and bred decreasing
purses translates to a data
downward spiral of economic
activity because purses drive
the whole thing in New Mexico by
virtue of the exiled.
By virtue of the tribal gaming
compact.
Racetracks are allowed to have
up to six hundred slot machines
and we're taxed at twenty
percent of that slot revenue for
purses and twenty six percent of
that slot revenue goes to the
state.
So that's a big part of where
purses come from in the state is
is casino gaming we close the
casinos March fifteenth and have
not had them open until the last
seventy two hours because of the
Covid pandemic we haven't
generated any of that money.
We ran truncated meets with no
attendance or low attendance
there for low revenue as an
example right also dance
typically has ten million
dollars bet right here at this
facility.
In full you fully fully capable
years in twenty twenty with bet
three million so seventy percent
reduction.
But right now tracks are
prohibited from using digital
channels to sell our product
directly to consumers there are
multiple bills in your purview
right now the deal with COVID.
comment related shutdowns in the
ability to directly sell to
customers and to maintaining
economic activity in this
comment pandemic this is that
bill for our race.
And finally on the slide out of
state operators are offering
Interstate wagering and they're
not paying any taxes from that
period mutual bets they're not
paying any purses from the best
that they're taking in direct
competition with what each of
the racetracks is doing each
racetrack offers budget on other
tracks we get revenue from it
the out of state operators are
offering bets on out of state
tracks because of Interstate
Commerce rules but they're not
leaving any of that so we'll
move to the next slide.
Moving to the next there we go
so what is advance deposit
wagering as I mentioned earlier
it's a twenty year old web and
mobile based wagering channel
primarily developed in the US
along with the advent of the
internet it represents at least
thirty five percent of all north
American pre COVID parimutuel
handle.
And of course after the COVID
nineteen.
Pandemic kit and live attendance
was eliminated virtually all of
the eighty W. all of the usual
handle was through this eighty
W. channel and as miss barber
mentioned earlier in California
they had a significant increase
in the amount of wagering
conducted over that channel in
there by we're able to increase
purses thereby increasing the
impact of the industry in the
state.
More than three dozen states
provide for AT WH and virtually
the entire world uses it this is
a channel this very well
established it's a closed loop
account based system which
handles wagers from qualified
verified customers as I was
talking about the K. Y. C.
earlier.
All these companies myself
included mine included go
through all of its operational
audits financial audits to
validate that what is supposed
to be going on of the law is
actually followed so AT WCHS
parent very secure way of
wagering and it's much more
transparent than in fact what we
do at the racetrack.
Every bit on the advance deposit
wagering channel is by a
qualified person that we know
who reserve where he's from
where is a resident of and we
validated that with the third
party service and every bit that
they make goes on a transaction
log in those logs are reviewed
we know how much and when it of
the person is in trouble with
respect to.
Public gaming issues that we
know that it in advance we don't
know that for a person that
walks into racetrack with cash
and anonymously places a bet so
eighty W. improves our
transparency improves our
ability to deal with problem
gaming issues.
All the qualified wager from the
sources all qualified waiters
from all sources on track to be
off track betting locations
and eighty W. or pooled together
so everybody sees the same pool
amounts and they see the same
odds in the same pay offs.
And as I mentioned it's got a
lot of transparency to it is a
well established channel the
next slide please.
We believe and we're supported
by legal opinion.
That the H. B. one ninety nine
does not conflict with the
tribal compact the trouble
compact clearly states that the
period mutual domain is the
domain that belongs to the horse
racing industry we allow
parimutuel wagering in fact
mutual wagering on eighty W.
challenges her is happening now
and we're just not getting any
of it with respect to the travel
compact.
We're extending the capability
that's currently legal and we
know that I gaming is not
parimutuel betting on horse
racing and so with respect to
the tribes in their opinions so
we have clearly stated in this
state and federally.
That horse racing is special and
it's not gaming next slide
please.
Help drive that point home we
refer to a court opinion.
And I'll let you read it for a
second.
mutual involves live play
against other people not for
example a new form of
competition against a machine.
So just to be clear parimutuel
betting is we're all betting
against one another.
Whoever has a better winning our
shares the proceeds of that pool
there's a take out from that
pool and that's what goes to the
purses into the track into the
state but again we're simply
aiding the existing practice
using the current electronic
means.
The last slides that I'll
review.
Then we'll move on to the next.
Federal law all.
Differentiates between horse
racing and gaming.
The interstate horseracing act
is the only.
Lee is the act that provides for
the only legal Interstate
wagering in the US aside from
the state to state compact for
Powerball or mega mega lottery
something like that our racing
is the only legal interstate
heading in the in the country.
And the wire Act was was created
for sports betting back in
nineteen sixty one but it recite
it specifically excluded horse
racing the wire Act relates to
sports betting but keeps horse
racing aside the federal
interstate wire act.
Our racing betting is not
prevented from that because as
per usual it's a different type
of gaming the more recent
unlawful internet gaming
enforcement act specifically
says.
Unlawful internet gaming does
not include.
Best according to the interstate
horseracing act so there are
other references that we could
bring but the the primary
message is that.
Federally and in most other
states of the union.
Our racing is a different type
of wager then casino gaming
mutualism ourselves casino
gaming is against the random
number generator.
Right when you pull a slot
machine that random number
generator tells you whether
you're gonna win or not it over
time from a slot machine you
know when a certain percentage
with horse racing we're pulling
our bets and based on our skill
of looking at the our looking
into our past performances we're
choosing winners and everybody
that uses a winner it's paid
equally based on their stake in
the pool.
And so I I hope that this brief
slide presentation frames the
the issue in that we're
digitizing our parimutuel domain
that mutual domain is
specifically in the law both
state and federal as well as in
the compact specifically the
domain of the horse racing
industry encouraging wagering
said so this bill will simply
capture those illegal wagers
that are going on now the best
coaching the Mr Everhart
referred to.
It will also enable New Mexico
residents to afford themselves.
New Mexico source wagers and
thereby everyone is legal.
The sport is transparent and we
are not expanding as some have
argued into internet gaming our
racing is specific it's not
sports betting it's not
considered gambling and with
that I yield madam chair and
Representative Ezzell.
Yes thank you very much.
I want to go back now to the
members of the committee and the
next person on my list is
Representative Cook.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative Ezzell
for for bringing this bill and I
had a lot of questions that were
actually just answered by Mr
cruise.
power point presentation I I
will.
And embarrassed to say I don't
really even know our I didn't
until a few minutes ago that the
definition of parent mutual
betting.
And and so now I understand it's
everybody throws into a pool in
the Bennigan's themselves and
and they they take the the the
the top three split up the
winnings.
And so but with the way you
describe it Mr true if you don't
mind madam chair I asked Mr
directly what's the difference
between that and that if I'm out
of the in about god's playing
Black Jack with the table full
of other people are we doing the
exact same thing.
Madam chair if I may respond.
Thank you madam chair our thank
you madam chair and
representative cook for the
question.
Casino games are typically games
of chance.
And so I think Black Jack you're
actually playing against the
house you're not playing against
the other folks your cards
verses the the house cards.
That's how the game is played
and when you lose the house
wins.
mutuel betting.
I run racetrack right so we
organized our races we build a
facility we we spend the money
on Barnes and and we give the
Barnes access to parameters for
no fee we pay their electric and
water they put our they get
horses and shape we put the
races together and the skill of
the player.
Is.
Is evidenced by his ability to
look at that our and see if he's
ready to look at his.
S. performances and see how well
that horses done in similar
competition and I'll make a bet
on a horse based on that
research and I'm betting against
everybody else is betting on
that race in that pool.
So literally.
A single gaming is betting
against the house in a winter
lose proposition of the house
or betting against a random
number generator by the way
every time you pull that slot
machine you don't win that's a
winning for the house.
In our racing or betting against
one another everybody that has a
winning selection gets paid and
we take a commission from the
total so the the outcome of the
wager at our mutual impairments
will bat.
Is does not determine how much
the quote unquote house makes I
hope that answers the question
Representative go it does
mistruth and so the house in our
Racine isn't the house like at a
casino the house in our rating
is just operator the person that
provides the facilities and the
operator gets a cut of every
race regardless of anything.
Yes Sir madam chairman and read
those position for the house.
Yes Sir Mr cook you Madam
chairman that's correct we we
take a percentage of the will of
the pool that's wagered so for
example any wind pool.
Hundred thousand wagered in a
wind pool the statutes.
The laws of the New Mexico
dictate how much of that money
is taken out from that pool how
much is distributed to purses
how much is distributed to the
track operator how much the
state get some tax how much the
breeders get etcetera in about
the way there's a percentage for
the one testing fund so it's a
very different type of game.
It's the.
This type of game is practiced
in more than three dozen states
all of whom have the same sort
of regulatory structure.
and it's very different when you
go into a casino.
Okay and you were moving pretty
quickly through your.
The slide presentation but you
said a few things that that I
didn't understand.
It but it it seems to me what
you were saying is that our
Racine.
And casino gambling are
regulated very differently in
the state and federal statutes
right.
Yes Representative coca madam
chairman that's correct casino
gaming.
As I described as a very
different game and federally and
in most if not all states is.
Is a different animal casino
gaming is regulated one way
mutual horse racing is regulated
another that's evidenced by.
Again the wire Act the
interstate horseracing act which
specifically enables Interstate
Commerce in horse racing as well
as the U. I. G. A. unlawful
internet gaming enforcement act
we separate our racing from
gaming for precisely those
purposes right many state we've
been doing our racing in this
country for over a hundred fifty
years and while there was a
prohibition in the early part of
the twentieth century in
nineteen thirty three the
prohibition was taken off and
that's when horse racing started
to develop and was the only game
in town for a long time so if
you did any wagering at all that
was legal it was on horse
racing.
When we got into the nineties
and we got into other types of
gaming then the regulation for
horse racing was kept separate
well we constructed.
The weight of the regulatory
regimes for other types of
wagers.
J. and so before you put on your
slide presentation I had raised
my hand already because I wanted
to ask you what is internet
gaming because at the track in
right so if I want to place a
bet can only do that in cash.
Or can I give you a credit card.
Thank you Mr Representative Cook
and madam chair.
Here we show betting is cash
only okay here it full stop
their credit you can't stick
your credit card in the machine
you can't use your your credit
card on the eighty W. for a for
a credit transaction it's cash
wagering so even if you have an
account at the track to use a
little tablet that we have you
have to put cash across the
window at the teller window to
fund.
And what I was.
Trying to work through.
Earlier was what what is
internet gambling I don't know
if there if there's if there's a
definition in the in federal
code or in state statutes or
anything like that but it's all
moot because you're in your
presentation you can see that
eighty W. is in fact internet
mobile.
Of wagering correct.
Yes Representative cook you
madam chair the.
Internet gaming.
Is gaining and eighty W. is
mutual betting on horse racing
so I really because I've been in
this business for more than
three decades it's kind of
common sense to me that gaming
is one thing in our racing is
another and we're not addressing
gaming at all internet gaming
would be going online and and
pushing a button to make a slot
machine spin it would be playing
roulette or some other games on
the internet with some operator
maybe it's on maybe it's a
domestic or maybe it's a for an
operator and those are the
things that are that we're
precisely the cause of the
unlawful internet gaming
enforcement act two thousand six
because.
Operators in Malta or Antigua or
some other place we stand up a
website.
But some software on the website
take deposits from American
residents.
An offer then gaming well that
federal government decided the
best way to curtail that was to
stop the credit transactions
stop the money flow between
these illegal foreign operators
and residents who are operating
illegally I gaming is not legal
in most if any in in very few
states right so I gaming is one
thing our racing is another
sorry that was too long winded.
No
you also want your slide you
presented a up a quote from a
from an attorney who essentially
said that.
That advance deposit wagering
would not be a violation of the
compact the four because it's
not internet gaming or something
along those lines I just have a
hard time my mind.
With the technology of.
It I mean it sounds to me like
you've conceded that it is
internet gaming but then we have
an attorney who says it's not
interacting and just having a
hard time getting those two.
Yes thank you for the question
Representative Cook and madam
chair.
My if you don't hear anything
else from me today.
I gaming is not eighty W.
betting on horse racing.
So.
The compact issues deal with
online gaming and gaming is the
domain of tribes in this state.
Our racing is the domain of the
horse racing industry the five
licensees in the two or spent
organizations so those two
things are completely separate
in multiple examples of
regulatory structure.
Okay.
Okay well
earlier today I reached out to
the attorney for Mescalero and.
There was I think she was in a
there was a tribal council
meeting going on today but I
wanted to talk to her to about
it and see if she could help me
understand their position a
little bit more but you've been
very helpful and hopefully Act I
hate to see this bill you know
get stalled right now but it
sounds like that's what's going
to go on but I'm happy that now
have an opportunity to talk to
their lawyer and and see talk a
little bit more about what their
position is exactly on point to
what you were describing at the
the last question that I asked
you so Mister trick appreciate
it very much I appreciate
everything you do for read also
in thanks for being here and
thank you Representative Ezzell
and then chair.
Thank you and well I've let
everyone go on and on we have
tracked down the amendment.
And we did get it.
On the eighteen add weight but
we didn't have the share file so
I'm gonna make sure everybody
gets a copy and we do have more
discussion though so we'll
continue with that.
Make sure everyone gets a hold
of that well we're talking
Representative Eli.
Thank you madam chair so.
Let me just make sure we're on
the same page.
So section seventeen of the
compact says internet gaming in
the event that internet gaming
is authorized within the state
the state in the tribe agreed
that they will we open good
faith negotiations to evaluate
the impact if any of internet
gaming and considered just into
the compact.
Parties understand agree that is
not possible chairman at this
time what if any adjustments to
the compact would be necessary.
So.
Madam chair and representative
result your expert I just wanna
make sure we're on the same page
if you are wrong and this is
internet gaming then the compact
will be renegotiated correct.
Mr Chairman representative madam
chairman Representative Eli if
this was internet gaming yes we
would have to go back and
revisit the compacts but it is
not internet gaming all of it
does not create what we're
trying to do does not create a
new form of gaming.
mutuel wagering is already
permitted in the state of New
Mexico we all we're asking is
that it.
That New Mexico be able to move
in the twenty first century by
allowing parimutuel wagering to
be conducted through through
electronics there is no way
shape or form internet games
okay I and madam chair
representative I appreciate that
answer I I just I just want to
start with that's why become
so important because if it
wasn't and I understand the
position I get it I'll get to
that in a minute but it was
internet gaming that would be a
problem because then we would
have this renegotiation right.
Okay Chairman representative
you're exactly right yeah okay
so what I want to make sure this
is I I I've heard the expert I'm
I'm you know my phone's getting
blown up for the analyst I I I
would like to get
you know certainly if this gets
out of the committee I would
like to get
R. as much information as I can
get on the definition of
internet gaming so I can know
kind of what it is we're talking
about because I would assume
it's not just case law I would
assume there statutes and all
kinds of tortilla I don't have
that for me and so anything I
can get would be helpful to me
and that's what I like to see
all right.
That's it all right thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative thank you
Representative thank you madam
chair.
Mr speaker.
Thank you
Madam chair I'm so I have for
the first time in quite awhile
I've been reading a compact.
And.
I I think it is very clear.
That.
Our racing impair mutual betting
our class three gaming.
As used in the compact and in
the federal Indian gaming
regulation Act.
the applicables regulations
says.
Last three gaming.
Includes quote any sports
betting and parimutuel wagering
including but look including but
not limited to wagering on horse
racing dog racing or Jai alai.
Highlights.
that is the site that is twenty
five CFR section five zero two
point four.
I'm so that because we are
compacts state.
We've got to fall under that
code and then we've also got
twenty five CYFD.
Twenty seven oh three which also
provides definitions as used in
a crime.
Those two sections of statute
and the regulations are cited in
the gaming compact.
in the definition section two C.
like Charlie on page two.
I'm so we're definitely dealing
with class three gaming here
Whether or not it is considered
wagering or gambling in other
statutes is somewhat secondary
because you know when you got
loss of general applicability
those are fine and I understand
you the year if you're in a
state that doesn't have a gaming
compact or doesn't fall under a
grant then you would be looking
at these other statutes that are
cited they make clear that
mutual wagering is not gambling
I I I think I think in other
words both things can be true at
the same time that under
generally applicable statutes
mutual aging is not gambling
Under federal law correct but we
that is not correct in states
where it grows is is at play and
we're dealing with the
definition of class three gaming
is used
And that statute again and in
that.
In our contacts then I'm gonna
look at section.
Eight eleven yes the sectional
Levin D. like David.
One D. like David eleven one.
Jerry Levin D. one D..
Says that revenue sharing
shocking to the revenue sharing
obligation obligation shall
terminate in the event the state
licenses permits or otherwise
allows any non Indian person or
entity to engage in any form of
class three gaming other than a
state sponsored lottery
parimutuel betting on horse
racing bicycle racing
that's also the same category
as to highlight
operaci game machines limited
fundraising by nonprofit
organizations as set forth in
sub section do to hello
and then it goes on to say
there can be contacted by horse
racetracks and
intermedio betting on races at
such tracks.
So both of those sections talk
about.
Parimutuel betting being H. a
fourth class three gaming that
the state can authorize without
violating the compact without
terminating the revenue sharing
obligations I think to me the
question at such track is less
significant than whether or not
this would be considered an
expansion.
of betting.
And I think it seems to me madam
chair that is it could be
construed as an expansion of
betting.
If there's gonna be more people
betting are if we don't have
your geo fencing.
And yes we have people in.
Clovis you know able to bet on
horse racing and someone park.
so I would say I I I've reached
you know the it's the I've
reached the maximum extent of my
knowledge and legal
understanding of the compact
integra it is point I do think
it's worth asking whether or not
the term you're at such tracks.
Is significant my guess is that
probably not.
you know that modern technology
could be used to establish a
person's presence at a track by
electronic remote means to me I
think it's it's easier to say
it's not a prohibited expect a
prohibited expansion gaming if
we could.
Put in a the geo location
mechanism to say that you have
to do it from a mobile device
within a certain tightly
constrained.
Distance from the track and also
I would say maybe needed for
limited duration at this is
something that would be
Here to help them the ex I I I
agree I am extremely sensitive
to the impact that the public
health orders had on these
tracks they have been closed.
Basically since March and
there are a few so we need to
get them back up and running it
and have revenue.
But I I don't want to risk the
to the two following two things
one a termination of the
obligation for tribes to gauge
revenue sharing
Into to trigger automatic
renegotiation the compact if
it's determined that the state
is inadvertently engaged in the
authorization madam chair
internet gambling.
So those are the two questions
that have madam chair I thank
you for a and the scene request
use thoughts.
Thank you Mr speaker
Representative night Burt.
Thank you madam chair just a
couple questions that the the I
have because of.
I think we cover the waterfront.
R..
Citizens of New Mexico able to
engage in.
Wagering on forces.
By having these types of
accounts established at tracks
outside of New Mexico the
current time.
Madam chair representative
Nibert right now there are
different venues located out of
state where people can actually
they have to.
Mr Chairman.
Madam chairman Representative
Nibert I'm going to let Mr true
tell you how many different
domains there are out there for
this actually does go on.
That would be the easiest way he
is more in tune to all the
different venues that are
available for our residents to
go out of state to be able to
set up these accounts Mr true.
Thank you Representative Ezzell
madam chair Representative
Nibert there are multiple call
it fifteen.
Companies in North America
currently that offer advanced
deposit wagering on global horse
racing.
So there's horse racing
available twenty four seven.
From somewhere in the world
right so depending on the time
zones.
This is a race of course in
Europe South Africa South
America Australia Asia so all of
that content and I'll refer to
the horse racing product as
content in this in this context
If I'm interested in betting on
horse racing I can do a search
to do a Google search and find
any number of companies that I
can go to and apply for an
account and as I mentioned
earlier there's a specific
process for applying for the
account getting approved for the
council funding that account.
And in all these systems are
competitive right so it's about
the best class of service it's
it's very much a can to a Scott
trade or Charles Schwab online I
go open an account they verified
that I'm that I am who I say I
am a put money in and then I buy
and sell stocks from that
account same thing eighty W. so
there are operators some owned
by major racetrack corporations
like twinspires dot com for
example is owned by Churchill
Downs Churchill Downs runs the
Kentucky Derby the biggest race
in the world.
They operate in all the states
from a multi jurisdictional hub
and they currently because again
Interstate Commerce act allows
it.
They currently take residents
from New Mexico and offer them
non New Mexico content.
So the situation is that New
Mexico residents.
Are betting online through
eighty W. through these
processes on Santa needed for
example.
Online none of that money is
being returned to the state in
taxes purses or revenue I'm
offering Santa need a budget
here at my facility.
What they're offering those bets
at all the other facilities and
we're we're paying the taxes
we're paying the purses so we're
in competition with somebody
that that we can't compete with.
Because were disallowed.
In our argument is that a
there's that money's going out
the door right now and has
literally for twenty years just
as a by way of education.
All this started in the late
nineties and when the internet
started growing company started
springing up I in fact work for
a company called you bet dot com
and we developed many of the
practices and platforms that are
in use today in fact Churchill
Downs bought our company.
So between twinspires xpressbet
the company called TV G. which
actually has a television
network.
You can go bet on is much horse
racing as you want at any time
of day.
But if you're New Mexico
resident you can't bet on New
Mexico content under this
current regime we're trying to
recapture that and put the New
Mexico content on that menu of
content that's available sorry
for the long winded answer but
it's a complicated subject
Representative.
thank you madam chair and thank
you Mr true of course second
question I think you already
answered it was that New
Mexico is not receiving any.
Taxes on some of that content
measure described.
What if I read the bill
correctly.
The.
Portion of the bill regarding
zip codes is basically to do
what I think another question
asked and that was to make sure
that that for instance we have
those of valves recieved the
ability to offer this to people
with them certain zip codes in
proximity to extract white was
someone park would have zip
codes in proximity to red stripe
Albuquerque would have a
proximity of people to extracted
it I read that correctly.
Madam chair representative
Nibert.
That that that's incorrect
actually okay nature of the
internet of course is that it's
Google that is ubiquitous that
its border to border.
The the issues around.
If you look in the bill sorry
for not having it up right in
front of the the section of the
bill that deals with the split
of the revenues recessed forty
five percent of the track forty
five percent of purses five
percent to two breeders awards
in five percent to economists
estimate on that's the way to
gauge the market power.
At each of the facilities so
that the statewide eighty handle
which is the amount that.
Is a portion based on market
power so however much handle
Albuquerque generates on track
verses all the other I all the
other four tracks determines
what percentage of that money
they get to keep.
From out of state wagering so
it's really about it's not zip
code I mean yes we can geo fence
but that destroys the impact of
the internet.
That just that destroys the in
the I mean for example if if I
want to buy a stock well I have
to sign up with the local.
investment office or can I go to
Charles Schwab and we're Scott
trade and do whatever I want.
You know it we we can't section
of the internet that way so we
designed the bill so that actual
market power determines how the
money is distributed among the
the licensees among the
stakeholders and we've all
agreed.
Again we've got an industry
coalition we all agreed on how
that money would be split.
Madam chair and representative
Mr true thank thank you for
clarifying that.
To me again the.
This issue is one that the.
We have to figure something out
to help the server Destry it
brings a lot of people are not
only
Through my why tell the but also
Is a great contributor to the
economy.
In in my district and and it's
something that has been sorely
sorely
Marist of this past year and I
need to madam chair I need to
thank you Mr troops for
running this summer because a
number tracks around the state
have
either cut back or have refused
to run which is also complicated
R. the.
The ability of of this industry
to for the state via board and
so
I I I I hope that we can figure
out the the legalities of this
and make sure that the what we
can do it without upsetting the
other end of the spectrum but
the something.
This or or something very much
like it needs to be done third
to capture that.
Capture that tax revenue and
assist these tracks through of
our baby as was stated earlier
get into the twenty first
century and compete R. M. and
continue to supply their
product.
Not only within the state but
but around the globe as they're
doing now so thank you madam
chair and thank you
Representative for bringing us
thank you Mr true for being with
us today.
Thank you Representative.
Thank you very much everybody I
I would like to move the
amendment for discussion
purposes I have looked at it and
it's.
It substantial meeting
And in terms of bringing people
to table but in itself it's not
a along with it
substantive amendment it may
have substance in it's a fact
but members that is in the Here
file.
And I can right here that two oh
two number.
It's point two one nine point
seven five point two.
While you're looking for that.
We can discuss the amendment
wanted just a couple of things
about is that
I know.
There are people who with good
reason.
Have criticisms of the racing
industry and there are people as
representatives Ezzell said who
are disreputable and I just want
to say that
my husband I lost are really
really wonderful friend in
December quite maxed actively
and he was a member of the
racing Commission is also a
pharmacist and quite an expert
on horse races and whenever he
would.
Said I'm really concerned about
a drug issue at the tracks I
would he would let me know and I
would get in touch with
Representative Ezzell and
Senator Paypen.
And they would talk to this
gentleman can cross.
Is our arms are we pharmacist
ice worries kept my husband
alive Senator.
We will miss him a lot but I
know that Representative Ezzell
has worked very hard to clean
up.
The that any state on the
industry I know that she's
always worked on that so I just
wanted to.
And I wanted to also credit
Senator Paypen for working with
her and with care and corrosive.
Madam chair of the two oh two
nine read out on the amendment
is different than the one that I
pulled up on share file.
Eight point two two zero zero
one three point one.
Okay I didn't go to share file I
just had it emailed to me.
Yeah madam chair if I obeyed the
number that you read off the two
one nine four seven five point
two is the committee substitute
that that was presented in the
house commerce and economic
development committee the
amendment number and as
Representative Nibert to set is
point two two zero zero one
three point one that's right I
just was looking at the page
that I wrote on a.
Okay.
Representative Nibert here thank
goodness it's point two two zero
zero one three point one but
right on the page I only broke
on the actual committees that
okay so that explains it so
I'd like to.
Get.
You Representative Ezzell an
opportunity to tell us what the
amendment accomplishes.
Madam chairman of I would like
to let Mr true explain it
because he was in on the
negotiations whenever this ma'am
what was agreed to with other
tracks.
Everybody was a participant
okay.
Thank you madam chairman
Representative Ezzell the
original language of the bill
based the share of revenues from
eighty W..
On the number of race days by
each track.
So the concept is that all
eighty W. waging on out of state
races.
Would generate five percent that
that handle to the industry.
We originally said it was based
the split was based on race days
that didn't sit well with one or
two of the other tracks they
thought the market power was
better demonstrated by on track
handle so the amount of money
that at each track currently.
What do you would be the
determining factor for market
power and we would split that
money this way so that's all it
is from racing days to on track
handle is how we're splitting
the money that's the that's the
effect of the of the amendment
everything intact.
And then proposing that
amendment and knowing that that
was our.
What's your purpose was you're
for our along some other folks
who were previously opposed or.
Yes.
Okay that's what I thought you
had said.
Madam chair we had we had
negotiations ongoing for two or
three months actually longer
than that but it recently we
were able to bring folks to the
table offer an alternative.
And make a compromise and and
candidly I think it least in my
three and a half years in New
Mexico running this race track
is the first time we've had an
industry unified position on any
legislation and and it's a
pretty important move in my view
for this industry and for the
state because this is a much
needed.
I stated deal thank you what's
the pleasure of the committee on
the amendment.
Madam chair I would move that we
accept the amendment R. as
presented.
This adoption of the amendment
Representative Rehm seconds that
is there discussion of the
amendment for the district.
Click to call the roll under Dr
minute.
Representative Alcon yes.
Representative Armstrong.
Yes.
Representative Cook yes.
Mr speaker.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Lewis.
Mr speaker waitin did you hear
him you know.
Okay Representative Mr speaker.
I just don't trust my band with
anymore I thought I heard him.
Representative Lewis.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative night.
Yes.
Representative Rehm yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Yes madam chair I also thought I
heard the speaker so maybe what
you might call in one more time
it wasn't just you madam chair
Mr.
He's muted so is there.
Okay.
The we have the votes to adopt
in the madam chair.
Madam chair.
Yes.
So what's the vote on them Dr
Bennet.
Attendance.
Okay.
So I'm the bill is amended.
Is there.
Further discussion.
On the bill.
What's the pleasure of the
committee.
Madam chair I would move a do
pass on House commerce and
economic development committee
substitute for house bill one
ninety nine as amended and also
that.
We have a motion and a second.
And the clerk to call the roll.
Representative okay.
Representative Armstrong.
No.
Representative Cook yes.
Mr speaker.
Representative Eli.
Yes but I'd like to explain more
about.
Representative Lewis.
No.
Representative McQueen.
Representative Nibert yes.
Representative Rehm yes.
Representative Townsend yes.
Thank.
No and I'd like to explain my
vote.
Madam chair.
Now.
When my manager I'd be a measure
just sorry I stepped away from
it Nabil.
Yes go ahead I will know and I'd
like also to explain.
Can you give us the boats.
Five to seven we have a do not
pass.
Okay well we don't have a do not
pass we don't we have seven
votes now and I votes yes on a
do pass.
And I not sure who else want to
explain I think Mr speaker and
then Representative.
All local.
For a substitute motion to
table.
Okay.
Some motion to table at this
time Representative Alcon.
So
Representative let let's call
the roll on that the non
debatable motion.
Representative Alcon yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Cook.
Now.
Mr speaker.
Yes.
Representative the line.
Representative Lewis yes.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative night.
No to table.
Representative Rehm no ma'am.
Representative Thomson.
Thank.
Yes.
Madam chair yes to table.
We have a vote of seven to five
to table.
I still wanted to give people an
opportunity to
Two way and on their previous
votes and I I can't remember
now.
Like this at if I may just very
briefly madam chair.
Okay.
Madam chair at the eight hi.
I had not until today taking the
time to re read it grow and the
compact and I do think that
there is a more than in
significant chance
that we could either trigger a I
know limitation revenue sharing
provision under the compact or
trigger a renegotiation the
compact and headed toward
legalization of full blown class
three internet gaming.
And I think we've got to get a
better handle on the consequence
of moving forward on this before
we send it to the floor of the
house I was happy to have this
rolled over for a day or two and
access to the next meeting I
need to answer that question
because that's the.
Depending on the year it's an
eighty two hundred ten million
dollar question idrs revenue
sharing and if it leads to the
year to the force legalization
of class three gaming or
internet that has extremely
widespread societal implications
it's either one of those I think
is a pretty big our consequence
that would be an unintended
consequence of this bill is
concept I I I support try to
give more opportunities for the
racetracks to.
Conducted business but with
those two provisions I I don't
feel like the.
The gaming lawyer experts had a
chance to weigh in in a
meaningful way and I'd like to
other than our own committee
member ensure with Andrew Lewis
he does practice someone at risk
I think districts a lot in this
area but I would be more so we
don't risk a huge impact to our
budget it budget generalization
revenue sharing thank you madam
chair.
Mr.
madam chair thank you I think
it's also representative Ely up
for an explanation but that the
speaker by yes Representative
what I was going to say I just
also wanted to add that I
appreciate my constituents at
home in district thirty three
that race horses raise horses
and definitely want to continue
finding a way to support the
industry
in within the parameters and
responsibilities of of the
compact so I look forward to
finding a solution and hope
we're on our way there thank you
madam chair.
Representative Eli.
Yeah sure I I was just I I think
we just come in a different way
but same kind rationale I I am
concerned specifically and I
would ask them to look at
the definition of internet.
Under thirty one USC a.
R. fifty three sixty two ten a
this is going to encouraging
them to get the information but
it's I'm I'm good chair thank
you.
Madam chair.
Yes yes Representative Armstrong
I'm sorry I didn't ask to
explain my vote I don't want to
belabor this but I I just want
to say the same the same issues
for me I don't object to the
concept of what was trying to be
accomplished but when the tribes
in our own gaming expert and
chair blue have concerns about
the possible triggers in the US
done
that was my rationale is as well
so those can be worked out and
figured out on time I'm good
thank you.
Thank you and
What I wanted to say is that
I am also persuaded that we need
to be very careful not to
violate the compact when I was
first elected we didn't have the
the
Compact yet and that after I was
elected I I hold in my district.
Despite my sympathies with the
tribe's
my district doesn't really like
gambling.
And I I've never.
I'm I've never voted
for I I left all the drives not
all interested and.
I just can't vote with you not
going to be.
Side run constantly
Give you a hard time about it
but the potential.
To expand to internet gaming
National you know and it works
quite level is of concern to me
so that's why I was reluctant to
go forward at this time but I
apologize again for having lost
your amendment I hope we made
that up to you I know you're not
have you.
The end result but I I hope your
conversation can continue I
thank you all for being here
today madam chair members of the
committee thank you very much
for the consideration for the
questions.
Thank you I'm members we need to
act on.
Representative Representative
Hochman Vigil house bill two
fifteen you should all have the
proper amendment and I do have
it in front of me now it should
have brought us an amendment
that was sent to a two number
all right two two zero zero
seven one point one and I swear
this is the right number now
where eligible enrollees were
That term was changed to certain
persons and then there was state
a provision to.
Yes Sir.
Under the supervision of a
health care provider and and so
forth and we had adopted those
I amendments all incorporated
into one amendment post I
changes before we got into the
discussion of the new material.
So I think I would like to have
a motion on the amendment and
then the bills so some of.
Okay so Representative
are strong lives that we adopt
the amendment to house bill
fifteen.
Okay I see by a show of hands if
anyone objects.
I see no objections but I don't
see every member here.
Is Representative Townsend still
with us.
Okay it looks like we have.
Representative.
Okay Representative Armstrong
representative Ely
Representative it Galle.
Representative Lewis.
Representative McQueen trying to
go down and now that it clearly.
Right looks like everybody
else's so you'll.
Every time I get a note on my
screen it says what I'm unstable
I turned off but.
I don't feel unstable but my
internet jobs so that amendment
is adopted and we had actually
passed that bill unanimously
Let's
I will.
That we at.
We did pass for hostile to
thirteen as amended second.
Thank you for representative
Armstrong.
And I'm going to assume that we
had we have no further objection
if you do objects please raise
your hand I can see your hand
even if you don't have to screen
on so.
We have no objection so staying
on line the show all of the
members we have on the screen as
voting in the affirmative.
Representative.
India has that bill amended.
Well.
we still to sixteen.
She is a Ivey Soto are co
sponsoring that bill they're
both in Senate Judiciary our
analysts have proposed a fairly
substantial amendment which I
thought was perhaps we we
discussed today but it's got
late they're not here I'm gonna
let them try to prepare that
amendment for our next meeting
so we are finished with the
agenda for today.
And anybody have any comments or
questions.
I think will meet Saturday but
it depends on when the floor
session this will try to
perhaps May yeah by the
Representative what do you have
bills to be heard they'll be
shaking your hand okay we'll see
on Friday though thank you all
very much thank you.
