Yesterday we were two days ago
they're all blurring together
actually but a couple days ago
we will take a public testimony
on
the house will one twenty seven
and one thirty seven so that is
age twenty one for higher armed
fire purchases and the second
one one thirty seven is gas
operated so my automatic fire
arms exclusion act
in one one session and we will
allocate twenty minutes for each
side and each person will get
ninety seconds and you can speak
to both bills or either bill
that's your choice will assign
about fifteen minutes to those
in the art sitting in the
audience and about five minutes
to those
online so with that i'd like to
take public comment on bills
house bills one twenty seven and
one thirty seven and we will
start with her
should you take the rule yes I
should we please take the role.
Yeah.
Representative account
representative of cheney chassis
sorry.
Representative hemry
representative lane
representative martinez
representative making
representative read here
representative ream.
Representative sapansky here.
Vice chair remarried here chair
here.
The.
We have a corner thank you
represent a mcqueen so with that
we will start with those wishing
to speak in the audience in
opposition and you have ninety
seconds each so you can stand up
there and mikes in the ceiling
whoever wants to go please we
need to start
yesterday in the jacket entire
yes madam chair members of the
committee representative
my name's doctor william fire
eyes and i'm a retired computer
sciences
both bills but my remarks are
about going safe this is not in
the sold weapons band it goes
way beyond that beyond and
previous band of the country for
bitting almost half of all
firearms in new mexico.
The semi automatic rifles pissed
almost commonly as firms chose
citizens
hunting and target they are not
some exotic rearity favorite
five militia issues they are the
main stream of fires I don't
think you intended to ban half
the firearms in new mexico but
that's what this bill does I ask
you to vote do not ask on this
misguided attempt at reducing
violence
thank you man chair members that
committee thank you next
week in opposition sir
are you speaking
my suggestion is when one person
is standing in speaking the next
one who wishes to speak stand up
so we don't have a lot of you
know lost time so go ahead sir
in speed give me your name
please my name is
myself as a marine better and
really tired of the scheduled
for people
party
years old my first
and there's a lot of people
millions of americans who do
things like you.
And.
This year with rebuilding
dollars to address the real
issue which is mental health
care
in the air fifteen or that's the
magazine if they're going to use
it
issue with that person there's
no mental health stuff for the
state no places for people go
get services for seven years
push the side in this time that
nittle hell is used yet
what is deserved is very fast
sounds familiar with.
Thank you next metal chairman
members of the committee of my
name is in a shelf as many i'll
be happy to mexico categories in
new mexico walkers and we stand
in opposition to the house still
when twenty seven section one
has a long list of exceptions
even so it's not complete
especially for those of us who
live in wrong mexico there's no
general exception for minors or
young adults processing this
fire arms inceptive yet if it's
of another if it's a property or
different of our lifestyles
while we're out there living and
working in remote areas or a
calculators which are young
people routinely do there's no
exception in the bill for a
person under twenty one who
works on the ranch who is not
owned by their parents or is not
supervised by their parents.
Nor is there an exception for
fire that are transferred down
from generation to generation
from my to miners therefore we
oppose possible when twenty
seven
thank you.
Chair committee members terrible
with the national gripel
association and opposite
seven
the exceptions for possession of
some automatic fires
are fully adequate exceptions in
fact don't even match up with
exceptions that were in house
bill nine which I believe
members of the majority party on
this committee voted for that
bill contain exemptions for some
defense depends but another any
awful recreational use for any
lawful purpose that was a
language approved and how still
nine and sent to the governor.
This bill
blacks those
thousands of minors and young
adults legally owning their own
rifles and shot downs would not
be able to legally do so
they've only spired for years
without incident and would
become criminals if they
maintain the such as the
possession of them after this
passes most opposed to house
bill one thirty seven we
extrapolated numbers from the
national fire survey and
estimate that there are two
hundred and fifty thousand new
mexicans that own.
Magazines capable of holding ten
ten or more rounds.
Two hundred fifty thousand
accidents and all better most of
those
capacity as far as fifteen
similar style rifles which seem
to be the target of this
legislation even though it's
much more expensive than just
those funds there are
approximately a hundred and
fifty thousand accidents
it would all be forced to
register in appreciate it thank
you madame chair.
Next
adam chairman members of the
committee my name is tom
skibitski I live in albert.
I oppose both of these are
proposed legislations i'm going
to speak to HB one thirty seven.
I oppose everything provision of
this it will punish people who
own a thing and do nothing to
punish who misuse a thing.
Please do that about this to
become law in twenty thirteen
new york past a while
provision ten years later the
estimated compliance rate among
those people is four percent.
Think of how that might apply to
new mexicans I urge you not to
allow this to allow this bill to
become lost thank you.
Thank you representatives
I asked you represent your
absolutely thank you I
absolutely will not vote for a
pipeline to prison bill i'm not
going to put a bunch of people
behind bars the people that you
want to come after not
not going to register them and
there's no way to put it about a
half million people in jail
probably twenty fifty dollars
because one learn more there's a
second rally that is going to
happen here the capital saturday
february third at ten o'clock if
you guys would like to meet real
people who own fire arms and
find out why they feel the way
they do I highly recommend you
come they'll be right outside so
that's ten o'clock on saturday
thank you thank you
yes ma'am.
My name is johnson carrying to I
was killed by my government
seventeen seventy five ma'am
what's your name
are you questioning my gender
I
i'm asking you for your name if
you're saying your name is
johnathan herrington i'll accept
that is that right
and that's a truthful statement
ma'am is that right at this
moment
go ahead anyone.
I was killed by my government in
seventeen seventy five when I
another fight there
and their attempt to confiscate
our weapons members of this body
passing in tolerable rejecting
the new mexico and US
constitution and the fill of
rights I shall speak by
sentiments really i'm without
reserve this is no time for
non negotiable we shall do this
your mandates
illegal laws you will be forced
to go door to door to confiscate
our property we shall not
tolerate your black shirted
thoughts putting their foods
upon her back to quote patrick
is like so dear or peace we have
to be purchased out the price of
change
what course
before making me liberty.
Yes sir.
My name is.
Services
both bills.
In my opinion and
you're considered adulted teams
of h I understand play we
wouldn't be allowed to have
weapons.
In eighteen years of age for
adults
as far as the other bill.
As the thirty where you're gonna
be moving.
Fire arms are forcing legal.
Register their their weapons
and.
It's really it's an overreach
we're punishing the full awful
the crimes of a few it's no
different that the police work
saying.
We need three fifty somebody was
drunk killed people on the
highway
thank you
chair members of the committee
career romero executive director
registered lobbyists for the new
mexican council about putters
and guides we do stand in
opposition to both bills
house built one twenty seven
hour opposition is a technical
matter and we did offer an
amendment to the sponsor which
we chatted about but i'm not
sure whether or not if it it was
introduced in the officer and
guide industry in new mexico you
can become a legal guide
and work in a firm industry and
that would obviously include
possession and so we have
requested that amendment and
will remain in opposition until
that amendment is at it we also
are opposed to hospital one
thirty seven we feel that the
extensive list of firearms
within that bill is just far too
broad and we are post thank you
thank you yes sir.
Yes sir in the front of me yes
sir.
My name's dark scott also
chair of
the mexico party
at the moment what we're going
for minor party says.
Anyways
unfortunately the numbers are in
your favorite if you go to
what's called crying research
or which is the new.
Updated information and passed
mass murder shootings from
nineteen ninety eight to twenty
twenty three
number one.
Them to this is openly you can
find it.
You find that what's going on on
this information here is that
it's not people serving the
military problem it's not.
The big one is countries so
right here
it says eighty seven percent of
shooting to be done because
people don't have fires take
themselves
and answer I do things right I
do a lot of things in that brown
still and so I totally
understand what you guys think
you're might be doing but you
have one force an officers that
don't have protection.
When you can go out so you've
got a whole lot enforcement the
part out there.
You're only going to hear the
state a lot out there that say
this is on constitutional and
you're putting them in
for their job and for their life
also because the
opposition of that of the
firearms bill one thirty seven
now my son asked me to talk
about the twenty one are older
members of the committee I am
talking with the mexican
association.
We do not support either these
two bills if you go
if you go us to take fire away
from mobiling the mexicans this
will will accomplish that.
This will make well over two
thirds of fire
illegal the by sell transfer.
The hundred thousand people who
leave
for him using them and hunting
activities
even though it was recorded
operated
best on the market
because in the ten round
magazine
for the fire industry
was many small businesses was
limited
to continue to black market and
black market continued to grow
if your troophole is
go after the criminals the
already illegal guns on the
street not.
Yeah.
The sixty five thousand
even a concert of the best of
twenty million air fifteen the
united states they never do next
it was it's likely over a
hundred thousand probably called
you will have to place it is
just one of the fire of the
distance to and.
It will be on many more other
than that hundreds of thousands
of actions could be impacted by
the still don't offer the wrong
and many would not even know
the common nature to go.
A study from random published in
the june in january this year
did not find any evidence that
state level band.
The policy misses drivers and
violent actions by targeting
objects instead of coffee people
actually
build one thirty seven
thank you.
Hi i'm nancy bennett
and want to point out that in
one thirty seven section three d
four says again this describe
they only because well engaging
in the legal use of the fire and
a properly licensed playering
range or sporting competition
venue there are none of those in
santa fe.
That's nineteen hundred square
miles one hundred fifty thousand
residents seven percent of the
state local people like it may
have no where to shoot.
I have some letter twelve rounds
to be interested in magazines
these are hand guns nine
sold with that guns specifically
inside and the guns are built
this way to make the last
I won't have any option to use
these guys when these hurt.
This makes it difficult and
costly.
Or self protection
and
registration is also included I
will not have anywhere to take
my guns even outside my own.
Big picture is in violate
records the understand
established in twenty twenty two
and was struck down when the
state organization to protect
their american second language
rights thank you.
Thank you madame chairman
distinguished the members of the
maybe my name is henry survey I
am a retired information system
security manager for three very
large defense contractors across
the country i've been formally
clear through top secretary
clear capabilities so i've come
in from good background on the
heat one twenty seven I opposed
to each twenty one it calls
strictly for age there is
absolutely no interest in the
person's background or his
current work situation or life
situation at all
if he's under twenty one he
could be allowed to be issued
automatic weapons in the
military or a police
organization this makes
absolutely zero sense to me
whatsoever.
On the house bill one three
seven number one creates a data
place of serial numbers wire
arms and users a thing which is
wrong then forbidden by at least
four existing laws and alone was
completely disregarding
across the country we have to
fight this every time.
But this is a quite via also of
the infringements because of the
second amendment.
The thing that is it includes
thirty two automatic because
it's a back operating that is
the very definition of a mouse
gun no one in their right
thank you sir thank you thank
you anyone else in the audience
at which.
One more if in the audience and
then we'll go online yesterday.
She remembers the committee and
dear was sort of the national
shoes for foundation you do
represent fire industry
we do know that these bills
will not reduce try
what they will do is diminish
economic activity in this state
by tens and ultimately hundreds
of millions of dollars over time
so that does need to be
considered we know these are not
going to gain in crime reduction
not
most likely probably cost lives.
They will have enormous economic
impact which means jobs families
and there will be thank you
thank you and we'll go online.
Those wishing a speaking
position online.
Okay
please
thank you madame chairman
members of the committee the
need asking on behalf of her
seventeen hundred members of the
arrifal pistol club here in the
albuquerque
i'll start briefly with a house
but one thirty seven medical
chair when you and sander
savantes discussed the kind of
bills that had no chance of
surviving your respect for
committees the postparent world
let alone judicial review this
bill would have been a prime
example other people have made
plenty of other arguments on so
i'll leave it there on one
twenty seven similar laws and
other states have been over the
past few years and are still
being rapidly challenged and
failing in courts spending time
while making in that regard
seems to be set up to fail in
the current legal climate
there's no question that 18-20
year olds are adults and are
part of the people as defined by
for due to his and
taking away their right to be
arms therefore again contravenes
burn challenges have had success
in new york california have
recently overcome somewhere laws
in texas can see minnesota and
most recently pennsylvania where
there in vievenshik was decided
in third circuit that's
including new jersey and
delaware.
In favor of the young adult
plaintiffs about the same issue
if the government couldn't
succeed in that circuit I don't
think they'd fare much better
here in the tent but encourage
you not to waste money passing
attempting to enforce them
defending this bill in court
thank you
thank you could savannah tupper
please.
Savannah.
Thank you manager committee but
my minimum smile topper i'm from
any county from a senior
and recently committed to
animated to continue my street
in sports career today I speak
on behalf of new mexico for each
and the experience will division
and we are an opposition of
hospital one twenty seven
the team of an individuals which
is important to state we have
compassion sorrow for the lives
lost from by arms is also
important for all to know for
each and the high school
division are the two safest
organizations in the country
that promote youth of fires
we learn to save your rules and
finance and live in breathy
safety roles on enough field we
also learn each score is
affected by each person
therefore believe that it's off
the fire it is responsible for
devastation it is the person
behind it the collegiate treaty
house will one twenty seven
would restrict you from keeping
firearms at our homes away from
home as our parents want to be
present as a young adult we can
vote certain military or even by
a eighteen the restrictions of
carrying fire seems an
inconsistent please consider
applications of hospital one
twenty seven poses on the ute.
Do not make masses responsible
for the actions of here from the
new mexico for each and the
mexican high school division
shootings please suppose
hospital
for.
Yes madam chair members of the
main report of the legislative
there's offset mexican shooting
sports association
sorry yeah well a little bit
okay
so I guess that one house but
one twenty seven there's an
adjunction in the tenth circuit.
The two colorado is under twenty
one banners issued by the tenth
circuit so you know as we are in
the tenth circuit that would
seem to be it would have a utter
battle to climb as a function
against the similar call and
house but one pretty seven the
the f
department of public safety
talks about the seventh circuit
decision on illinois band I will
want everyone to note really
quickly the illinois band is far
more limited and scope and house
to one thirty seven and two in
order to support the law the
circuit embedded a new test
that's not in bruin hello
mcdonald's the basically talks
about whether or not something
is in military weapons it is
nothing to do with the operation
of the partner has to do this
court development however I
suspect in a long when they meet
regret opening that can of worms
on fire and classification so we
ask you your post how still one
twenty seven and house one
thirty seven
thank you thank you sacry.
And nick sutherland.
The.
You can hear me yes
okay my name is next other and
i'm promiser gen at the end
trauma medical director at the
second busiest promise enter in
the state i'd like to urge you
to vote against both of these
bills
for a number of reasons which
have been better articulated by
a lot of other speakers
but
specifically with the one thirty
seven these
these are arms that are in
common use for lawful purposes
and there's
no historic president for for
banning them I can tell you as a
promise of agent who's practised
in new mexico my entire life
that
the overwhelming number of the
injuries that we see are from
which are specifically not
addressed in this bill
for reasons I guess you know
they don't look scary enough
but I I would not anticipate
this to make any difference in
inviolent crime
perhaps even to make it worse
criminals are still going to get
there their weapons on the black
market
new mexico is not hawaii we have
an international border in
multiple state borders that
people can drive things across
the last thank you santage.
Thank you matter betty larry
santaker i'm an air force
veteran who was a security
specialist then retiree from the
oliver key police department I
oppose both of these bills
in context of they target the
wrong people during my service
in the air force guarding
nuclear weapons and with the
opportunity the least department
the rules of engagement were
dealing with people who were
breaking the law thought that
these laws do the opposite and
go after law biting new
mexicans.
You heard earlier that the four
h has a program and proud to say
that my adult son spent hours
and hours volunteering with
eighteen to twenty year olds in
high school to help them channel
their energy towards a sport
where they could learn to shoot
rifles that the law concerning
that is misguided the lock
concerning banning.
Semi automatic weapons would
greatly reduce the ability for
thousands of hundreds of
thousands of the mexicans
I urge you to vote no one both
bills thank you thank you we'll
now go to the audience.
For those wishing to speak in
support.
Alan is a madam chair and a
members of the committee my name
is alan sanchez on the executive
director of the new mexico
conference
the bishops are to impose but to
propose and we propose that you
support and pass this
legislation we want a courage
you not to be perilized by the
threat on the lawsuit over it's
constitutionally we know that
every piece of legislation you
have to be tested by the
constitution and many times
there are lawsuits of many
things that you pass not
we also know that the US
constitution is up for
interpretation we see and the
interpretation is not just what
the value of others want it well
what fits the society today we
live in a culture of violence
and sometimes your votes have to
be countered cultural.
And that's what you're but it's
the right one to achieve the
common good we bury the dead
people to die for fires
these are people with real
reading families please both yes
on both of these.
Thank you merander random
scholar call president of new
medicare members of the
committee in random scoring for
president of new mexicans to
prevent going balance we stand
one hundred percent in support
of both pieces of legislation
the number one job we have as a
society is to keep our young
people safe and we have failed
them the majority of the work we
do at new mexicans to bring gun
violences were with our and I
can tell you they are
frightened.
They are tired they are
traumatized they are heartbroken
and they are beyond confused as
to why we are doing so little to
keep them safe.
Today around school with the
unampromised surgeon where we're
doing the stop the bleed program
in this program they get fake
whims.
With board halls and they learn
how to stuff those board with t
shirts socks they learn how to
put tournicates on so that they
have a tool to keep our yet
themselves safe and to hopefully
save one of their friends and a
school shooting and it gives
them that to all.
What we have given them so
little else.
These weapons award never
belonged.
In the hands of our civilian
population and they never
belonged and the hands of
somebody under the age of
eighteen twenty one.
Thank you sir you hear and
support okay members can make
patrick alone secretary of the
department of health
gun violence is the number
of forty kids in twenty twenty
two that I do violence both
of accidental honor side into
the side that's almost as much
as the next two causes of death
traffic accidents and drug over
those combined.
We've cited in the fire that you
have to research the indicates
that improve on safety
requirements like each limits
like waiting periods other
restrictions are associated with
reductions in gun deaths and in
particular suicide for those
reasons and reasons that are
also in
the department
thank you anyone else in the
audience yesterday.
Manager and committee members I
support both bills what's your
name my name is harder
representing the horse
foundation.
As the US army cable scout I
carry clean train and shot with
my m four the military version
of an a r fifteen more days and
I understand the power the
purpose of the thoughty of these
weapons in the military we use
gas operated semi automatic fire
to take human life quickly and
efficiently too often that
that's exactly how they are used
to your.
For some reason our country is
unable to accept reasonable
trade offs in order to protect
them responsible our children
without the passage of these
bills ribles will continue to
flood our population in evidence
they will call into the hands of
dangerous people who wish to do
and we will see more mass
students like the one last year
information
I can't reconcile the side of
civilians on the streets of new
mexico equipped with the weapon
I carried in the desert back.
Bottom line
for use in war we must be in the
further sales gas operating semi
automatic fire and insure the
next hassle
doesn't happen inside
thank you.
Next year's man
chairman chamber
number
my name is cathy moslem public
speaking cath of mom's demand
action for
visible.
In support of HB one thirty
seven.
My professor.
And clearly was killed
international
leaving six people there.
And one paralysed i'm to ask
your support.
For a lot of large capacity
maybe that's part of hb
one thirty seven
research has shown
his associated with forty nine
percent reduction in mass
shootings and seventy percent
reduction in the table
fourteen states
already restrict
the constitutionality has been
successful by the seventh
federal circuit portable screen
chase
between court reversal rate
among thirteen federal circuit
thank you port bringing this
bill forward and thank you for
your support.
Thank you yes sir
good afternoon
that long day insurance
committee my name is lazar's
lecture not from all the cricket
pc candidate are you an
according way to special
advocate for new mexico's boston
i'm also survived in aggravated
assault with an ak forty seven
and i'm here to back up the
committee yes.
You know twenty twenty three
while I was sitting at home
playing video games my neighbor
tried to kill me with an assault
but then.
He part eight times until
another neighbor stopped in
saving countless lives.
His bullet went through two
metal sides of an air street
trailer but wouldn't fence two
sides of the metal shed and one
more would independence into my
neighbors you are I can only
imagine what the bullets would
have done to my body.
Why does the civilian especially
one of the long history of
domestic violence in the wise
have the right to military great
weapons with high capacity
magazines why does his right to
mass destruction matter more
than my sixty my piece.
My attack terrified my community
pride events increased security
and added self defense classes
the children I blocked and I
want to leave their houses the
innocence of my safe
neighborhood shattered my life
wasn't taken that day and I
refused to let my attack take my
voice as all of them have no
place in new mexico let's make
our state of frustration.
Thank you anyone else in the yes
ma'am.
Madame.
My eighteen year olds and nine
hundred was taken.
The friends he was with this
friend and nightmare staying
running from a garage of police
as a plan to safety after a
fight and broken out.
That night another young man was
killed and forward injured.
We have a crisis of them by the
new mexico in the last two years
they met where too many parents
were going to the loss of a
child bank.
I've also seen security measures
that my school and trees
because of the potential threat
of an active shooter situation.
A soft weapons and a high
capacity magazine were involved
in at least eight of the debit
maths between twenty d.
Should pass this life taking
policy.
There's a person in the back
let's do that person.
Well I excuse me i'm put them
indicating to you
sure
mountains here and members of
the committee my name is
favorite astra and I am in
support at both house bill one
twenty seven and house at one
thirty seven I will be speaking
and support twenty seven.
I would work for many reasons
though I like so many other
personal story and we.
When I was a teenager here in
santa fe one of my friends here
major is going through difficult
as many young people do.
During the stypical time he was
experiencing the passive episode
none of this knew how that it
was to wait.
Then this new until you
purchased a gun and killed
himself okay.
It was one of the kind of
generous people I don't know.
I can't help wonder something
like hospital in twenty seven
had been in place at that time
if it was given my friend time
to get to help needed to prevent
him and think betting suicide
and if you would still be alive
today.
I urge you to support hospital
on twenty seven I also.
The.
Thank you yes sir.
Thanks.
Manager is the committee manages
chris martin I represent the
every town
and testifying in favorable
bills.
I'm retired on the officer
better in the war afghanistan
i'm also the sun grandson and
great grandson that in fact my
family's military legacy exempt
to seventeen seventy six
constitution.
For centuries my family has
fought for this country and the
last fifty years we did so hard
with gas operators and the
automatic firearms.
In the army I qualified expert
multi m sixteen and the employer
and I cared the important
candidates
of course.
I haven't trained on these
platforms and years.
Why would I I don't need them
outside of battlefield.
These weapons are fortunately
for hunting their unreasonably
awkward or self defense.
And military else all of its
have only one purpose.
Surprising and killing the enemy
and combat.
This legislature as proposal
brilliantly with.
Focusing on the engineering
aspects that make the gun so
legal.
At once this long respects the
second limit amendment and
protective lives in mexico's
children.
We must pass this bill.
A hundred million americans
already live in states and
studies from northwestern
university and the american
medical association report these
policies reduce number of
messagings and lower definitely
some shootings do occur it's the
last day of january.
And this country's already seen
thirty six mashings this year.
The only staff that really
matters though is that recent
police revealed the majority of
the mexican support thank you
fifty three percent of rural
yesness.
United share members of the
committee my name is
attorney every time and legal
council that works on policy in
this date and eat others I
wanted to give a brief overview
of the constitutionality.
Two and a half years ago.
I know that this committee has
been hearing from people about
how the court cases then coming
out and I wanted to get an
update at this point all states
that have sold these laws on the
box.
Those laws are in effect and
almost all states but one that
have large pasti magazine
restrictions how does
these laws are being tested by
dozens and dozens of cases and
courts continually are saying we
are going to afford them for
court challenge they're about
eat at least federal port
opinions confirming the
constitutionality of assault
weapons
acknowledging that regulation of
highly dangerous weapons dates
all the way back to the founding
and federal courts are similar
similarly saying that large
capacity magazine regulations
consistent with the second
amendment.
I'm happy to speak more to any
committee remember who wishes
here more but I just.
Anyone else in the audience
I don't see anyone will now go
online
megan please.
Thank you madame chair members
of the committee I am doctor
megan henry speaking and support
of both bills on behalf of new
mexico it costs the american
college of obstructions and
gynecologists we are advocates
for reproductive justice the
right thing maintain bottle the
autonomy have children not have
children and parent the children
that we have and safe and
sustainable communities on
december seventh twenty
seventeen the day before my son
turned to I was in my clinic
when we heard that schools were
unlocked on because of the
school shooting and astech I
will never forget the scream of
my nursing assistant a short
term a short time later once you
learn that her family member was
one of the children murdered her
wales permitted the balls of our
clinic because we bore witness
to her robert felt like a
nightmare that such tragedy had
come to our small community
and believeably it might like
data through this past may I was
once again in clinic when I
heard that my own now school age
children are unlocked down
because of a mass shooting and a
farming to neighborhood and
eighteen year old who had
legally purchased an air fifteen
style rifle shot a hundred and
fifty rounds and less than ten
minutes hitting seven houses
eleven vehicles and killing
three women in the hours and
days that I we've been learned
that my husband new family of
the victims and some of the bray
of first responders
unfortunately more and more of a
spinder lives directly impacted
by gun violence these aren't
simply stories in the news they
are stories about our loved ones
and our communities please
support house bill one twenty
seven and one thirty seven thank
you
thank you bill jordan.
The.
Begin madame chairman members of
the committee of bill jordan
with new mexico voices for
children we support both of
these bills and urger support
we are greed that guns are now
the leading cause of death among
young people and we really
applaud your efforts to approach
this issue with these two bills
thank you
thank you.
Janet williams.
Hi i'm janet williams.
National organization for women
and the alliance for gun violent
solutions and I strongly support
both of these bills for all the
reasons already given but I
would like to underline that I
am very very concerned about my
grandchildren and having to go
into a school building and being
afraid and I also think that
automatic reports are not
shooting for persport they're
shooting for deaths and that is
not something we need in our
society thank you
thank you
campbell.
The.
Madame chair members of the
committee my name is pam
campbell and i'm with the
alliance for gun violence
solutions and I urge you to
support both of these bills for
the safety of citizens in new
mexico
and to decrease gone violence
thank you thank you.
Elaine miller.
I think madame chair yes thank
you madame chair
I am with new mexico chapter of
mon's demand action living in
alba kirkey and for all of the
reasons that other people have
already stated so eloquently and
so forcefully we do ask you to
support this bill thank you
thank you regina.
But a share woman changed our
members of the connecting my
name is regina greego i'm the
survivor membership leave for
mom's demand action new mexicans
are not free when we fear being
shot every time we go to the
store theater concert or fear
for our children every time they
leave the home we should not
have military grade weapons
available to the public the
ripple effect of gun violence is
devastating my story was a
perfect storm that took five of
my family members all victims of
the mass shooting committed by
my troubled nephew I wish I had
been more vigilant and knew that
my brother kept eight guns and
fifteen thousand rounds of
ammunition all available to his
children part of the reason he
had this arsenal including two a
r fifteen is because he believed
he might have to take on the
government instead he these
weapon these weapons were used
against him which is not
uncommon I know.
So well that the brain does not
develop until age twenty five
and people under that age often
do not consider long term
consequences and are very
vulnerable to peer pressure
currently children can possess
guns given as gifts at any age
assault weapons and high
capacity magazines were involved
in at least eight of the ten
eight deadly a smash shootings
between twenty fifteen and
twenty twenty one it only takes
minutes and the children are
either dead or in jail.
Please stop needless slaughter
of our citizens and give our
children a future and boat yes
on HB one twenty seven and HB
one thirty seven
last one reader.
We detrifits.
Read a use seem to be unmuted.
Reader
okay we will close public
comment at this point.
Representative sapansky
the floor is yours thank you
madame chair madame chair and
members i'm here to present to
your house bill one twenty
seven.
This spill would establish a
minimum age for the purchase and
possession of semi automatic and
automatic firearms and
skis me i'm trying to avoid a
microphone mouth oaches
for the purchases in possession
of automatic and send me
automatic firearms and large
capacity ammunition feeling
devices with some reasonable
exceptions I am going to keep my
presentation fairly brief in the
interest of efficiency
this reason that we are bringing
forward this proposal is because
far too many of new mexico's
children and you they're dying
from gun violence and far too
often there are the ones pulling
the trigger evidence by the fact
that across the country six of
the night deadliest mass
shootings are in the us since
twenty eighteen
we're committed by people who
were twenty one or younger
this bill is just one piece of
the solution
our state needs a number of our
forms as it relates to gun
violence criminal justice public
safety behavioral health and
violence intervention
I want to take a minute to
highlight the exceptions in the
bill
this build is not impact new
mexicans between eighteen and
twenty one who are a peace
officers in law enforcement
security officers members of the
armed forces or the national
guard it also permits your
mexicans in this age group to
possess and use these firearms
when they are legally hunting at
an established firing range on
private property under the
supervision and of parent or
legal guardian tending a
hundreds of fire and safety
course participating and
organized firearm competition or
performance traveling with the
unloaded and safely stored
to one of these locations.
I am going to wind up my
presentation and introduce my
experts as well
I will just say it is policies
also about preventing harm while
respecting the traditions of
youth sports mentioned and
hunting some of which are part
of my family's traditions as
well so to that end point two to
caliber rifles are also excluded
from this bill
I hope you will find that this
policy is a common sense one
that simply prevents via hermes
and immunition devices that are
most capable of rapidly taking
human life from falling into the
hands of an age group that is
most at risk of hurting
themselves or others i'd like to
introduce my experts madam chair
in committee I have
mister benjamin baker who was
public safety advisor to the
office of the governor as well
as miss elizabeth johnson
general council for the
department of public safety and
not sure if either of them would
like to add anything to that
thank you madame chair that
concludes our presentation
thank you we've done public
comments so worked at the
committee representative lane I
believe you have to hand up
thank you madame chair
so I think
can I maybe just understand
what's the harm that we're
trying to address i'm just
trying to wrap myrons around
which twenty one when currently
I believe right age eighteen.
Madame chair and representative
lane currently there is no
minimum age for a possession of
a.
Semi automatic or automatic
firearm particularly arrival or
shock and in
state
there are federal restrictions
on possession of hing guns
and a to answer your first
question madame charit and
representative leader lane
the idea is is truly just you
are to understand that while
young people are still
developing prefendable court
core taxes developing our
decision making capability is
developing as well as emotional
regulation that semi automatic
firearms should not be part of
that equation until they turn
twenty one.
A man of sure.
What what is the federal law
with regard to hand.
I'm gonna ask miss johnson and
to reply to that management
chair and we are lane of your
give me a second I can give it
to you for word I don't want to
once.
Madame chair and leader lane
per federal are is illegal to
transfer a firearm from another
fell to a buyer if the buyers
under age twenty one.
And chair and and do you know
the majority of massus are they
committed with handguns.
Madame chair members committees
leader lane
I don't know with absolute
precision the the answer to your
question about what the the
numerical majority of minority
of mass shootings certainly earn
new mexico we have seen our fair
share of machines committed with
both hand guns and eight some
automatic rifles and weapons on
her consideration and this
legislation to speak up for
example in the northwest corner
of our state as tech shooting
was committed with a hand gun
deferred and shooting was
committed with a combination of
air fifteen and hand going as
well I think that's the best I
can do leader
yeah ma'am chair and that's my
point so.
I'm very since as was issue as a
born and raised an aspect I was
on the school board when that
shooting occurred.
And you already have a federal
law on the books that bands
possessions of hand guns.
Until each twenty one.
And so i'm just trying to wrap
my arms around the harm this is
intended to prevent when we
already have a clear example.
Of along the books.
That makes it unlawful the
possessed a very thing that is
used in most mass shootings
particularly in schools.
And so the premise I am i'm
afraid is is faulty.
That this.
This law aged twenty one when it
comes to owning automatic
resumatic firms is going to move
the needle whatsoever when it
comes to.
To mass shootings
when we already have an example
of that.
Um.
In federal law.
I do have a question on some of
the specifics of the bill
manager.
Page two of the bill.
The.
So if I understand lines for
through nine.
Let's assume
an eighteen year old.
I can.
Possessing semioutic firm for
target practices that correct.
Manag.
Manager leader lane that's
correct.
In medicine but I
so I can I can hold the fire I
can shoot it.
But I can't own it is that
correct.
Madame chair leader laying
correct.
And so I guess some manager i'm
a little puzzled by the logic
there
can i.
Can I maybe just have a little
bit of.
Understanding about why this
provision is in there to allow
me to.
Handle the firm.
Should alive round.
At a target.
Um but I can't take it home and
own the thing.
Madam chair and leader lane
part of the rash now for that
exception as well as all of the
other sort of circumstances that
are it contemplated in this bill
is to
we are.
Limit this is not an outright
band madam chair and leader lane
this is not a
a one's ice bits are a hope of
bill what this is attempting to
do as carve out for some of the
traditions of sportsmanship and
hunting that you know maybe have
had been passed down generation
the generation while also
limiting access to these
incredibly lead off.
To specific situations where
those competitions traditions
activities that may be
supervised by parents or other
family members are occurring.
Thinking about insurance.
I have a question about.
Let's say nineteen year old and
i.
Legally purchased or tramp or
received through a transfer
a semi automatic.
Firearm.
This law goes on the books
can you speak to what happens to
those people who are currently
lawful gun owners when this
statute goes.
Madame chair and leader lane
in the time before the the law
became a factive
those who currently on those
weapons would have the
opportunity to transfer them
sell them
or otherwise dispose of them
until the la went into a fact
and so they could transfer them
to
a parent to someone who was a
age to possess their firearm.
So many i'm i'm currently lawful
gun owner.
I'm nineteen.
I haven't community crime with
the firearm I haven't shown
myself to be irresponsible going
owner.
And now because we as a
legislature.
And act appears to be an
arbitrary number.
The.
I have to either.
Transfer the firm sell it
destroy it.
Or i'm guilty of that statute is
that correct.
Madam chair leader lane yes
although I would arm just remind
the committee that this bill is
limited to the specific firearms
that are described.
In the legislation.
So manager i.
I find that concept actually
really quite troubling.
Because it seems to me that you
could have some grandfathering
language in because you're.
You're really almost going back
after the fact because again if
i'm nineteen ninety.
And I went through the whole
process to purchas.
Aid the money form because a lot
of these aren't cheap.
Uhm and now i'm faced with this
conundrum to wear either I have
to give up what was prior.
Me exercising lawform legal
rights or verse or face being
prosecuted.
Under this new.
Statutes have you given any
thought madame chair to any kind
of grandfather and concept built
into th.
Madame chair and leader lane
it's the first time it's been a
brought up in and committee so I
definitely appreciate your
bringing it app
certainly the intention is not
to criminalize young people and
so you know I think it would be
interesting to disguise the
solution whether that be some
kind of.
You know option to safely
dispose of as well as includes
language regarding transfer to
individuals who were over twenty
one I think.
We could contemplate something
like that I can't speak for
everyone bed speaking for
myself.
Madam sure you know I think
something along the lines of.
Essentially.
And I don't know when the spill
would go and affect if it's just
the normal.
Yeah doesn't look like it hasn't
inactive dates should be the
normal timeline after we get out
the session and if the
governance it
so could be something along the
lines of essentially a few
demonstrate that you legally
acquired the fire and prior to
the date of enactment.
And you're under the agen.
The.
Because right now i'm worried
that there's a whole segment of
our populous and new mexico is a
really unique state.
It it is majority.
Blue but there are a lot of our
population th.
Right.
And so it seems to me that
there's the.
There's a subgroup here that's
going to become.
Criminals essentially it's it's
a misdemeanor but it's still a
violation along there could be
prosecuted and jell for up at
three hundred and sixty four
days and and I think it's a
thousand dollar finer fibr.
Or both.
So something I would manage to
appreciate if you'd consider as
this bill moves forward
ma'am a question about.
You know sort of rural life.
There are a lot of adkids in new
mexico.
And when I say kids I mean
sixteen seventeen eighteen year
old.
Kids that are on a farmer ranch.
And they have life stock.
And there are pretters that come
on to the property often times
especially if you have smaller
lifestock.
You know sheep chickens those
kinds of things and so bound
share i'm curious I don't see
any exception here for
just charge of a firearmer
possession of fireman defense of
what is essentially property.
One of those again also can I
get some understanding as to how
come that's not an exception.
This.
Madam chair a leader lane I
would direct you to.
H two lines starting on my
twenty four.
In that is an exemption for
possession on private property
and with those specifications
around control of the
parent grandparentally a
correctly a legal guardian and
supervision
would left her you to look at
that and see if that might apply
to the situation that you're
describing.
Manager and I think it would
apply on in a lot of situations
I think that's a fair point.
But it doesn't apply to all
situations so I guess that's
sort of because the question
what does that mean when we say
supervised.
What does that mean in the
statute.
Madame chair and leader lane i'm
not picking on you I answered
the same way to representative
block when he asked me what a
word that was under fine means
in this case we would just look
to its plane meaning so we would
probably rely on a dictionary
definition but I do think that
there are few ways to construe
that term so manager can give me
an example of what would be a
common.
Constrain of it.
Madame charan leader lane is
someone who's still supervised
by her parents
I I like to think that you're
being monitored being watched or
they know what you're doing but
that control can be sort of off
hands or hands on.
So many insurer I think most
people when they talk about
supervision particularly when
you're talking about a firearm I
think monitoring.
Is a good term I think observing
watching.
And so I you know I I guess.
The question I have is.
You know I do over seventeen
year old son
and we we have firms where
multiple farms in our home
and he knows how to handle those
responsibilities been trained in
that.
And so what happens if i.
Run to the grocery store and
he's there alone.
Is he allowed under the statute
to discharge a semioutic so my
automatic weapon in defense of
property or does he have to sit
there and watch the coyote kill.
The.
Madam chair and leader lane I
certainly think that's a
possibly covered under the
sledge under the language that
we have now something stronger
might say that you as the parent
exercise dominion and control
over the firearm not merely
supervised so I think that's
potentially covered although
up to interpretation so many
right.
The.
No I let me ask this question
because I think this kind of
gets to the foundation of.
Of this discussion on the
subparagraphers.
The way I understand the intent
of this paragraph seven is.
Where it started covering out
this exception to allow someone
under the age of twenty one to
possess.
A similar automatic firm.
But only because they're being.
Modern supervised by somebody
whose responsible over the age
of twenty one is at fair.
Madam chair leader lane yes and
I I out as a parent I would
could also construe that under
you know what are the rules of
the home what are the accepted
instructions that have been.
Given time and time again
sometimes many many times do
children and that those are the
standards of behavior that are
accepted in the home
under which conditions are that
those firearms were to be used
or not used and.
You know I would think as
someone who are.
You know it is is in a similar
situation I would
expect that.
Youth under twenty one who were
on my property in my home my
children under my control and
being supervised by the rules of
that home would have to abide by
those expectations.
So many insurer.
I think so as we discuss this
more to me the only logical
reading of this paragraph and
why would even make sense is.
To have someone who is basically
looking over your shoulder to
make sure you're not shooting
yourself.
Or shooting at something you
shouldn't be shooting at that to
me I think it's the only
reasonable reading of supervised
and so if that's the case then I
think we again we've got sort of
this.
This.
Sign of our population that you
are gonna have a you could I
will have a twenty year old
ranch worker frankly.
Not even fourteen year old boy
home alone you could have a
twenty year old ranch worker.
And you're telling them they
could use a shock earner hand
gun but they can't use a semi
automatic.
Rifle.
To defend what and this is again
of a lawful shooting you know
it's not a violation of another
crime.
And so I again I just think the
language.
Either needs to be timed up but
I think we just need to come to
grips with what we are actually
prohibiting here.
The.
I have a question about
inheritance I don't see anything
and here about if.
If i'm a twenty year old and my
grandfather passes away.
And and he wants to give me a.
Some semi automatic firearm and
mile loud to take possession of
that inherited firearm
madame chair and leader lane no
so again i.
Another sort of what I think is
captured too many scenarios.
Now we're sort of digging into
the inheritance please so what
people can hear it and what they
can.
Manager so the way I read this
bill is the crime that's created
it's a mystery or is that
correct.
Madam chair and leader lane yes
manager do we have any other
examples than our laws in our
state laws where unlawful
possession of a firearm is
anything other than a fellow.
Um.
Madame chair and leader lane I
do not believe so i'd be happy
to check while you're continue
to question but I do not believe
so manager that's my
understanding of the wall so.
And so it again it decided begs
the question for me what are we
really trying to prohibit here
if this is such a problem.
Um and in every other context we
make it a felony.
And on the advocating for to be
fell into it at all but I think
it goes to the point of how
serious are we about curbing
whatever.
The alleged harmers were trying
to solve and the fact that we
only make it a misdemeanor for
unlawful possession of a firearm
I think should wake us up.
That there is not that there's
more to the problem really than
what we're trying to dress.
On the.
The.
The misdemeanor peace
so let's take that example where
i.
Well no it's let's even take a
bad actor example manager so
let's say that you have a parent
child relationship.
Parent lawfully owns a similar
sim out of firearm in their home
cause this doesn't private
parents morning in their home is
that correct
madame chair leader landcorrect
and I leave.
My house and my.
Seventeen year old son takes
possession of my son amount.
Firm.
And let's say.
Shoots of.
You know and i'm unactually
vehicle.
Some other crimes in there too
but.
Is the child guilty of the
statute or is the parent yield.
Madam chair leader lane the
benny hard growth act would
potentially apply to the parent
is the situation you describe is
actually similar to that
individual situation
and the.
The youth who took possession of
that firearm would be the one
addressed by this legislation
and a mister baker what i'll
have him add please.
No term of the committee clearly
just expand for comprehensive
answer in the episodically used
shooting at an I could pay
dwelling indoor shooting at a or
vehicle as a separate in
distinctive felony crime
contemplated within the statutes
in mexico so any and all
investigative leads related to
the to the individual facts
which are unique to each
situation would be contemplated
in the criminal assessment by
one forcement and subsequent
prosecutorial effort is my
experience.
In manager and at you know as I
said there's other crimes and an
example also but.
This.
A lot of the sort of the
rationale we've heard as this is
decurb.
Suicides and mass shootings.
But if it's the.
Child who's the going to be the
criminal defendant I don't see
how that extends to prohibiting
anything.
It seems like it'd be more
effective if you went after the
parents.
Let me explain to you my
situation so.
As nineteen year old I was
married.
And I had my own place.
I had my own job to go to
school.
I was not I was no longer up you
know.
A children if my parents home
nineteen year old.
Under this bill in my own home
as a nineteen year old married.
Can I own in possess.
Sim a similar automatic firm.
Madame chair leader lane no
so I I think we all need
manature to just sort of take a
breath there and realize what
that means and what ted
extensive so.
I was responsible enough to be
married
I was responsible enough to have
my own home.
I was going to college I was
playing baseball had a part time
job.
And
I could enlist in the military I
could you know and own a fire
possessed farm there can do it
through the police force.
But.
In my own home I couldn't even
own as the adult in the home.
A semitic.
Firearm and I it troubles me.
That we're getting into that
level of detail.
To decide what I can cannot use
to defend my own homework so I
could.
I could use a hand gun I could.
Own shock on and do the same
atrocities with those that I
could with the similar matter.
Um fire.
But I couldn't own legally on a
similar matter fire in my own.
And.
Again it's not just some
hypothetical that was really.
My life.
Twenty two years ago I guess it
w.
The other.
Thing that I find managers sort
of puzzling about this statute
and correctly if i'm wrong but
the way I read the statute so
let's take that example of when
I was nineteen.
I could.
Target shoot with the semimatic
firm is that correct.
Madame chair leader lane if.
A unh two
lines for three nine as as we
discussed earlier
addresses that and madam chair
as a nineteen year old
who had their own place I could
travel I could travel to and
from the shooting range in
possession of the firearm is
that correct
mountain chair leader lane that
is addressed page two lines
twenty three twenty three.
And so man sure that's that's a
correct understanding is that
right that is correct madam
chair but mansion when I got
home
I can no longer possess the farm
so to me there's a huge gap
there in terms of the logic and
in terms of what we're trying to
curb.
Um.
And I just again I I have a hard
time seeing how this is going to
move the need on.
And i'll just finish with this
matter I think i've.
Asked my questions but.
I feel like what we're doing
here is we're we're telling
eighteen nineteen twenty year
olds that you're old enough to
vote.
You're old enough to go diaf
your country.
But you're not really
old enough for safe enough to.
I want something like a similar
matter fire.
The.
And it's an example of how we
are passing laws.
That restrain individual
liberties and as the federal
statute makes clear.
This law is going to do nothing
to prevent and these are real
atrocities that have been
discussed here and public
testimony and this bill is going
to do nothing to to move the
needle to present those and
instead all it is going to do is
make it more difficult for a
long biting.
Thank you manager.
Thank you I represent it chase I
believe you had your hand up
before it represented rebe can I
gotcha represent welcome
they come out of chair and
represent the supposedly you had
indicated when there was
testimony regarding the
the desired exception from the
guides and outfitters that you'd
be willing to amend this
and I went up stairs to check
with the bill drafter and it
looks like we could amend this
very simply so i'm in a
proposing amendment as the
drafter can suggested it
heard me
mount her on page two nine nine
two.
After the word activities.
We don't need a new subsection
simply answered.
Or possesses a guidelicense
pursuant to seventeen dash two a
dash three
ms nineteen seventy eight like I
can pass this down through the
yeah
very good one we repeat that or
possesses a guideline license
pursuant to what seventeen dash
two a dash three okay
animals say nineteen seventy
eight okay.
And I don't know we've done this
once before in the drafter will
help us is that out of the draft
that's how we were told it and
he didn't think he needed to
prepare them for this okay we do
yeah we were doing
with our analysts first
and
about whether we need to do
subsection and it was suggested
i'd go up and talk to the
drafters so I did that okay very
good is that a motion yes
that manager
and
is that a friendly mo- uhm
proposed amendment yes madame
chair in leader chasey that is a
friendly amendment we're just
the decitation is correct as
well thank you very good
questions or comments on the
proposed amendment.
You don't see any any opposition
to adopt the amendment
okay there's a motion to adopt
the amendment second by
representative remarries that
right okay is there any
opposition to the amendment
I don't see any.
You still have a floor madam
representative that's my money
to I have no other questions
thank you you're welcome
representing reeb and thinking
out of chair and representative
I don't want to go up repeating
pretty much everything that
leader lane said because it was
exactly what I had written down
specifically number seven on
page two
and how to interpret that
but also I myself have a sign
he's eating in a half years old
and his possessed and semi
automatic weapon since he's been
sixteen years old
and I can see him in the same
situation that leader lane was
then for he's about to graduate
from high school at that point
he'll be close to nineteen years
old in june and if he chooses to
go out and get a families
talking about being a
firefighter
he's used to scan to hand he's a
very responsible person I
have a hard time wrapping my
head around this idea to that
we're going to tell him you know
you've been we've been the owner
of this firearm and now that
you're going to go out and his
leader lane said you can.
You can get married you can vote
you can enter into a contract by
a house be charged as an adult
on a crime but you can't protect
yourself I that's just a huge
huge problem for me
and I submit listening to this
and and listening to
leader lane said that exact
things that were going through
by mind and again madame chair
and I am representative with
would think that and hope that
you would consider some type of
grandfather clause for people
who of already are only in these
firearms
because it just seemed strange
to me that the way this has
written and I am unsure and on
page two hundred seven what
under the control of the
person's parent is an and the
supervision to me also means as
you all were stayed in madame
chair and representative that it
seems you have to be watching
them
you can think of scenarios where
you can interpret that so many
ways if you're out of the home
and he has to defend himself or
defend the property only we're
talking on a ranch defend me or
defend my husband or you know
himself as he going to be
charged with a misdemeanor.
You know so how I don't know
madame chairman you could
respond to that situation
would he be charged in that
situation if he had to defend
himself in his eighteen years
old in my home.
Madame chair representative reap
thank you very much for the
question
in with difference to your
significant experience
prosecuting criminal cases and
understanding of the law each
individual instance would have
to be waiting measured by the
responding law enforcement
agency significant collaboration
would be conducted in the
example like you used where
firearm was used to to quell a
violent encounter for example in
your hypothetical.
At to determine who the
oppressor was what the
circumstances were what the
evidence told the law
enforcement personnel and then
of course the coordinated effort
between them and their
jurisdictional proscutorial
authority on what charges if any
would be appropriate relative
that individual case smaller
appreciate the question it
depends on so many variables
would be difficult to answer
with a precision
madam chair and I understand who
said it be up to the da and you
know that so that's a lot of
discretion you know depending on
who your day is an and you know
I understand that that it is a
probably a little humorous but
it's just not black and white
under the this section number
seven I mean what is under the
control of the parent what is
being supervised
and I guess my biggest problem
is these are adults and
entruefully there doesn't seem
to be any backup evidence
legally or.
You have statistically that this
is going to do anything to help
crime in the situations that
you've described madam chair I I
don't even believe the case la
that's currently in place have
found any and i'm sure miss
johnson will correct me madame
chair friend wrong that under
brunch still we had the
situation that
the age restrictions onion and
young adults have been being
found to be unconstitutional and
so I am concerned whether this
would even hold up
constitutionally and and I
recall madam chair and
representative when we were in
ccj we didn't even endorse this
because we had that type of
concern we couldn't even get an
endorsement on this bill in
courts and corrections and so by
many of these members and so now
here we are discussing and again
and so anyway I don't want to
repeat will leader lane said I I
think it is my own family my own
son and and this doesn't really
make sense to me but go had
representative madame chairman
and representative read I
appreciate that very much and I
think this is an issue where
we're strilling and uh difficult
lines understand where exactly
the balance of public safety
really is one of the things that
I do want to raise what the
committee is that because most
a criminal offenses that are
committed before the age of
eighteen are not actually
considered criminal convictions
and so at the age of eighteen
you could go and get a
background check despite.
Potentially having a violent
history or or a challenging
criminal history
and that background check would
not reveal you know if it could
indicate that you are perfectly
eligible to
purchase the semi automatic
firearm which is a real concern
I think
the other piece here is is we
we do we can draw some parallels
to alcohol in the way that we
look at alcohol and so you could
be married you could be living
on your own you could be in
charge of children certainly you
could you could be
burdened with an incredible
amount of responsibility
but at the same time not legally
possess alcohol because we've
deemed that to present a certain
level of dangerousness and risk
to yourself and to others under
policy so
you know I but III just want to
recognize you know the scenarios
that you brought up
however I would say that given
some of their the data and
statistics that we've been
looking at that this
this truly is
an important consideration for
public safety.
Man of chair and representative
I appreciate that it's just when
I look at the exceptions.
On page three if you're a piece
officer.
If you have one into the
military security office but I
mean those are really huge jobs
you know and we're saying hey we
we trust you to go to war we
trust you to be a piece of
certain respond our house and
something's happening um what
what's the difference madam
chair representative I mean and
why why
twenty one why not eighteen or
what got you to twenty one
madam chair and representative I
like mr baker to chime in on
this as well but I do think the
parallel to
alcohol is important I think the
research on brain development is
important and I would note that
all of these professions which I
will leave to mr baker to
describe involve extensive
training on the use of
a weapon with this kind of
capacity
but I would love for him to add
to that.
Madame chairman to the committee
a representative read thank for
the question particularly is it
relates to law enforcement
certification as is provided on
page three line eight is a piece
of serious accordance with the
policies if not only the peace
officers agency that's one level
of regulation and who is
certified pursuant to law
enforcement training act there
is a requirement within statute
that exists today that the state
of new mexico is the regulator
of all certified police officers
in mexico the hundred of six
hundred plus hours of mandatory
are basic training to be
achieved certification and then
subsequent to that they're
required by law laws passed i'm
here that require their advance
training some of that advanced
training biannually and hanging
far manipulation and confidence
he there's a significant
informed emphasis on
professionalism and proficiency
with the weapons used in this
profession I can't speak
directly to the united states
military but my suspect that
there are similar circumstances
there so we're talking about a
untrained population of folks
versus a trained population of
folks not by perception or by
what they may have been through
but by certification and on
governance in new mexico.
It a man of chair represented me
you said something about going
back to my favorite argument is
the front lobe and and there are
brain not being completely
developed and we've heard this
argument
when we were dealing with there.
That perol issue
and I and the argument was
earlier braids up fully
developed to your twenty four at
twenty one eighteen but yet and
I won't get into the whole
argument you're when you're
eight year old enough to make
decision on whether you want to
be a man or woman or have an
abortion so it's like I I hear
it some people bring ways on
like what is it you know is your
brain not developed or is it
developed are you able to make a
decision when you're younger or
do we need to be twenty four and
so it's just all over the place
for beyond on the the research
for the brain and and the way
it's argued amongst everybody in
the round house and so I don't
know I just don't the issues I
have I appreciate your answers
to the questions I understand
what you're trying to do I just
don't think it's going to
accomplish what you're trying to
do but without it thinking
manager thank you represent
representative ream.
Thank you
madame chair and
I I want to begin with some some
of the comments from the public
they were talking about salt was
soap weapons mp for or m force
assault weapons and m fours are
machine guns
and under twenty one cannot own
a machine gun so that's already
law
but
you know on the brain
development part madame chair
and representing
pansky I have a real problem
with that because you're going
to go at the same that there are
not material enough to handle
firearm and tell them twenty one
is that what you're saying.
A sim I automatic fire madame
chair and representative ream I
think what we're doing is trying
to base their spill in in
research and also look at the
information around uh
shootings and the rising love
number of young people that are
involved in in shootings in this
country.
See madame chair and
representative sapansky this is
where I have a problem.
So we allow you to go ahead and
vote at eighteen because you're
smart enough to boat but you're
not smart enough don't fire the
semi automatic fire likewise at
e g teen you can join the
military and a federal
government is decided that your
mature enough we will give you a
machine got.
And so i.
That range authorized by a
governing body.
What governing body issues a
permanent for a fire rate.
M- terminals the committee
represented ram think for the
question I can give you an
example that I think you're
we're both probably proof
familiar with their ranges
operated by municipalities
throughout new mexico for
example and in the city of
albuquerque where we both
preside there is a range owned
and operated by the city of
albuquerque so I would submit
that that.
And madame chair mister baker
then what regulates a private
range.
Madame chair and representative
as someone who has gone to a
private range with you
I I trusted that you took me to
a safe place i'm not sure but I
believe there are some
regulations for them
madam chair and expert no
so many chairs and.
Let's go down and represent any
surpance get must go down to
page two wine eighteen so
this person can and we just put
in the guide okay so that's a
good thing now when they're not
guiding what did they do with
their sim automatic
weapon.
The.
Madame chairman representative
so if you look at page two lines
twenty three twenty three
that would apply to
travelling to that location it
depends on for example if they
were a guide and i'm not sure if
the person representing the guys
is here but
these.
Firms could be stored at the
outfitter location and then
simply used during
the hunting trip for example and
then returned to that facility
that mentioner and represents
her pants give we leave if we
read eighteen and nineteen it's
lawful
for up to have a certain
automatic weapon.
Engages in legal hunting or
trapping activities or disasters
a guide license okay so it's
legal for them to have it while
they're hunting.
So now that the guide is not
hunting so basically september
one to about the end of the well
about the beginning of february
weary is the end of the honey
season so the rest of the year
what is that person do with his
fire.
The.
Madam.
Madam chair I think miss johnson
has a comment but I would say
that they're not
they would not be able to
disaster firearm when they were
not engaging and guide hunting
or trapping activities
madam chair and representative
and crack me if I didn't get
this amendment down correctly
but now so paragraph five should
read that there's an exception
if they are engages and legal
hunting are trapping activities
or possesses a guide license
possesses a guy license is the
only criteria I don't see a
limiter so I don't know if that
was the appropriate amendment
based on
the will buy a eight to me i'm
reading that to me few possessed
the license now it's ok
period okay i'm not sure if
that's correct but in manifchair
and representative and expert if
we go back to that how did the
under twenty one obtain semi
automatic
drivers or or shot down to go
hunting
madam chair and representative
ream I don't believe that these
firearms are necessarily owned
because they are employees of
a license outfitter that they
they could be certainly today
but.
It's a yeah that's a interesting
situation that you've raised.
Madame chair and representatives
of supernsky you own your own
weapon when you're a guide I
have guide it before so you only
wrong weapon but going to the
legal hunting aspect okay I have
a sun was greater than user
seventeen eighteen year old
whatever and he wants to go dove
hunting and he wants to use it
some automatic shot again and
let's make him eighteen because
he under federal lock and
possess that gun how does he
obtain that gun.
Mbm and not being violation of
this
proposed lot.
Man chairman was the committee
representative dream thank you
for the question I think one of
the things that the hypsetical
to raise conflicts is the laws
are main effect which assumes
what you mean because that's not
really that wasn't super clear
this law is in effect during the
epithetical that you are raising
that correct correct okay very
well ownership of the firm in
the in the hypothetically raised
the father the responsible adult
some other legal gun owner could
in fact awfully own that weapon
and this person could in fact
engage in the accepted
activities within here legally
provided they followed all of
the provisions in the law as
it's written and if it were
enacted that way
and madame chair and
mister baker so i've got a side
he's eighteen nineteen years old
i've got a similar automatic
shot gun I go you know it use
your christmas this is so you
can go dove honey.
Now that september one he wants
to go down hunting
go ahead son you know how to how
to hurt debts go yet i'll see it
tonight when you get home.
Do you think that to buy a
lation or not
madame chairman's the committee
representative range I think
given the my understanding of
that of the scenario you
described in here provided that
person used take away for a
minute the inheritance peace
which I think was addressed
earlier by leader lanes question
which I don't think it's part of
your question think which are
asking is with that eighteen
year old be subject to criminal
investigation and prosecution
under that question is that
correct yes yes thank you
provided that they up but used
all the provisions in her
related to transport to an
actively described by you as
being lawful and accepted from
here no
unfortunately that's not the way
I read that let's move down
because that's one of the
problems i've got so let's made
a chair and represent him
surprise it must get down to
winds twenty three
wenting too so travels with an
unloaded automatic or some
automatic right firearm and a
walk container in the person's
possession to and from the
activity so.
He's now out hunting was to do
coil okay and the way that you
do quality nice typically you
drive through an area and all of
a sudden the quail run across
the road near jump out you start
chasing up.
Well since it's gotta be in a
local tainer
or you take someone that's out
dear el county
and again i'm talking about you
know I use that's under this
it's drive around in all the
certain you see the game and now
you get out you're on the chase
and I see that provision not
clear enough to allow when
you're out in in the area
because you're driving on you
may be driving on a state road
you may be driving on a county
road whatever
do you understand my question
for my I guess yes yes her madam
chair members of the committee
in and represent a rim think for
the question there are a couple
of very possible they think a
really important whether or not
the use in question was by him
or herself would be really
material in the evaluation you
gave because which are talking
about is a long forcement
interaction except the only
grouping that could investigate
and subsequently charge somebody
with the crime where that
activity was occurring provided
that it was not in one of the
accepted areas for example
private property which is also
highly likely in the in the hype
setting that that you raise um
a biting by the provisions
related to the laws governing
hunting about what the condition
of the weapons can be in
relative to automobiles and
where they can be fired from
relative data more bills will be
very important as well and then
most importantly the law
enforcement officers observation
since we're talking about a
mystery meter allegation
relative to possession of that
weapon so will be very difficult
to tell that from four hundred
yards away inside of the moving
vehicle for example so the the
hypothetical beat would raise
would require intervention by
law enforcement observations by
the human being responsible for
engaging in the investigation
and then in take of all of the
relevant facts including all the
variables I just raced.
And madam chair and and
represents a tansky and mister
big when i'm speaking about
these i'm assuming that they're
lovely honey they're not
shooting from the vehicle and
all that anyway I think that's
and madame chair in representing
sir panski was get on page two
wining twenty four twenty five
we have somewhat of a discussion
about this but I have a similar
shot good that I have at home
and it's loaded and it is for
self defense
my eighteen twenty year old son
is home and a birdler breaks it
I am not home in fact I met work
and all of the sudden is bertler
goes at him with a gun or a
knife and he grabs the shocked
and and she I think that there
is a problem with the
supervision as we said earlier
it was watched by a parent
and so clearly the parent is not
close and close proximity and
when you look at the game and
fish lives if you weren't a
mentor a kid for hunting you've
got to be within shouting
distance and I think that that
goes to what the supervision
means.
I don't know if you've got a
comment on that or not.
Madame chaired representative uh
dream but but i'll just i'm i'm
not sure if women answer the
question related to the criminal
investigation on the potential
use of force resulting in the
secondary or on the supervision
peace cause i'm probably not the
correct person answer the latter
but I am happy to tell every
down the former if it's the
first part so I think that's
very similar to the to the
hypsetical raised by a
representative of revenue and
what I would again respectfully
submit to this committee for
their consideration as that if
you are talking about a person
who engaged in likely which are
talking about aggravated assault
with a deadly weapon against
your household family member
the examination that law
enforcement and then
subsequently the prosecutorial
authority would be examining is
the reasonable mess in the law
from this of their use of force
will we're talking about a
missing crime of possession of a
weapon on private property in
the semantical detail of what
constitutes supervision which I
would respectfully submit is
significantly supported to be
analysis of a use of deadly
forced decisions and the
aggravated assault suffered by
your family member
and.
Madame chair and representatives
of sansky were move on this good
page three and so down the wine
twenty one where we talk about a
security guard being able to
possess a some automatic weapon.
Okay.
Madame chair and representing
sir pansky how does that person
purchase that sim automatic
weapon
if this loss in effect.
The.
Manifchair and representative
they would have to demonstrate
that they were a security
officer licensed subject to the
private investigations act to
the to the seller
okay madame chaired representing
sir pansky so he watched because
security guard.
He doesn't hear he is not
wissons and tell he completes
the training
so how does the obtain a several
bad firearm to complete the
training
madame chair and representative
rim you'd have to complete the
training first.
Well madame chair and
representing sir hansky the
problem is one portion of that
is with fire.
He can't get a level three
security guard without
completing the fire training.
Madame chairman was the
committee representative remains
a point related to whether it's
security law enforcement of
military training the the
training is a controlled
environment governed again by
statuton and regulations
promulgated by this new mexico
legislature as well as
contemplated within acts and
agency rules for a law
enforcement officers training is
conduct conducted in a
controlled environment and can
be accomplished without the
ownership of a weapon and I know
this to be true because I have
done it myself
so many chair and representing
well and mister baker so listed
that you're going to loan him
the semi automatic firearm to
complete its training as that
what you're importing
madam share members the
committee represented real
method I would take us back to
some of the exemptions related
to the regulated place to
conduct farms training arm in
and in the example that you give
mature would use the world won't
I think that would be the
property of the person who owns
it and it would be for the use
of demonstrating one's
proficiency and applicability
for certification or licenser
yet and madam chair and and
mister baker I think we passed
walked off the years ago where
if I want to go ahead and loan a
gun to another person they have
we have to go down to the
federal firms dealer and
transfer it to men and transfer
it back to me but i'll move on
from there
madame chair and mr baker
whistake the security guard what
how many hours of training fire
is training does he.
Complete
to be certified on the level
three
mediterranean members of
committee represent rim will
have to look up the exact
forbits from the licensing act
that governments have but we
will get to the answer as we
continue
man of chair and
elizabeth without save you the
time forty hours
madam chair and
mister bakener was to take the
security guard and so easy
security guard for six months
and he decides you know what I
don't want to be a security
guard anymore
now what it see do with his sim
automatic forum
madam chair representative that
would depend on whether he
maintained his license or not.
Madam chair and
representing sapansky at one
year if he doesn't complete new
training then he is no longer
license so one year from that
date that now what
madam chairman representative
then under this law he or the
spill he would no longer be able
to laughly possess that that
semi automatic fire.
Okay and madame chair and
representing sirs pants scheme
list over to page five wine one
and we we're going to say you
can't have a magazine of more
than turn round why did we
choose to.
Madame chair representative that
parallel dates back to a
federal.
Automatic weapons
lod the brady bill and also set
the cap at ten rounds
and again the purpose of this
bill is to reduce the potential
reality of semi automatic fire
arms and
as well as you point out
automatic firearms sorry about
that
managed chair and represent
mr baker let's let's go over to
page five and let's go to wine
aid and we exclude twenty two
calvers and I assume because a
rim fire is that the rationale
manager represented if this was
subject to you a lot of comment
last the last time this legis
similar legislation was
introduced and it is because
semi automatic point two two
caliber rifles are
things that are used for more
for by youth and and shooting
competitions some of the
situations that the leader
describes around farming and
ranching and so it was a
acknowledgment of sort of the
daily use of those carriers of a
that category but this bill does
not specify santa fire versus
rim fire
and manage her and represent
surpound ski did you think about
including seventeen cower which
is smaller than twenty two
as an exclusion.
Madame chair representative I
did receive one comment so we
are regarding that caliber would
be happy to talk with you after
about the commonality of that
because I am less familiar at
madame chair.
And matter chair and
you know members of you know
it's it's funny that we
were looking at legislation to
take a large group of people who
are law fighting and could make
them criminal um criminals under
their spill but yet we have
legislation here at the
legislature to make fellows in
possession of a fire people the
can't even known a firearm or
possessive.
And we won't increase the
penalty and how many times do we
hear you know if this offender
had a long criminal history.
And this legislature doesn't
have the forced to to go ahead
and and deal with criminal acts
but goes after those and benefit
here I think the other problem
that we need to do is I think
you need to have school training
you need to train kids what they
do when they see have gone how
to make it safe how not not to
play with it
and I think that's the direction
you need to go to make safe
society thank you madame chair
thank you representative
representative on
chair my loud
thank you madame care I am now I
I just have a lot here specially
what listen to the debate
i'm thinking of the young man
asked well years old I saw the
bunch of all occasional cards
and I got a free rifle that a
twenty two single
boat action
rival a surprise
my sales
and you don't were that rifle
with a long shot bullet.
I could bring down the dear
we've done rabbit I could bring
down hawk just but anything I
want it would arrival
I didn't need
a similar automatic art fifteen
to kill a coyote
that I would even be allowed to
think of something like that
because in my house as we make.
We had two twenty two and one
thirty thirty
we had a box of shells I mean we
had like two three boxes of the
courier to shelves one box of
thirty thirties that boxes
thirty thirty seven yourself for
yours it will hardly ever used
it
only used on special locations
like to kill the coworse
like that
that was not used
to I think myself
is the eighteen year old needed
automatic or should my automatic
the go hunt in a call I guess
the hunter
is hunter
fifteen the good dear.
The hunter hunting a dear with
an ar fifteen is not a hundred
I mean he's not there for the
sport you just killed animal
because it's additional sport is
shooting a lot of medic rifle
that are running dear the
initial sport you gotta have
some sport you got to have some
thought and you've got a sipper
quietly and you've got a hunt
they just brained the mountain
with what
that's a bothers me about when I
hear the debate on this because
you know I hold an extra bed to
military for automatic weapons.
I mean I only got a maximum on
the important but I got it
expect on the a r fifteen.
And
only on sixteen so believe it or
not I know what their right
I hated it I could with the
fourteen I like the important a
lot better than they get the a r
fifteen or the sixteenth m
sixteen i'll have to do drop it
in much and it wouldn't work
anymore it's just useless it is
the way it was a piece of
plastic jump made by my tell.
And as a medical course I really
didn't use my whip and much I
did get the fire.
But I go that I had to basically
baby that piece of junk in order
to be sure that I was safe
as I thought it was men into
that was a piece of doubt
and so I I sit here and I think
about this and I think myself.
I raised for children
if the wind had got a little my
voice from eighteen to twenty
years old or even younger run
around with another medic rifle
that happened in my house
I mean even in today's world
wouldn't happen I don't arrival
I have a sling shot but I don't
own your rifle so therefore let
him cheer I hear that debate as
to how and why we shouldn't do
this and I like it the more I
hear that debate the more ic why
we should do this because if
you're telling me that you have
to have an automatic rifle to
shoot a tio
you're not
you're in the bed world
that's all there is do it that's
what you need
anymore we're just abundant
different kind of people so with
that matter what I just if I
could I would make the motion
but I can't because i'll speak
it
thank you representative hembry
thank you madame chair I think
most of my questions and and
things have been answered but I
just I I question
what it is exactly this this
exercise were doing
I understand that right now
bruin is the law of the lane and
people don't like that and there
are other laws of the land that
I don't particularly care for
but that is the society we live
in.
And very similar locks that
restrict the age of of those
persons between eighteen and
twenty one
restricts their right to buy
firearms have been struck down
in both the night circuit and
the fourth circuit and that's
the law of the land and so I I
just
it
seems
to me
what we're doing here thank you.
The representative of my queen
thank you manager
manager
hansky
we've heard a lot of
hypothetical site
what about this will about that.
To.
All of this hope of their goals
to do all the logical challenges
with those heck with their calls
do they all hinge under your
bill on the web in being in
automatic or something
madam chair and representative
mcqueen yes
meant to return this company all
of these
challenging act better and
the vaporite with a standard
chocolate rifle hanging second
madame chairman representative
yes thank you manager
thank you representative chasing
and i'm terrible of the dupe
house on household when twenty
seven as amended second
we have a motion for a due pass
on house bill one twenty seven
as amended motion
I gotcha
made by representative chasing
second hand by repetitive
representative alcon before we
take a vote on the motion I
haven't spoken so if you could
indulge me please is there
anyone else who wants to speak
okay.
I would like to also emphasize
that point that arms
representative macqueen made
there was a lot of kind of
conversation about
this the particular is the bill
but often we lost sight of the
fact it's an automatic and a
semi automatic so what's an
automatic and automatics a
machine.
That's what we're talking about
so III find it hard and I hope
we can all agree that machine
guns should not be on by in
young people younger than twenty
one and young man.
Please don't gesture out me
while i'm speaking and please
don't speak while i'm speaking.
Thank you.
Um.
So that's clearly you know I
think wish I would like to think
we all agree they shouldn't know
machine guns.
On the other the question is.
Does the semi automatic fall
within the bounds of the second
amendment
and contrary to what we all
would like to say up here that's
not clear.
The case lost split on that so
we can pull out cases as we have
but in fact it it's it is
unsettled at this point in time
and there's case law wealth
fought out case long on both
sides so until such time as we
have clear definition I think
were well within our bounds to
craft laws that we think are
prudent for the health and
safety of our citizens and
that's what I think a number of
us want to do.
In terms of dispate satisfaction
with bruin I am dissatisfied
with bruin because it has
created chaos and lack of
certainty across the circuits
that did not exist prior to its
issue that's where my concern
arises so
without I just want to say I
think we're well within our the
boundaries of the constitution
at this point and I appreciate
the fact that we are trying to
keep out military style weapons
from young people who are young
who are less than aged twenty
one and I also want to score one
less thing alcohol there's not
one person appear who would say
we should have kids drinking
under the age of twenty one but
we don't seem to use that
analogy when we're talking about
this particular issue so I want
to commend you representative
for a reminding us all that
there are situations where are
concerned about safety of the
item and that is what we are
talking about here the safety of
the item and whether someone
younger than twenty one should
have it without appropriate
training and supervision so with
that let's call the vote
representative i'll con
representative chasing.
Representative himbry no
representative lane
no
representative martinez
representative mcqueen yes
representative read no
representative ream no ma'am.
Representatives the pensky
yes.
Vice chair remember yes chair
yes.
It's a dupass with the four
thank you represent it thank you
madame chair as amended as a
meant.
The.
The.
We have representative remarrow
presenting on HB one thirty
seven gas operated semi out
madic firearms exclusion.
And matter we have a committee
seven
the sub is being handed out.
This.
The.
The floor is yours represented
for a
think you madam chair I can just
start with
a brief overview of the bell
and then i'll just talk about
some of the changes is that all
right
yes when you're ready to start
talking about what's in the
subwill ask someone to move for
discussion
on the sub okay when we go ahead
and move it now so that way we
can anyone want to move.
Second
five representative chasing
second in a representative
mcqueen the sub for discussion
purposes and you would you tell
us that two two seven number
please
I believe it's two two seven
seven two four point three.
So you have great.
Before us today madame chair is
the gas operated semi automatic
weapon regulation act this is
designed to ensure that we
prevent mouse shootings from
occurring in our state.
What we're seeking to do here is
essentially clarify in the law
what weapons would be allowable
which wouldn't gas operated
weapons that have a high
capacity magazine would be
outlawed in the state this would
also create a certification
system with the
attorney general's office that
would allow those who currently
currently own these weapons
to certify those weapons and and
keep them however
after the day of an actual
incertification
of allowability they would no
longer be allowable in our state
this limits magazines to ten
rounds total for a semi
automatic weapons that are gas
operated.
Most common fire arms that are
used today for protection and
new mexico are exempted from
this act and most hand guns are
not gas operated
as we do know madam chair
limitations work in the nineties
we had a an assault weapons band
nationwide
after that uh
expired we had a seventy percent
increase in mar shootings and
the weapons that were seeking to
bound are the weapons of choice
today and ten of the last seven
of the ten of the last deadlier
shootings in our country
as we know this is also close to
home madam chair we've had mouse
shootings using
semi automatic high capacity
magazines in our own communities
including just last year
my co sponsors can be here today
it's late arms so I will save
you from their testimony but we
have hours and and photographs
emails of testimony provided by
so many who have both been
victims of my shootings
and those who have been victims
of
firearm
crime in which case we are we're
here today to to talk about that
i'm in what we're seeking to
prevent
with that madame chairman happy
to walk through some of the
changes in the uhm sub from
deliver different from the
original bill is that good time
okay
in section two madam chair we
clarified we had the question
about the definition of fire
armed that was worried that we
might be including the guns are
paint all guns we made it clear
with adding the definition what
it is that we're doing with this
bill
we changed in section three the
date of prohibition on importing
transferring receiving gas
operated semi automatic firms
to july first to make sure that
there's no rush for her folks to
purchase these firearms when the
laws and acted.
We've changed the fixed magazine
I mean the nation live limit
section three to be consistent
with the rest of the bill to ten
rounds
that's consistent with rifles
and shock guns as well as
the feeding devices for for hand
guns.
We've also changed the
definition of immediate family
member to ensure that it's
consistent with our universal
background checks as well
section for
we have added a provision to
discuss how our transfer would
work with the grandfathered in
high capacity
ammunition feeding devices for
those in another state or with
licensed at her fellows
in section six we
change the deadline for the
attorney general identify the
list of gas operated semi
automatic fires to july first of
this year to ensure that folks
knew what they would needed to
transfer or
essentially remove from the
state.
We also.
Provided the opportunity for
firearm owners to appeal
anything that's on the list on
that they believe should not be
on the the list for prohibition
and we added its admin for the
attorney general to actually
first to publish acceptable
manners in which a magazine can
be permanently fixed so you can
alter
a weapon to permanently fix a
magazine.
An insection seven this is our
last change
we change the deadline for the
setup of the certification
system to september first to
give gun owners more time to to
certify their weapons with the
attorney general's office
we had heard some feedback from
our initial
presentation and we took those
out that feedback into account
that's why we're here with these
with the substitute today madam
chair
thank you representative is
there anything else you'd like
to eh before we go to the
audience
that it I think of my
experts madame chair course been
baker special advisor to
governor the hunger shame on
public safety and child fee
general council for the
governor.
The.
It was a question that I was
getting actually legitimate
assistance from representative
so what were you gonna say I
just introduce my experience her
world stand for questions
anyone on the list.
We did public comment
manager just curious I think we
are on the committee suburban
adopt.
We're undiscussion of the
contract my apology yeah yeah
I get it's it's getting like
we're all a little ok anyone on
the list or everybody likes the
bill and we're ready for motion.
Oh a representative
yep think about a chair
manufacturer and
representative.
I want to talk about the game
and fish budget for a moment
large portion of the game and
fish budget comes from
i'm sorry to interrupt i'm just
curious if we're on the bill
my bill doesn't have anything to
do representative I don't think
it's appropriate for the
sponsored hitcher at it to
interrupt even before the
question is complete and then
maybe that share will ask the
the question her weather
it's relevant to the the bill
house at
you can complete your question
but I could see where she was
going with that representative
yep madam chair and
representative so when we talked
about the game and fish budget.
A large portion of that budget
comes from what's called pittman
robert's funds and pitment
roberts phones is from the sale
of ammunition and firearms
and so I when we start
restricting the firearms were
going to effect the budget of
the game and first they get no
state funding
and it's more of a comment on
this it certainly is
representative and I don't
expect the rep to answer it
okay.
The.
So madam chair and
representative was going to page
six and we go to.
Wind six three eight so.
Hi
I have a similar automatic shot
which is assumed now
I have somehow damaged the
barrel you know whatever right I
bent the barrel it's now in
operative
and now I ordered in a barrel to
repair that gun and to me when
i'd read this section here looks
like it would be eligible for me
to buy the barrel to repair that
thank you madame chair
representative so as long as you
certified the weapon that there
wouldn't be any issue with just
simply buying replacement part
because that would still be the
grandfathered weapon you're just
replacing a portion of that
weapon so there would be no
issue
yet madame chair and expert but
i'm importing into new mexico
that barrel that's that's the
concern
yes madame chair will you would
be importing one part but this
is an accombination of parts
that is designed to be assembled
into a fire i'm now operates as
a gas operated semi automatic
firearm that the main portion of
that firm is still in your
possession and you have sure to
fight it so that's the operative
object here okay managed chair
and.
And represent if if we go down
on page six and now we go into
lines twenty three twenty three
and I notice that we're going to
exclude native american land.
What is to prevent the native
americans from setting up a gun
store on their reservation and
selling firearms to
individual.
Madame chair representative what
they are sovereign nation so we
we and difference to that
sovereignty
you know there's a lot of things
that for instance with
car dealerships and director
sale sales there there's a test
slide dealership on the
reservation there's not here
allowed in the state by again
that is due to their sovereign
status
and madame chair and
represent if I I think they
creates a problem so if I went
to that gun store and I bought a
firm that was used or maybe it's
even new but prior to the
manufacturer date
even after this law went into a
fact and now I if you will i'm
now leaving one state and coming
in to.
Back end in new mexico I think I
I could approach
dps and go here I want to
register this gun now
thank you for that question a
madam chair representative so in
section I believe it's nine
eight at the top of page
seventeen that's where we deal
with non residents and so we do
carve out an exception but we
make it specific to non
residents are bringing in there
regulated weapons also under
section three the certification
deadline for grandfathered
weapons for those who are
residents of the state is a
january first twenty twenty five
so there would really you would
start you to be prohibited from
um possessing that wap instead.
The.
Okay a man of terror asked a lot
of questions that were on the
other bill I don't want to be
redundant on that letter go to
page.
Nine mins seventeen and what's
work at a rifle
and a rifle with a capacity of
not not to exceed to rounds of
ammunition.
So man of chair and experts was
start off I just pick a rifle a
remington model seven forty two.
Similar battery cunning rifle
and the magazine depending on
the california is for five
rounds.
Madame chair representative so
uhm this are exempted what
you're looking at or are
currently exempted firearms from
the go save act so a rifle that
is a single shot rifle
is it if it's gas operated
that's the first test and the
second test is whether or not it
had a high capacity magazine so
if the rifle you're talking
about is not gas operated or if
it is it only has a four
if it's under a twenty two cap
twenty two calorber or under um
and it's only four round
for rounds of ammunition allow
that would be
under our act
exempted from
from this act it would meaning
it would be allowable.
Canada just one quick question
it has to be fixed though does
it not
the four rounds would have to be
fixed i'm sorry I don't
madam chair representative yes
so so under here under a
subsection f of a section three
we are dealing with general
exemptions one of those
exemptions is when you have and
otherwise a gas operated some
automatic firearm and if you
have a fixed magazine that is
limited to ten rounds or less
that would qualify for an
exemption and the rest of the
other enumerated parts here are
also separate exemptions so for
instance if it is you know a
single shot rifle then then that
the fixed magazine calculus
doesn't
come into it because that's its
separate examption
yeah matter chair and represent
on page nine and when i'm
talking about is a breach
loading rival with a capacity
not to exceed two rounds of the
nation and a mile seven forty
two remain you can get it to
forty three three o eight thirty
six you know there's a lot of
different calibers and those
magazines are not fixed.
And you're gonna have four five
rounds in the magazine
is there a question mancher well
i'm wondering is that what the
legal gun to.
Madame chair representative well
assuming it otherwise qualifies
as a gas operated some automatic
firearm if we're just taking
that for granted um and it does
not have a fixed magazine and it
is it has a capacity that's
greater than that too rounds and
it's a breach loading rifle then
it would be subject to
regulation under the sacked
yeah madam chair and
representative it is gas
operated and will go to the next
page where we start talking
about shot guns and we say that
your capacity not to exceed to
round.
So if we looked at winchester
and remington are probably the
most popular similar manic shot
downs
used for hunting so winchester
you get the model thirteen
hundred to fourteen hundred to
fifteen hundred the s x three
the s four you know remington
you get the bottle eleven eleven
hundred eleven eighty seven
they're all gas offer rated shot
games.
Manufacturer with the were the
magazine capacity in the area of
four five rounds.
So are they going to be lawful.
Madam chair representative so if
they are again gas operated
and they don't qualify for any
of these numerated exceptions
here then they would be subject
to regulation.
But i'm not you know familiar
with these exact models so I
can't see for sure but you know
if doesn't fall within one of
these exemptions it is subject
to regulation
madame chair and expert i'll
tell you that all of them are
gas operated.
And in their original
manufacturer their four or five
magazine capacity.
And that is actually a fixed
magazine.
Manifchair and um experts so we
go or and each time and we
talked about a hand gun and now
we go head and talk about.
Not to exceed two rounds in a
magazine and what i'm asking is
a glock seventeen which is a
very popular firearm it's gas
operated server marriage and the
original magazine that came with
it as seventeen rounds what are
we going to do with that and
that's a detachable magazine
madame chair representative so
again that that's just one of
the first
exemptions which is for a breach
loading handgun with the
capacity not to exceed two
grounds of ammunition under
number seven we have
exception for a permanently
fixed magazine with the capacity
not to exceed tan rounds of
ammunition and the exception
before that is also for require
operated hand guns so those are
some pretty large exemptions for
current hand guns okay and
madame chair and an expert so.
What's used the clock seventeen
it's gas operated a nurse she
operated.
And its magazine at seventeen
rounds from the factory it's a
detachable how are you going to
make it permanently attached
because she after removed the
mag zeam to load it
you can't load it while you
can't look the firearm or load
the magazine while it's in the
gun
terminals the committee
represented him and I think that
the supposition I potential call
and I took the grand that.
Are bill contemplates a clock
seventeen as you have described
as a require operated pistol
addict as operated
madame chair so are you saying
it's excluded from this act
that's correct
manager and madame chair the
magazine band doesn't
doesn't apply to that gun to
record operated pistols madam
chair uh.
But mattered her representative
that's correct it would still we
would still have the overall
large capacity ammunition
feeding device limit which is a
tan rounds very good except
detachable magazines no problem
and I and i'm sorry when the man
of chaired expert so I can have
a detachable mag seem that it
can only have rounds
okay
yeah yes unless you are madam
chair representative yes
that's correct of course I might
you already own it and you
certify then you can have one
with you know a larger magazine.
Okay managed here in
representative when we go down
to page ten
wine twenty three immediate
family members.
I don't see a step child in
there
and as we have a lot of families
that got divorced and remarried.
Maybe they have an adopted the
other children but there are
step child is there a reason why
manager representative this is
just consistent with all of our
other firearms laws when it when
it comes to transfer this is the
list that's in our background
checks in some of the other
proposal legislation all this is
consistent with current law.
Okay man of chair representative
it's going to page fourteen and
were talking about wangs wine
through twelve some of the ag is
going to come up with this list
and so he produces a less of a
these are excluded firms or
these of the one children after
certified
then every year he's going to
review the list and now comes up
he says oh you know what we
missed one and we should have
included this in the beginning
there's no provision for you to
go it and say they'll now that
it's a new one and you actually
owned it before
to give you a period to register
that weapon
do you understand my question
yes i'm madame chair
representative so what while
there is a provision for the
promo gate this list it is
incumbent upon the citizens to
understand the definition of gas
operated semi automatic armed
weapons and if you look at
section three.
Um.
Let's see section three which is
on page six
lines six through nine
this provision refers to the
definition of gas operated some
firearms i'm is not dependent
upon it being on the list the
list is to really inform the
public as much as possible that
these are the most popular you
know weapons that fall within
these definitions it's possible
you know every day manufacturers
are coming up with new models
and so forth so it is incumbent
upon them and upon the public to
make sure that that they
understand is this gas operated
to semi automatic does this not
have a fixed magazine and in
addition madam chair would just
say when we're thinking about
illegality if you weren't using
this for any other purpose than
to possess it I mean it wasn't
on the list that would have to
be taken to account as well with
any potential charges that would
be against a person
well man of chair I think that
that's problematic so now we
don't have to have the list from
the
you have to go ahead and figure
out you're gone and know how it
operates and you've got
and I think that that's
considering
I think either the the highest
law enforcement agency and the
state will make a list and i'm
in a comply without list but we
can go ahead and move on.
So
madame chair and representative
with
page seventeen.
And now we're going to talk
about the non resident
and so they have twenty four
hours to travel through our
state.
And
with a gun that's on the list
with the high capacity magazine
and all that.
I see this
I see this as problematic what
if they
got in a traffic wrote or their
car broke down and are not
through the state and twenty
four hours.
Madame chair and representative
you know of course that that
goes to prosecutorial discretion
if you can show that I mean also
in the eyes of the fact finder
in the jury they could be
entitled to uniform gerry
instructions on necessity for
instance in that case like there
was no way for them to avoid
violating this law.
Yeah I
met a chair I just see that as
problem there likewise man of
chair
and representative we have a
hundreds come in from out of
state her heart and how are we
going to inform them not only
you know he
you know you're here and you got
a comply with these laws are we
going to put a sign at the
border coming in or how we can
inform those hunters to make
sure they don't violate the wr
when they're coming into the
state.
Madam chair representative again
this will be on the ag's list
and so anyone coming into the
state and again this this is not
a new concept as far as having
these types of um
regulations on certain types of
weapons and in certain states
these are already in place so
however folks are getting their
information including the list
that the age you would be able
to have that would be the same
way to obtain that information.
Yeah about insurer I think we're
in a search for your argument
you know you've got to know
which money but the age has a
list maybe not man of chair i'll
just go ahead and
disagree with you about the
clock seventeen it is also a gas
operated but thank you madame
chair that's all my questions
for right now thank you anyone
else on I wish to speak to this
bill.
Question yes represent every
think you met him chair and
represent them trying to wrap my
head around all this to and how
to figure out which gardeners is
going to be illegal or not but I
want to talk more about the the
certification with the attorney
general and and
am I going to be
a certifying all my firearms and
and who will know about this
list
will a criminal no is a
confidential can you go into
that a little bit a read
something about it but I would
like you to explain if you can
matter thank you matter thank
you representative so
essentially if you had an I firm
that was on this list you would
need to certify it with the
army provide minimal information
in fact when we look to conceal
carriers sort of the standard
for how um.
One with essentially be able to
certify in a certain way we we
followed a lot of that protocol
and minimised it as much as we
can so it's at no cost to
essentially certify
your your firearm this is a
private list it can't be abroad
and essentially
basically what you would need to
do is it is just do that at one
time and then you're done
okay and so it can't be a bread
so nobody will have access to
this list that's correct manager
other than those who are
obviously keeping the list which
is the ag's office and
potentially
any information that a law
enforcement agency would need to
procure in the performance of
their duties okay madam chaired
representative I mean I guess
i'm kind of thinking people are
not going to comply with this
list would you have thoughts of
matter how are you going to
enforce compliance of them
actually registering their fire.
Madame chair representative
again that's just compliance
with any of the laws that we
create
we were just assured that law
abiding citizens would want to
certify their fire where whereas
they would be at risk of
potentially
committing a crime if they were
found to have unlawfully
possessed a fire after the act
was enacted manager and
represented I totally understand
we're saying that just the
solicitors it's it's really hard
to tell what you really need to
actually you know register or
not register and it worries me
that someone's not going to do
this and then something's going
to happen somebody's going to
break into their home they're
going to be defending themselves
and the next time you know
they're going to be a fellow and
under this the statute are you
do have concerns about that
and how would you address that
manager a madam chair
representative so so there is a
six month period and between the
again promo gaving this list and
the right of the registry
deadline so there will be a
significant period of time for
people to become familiar indeed
people are already becoming
familiar with these sort of
weapons so and in the ag again
is responsible for a lot of our
consumer protection laws so I
i'm sure
the ag's office what will you
public outreach campaigns i'm
sure you know gun organ
organizations manufacturers for
fells they'll be a lot of you
know public publicity around
this and madam chair
representative if you look at
the penalties on page eighteen
it's only if you work to commit
or attempt to commit a crime
using one of these weapons that
was exempted earth that was
under the act that fell under
the act would be a felony
otherwise it would be a
misdemeanor.
And so is there any type of
madam chair and representative
what's the exemption for
listening there's an exemption
for law enforcement to have
these higher capacity of weapons
and if you can explain what
their exemption is and why
they're accepted.
Yes madam chair representative
so there is an exemption under
each section so there's three
different sections one is for
the gas operated some automatic
arms that's in section three and
the exemption of which would
cover law enforcement agencies
it's under a subsection c one.
And that identical language is
also in the section relative to
machine gun and machine gun
attachments as well as large
capacity ammunition feeding
devices and again you know the
reason for exempting them is is
pretty
clear in that their law
enforcement that these these
types of weapons which are built
for assault after times policies
need to go in and engage
you know active shooters etc so
they should be unpermitted to
access these especially
dangerous weapons and thank you
and that was kind of where I was
getting you to try to go out
manager and represent an experts
because
I understand they have to go
into these situations where they
may need a higher capacity
weapon in order to deal with
them but I guess i'm looking at
your everyday person who might
be in a convenience store or in
walmart or wherever they're
allowed to carry their firms and
some mash shooting occurs and
we're gonna have a citizen who
now has to possibly you know use
their firearm to protect others
and we're saying well law
enforcement needs to have these
high capacity things these guns
to protect citizens in these
situations but generally law
enforcement is there when the
stuff happens and so then you
take your average citizen who's
going to protect and try to help
in these other situations and
they're on a disadvantage
because now they don't have a
capacity magazine or type of
fire that could actually do what
they need to do to protect
themselves and others so do you
see kind of matter of chair
where i'm going with this
argument and in my concern that
if you feel law enforcement
should have it why shouldn't the
person you know be able to carry
it to be protected themselves
and others and situations where
we know how long it takes long
forcement to actually get there
madame chair representative will
I see where you're going with
the argument we just don't have
a single situation where there
was a mass shooting.
And someone else with an a r or
a kay like weapon was there to
defend
an including even our law
enforcement officers who do have
that ability to have those firms
have in the case of even evolved
were too afraid to go into a
situation where they knew it was
extremely deadly and they peers
their own body armor so while a
understand the hypothetical you
bring up it just has never
happened in the history of moush
shootings that we've had
throughout our nation madam
chair and rivers and i'm not
being so much talking mass
shootings i'm just talking
protection and against someone
who has
some situation where they aren't
in a they're doing a robbery or
they're doing something like
that and they have a hike
capacity weapons and the average
citizen with their concealed
carrier whatever they have isn't
matched up with that person III
I don't believe anywhere in the
united states has probably never
happened or I would love some
stats on that madame tear
members the committee and
representative appreciate your
question in the and the other
the scenario in which you
describe I will smite you as
evidence pieces of information I
think important one enforcement
in the late nineties in america
particularly in new mexico were
not armed with high capacity
assault type weapons and I know
this because there was one of
them represented reap rim was
also one of them and we
conducted law enforcement with
weapons that would not be
prohibited under the act that is
contemplated here today I will
tell you I also did not
encounter with the frequency
that we are seeing now armed
assurance particularly armed the
sales who are interested in mass
casually being armed and in fact
one of the impetus for some of
the changes in the evolution of
law enforcement training were
school shootings and bank robert
and hollywood california where
the police were to disadvantage
so while I understand what
you're talking about it is my
experience believes.
Over twenty seven years of
responding to calls of folks
defending themselves is that the
ordinary weapons of self defense
including those not prohibited
by the legislation proposed here
are sufficient to be able to
accomplish that
and I and I guess we can
disagree that necessarily just
we can disagree but I just
concerned that this this takes I
mean I could talk about wifi
arms but I bet you everybody in
here has a firearm or close to
you probably you too they're
gonna have to do some major
adjusting on your magazine
rounds where your law
enforcement so you can you
cannot but you're you're saying
that.
Well I don't want to ask you
that you're I mean these the
list of guns on here is is
pretty much what everybody olds
I mean everyday citizens I I can
say I own one that has a larger
capacity than ten it's under ar
anything like that but i'm going
to have to go now and register
my fire or change my magazine
capacity is that what i'm
understanding.
Madam chair depends on whether
or not it's gas operated
and again so we will get we will
not be seen a list of what these
different types of guns are it's
just we're going to have to or
will you schedule manchester
representative yes the ages
office will produce a list
that's readily available
on
the date
july first of twenty twenty four
so in six months cracked and in
you believe madam chair that
this can be advertising enough
to where I just don't see how
everybody is going to know that
this is the situation I know
it's going to be advertised and
things like that this is a very
rural state a big state I I also
just you know while I want to
believe everyone's law bidding I
just don't believe people are
going to register their firms
and I know we want to think that
they would but I just don't
think it's probably going to
happen madame chair so I just
worry about the person who
either doesn't know about it or
who doesn't register their
firearm and then now is going to
be either a have a misdemeanor
conviction or have a felony
conviction so I just have
concerns about it I just think
it's a very long list of of guns
that a lot of people outside
thank you for answering the
species better.
Thank you representative chase
I think mountain chair i'm they
do not pass in house per one
thirty seven in to do pass on
house traditional committee
substitute for house but one
thirty seven
is not second
there's a emotion for a do not
pay us on house bill one thirty
seven in a do paris on house
judiciary committee substitute
for house bill one thirty seven
made by representative chase and
second and by representative
cone like to hold in a bands are
vote as I actually have some
questions and must.
Okay
I don't see anyone else on the
so I just want a little bit of
clarification so we have rifles
so my right at matic rifles
there are gas operator
after the effective date of this
law bill.
Those.
That have non fixed magazines of
any size
would be grandfathered in
presumably.
After the process was the
certification process was fall
is that correct madam chair
representative yes okay
in those those items I just
described non fixed magazine
could be transferred to an
immediate relative is that
right.
Madame chair that is correct
okay
will stay with rifles
rifles that are gas operated
that are purchased after the
effective day must have a fixed
magazine with a capacity of ten
or fewer rounds is that right
madam chair that is correct
unless it's for law enforcement
yes okay fair enough let's talk
regular citizens
okay
so the gun the rifle that I just
the first one that I described
that's grandfathered in
may they be taken out into
public and used as in the normal
course and matt madam chair so
that is governed under us
subsection d of section three
which is on page eight beginning
outlines not at line nine and so
that specifies that these
grandfathered weapons user the
the places where you can possess
and use that and so that little
numerates where you can keep
those weapons okay very good.
The.
If you wanted to
if you were so inclined you have
a grandfather done you would
like to have a broader use than
what is enumerated here could
you convert it and I know
they're conversion kits to turn
it into a we go.
Hence fourth legal fire correct
medicare you would just have to
uh essentially alter it to have
a fixed magazine of ten or less
around correct correct and if
you go on you to
you can find videos that
describe how that's done in
vendors that do that okay
so because when I so i'm gonna
say something that you all know
i'm sure and many in the
audience now but
when I was first learning about
this I was confused like fixed
to me sounds like fixed you know
and then you say well fixed how
you going to reload it that's I
kept saying well how you going
to reload it well fixed means
you have to break the fire.
Do this the magazine can then be
released through that action is
that not right
responser
did I get that right basically
madam chair it would be a little
bit difficult to say without me
seeing it but one of the
provisions that we added in this
committee substitute was a
provision to have the a g
promote acceptable manners to
fix though so so it would solve
that problem
okay
I get it I I understand there's
like a california method in the
new york methods so some of that
might because in new york to be
clear I think I believe some
version of this law is in place
and fire arms are being sold in
and not new york california
but I think to california and
and
they are being sold and
purchased it and might not
correct about that
madam chair yes you're cracking
in the reason i'm emphasizing
all this is I hear the word band
you know banned etcetera
etcetera this is not a ban
the guns that currently exist or
grandfathered there are
limitations i'm where they may
be brought in used
in hence for
semi automatics can still be
purchased and own if certain
conditions are met like the
fixed magazine okay so that's
rifles
what about hand guns there are
semi automatic gas operated hand
guns house that can work madam
chair it's pretty much this same
rurals okay
so the magazine capacity has to
be what
ten round resistance okay in the
magazine has to be fixed yes
matter and if it's not fixed and
it's greater than ten rounds
there are these limitations on
locations and the like.
Yes madame chair okay if it's
been sort of an for hand guns
are there conversion
packages and so and I didn't
look that up.
Managed her first most hand guns
are require operator so it
really depends on the the type
the make the model
of that gas operated hound gun
and then yes very much likely
with something that is in common
circulation would have the
ability to be fixed as you said
new york in california a third
of the population has an assault
weapons regulation like this so
the market has met those demands
okay and it's not illegal to
ship on the conversion
device through the males and it
wouldn't be after this law is
madam chair that is correct okay
so
at my one concern is the list I
have to admit I think that in
you know making sure people have
up the knowledge to know that
they have to certify that they
prep free on the gone and so on
so I think we need to be sure
that whoever is is maintaining
that list and so on has a very
wide spread
you know advertising thing the
need thing though is I know very
well that the gun communities
very good at communicating with
their members and how do I know
that I get emails from them and
they sound a lot of like so it's
clear to me they are there is
good communication in the gun
owning commuting not a hundred
percent but certainly it is
pretty effective cause I see it
myself
alright anyone else before we
vote on on the bill.
Yes
yes.
I have.
A concern.
Again uh constitutionality but
not second amendment
constitutionality but fifth
amendment constitutionality and
how this registration process
could be seen as self and
criminal
could you address that please
yes madam chair representative I
don't believe so because
certification process is to make
sure you are compliant with the
law so if you're certifying your
by definition complying with the
law so you're not self
incriminating anything.
Okay thank you thank you for
that answer I appreciate that
thank you manager thank you
mister humbry representative
okay we have emotion.
In front of us of a do not pass
on house bill
one thirty seven and I do pass
on house judiciary committee
substitute for house bill one
thirty seven made by believe
representative chase and second
and by representative
would you call the role please.
Representative
i'll con
representative chasing
upset of hamburgery no
representative lane no
representative martinez yes
representative mcqueen yes.
Representative no.
Representative ream no men
represent of sapansky yes
vice chair remember yes
chair yes.
We have a do not pass on bill
one thirty seven that we have a
due pass.
And substitution point two two
seven seven two four.
Point three.
Seven to four
actually I think we should say
how.
Thank you represent him thank
you
experts
thank you
one more
but.
So we are
are final bill for this short
evening is
house bill one thirty three
oil and gas act changes and we
have
representative or test and she
has an expert with her whom i'm
sure she will.
Introduce
thank you manager
not quite and there's also a sub
that we need distributed
would you like me to read out
that the two hours you can get
it out
you can.
The.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Get the senator.
Okay
representative lower is yours
good morning and a chair I mean
good evening
would you like me to read out
that to to number an hour to
sweep for a bit
sure she shoot with the two of
two number which we don't call
me some numbers at two two seven
seventy five point one yes.
All right so proceed are you
gonna be talking about the
suburb
move for consideration second is
there a second okay moved by
representative mcqueen and
second representatives of bansky
to
move for consideration so
proceed thank you madame chair
the committee said before you
and the bill represent important
entimely updates to the oil and
gas act that were proposed are
based on emergency oil
conservation divisions
experience over the last four
years implementing the act in
the face of rapid growth seen in
new mexico's oil and gas
production this language was
developed over the course of the
last five to seven five to six
months during discussions with
emerged and key stakeholders a
diverse group of sake holders
including environmental groups
frontline community stakeholders
representatives from the oil and
gas industry from both large
national multinationals and
smaller independent operators
the bill updates the ocd's
authority to assess a fees and
penalties overseas well
transfers updates requirements
related to financial shirt
assurances and cotifies the
methine waste rule
these targeted updates are are
designed to ensure that oil and
gas development which is
critically important to the
state is done responsibly and
that the agencies with oversight
responsibility have the tools
necessary to ensure compliance
the bill has measures to
adequately adequately protect
new mexico taxpayer dollars from
being used to clean up large
numbers of orphan wells and to
ensure that the financial
resources are available to plug
those wells when they are
orphaned if those production
protections prove inadequate it
is designed to address both the
wells that are known right now
and those that will be created.
In the future.
The bill is also looking to
codified statute the ocds nation
meeting methane was ninety eight
percent gas capture requirement
those rules were developed in a
robust multi year stay colder
process and that been in fact
since twenty twenty one i'm
adding though the targets of the
rules and statute will provide
more regulatory certainty for
operators and durability for
this important environmental
protection.
Manager members I have to
acknowledge that these changes
while targeted are complex
oil and gas production is
critically important to our
economy and our state budget.
The men and the women on the
ground that do that hard work
represent small local
independence with a handful of
wells to large multinationals
with thousands of wells we know
this but we also overduty to our
communities to make sure that
oil and gas development of curse
responsibility and what it is
concluded it's on the ground
impacts are addressed the
measures in this bill provide
carefully crafted statutory
updates that will help our
regulatory agencies keep peace
with the industry and industry
that produced over six hundred
million barrels
used me six million six hundred
million barrels of oil with the
market value of forty five plus
billion dollars in the past year
the bill also provides the
flexibility to address the
concerns of our small operators
i've confidence that imnert will
implement these changes in a
fair and transparent matter now
madame chair at their three
major changes with this
committee sub
the first is that we establish a
clear tearing structure for
financial assurance that's
partially reflective of what was
happened through the thinking
that eminered has you know has
been considering as the approach
implementing the and the the
rule
we were proposing tears of
blanket financial insurance you
could find that starting on page
eight of the committee stuff
secondly it reinstates a a cap
on the penalties that oct may
collect under a single violation
at a level of three point six
five million we think that movie
the cap to this amount will
have a more deterrent effect for
violations and thirdly that
changes changes language in
section five that clarifies
ninety eight percent mething
capture rule currently in place
the intention with this section
has always been to reflect the
mathem rule and not to change it
and we've added some language
that has been
agreed to by many of the
stakeholders and with that madam
chair members of the committee.
I've explained the committee
seven i'd like to introduce my
witness
acting
acting cabinet secretary dill in
future rams with huge
true
matter
we can ask I don't know if
building services is in the
building but I don't know how to
operate a.
Okay
okay
yes please.
Mr acting secretary of your
acting secretary
official deputy secretary
moonlight is the ocd director
from time to time okay
good evening madame chair and
committee
I echo the remarks that
representative of our test laid
out
proud of the bill that we've
partnered to put together as
representative or tears
indicated
was the product of a lot of hard
work with forty plus
stakeholders representing the
diverse sets of interest i'm
interested in this measure we
have some handouts to share with
the committee with some
information.
The.
Only chair always nice to see
these things beforehand
sure
thank you very much I hope
they're short people don't spend
a lot of time reading well I
think they'll be a last year
they're just a list illustrative
of the issues we're talking
about in each of the page and
most of them are tables no
substantive content okay sir i'm
hand them to the attendant
please.
Thank you madame charges quickly
out close my remarks working
through the first argument
that's coming around.
Lays out our known orphan well
liabilities and the money
available to close those and the
gap that's there
the second more complex
number of more detailed
spreadsheet with more fields and
tables is an exercise that we
did looking at potential
liabilities down the road
if percentages of wells under
different scenarios are orphaned
we have known orphans now we
know orphans will be created in
the future
that is an established trend
fortunately or not the third
provides data about the tears
were proposing to add in the
committee sub and shows how many
operators would fit in each tier
based on known information and I
think it's highlighted there
eighty one percent of operators
would would remain effectively
under the current structure or
under the current cap and the
fourth is just an illustration
of the type of site we're
dealing with and sort of trying
to avoid and happy to sort of
talk through if the committees
have questions but folks had
asked questions about numbers
and data and that's what those
sort of short spreadsheets are
for and happy to walk through
and I look forward to discussing
the bell thank you.
With that manager we sent for
questions
well
well we're listening the
audience i'm sure people will be
studying the spreadsheets you
provided just now
so those in wishing to speak it
opposition it's getting tired
and i'm trying to
that was wishing to speak in
opposition please reason
yesterday please keep your
comments to about ninety seconds
please.
Association mexico representing
small producers
directors were tell me we
refirmed that our small
producers here in the states
from the opposed bill
and eleventh hour changes
professional
small operators who do play five
possible produce.
In general this bill is is too
big
ready especially for a thirty
day session
some of the tenants of it you
financial in this new subwill
actually worsened prior versions
in some cases raising two
hundred fifty thousand dollars
ten million dollars and that's a
forty four
well transfer positions in this
bill will make orford well
problem
this
colorado and they put something
very similar to the place.
We also question the local of
the provisions in the well
transferred
another area that you took two
years from statement established
and now the two settings are
just been make just twenty four
hours pushed into language
with supersede those existing
rules
there's not one single stand of
economic on small producers
the only clear economic impact
we should spend from an operator
today which out to me this
morning it said almost in tears
we could have started
under this bill and we cannot
survive
thank you.
Yeah.
Thank you manager members
president of government the new
mexico oil and gas association
we appreciate the open process
utilized in the development of
the proposed changes to the
willing gas at and we commend to
represent it or test and
secretary refuse daff in all the
state holders for their efforts
to listen to you and further
discuss the complexities of this
issue.
The intention of this bill and
the efforts being made to
modernize the only aspect or
admirable and we're proud to be
part of that process on all of
our associations membership.
We believe they're still work to
be done on this bill is
specially in the area the
financial insurance and civil
penalties we remain committed to
working with the legislature and
near our membership and other
state holders to achieve
beneficial modernizations for
the act and improve oil I guess
operations in the state thank
you.
Oh thank you
for the community I got.
I employed my production
corporation information in
mexico.
We've been in business for sixty
five years I have a hundred
ninety six employees.
I operated.
The past sixty five year.
One thirty three
because never and i'm interested
in consequences.
To small offers the financial
insurance.
And
the increase in
increased by forty times.
And that's gonna be devastating
to us.
Sixty five years.
Not one time.
On the type of operator that
should help
you difficult to offer you
forgive my shipping random
financial insurance the plugging
responsibility
is.
That's going to generate lots of
issues for us the well transfers
are well within the control and
the mexican conservation
division right now plenty of
roads.
And I just went through thirty
five well I positioned took me
here and she did
try to we don't be more
regulation.
Thank you for your consideration
thank you sir anyone else in the
audience wishing to speak an
opposition
alright let's go online.
Those online wishing to speak in
opposition and I see hands up
that i'm questioning whether you
really want to speak in
opposition so if you do not wish
to speak an opposition please.
Okay
terry call please keep your
comments to ninety seconds.
Madame chair and members of the
committee my name is terry call
and I am the president ceo of
the greater alcohol key chamber
of commerce tonight you've heard
from the independent patrol in
the association of new mexico
about the problems created by HB
one thirty three for our home
ground smaller independent
producers were all aware of the
importance of the oil and gas
industry to the state treasury
may be where are less aware that
this also is an industry that
has consistently striven often
voluntarily to improve the
safety and environmental
performance of its operations
surely there must be a metal
ground that will work to update
the oil and gas act satisfying
both regulatory and industry
interests we recommend the
committee said this bill aside
and take the time it takes to
achieve a balance outcome thank
you maryams here
thank you gale evans.
Gale thank you madame chair
members of the committee my name
scale events i'm an attorney
with the center for biological
diversity and I am very sorry to
say that we stand in opposition
to this bill I think what we
have to talk about is what's not
in this bill we had such high
hopes when we learned that the
oil conservation division was
going to propose amendments to
the oil and gas act and the
originally this bill contained
health buffer zones for to
protect people from the
pollution that is inherent in
the oil and gas production
process and it also contained
protections for our fresh water
we watched as those protections
were stripped down and down and
down and finally completely
removed from the bill at this
point this bill does not contain
any protections to improve air
quality for front line
communities and it doesn't
protect our fresh water
resources from fracking so the
instead of standing up to
industry and putting in place
actual public health and
environmental protections we're
left with the bill that is
completely bowed down to the oil
and gas industry we have thirty
four thousand children in our
state who go to school within a
mile of oil and gas production
sites this bill needs to be
amended to include health
buffers owns so that children
don't go to school near fracking
sites
your times thank you
thank you
um julia were now.
Yes good evening madam chair and
committee members my name is
julia bernard um i'm the
executive director for public
action alliance and then roll
tribal member from sandia publo
I think it's just important for
the committee to
to know that the stay holder
process that's been mentioned
excluded plaintiffs from the
attention versus new mexico
litigation in our otherwise
known as the ad in laws
constitutional la sue plaintive
group arm and you know that
exclusion of indigenous front
line and youth voices
is something that was really
needed in order to make me in
for reforms to oil and gas act
feel like this is a blake
blatant act of silencing from
democratic process and really
urge you all to hold political
leaders accountable for this
type of exclusion we did support
the previous version of this
bell and it's on unfortunate
that we're standing opposition
as we're not seeing those
meaningful protections for a
fresh water and communities that
live near oil and gas production
sites and any financial
assurance for when spills and
infrastructure failures occur
so we just hope that in the
future new reforms for the oil
and gas act could have some
meaningful steps towards
addressing public health and
environment impacts thank you
thank you
jerry mcu.
Gerry.
The.
Can you hear me now yes.
Okay
madame chairman chair person and
members of the
house should just sir judiciary
committee thank you for the
absolute sure I want to voice my
opposition to hb one thirty
three my name is during the
junior president or santa one
resources I worked in the sand
one basin since nineteen eighty
we have three employees utilize
over twenty consultants manager
of production enjoying
operations exclusively in new
mexico I made a purchase
decision in nineteen ninety to
begin operating in the state.
New mexico has had a stable
rigor to environment certain gs
aren't producing an exploring
for all gas h v one thirty three
is written without any input
from small independent producers
like me it has huge
uncertainties who are decimated
my company specifically one
rewriting the native percent
method capture rewrite two
exceedingly high financial
assurance as provisioned three
similar penalties with no cap
how can small operators afford
it to develop themselves in a
system that's a wireless purity.
Independence in you might not
that there are millions who have
been helped new mexico grow are
the life flood of new mexico's
oil and gas industry and you
can't afford to eliminate
they can very much experiment
the same to my comments
mitch i'm gonna let you mitch
say you're last name.
Mat.
As to i'm i'm to being told ask
you to immute yourself.
Yeah.
Can every now yes
okay.
So I my name's mitchell her
calcust thank you so much for
respecting my conversation and
my comments
i'm interim president of ipn
vice president of strategic
company a small family owned
independent oil and gas company
located in ross will new mexico
we've been operating here for
over thirty five years.
This bill is detrimental
to many of the small producers
in our state.
Producers currently.
Tender to the wrecklemation fund
through the conservation tax
collected on her production
currently the state has over
fifty million dollars.
In our recommendation this
foreign has been abused and
rated.
Over the years and otherwise
would have been hundreds of
millions of dollars plenty to
plug any well that has ever been
abandoned in this state the
state only played thirteen wells
and twenty twenty three on state
and feelings spending roughly
two point two million dollars we
went through the same process
five years ago increasing the
bonding limit five fault.
I think the statements to look
at current rules and regulations
and see those already in the
third disposal.
To address issues they see to
plug an abandoned wells we
strongly stand opposed to this
bill and I encourage you to do
the same thank you so much
thank you
emans yates
open says your name correctly.
Hi yes thank you my name's
msiates and the vice president
hall pennial corporation area
family own company that's been
operating for a long time in new
mexico i'm calling in opposition
to house bill one thirty three
because I view it as another
unnecessary attack and oil and
gas within the state
view look at it a lot of the
majors that I guess were
considered stakeholders in this
we can agree to it as what it
does is it unnecessarily
penalizes a smaller operators
who cannot afford to have a team
of lawyers to deal with all the
regulations and don't have the
type of money that you guys are
trying to require for people to
bad be in the oil and gas
industry this is just another
barriered entry to stop the
smaller companies from getting
in risking their own capital in
trying to create something that
allow the majors quite frankly
won't do this is something that
if you guys are nacked you guys
won't feel it and the next two
or three years but I guarantee
you five or ten years from now
when other undiscovered zones
are not discovered because the
smaller operators willing to
take risk whose willing to put
their own capital on the line
not public equity not public
funds but their own capital
aren't able to discover on tap
zones new mexico's gonna be in a
real bind cause i'm not sure
where having anything else any
other type of industry coming
down the state that's all I have
to say I think it's a shame as
another unnecessary attack on
small independent producers with
an estate thank you thank you
so field jankens.
Hello madame chairman members of
the committee my name is sophia
jinkins yet though in the
emerald representative of youth
united for climate crisis action
or yaka i'm here also sadly to
ask you to oppose the spell it's
essentially a hand to industry
as part of the amount of group
our organization was not allowed
in the planning and negotiations
rates be one thirty three and
because of this we watched the
bill get worse and worse over
many months.
As a youthflood organization
with members across the state
including an areas like the
premium based in the have
dangerous levels of consider oil
and gas solution we cannot
support a bill that pretends to
protect the people of new mexico
when it doesn't we supported
this bill last week and have
energy even other setbacks
provisioned have been stripped
because the bill made important
improvements and financial
assurance now the financial
insurance has been teared in a
way that was it will result in
most operators not putting
nearly enough money to guarantee
the cost of clean up and that
cost will be shouldered by the
state the environment and our
communities this is
unacceptable.
It be one thirty three cut of
minister in the right direction
we're all an agreement that the
oil and gas app needs to be
updated but the bill in front of
you will not provide the
necessary protections for public
health front like communities or
the environment instead we ask
you as representatives suppose
for a meaningful legislation
that will put safeguards and
more regulations on the oil and
gas industry thank you thank you
larry santag.
Mm.
Pay madame chair members of the
committee this is car less anteg
I am the presidency of the new
mexico business coalition
with stand in opposition to
hospital one thirty three are
overwriting concern is that
they're continues to be burdened
some regulations peas and rules
imposed on the industry that is
currently providing about forty
five fifty percent of the
state's budget it would be
prudent.
For our state to stand in strong
support of this industry while
simultaneously ensuring that the
industry operates in a clean and
regulated manner and we believe
that it is.
But instead we see continue
challenges imposed on the
sindustry.
But the state is always happy to
take the money that we get from
their taxes and fees.
And then word raising barriers
to what they can do and putting
more constraints on our
operators.
Our oil and gas industry is
producing good paying directed
in direct jobs bunding our
educational system while
safeguarding the environment I
believe they truly care about
the environment and I think that
we have the regulations in place
that we need for the sender
street I would rather see that
new mexico operate like other
states.
That are proud to have the oil
and gas operators and the
revenue they produce I urge you.
To vote no on this bill thank
you.
The.
Can you hear me.
The.
Below can you hear me.
We can hear you
sorry
madam chair committee members my
name is john thompson i'm the
president of wals engineering
and production here in farming
to new mexico i'm a life long
and proud new mexican I may
crowd graduate of new mexico
states engineering program and
together with our sister company
at the energy we employ over
eighty
hard working individuals and and
support their families we've
been in business for over fifty
years our company was frankly
built and our are operating
branch was built by taking over
wells from larger companies
because of the scale of
economies that were able to do
efficiently that they just can't
and we can carry on these wells
and produce some effectively for
years to come and have been
doing this for decades and at
the end of these worlds we have
properly plugged in a band and
in conjunction with the b l m
and animal cd
look we all agree that this oil
and gas act needs to be updated
but unfortunately this wildly
misses the mark we we are by all
definitions of small operator
but the financial assurance
tears that the sponsors suggest
help small operators does just
the opposite and I think for
those of you that are
considering voting in favor of
this tonight you need to
consider the fact that to the
largest oil and gas companies in
the country are in favor of this
for a reason because they know
that this will put under
pressure on small operators and
more likely we won't make it and
they can come in and pick up the
balance.
So I urge you to vote against
this orly concede bill and
consider new mexicans and
consider the state of new mexico
thank you.
We are now going to move to
hearing from people who want to
speak and support the bill
in the audience so could you
please raise your hand okay when
we start over here
my name is when you actually i'm
inevitable travel members for
the four corners area
and with new mexico native I
like to think the committee
chair members were opportunities
when this comment I would like
to ask for your support for HB
one three three let's fix the
entire plate oil and gasa to
insurance issue funding for a
top producers to oil and gas
clothes in immediate better.
I like to see it.
My mother is a lot of land that
has overturned wells
still stand in a two month
distance from the front door but
one was close fifteen years ago
after being an operation.
Over seventeen hundred currently
in the state and cost tax pairs
a lot of money to plug it's more
very soon there are more into
future with orphan risk wealth
that will cost more than triple
with the absence of this policy.
I know the bill isn't for
traveler locked lands but it can
bring money into the state of
resident states that
orphan wells
health
issues that we are waiting and
waiting to see the into the
wirecycles of oil gas thank you
it's next.
Thank you
my name is joseph hernandez I am
from new mexico and my my family
also has a lot of trouble can
you
although this doesn't really.
Take that consideration however
I speak to the naval nation most
department
of division and they do work
with oc when it comes like
whenever they need assistance to
to delivery mediation of the
orphan bank wells and all the
nation they they look at the the
for the opportunity and
everything we can do right now
to just keep moving this forward
to help you sure that we're
doing
protect our lands protect our
communities and and I notice
this isn't perfect but it's
moving in the right direction
and that's what i'm urging I
also
want to close with
director abby today.
And it may be about last session
when director abbey on the last
day of the of h c
art long term feature
that uses less oil and not to
gas.
That's the future we're heading
to
it and I just want to close that
because that that that's the as
I was paying for today
thank you whose next.
Good evening madam chairing
my name is.
Our organization supports each
one thirty three which targets
for band wells for
as they are direct because to
the health are communities
continue to endeavor.
The update to the old gas act
which has changed since nineteen
thirty five well time well
transfer rules and hold
operators accountable for those
who do business out complaints.
Our communities families and
young ones should not have to
live in polluted air or suffer
from industry induced illnesses
when the bill can do something
about it
and hire people from our
community for reviews while back
portions are not currently
introduced included in the bill
we still need the protections.
Thank you yes.
Madame chairman committee
members get evening I am also
changes for animated vote and do
that from so now mexico and from
public my family to lives around
these wealth I want to think the
governor and sponsors is one of
the groups working with eminer
oil and gas and environment
frontline groups said september
I stand here for my ancestors in
future generations this bill
updates the nineteen thirty five
oil and gas act to address the
school modernization that is
desperately needed to ensure
protection of the frontline
communities that we represent.
Our children and families live
near all of this development
under a threat from hundreds of
the of a band in an or from
wells reading in the air
this has been our home for
thousands of years we need
fiscal modern musician to help
address the thousands of orphan
and embanded wells left on our
near travel lands and sat back
oil and gas is had ninety years
to do better to protect us it is
not about profit it is about
life you are representatives
have the power to protect our
people around water oil and gas
were part of these process and a
profitative experience of from
my communities those children
your children are future
generations are the people you
are protecting by voting yes
please show the strength and
boat left yes to protect the
people.
Thank you
thank you madame chair members
of the committee i'm coming of
five women with the real granded
chapter of the sierra club.
Three points the majors sell off
their low producing high
polluting wells to smile
operators who then become the
nation's largest methane a
mitter with sixty percent owner.
The second thing i'll say is
that I have never once
participated in an oil and gas
rule making more legislative
process than industry ended up
supporting any comprehensive.
I also have participated in
september since september.
Nothing on fresh water remains
in the bill nothing on sat backs
remains in the bill the tears
are in answer to the requests of
small producers.
Industry will not support this
bill but the people of new
mexico need progress forward on
the financial assurances and
finds and fees that modern nice
oil gas.
It's wishing to speak and
support sammy.
Thank you madam chair members my
name is damning calling the
claimant and you director with
conservation voters in mexico
and we've also been
participating this declared
discussions hosted by eminer we
are supported bill before you
are because it contains many
positive changes for financial
sure and says civil penalties
and fees as well as cotta find
the mething gas capture rule
these updates have been
carefully bettered by our
frontline partners and their
communities and we are
encouraged to know that there
that these updates will benefit
their communities.
However human environmental
setbacks were stripped were
stripped out of the bill in
recent negotiations and that was
extremely disappointing the
reason for this amendment or at
least what I have been told is
that there are insufficient
scientific studies showing that
set back prevent harm to human
health.
That is simply not true.
Many studies conducted by
reputable and unbiased
institutions have concluded that
living within one mile of oil
and gas facilities significantly
increases transit of cancer
restaurant illness adverse
pregnancy outcomes into earlier.
And these health impacts is
portionately that these health
issues just approach to impact
under served disadvantage
communism color.
These concerns were consistently
highlighted by the state holder
processed by our frontline
partners so the decision to have
been to have the bill move for
without them in the current bill
is disappointing and dismissal
to our frontline front line
allies.
But all that we are supporting
the committee stop and look
forward to the next opportunity
to work on that backs and I urge
your support the bill thank you
thank you yes.
Man chair to the committee my
name is tanisfox
center part of the state convene
by energy to work on the form
that is oil and gas act a
commend secretary huge and
general council show for their
heart work bringing his bill
before you and represent his
retails and the queen for their
leadership sponsoring this bill.
Each b one thirty three
represents important and overdue
reform the one gas act reform
that will help for te.
The.
There's no real dispute that the
current financial insurance
requirements are inadequate to
protect taxpayers from flooding
the bill to close orphaned wells
no real dispute the state
doesn't have authority to
protect itself against risky
transfers and no real dispute
that abandoned wells can
contaminate our land and water
to be one thirty three
represents progress towards
fixing these challenges is the
product of months of
negotiations it is not a perfect
bill as you have heard I doubt a
perfect bill what ever come
before you this bill is positive
step forward.
Similarly heard panels in the
act around staff with penalties
in comparable state statutes.
The gallery civil penalties is
to account for multiday
violations bring violators into
compliance and deter future
violations bringing the acts
penalties more in line with
comparable state status with
better a.
The build substitute.
The.
Thank you anyone else in the
army ends wishing to speak in
support.
Or it will move to the
online participants.
Um.
Per se less.
And members of the committee i'm
a stabitation for new mexico
wild where is state why non
profit with about thirty
thousand members of order
dedicated to the protection
restaurants and drive and i'm
public plans water and wildlife
and september we have been one
of the staplers participating
with the agent and the street
and nonprofit state holders
about this proposal.
As well and thirty three is an
improvement for new mexico this
building make many improvements
her outdated oil and gas
including providers to address
new mexico tax parents mounting
liabilities like in a
remediation of a ban in order
to provide seven protections for
the environment for people and
for community is as compared to
our lives we are disappointed
that the substantial before you
today does not include set back
buppers for sensitive natural
resources including new mexico
special water sads well ins and
repair and areas these
protections were included in the
original bill and we think
representatives are tests and a
queen and the overseas for
initially proposing
to work with the agency and the
legislature on protection
replacement natural resources by
in the meantime that spelling
for you today is an opportunity
to act common sense at days for
our data lies and provide you
with appropriate and necessary
tools for the public interest.
So there are far we are asking
to please guys on substitute for
house
thanks very much
thank you arms deborah.
Good evening madam chair deborah
condit I am read air registered
lobbyist for environmental
defense fund and first of all
we'd like to think the sponsor
and eminer for the work that
they put behind this bell
we know is that quite a quite
undertaking for them
secondly the amendments are
designed to provide certainty to
small operators with no sudden
cost increase it'll still be the
most protected it what this bell
will also be the most protective
financial assurance umbrella for
the one of the largest oil and
gas producing states and we ask
for your support of house but
when thirty three thank you.
I phone june.
Yes thank you i'm june persons
thank you madame chair and
members of the committee
I stand in strong support of
senate bill one thirty three new
mexican tax payers are burdened
in the amount of over a hundred
thousand dollars her abundant
oil and gas well to clean up the
mass left behind by companies
who failed to meet their
contractual environmental
commitments this tax payer
burden is the result of in added
put bonding requirements in the
current law there are currently
about seventeen hundred or
something about in wells in new
mexico making methane and other
harmful environmental
resulting in a wrongful
outstanding cost burden to all
new mexican taxpayers of
approximately one point seven
billion dollars that's with a b
because current new mexico
bonding requirements in oil and
gas are in adequate to ensure
those companies extracting
public resources for their
profit making do not leave their
dirty burden behind the huge
cost in the mexico and new
mexican daxpayers of
insufficiently bonded oil and
gas wells needs to stop and is
the primary purpose of their b
one thirty three as it is now
written I stand in strong
support and employ you please
boat for this it makes financial
sense and it is giscarly
responsible.
Thank you
ask her simpson.
Thank you madame chair members
the committee oscar simple
representing
real grand indivisible it's a
chapter of the national
organization individual
we support house bill one thirty
three even though it is
significantly been minimized or
reduced in certain aspects but
it makes great strides for
financial sir assurances
helps.
Fix the bonding requirements in
the and limits or controls of
transfer wells it may
no end for companies going in
the bankruptcy please support
house bill one thirty three
thank you
charles good marker.
Yes madam chair members of the
committee thank you very much I
am charles good mocha registered
lobbyist for earth works we urge
your vote on the yes board on HB
one thirty three the financial
assurance pieces in the citizer
in this bill woke her the
industry one just a very small
amount because it's cost of
production are impacted so much
greater by other factors than
the very marginal increases in
their cost from this bill by
contrast this bill creates
enormous benefits for the state
of new mexico ever takes our
state government's future
financial health as well as the
health security of our people
we've seen what happened said
the bill does not pass the
recent massive settlement with
one producer across the states
taxpayers untold millions of
dollars to clean up the mass of
a producer private investors
where they're there are
multinationals or a small
locally on firms if they can't
afford to protect our
communities from the real
threats in actual environmental
impacts to communities that
their operations cause why
should the state be forced to
take on that pass why should
taxpayers pay the cost the
financial assurance pieces in
this bill are still way too
small to protect the people in
our futures financial capacity
but they are step in the right
direction so we urge your boat.
Yes on this bill thank you
a few.
The.
Yes chairwoman and committee
members my name is a then
increased to do and i'd like to
think my representative ream for
being here and and looking at
this bill but I am in full
support of HB one thirty three
i'm an environmental and energy
engineer looking for solutions
to the problems we humans have
brought upon us else especially
toxic air pollution and the
current climate crisis i'm a
retired navy commander and
raised my hand to support a
constitution and i'm a christian
which all tell me to protect
lives and people need clean air
in order to live and thrive
parcel fuel emissions account
for ninety percent of air
pollution and I know you don't
want us to continue to breath
the toxic air which causes
premature death and want to
point out one thing though
that's not been brought up and
that's mething
for years the industry has under
reported the amount of mething
that has been leaking and epa
has under valued it's global
warming potential it has
actually got a hundred fifty to
two hundred times as the global
warming potential of carbon
dioxide that means even if you
capture ninety eight percent
that leaves two percent of
emissions which will then have
the global warming potential
four times that of what you've
captured once it's burned that's
just an fying I think that what
really goes industry for
bringing the world to this place
of spiraling down planetary
systems and out as them what
kind of legacy they want to
leave our children and ground
children I whole heartedly
support HB one thirty five one
thirty three sorry as they step
toward forward to address the
environmental and financial
abuse the industry is levy to
new mexico thank you
okay we're going to take two
more barber california and so
barbara.
Good evening madam chair
committee members on barbara
elif speaking for the legal
women voters of new mexico the
league supports regular rigorous
regulation and enforcement to
prevent drilling activities from
contaminating surfer certain
water or the surrounding
landscape.
Adequate bonding or other
financial guarantees for
drilling activities to fund
clean up operations in the event
of abandoned by companies we
would have liked the proposed
set backs to be included in the
bill but we still feel it is
important believe the ask you to
pass hb one thirty three thank
you
and the last one lucas herndon.
Thank you chair and good evening
to the members of the committee
my name is lucas turned in the
energy policy director of
progress now new mexico and i'm
also a father new mexico's oil
and gas act hasn't had
significant updates in nearly
ninety years and while I agree
with some of those who spoke in
our position to this bill and
its current iteration because of
all that has been stripped from
its since it's original drafting
I am speaking and support
tonight simply because we cannot
wait the oil and gas industry
their lobbyists and their
champions within the legislature
thrive and continue to profit
every time we hesitate and kick
the can down the road meanwhile
kids in the state suffer from
some of the worst rates of
asthma in the country as a
father please vote to make even
the small effort to reform items
oil and gas act so I can tell my
kid there is hope that we the
people do still have some power
in our legislature thank you
thank you all right we'll go
back to the sponsor any comments
before we go to
the members ma'am sure
represent of him.
Thank you madame chair and thank
you representative or tas and
and secretary or
secretary fuse deputy
yeah you have so many hats you
know I was so used to calling
you direct refuse for so long
it's
taken me a little while to get
used to the new stuff
so
this is a very different bill
than the one that came through
energy and and we heard
what gallery seemed like a month
and a half ago but it I don't
remember how long
so
and you have made some some
changes
one of the place I
there were no changes and we
went into this I think quite a
bit was on the well transfer
provisions and I as I still have
some concerns about the well
transfer provisions
particularly
we discussed some scenarios and
we're not going to get into all
the mirrored of things but I
still think that there is real
danger there
for for.
A a division between the real
property convenience and the
transfer of wells and what that
does to
the right to contract into the
prevention of waste
but one thing I would work would
ask on that is have you given
any consideration to a pre
approval transfer process
mr chair
madam chair representative
we have I think that would be
something that would be
discussed
during a rule making process to
implement this authority our
current transfer rules
are very limited in terms of
what they cover and go if this
authority were to attach and it
is in the
sort of general power section of
the oil and gas act we'd need to
do a role making and I think
that would be something
that could be discussed as part
of that process.
Thank you secretary fuse
madame chair representative
secretary
the the other thing that I have
concerns about on the well
transfers also is what would be
I don't see in this sort of a
pellet process if you
determine for whatever reason
that the transfer should not
take and
take over his operator of.
I've made him chair
representative all ocd orders
depending on who is the
signatory can either be appealed
to the division we have an
independent hearing examiner
that handles cases before the
division if it were signed by
staff in our administrative
hearings and compliance group if
a denial of transfer was signed
by the director of the oil
conservation division that
decision would be appealable to
the oil conservation commission
and obviously any decisions from
the division tearings or the
commission could be appealed to
court
okay thank you
secretary madam chair
representative for tests
secretary huge.
So one of the ways
one of the instances where you
can deny a transfer is.
That the transfer relaxed
sufficient financial capacity
based on owner or projected
production
and in that lack of financial
capacity to manage liabilities
with the wells
but there are several business
models where.
An entity is brand new.
And it comes in and tries and
buys a package of wells and then
not necessarily for those wells
but maybe other production zones
or they've got a business plan
to rework those wells how do you
assess that financial
capacity for those companies
madame chair representative I
can give an illustrative example
at least as it relates to
inactive wells because under our
current rules those are subject
to you are some some more
restrictions we typically work
with the operators to develop a
sort of firm committed plan
often memorials do not
stipulated final order or an
administrative order on consent
where they lay out for us
a plan to either bring the
inactive wells back into
production or plug them
in my experience working at the
agency if an operator's willing
to provide such plan the
compliance rate is pretty good
if they're unable or unwilling
to provide such details and we
work with them on the plan and
sort of amending it you know
that raises them some questions
that are there and it's often
through a dialogue that we sort
of sort through those
issues
thank you secretary madame chair
representative and and
secretary so when
say a large or even a mid size
publicly traded company is going
to be the transferee.
And you are asking them to
may be submit evidence or submit
something to you determine their
financial keep a billity those
records with them become subject
to the inspection of public
records act and making day
significantly confidential
information how how would you
address that
madame chair representative
I believe confidential financial
information could be claimed as
business confidential under
under epra and protected it's
why we did include language in
there
stating sort of more explicitly
the fact we'd looked at his
production the new mexico cd is
the definitive source of
production reporting in the
state I know there are
forecasting tools that are used
to get more real time but we are
the definitive database so we
can look at it well we know a
wells history we can tell you
last production are not a whole
host of things and so we tend to
look at those factors because we
know that details about the well
have some understanding of what
you know it's end of life may
look like or whether it's one
that you know has some
additional opportunities to move
to the sort of begin asking
those questions we would not
start with detailed financial
information.
Okay thank you and
I also.
Thank you madame chair
and
representative or test in in
secretary of use so.
Again when looking at at say a
publicly traded company.
Um
you going to require
evidence of their.
Debt whether they're leveraged
to do this acquisition what
their debt levels are
things like that
and madame chair representative
in the context of a publicly
traded company I wouldn't need
any financial information I
would just go to their ten k ten
queues which would have
which would have that
information again I would also
say in in practice in a couple
of instances where we had to ask
for some financial information
my t mort judiciously to
collect targeted information
that we needed so it's supposed
to have.
Only that limited information
that was needed for relevant to
our decision making.
Thank you secretary madame chair
representative or test
secretary of huge
so what sort of
staffing needs to anticipate
to
monitor the well transfers and
the and and more specifically to
do the financial analysis
required
madame chair and representative
I think the staffing needs we do
anticipate here are not any
greater than our sort of overall
request as the legislature has
supported our growth of
organization alongside
production growth.
Because I think the assumption
is in the general authority that
this means we automatically
scrutinize every transaction I
think actually most transfers
under this new authority as they
do with existing would we
continue to proceed
this is about expanding our
ability to ask questions when we
see things that are problematic
with a predictable set of rules
so that folks can understand
when we might ask questions and
and what we might ask but I
expect the vast merger of of
transfers a two percent it in
the normal course of business
okay thank you secretary madame
chair representative or test
secretary fuse.
And as I said to you and energy
I think you have
the approach they.
This particular
ocd administration has taken two
orphan wells is commendable
and and I appreciate what what
you're doing and trying to get
those taken care of and we have
the and I misplaced it but I I
know we talked about it before
it's about seventeen hundred
orphaned wells and then about
another three hundred or so that
you are having difficulty
dealing with operators
where does the sort of break
down on where those low wells
are located.
A madam chair and representative
those wells are located all
across the state because
these.
Money we've been deploying the
federal money we've been
deploying has focused on steak
and fee and there's probably a
slightly heavier concentration
in the permean basin the sand
one basin has
significant federal lands like
the permeant basin but also has
tribal allotted lands but these
wells are
are scattered all over the state
or at least scattered in both
actually both the sand on the
permeant and then some in the
raton basin that would that
isn't the oldest basin and this
one of the older spaces in the
state thank you thank you
secretary huge madam chair
representative more
secretary fuse.
The the conservation tax that
currently exists.
I know you're familiar with it
and it it.
Provides for a certain
percentage of oil and gas
production to be paid into the
conservation tax on every barrel
of oil stolen in every mcf of
gas sold and and do you know
what I assume you know those
levels
I don't want to mistake them up
a madam chair and representative
I don't remember the exact
fraction of a tax cause it's not
written in a user friendly way
but I can for the committee
guess thank thank you secretary
fugin madam chair I would submit
that not many tax laws are
written in a use user friendly
way
yeah
but
madam representative
representative secretary once
that's conservation tax is paid
what happens to the the money
madame chair representative the
portion that is there is a
portion of that tax and there's
an escalator at above seventy
dollars a barrel those funds are
deposited in the oil and gas oil
and gas reclamation fund and
that phone subject you
appropriation by the legislature
is made available to the ocd for
plugging in reclamation purposes
if and when a bond is forefitted
we deposit those moneys in the
oil and gas recommendation front
were also authorized to pursue
responsible parties to the
extent they exist in any funds
we claim from them would be
deposited in that fund thank you
secretary madame chair
representative or tears
secretary fuse
the oil gas conservation tax I
was enacted I believe in
nineteen seventy eight
and I would and I believe
it's right something like point
one eight percent on oil below
seventy dollars point two four
percent on a b.
Of seventy dollars
and I find it.
Odd given the amount of oil and
gas production at this state has
had for since nineteen seventy
eight forty five beers or so
that the reclamation fund
I mean especially if we have
seventeen hundred wells orphan
wells it doesn't seem like a lot
of wells were getting plugged
why there's only fifty million
dollars in there
madame chair in representative
I would know if you looked at up
sort of long term graph over
that period of new mexico oil
and gas production
it has been a relatively recent
spike a driven by obviously
advances and shale drilling
particularly in the permian that
has sent up production to you
historic levels and as a result
revenues into the wreck fund
recently have grown the
wreckline is not in interest
bearing fund there are some
funds in state government that
earn interest there are some
that can be invested and grow
aggressively the oil reck fund
sort of a kind of shoving it
under the state's mattress
over the years income into the
fund and as recently is twenty
eighteen
was only about three million
dollars
this year I think we're forecast
to hit twenty six
but again that's sort of that
that sort of a production delta
and ocd received dispersements
again only going back to twenty
eighteen of about three million
dollars
you know
anywhere from tutors to to to to
sit two to six million dollars.
Thank you secretary madam
representative
madame chair rip representative
or test secretary for use
how many
people in the oil conservative
conservation division are
currently working on the
reclamation of wells
a madam chair representative I
have.
Two staff people devoted to
the oil and gas plugging program
because under this
administration and certainly in
my time and leadership and
eminer are focus has been
deploying those dollars on the
ground so we are getting
contract dollars out with local
plugging cruise all of our
pluggers are from producing
basins and other components and
we're working to maximize
dollars for environmental
mediation and other components
so I have two permanent staff
dedicated to it and obviously
my lawyers
my ast staff and all of those
component touch pieces of it but
they're not dedicated to it and
thank you secretary madame chair
representative secretary and so
when
they can I believe you said in
the energy committee that you
you've done somewhere around a
hundred and fifty wells over the
last three years is that do I
recall that correctly
I actually pulled the average
the ocd plugged a three hundred
and twenty three wells since
twenty eighteen.
Twenty five to fifty prior
twenty two and before or last
year repluned a hundred and
forty ok thank you and that
again as I said madam chair that
is commendable and I appreciate
your ongoing efforts
madam chair representative or
test
second secretary fuse and in
that saying period of time do
you know about how many wells
that the only gas industry has
blood
madam chair representative as a
matter of fact it do you
operators plugged four thousand
ninety four wells over that
period of three hundred and
ninety five a high eight hundred
and ninety one I suppose there
should be a couple of caviats in
there for example in the three
hundred and ninety five wells
last year about two hundred were
plugged under the threat of it
were an actual last ute from the
state land office
and another eighty six were
plugged a due to administrative
orders issued by my department
saying plug em or else those
wells show up in our system as
operator plugged but there was
some administrative compulsion
behind those actions.
Thank you secretary of madame
chair representative secretary
and and when you when the ocd
takes over.
The the.
And says okay this is truly a
north and well it's on our
plugging listing i'm sure you
have priorities
and and you
plug that well you are using
reclamation funds correct and
madame chair representative
historically yes but starting in
twenty two twenty twenty two we
received the first plug under
money under the bipartisan
infrastructure law the first
plug of new mexico's ninety
seven million dollars so while
we only plugged thirteen wells
with wreck fund dollars last
year because I had to spend that
first twenty five million and
only two years I plug sixty five
wells in fiscal year twenty
three with federal dollars and
most of the hundred and forty
wells that were plugged last
year except for the thirteen
with state funds were plugged
with federal dollars because we
had to deploy that cash quickly
thank you and madame chair
representative or test secretary
fuse
and on those
well now I lost my
several of us yes
no one.
Yeah.
Okay.
One of the things I I wanted to
ask about owned on financial
assurances.
Where were where we were going
if I can remember now I I sit
apologize
so on on welcomes right honest
years
oh i'm sorry
I guess beginning on page eight
madam chair
where
and then through
I guess is that.
Subparagraph a
and then b c d where where we
talk about well counts
and and production
have you given any thought about
you know just designating that
this is no one federal wells
a madam chair of representative.
The ocd has never been and does
not double bond the federal
wells tribal wells are subject
to independent bonding
requirements by the blm and it's
been our long standing practice
and even under the current
saturday that that's how we
approach bonding requirements
and I would expect that would be
carried forward here yes thank
you minister secretary fuse
madame chair representative or
test
secretary future I understand
that you do not double bond them
but i'm not talking about the
bonding i'm talking about the
count and so if someone had
forty five state wells and five
federal wealth I just want
or a certain amount of
production so that there was six
federal wealth that we're
definitively when we're counting
were not counting federal wealth
does that make sense
madame chair representative it
it absolutely does in the same
pain of doing it not double
bonding when we look at counts
under existing rules and other
components we only count of
federal and state.
Fed fee and state wells
at as as part of the as part of
the count which is why one of
the tables I had here only
showed thirty five thousand
wells
in the states closer to seventy
thank you thank you thank you
secretary madam jare
representative
secretary for use I just think
if if if you would be if you
would maybe think about this
clarifying that make sure that
it's in there that it we can
only count non federal wealth
I think that would be
very good
I want to
sort of shortly
and ask about the civil
penalties provisions if I might
madam chair representative
secretary and I believe this
this change to the civil
penalties provides that those go
to the reclamation fund is that
correct
madame chair
representative
we had a originally kicked about
kicked that concept around in
our small state colder groups
discussion
it is not
in this bill
for some it's it's not in this
bill and was never in the
prefile version but it was a
concept kicked around okay I
apologize mr secretary
activities one i'd seen it in
there madam chair representative
or test
secretary of you so I assume
then that the the cible
penalties would just go to the
general fund is that
madam share representative
eminer's reversion this year
looked very large because it
included fire reimbursements and
then the other half were the two
point one million dollars in
civil penalties which is counted
as a reversion even though
it wasn't forecast revenue.
Okay thank you thank you for
that mr secretary
madame chair representative or
test secretary reviews I would
just wrap up by saying.
If there was a way to look at
getting more of that
conservation tax money to the
reclaimation fund I I would love
to work with you on that and get
you that get that money so
because that is a tax that the
oil and gas industry is pain to
reclaim and and plug in
abandoned orphan wells good
actors are paying that already
to to
to
address the actions of bad
actors and if we can do
something to help you get more
money
that way I think that would be
a.
Something else maybe we should
look at thank you very much to
both of you thank you madam
chair thank you represent a
representative of queen
thinking manager.
Uh manager
to be secretary of huge how much
does it cost to plug him in the
band and well
a madam chair representative are
our average class to plug is a
hundred and twenty five thousand
dollars but that's just for the
plugging operation the surface
reclamation can be anywhere
from.
A hundred and ten thousand
dollars to north of the millions
of sight like the one I passed
the picture out of with them
active release and other
components
so man he managed here to be
secure huge.
So the cast to plug a single
well and do the recommendation
could easily be turned in fifty
thousand dollars to pick up
number.
Madame chair representative that
is correct so mantear.
To be secret huge members of the
committee.
You're under these tears
the first time for
I guess not up to fifty wells
but less than fifty well so
forty nine wells is two hundred
and fifty thousand knowledge.
Vampire to be secretary win
wells are abandoned is it
typical for a company that's so
operating to abandon a few
worlds or is it more typical for
your company to go out of
business in the band and all of
their rules.
A madam chair representative the
latter scenario company abandons
their wells it's typically all
of them.
So many chair
to be secretary then have.
I believe that we have an
obligation to protect the state
of new mexico.
And I believe we are currently
following woes
in that obligation
in this bill
takes a step
now her big step
but it does take a support and
that's why I continue to support
it
we've taken a lot of this bill
we took out the set bags we've
been a cap on the civil damages
yeah we're doing the tears
we know that this is a boom or
bust industry we know that
there's a very good chance that
when things go bad they will go
very bad.
And these amounts are not going
to be adequate
they're gonna be better than
what we have now but they're not
gonna be adequate and we should
all be concerned when we hear
the operators say they can't
afford this they can't afford
this insurance
because if they can't afford
this insurance now
they're not used right the
downturn
they're not going to be there to
plug these wealth.
And that's why I can take to
support this bill thank you
matter thank you represent a
speaker martin command chair
thank you for tests and
secretary of a won't be labor
the points I do want to
commend the sponsors of this
bill I want to commend your
experts I want to commend
everybody was come to the table
on this
I didn't see this bill till
before maybe maybe after was
introduced actually but I know
that you all were had been
working for some time
can you can you
for the record can you
briefly walk us through.
All of the compromises that you
have made on this bill over the
last three weeks.
Thank you ma'am chair thank you
mister speaker
when the bill was introduced we
did not have the tears in this
in the bill.
We had set back language related
to you know where well could be
drilled in relation to how some
school
water bodies in the state of new
mexico
we had no cap on civil
penalties.
I think that's encapsulates it
is your speaker thank you man
chair representative so over the
course of this is the second
committee so over the course of
two committees you've heard both
from members of the public
members of the industry
advertise members of this house
and you have continued to evolve
your bill madam chair
representative is that the case
membership is just because yes
that is the case.
Ramchair representative I think
that this is
that this is how legislating
should happen
and it may ten years here in
this legislature
i've very few times
unfortunately I wish we'd see it
more often very few times do we
see.
Legislation grow and evolve live
brief as it moves through a
process I will commend you for
your flexibility
i've been on the other side of
the table matter of chair where
I just think my bill is perfect
that you should not be touched
and then it's either a year
enabled
on the bill you've taken a
different approach you've taken
out an approach that is more
conducive to compromise that is
conducive to problem solving
which we know we all agree
are are things that we should be
doing
up the oil gaza industries
tremendously important to the
state right whether we like it
or not that is a fact there are
front line communities who both
depend on these good paying jobs
and also front like communities
who were often times be harmed
by bad actors.
I'm and I believe that she
representative that your bill.
Is a step in the red direction I
mean it just hearing some of the
opposition on zoom like well
you've got a bit of a unicorn
here you've got folks who are
post
because it's too harsh in folks
where I pause because it's not
harsh enough.
So I just want to commend you
for that flexibility I want to
commend all of you who have come
to the table advocates and
industry folks to help.
Make this bill.
A little bit.
Um
a little bit better depending on
where you perspective is
and I look forward to supporting
your billing I also know that
we've got two weeks left in the
session in this bills who has to
go to the floor of the houses
when we get passes today and to
the senate and you're gonna have
to continue to work with folks
to to to make the agreements
that you may need to make to get
this through the finished lane
think madam chair thank you
representative thank you speaker
representative chasing thinking
out of chair and thank you very
much a representative or teasing
and secretary food you'd i'm
sorry
I think I would answer to that
secretary.
I was interested.
If you could just address maybe
two things one
you
backed off one of the provisions
that has alienated some of the
environmental groups and that
was about the location of
well so by not mistaken
was just about the location of
future wells and
it seems to be like there are
civil clear consensus that it is
a public health risk so i'm
wondering.
With the potential is to mail
you rate that in the future
that minimum chair represent
chassis
we did
we did take that set back
language out in that would only
refer to new wells that were
drilled
there was a lot of consensus in
there also was not a lot of
consensus it became pretty clear
that we need more time to you
know work with members to really
figure out
where we could where we can sort
of deal with these public health
risks so
i'm very excited about the
possibility of working on this
going forward through the
interim you know we've
identified some folks on the
house side who are willing to do
this as well go through a longer
process have conversations
around the state with all of our
legislators and you know really
and and look at the date and
there is a lot of data that
supports
set backs and at various at
various levels various new
feet so i'd like to look at that
in the future and but we just
didn't have a consensus that we
needed
none chair and and
representative
back in a round twenty twelve so
I think we have twenty thirteen.
I tried to do an update on the
oil and gas outlets senator
michael sanchez who was the
senate majority leader at the
time and it hadn't been amended
since well I had never been
amended since it was written in
nineteen thirty five but we did
accomplish as much as you've
accomplished here but
I am concerned because I always
thought
there are good actors in their
bad actors and why don't the
good actors want the bad actors
to be the ones who pay the price
in the good actors don't
do can you just say anything
about the protection for the
good actors.
A madam chair
and representative
I try to avoid painting with two
bright abrush in either way I
think there are more
complexities in terms of
operator circumstances and other
components
and so
we tried a partner with
operators who are trying to do
the right thing even now as we
work to compliance as sort of
soft carried as it were kind of
move things forward and we try
to walk a clear line with
operators who aren't and I think
since our civil penalty
authority was reinstated in
twenty nineteen the ocd has been
deliberate in diligent about
sort of moving those factors
forward
to the extension of a question
was about sat backs
in that context in particular
it's not that simple there are
reservoir engineering distances
mineral leases sort of other
components that dictate
well locations and and other
factors so and in that
particular question I I wouldn't
necessarily put it into bad or
good actors buckets it's a it's
very complex and technical which
I think we felt like we couldn't
do in a a thirty day session.
The.
A mountain went when last
question I I was concerned about
the gentleman who rushed down
here from farmington and and I I
just and the
the concern I I had
is that i'm wondering if
evidence discretion wouldn't you
know people are are working hard
to mitigate things.
You know madame chair of
representative
one of the things that are my
team at ocd looks at and in the
office of general council when
we're deciding to take
enforcement
is corrective actions that we
see evidence have been taken
after we issue us citation and
in nov another factor we
consider when we resolve those
are sort of proactive steps that
have been taken so there are
many phases throughout where we
look at those questions and
often times before it gets to
the nov level we work to
partner with operators
to
assist them with compliance
questions and assist them with
compliance issues so that the
nov truly is
sort of the last resort when
we've started the end of the
road of those other tools.
But they thank you very much
madame chair for those answers
and III just hope that the um
concern voiced by a few of the
folks in opposition that are
smaller operators that
this will lead to the takeover
of their
their lives work by the big
industry I I would hate to see
that happen and down so i'm i'm
hopeful that.
All.
Facets out of type serve good
operators couldn't continue so
think manager thank you
representative line.
Email insurance for recording
the the hours late fall try to
be sinked but this is an
extremely important issue to my
district and so I do need to ask
some questions.
Manager page seven.
I look at the new
provisions c and d that are like
that are lines eight through
fourteen essentially.
So many
does this allow ocd to
block a potential transfer even
if the transfer reprovides
adequate final financial assura.
A madam chair
representative.
No I don't believe it would.
Manager I read wildly different
can you explain your ira.
A madame chair of representative
if an operator were transferring
active wells and provided
necessary financial assurance I
would have no questions or other
pieces see and
see indeed would come into play
when you're dealing with
transactions involving inactive
wells which per propose are much
higher risk of being abandoned
and often require significant
capital to be brought back into
production.
So madam sure.
The sort of the plain reading of
the statute the new language
so that we understand we're
talking about here.
Allows you to implement
limitations on transfers when
and then one of those is the
transfer fell to provide
adequate financial.
But bc and dear joined by
disjunctive.
And so I would interpret that
and I think a court would as
well.
When you insert the word or.
That any one of those would be a
basis for denying
a madame chair of representative
you would be correct
transfers like are like people
there are married of structures
and and circumstances that could
come into play
so many insurer that highlights
a concern for me and even though
I was born in reason as they go
I will be the first invest i'm
not an expert in one gas i've
been on locations I have family
members that have worked in the
industry but III can't talk to
the science with you you know or
even the the day to day.
Details but my experience in
talking to people in industry
over the years.
Is often times you have a a
large
major who has a particular basis
like the same one who has some
some wells that aren't producing
much like they used to
production starts a decline and
so then then I think the
question becomes a business
question manager which is do we
do it plugged as well and take
it off the books or we try to
unload it on to someone who
maybe wants to collect these
smaller products and wells and
often times that trickles down
to the independence and the
smaller producers.
And so manager my concern coming
from sort of a an older
producing basin.
Is if this type of language gets
in the statute.
Even though that smaller
producer the transferree has
adequate financial assurance the
department looks at this and
says this is a rest us even
though they're providing
adequate financial insurance
organic denied and so mad i'm
sure that's a concern I won't
express and then with that I
want to just ask the specific
question because I don't know
what the standard is in cnd.
So what does it mean to lack
sufficient financ.
Madame chair representative in c
we added known or projected
production again ocd is the
repository production data we
know what a transferred operator
may hold and have an assessment
of
the sort of revenues that might
generate and cash it might spend
off to support
additional wells again I don't
think these questions come into
play with transfers involving
active wells but there are
plenty of transfers involving
inactive wells which raise a
different set of issues manager
can can you explain why do you
think that it this doesn't come
in to play for active wealth.
The.
Madame chair representative I
can say from experience looking
at transfers we tend to have
my team will flag transfers even
though we can't slow them down
the rarely flag transfers that
involve exclusively active wells
under the scenario that you
described because those are
standard business transactions
and member share I understand
you're speaking from.
Experience in what the practices
but that's not what the statute
provides.
The.
Madame chair representative the
statutes in our general
authorizing section we would
need to implement this with some
clear rules explaining the
circumstances we would need to
update our existing transfer
rules which only ask the
financial assurance question
manager I just because you had.
Sort of do any ideas the
difference between active versus
inactive and I don't see that
language in the in the bill in
the new language that's being
proposed so that's why I asked
the question it.
Because I think the the planet
of the statute doesn't make that
kind of distinguishment and
madam sure the other thing that.
This concerns me
again.
For the smaller producers is.
They tend to be very aunched
renewal in nature and
they have to go out in race
capital
they don't have
you know shareholders and and
these used trust funds that they
have access to and so why that
matters.
Is if you have to do a round of
capital.
And there's a possibility that.
The transfer of whatever
collection was you have down the
line could be denied even though
there's financial assurances met
by the transferee.
That puts a risk in those
they're trying to to call in
capital from and raise capital
from and so this further limits
what I think is the
entrepreneurial nature of small
producers
so again I I would be a lot more
comfortable if the language made
it clear that if the transfer e
can meet the financial
assurances then c n d would not
apply but that's not what the
language is.
And so I saw a question but I
would like if you'd like to
respond I don't want to cut job
on that point so but you don't
have to correct.
Fair enough.
So page nine.
And sure can i.
So the way I understand these
new tears and this is new to
this committee sub is that
correct.
Member share representatives it
is okay so manager the way i'm.
Trying to rate my head around
these new tears and how you get.
Entered whatever tear you end up
in is it's based off of this
concept of
of barrels of oil equivalent can
I get sort of a high level
explanation of what that means
a madame chair representative up
a barrel of oil equivalent as a
standard oil and gas metric
enabling an operator come to
combine both their oil
production and their gas
production into one value
and so it's conservatively at
your mcf divided by six that
gets that conversion and you can
add it and provides a better
metric he'll corp for example
and i'll close with this is
forty first and oil production
but if you add their gason of
the ninth largest producer in
the state
so madam chair via my
understanding so essentially.
To put it in other terms if you.
And i'm probably butchering the
the nominee glitcher but if you
produce six barrels of natural
gas at the corner of one barrel
oil is that since we were so a
matter of cherriers and if
you've produced six thousand mc
f of natural gas are
sorry if you use yes your if you
produce six mc f of gas that's a
barrel of oil sorry okay all
right fair enough.
The.
And.
That of course is you can
understand this this calculation
is even though it's very detail
and specifics australia
important to my basin because it
is a natural gas base and there
is some oil exploration but it's
very rare.
Most of his natural gas
and manager the reason why I
think that matters and why I
think this could this tiered
system could actually end up.
Being quite inaccurable is you
look at the cost for a barrel of
oil what it's going for and I
just rode down roughly looked up
about seventy seven dollars a
barrel.
You look at what the mcf is for.
Natural gas it's at about two oh
nine.
So if you take save five hundred
thousand boe
and you look at it from the oil
standpoint that's about thirty
eight million dollars in
revenue.
If you take that same metric for
natural gas that's about six in
a quarter million.
And so it's a substantial
difference in revenue
that you're inflicting on these
areas unlike the premium which
is mostly oil.
Man sure the you know the sound
basin is almost all natural gas.
And so that revenue difference.
Makes a huge difference even
though your shoehorning those
those natural gas people into
the same tear system is somebody
who's producing essentially
mostly oil
so manager was there given any
thought to differentiating that
given the type of producer as to
which of these categories you
put them in.
A madam chair representative
we've actually looked at
individual production data for
for all operators in the state b
o e is a standard metric and
unfortunately the cost to plug a
well there isn't a
differentiation between a gas
and an oil well the only thing
that makes a well cheaper as if
it was drilled at a shall lower
depth.
So many insurance you know I I
think that kind of reason in
rest questions.
How many what percentage of the
wells across new mexico do you
think are pro.
A madame chair representative I
know there are about nineteen
hundred wells that we have
plugging orders for right now
those are definitively problem
wells and I can say with a
certainty that additional orphan
wells will be created in the
future
because of market upsets and
other components as
representative hemrin I discuss
in henrickino a publicly traded
company declared bankruptcy and
basically abandoned an entire
field outside roswell so we
can't predict when and where
they will occur but we know
there will be orphan while
created in the future then
matter share and I and direct
refuse you've always been I
think very thoughtful and very
kind and you know a good
advocate I think for your
division and so I I certainly
don't want to miss quote you buy
recall.
Sitting through a presentation
where I thought that you had
started and maybe this is in
front of else I don't I can
festival recall but I thought
you said roughly about one
percent of the wells you thought
were problem wells is that sound
anywhere remotely close.
Madam chair representative I I
don't recall saying that number
but I think you'll see in my
scenarios I felt like you know a
present and one of the sheets
one five and ten and up to
twenty worth were sort of things
that we looked at and look at it
modeling but I I don't recall
that presentation
fair enough and i'm not trying
to paying a corner i'm just
curious again trying to look at
these tear fundings because i've
heard from constituent that
they're concerned about these
financial assurances.
Particularly if they're just
producing natural gas.
And so I wonder you know let's
say even if.
Ten percent of the wells in new
mexico are problem wells um.
Why is why is this being
contemplated to require
financial assurances for a one
hundred percent of the wells
that are on my books for
example.
When we realize that a hundred
percent of the wells are not the
problem so why are we requiring
financial assurances based on
that
madam chair representative I
mean maybe tips flushed out a
little bit if I look at the
tears that first lowest here
average well count is ten wells
so a two hundred and fifty
thousand dollar tap which is
current law wouldn't cover the
that's not a hundred percent for
those ten even at the ten
million dollar tap hill corp has
eleven thousand wells in the
state of new mexico five
thousand on a fee and state
lands if a small percentage of
their wells were to go out where
to be orphaned it would be under
the one percent scenario hill
corps are ready at twelve
million dollars and you know
that's why we needed to impose a
range like this.
So many.
I understand the rationale for
the range and
i'm just worried that again
replacing the great burden on.
And to be clear when we say the
small producers the majors are
multimational corporations are
not headquartered in new mexico.
Most of their employees are not
contained in new mexico there
are corporate adequaters.
And so when I talk about the
independence really what we're
talking about managers were
talking about new mexico.
Founded in mexico owned
businesses.
And so I think that's why they
deserve different attention
then what we're dealing with
with the multinational
corporations.
Yeah.
Mrperiod few so on these.
And it is is it accurate to call
it up a bond or the financial
assurance whatever that thing is
if I violate it what what would
you call it up on your.
Bauncharity insurance policies
they can have a bunch of
different names okay and manager
so of these of these bonds
ensurities.
In the last save
three to five years how many of
you gone after
madame chair representative are
just a handful however most of
our plugging
activity in the last five years
have been concentrated in the
canoe field and we only had a
hundred and sixty one thousand
dollars in bonding against three
hundred wells so i've recovered
all the bonding i'm going to get
from that operator so madam sure
III understand you you know you
give an example of bad actor but
if this is such a huge problem
than why are we only going after
a handful of bonds.
A madam chair representative I
can't forfeit a bond until
I can prove that the operator is
unable to play and step forward
to the operator has to be
bankrupt I can't forfeit an
active operators bond their
insurer will not pay out.
Mentioner in this this really I
think kind of.
Highlights the issues with
with the majors um
who I understand.
Well i'll not go there but this
highlights I think the issue
with.
The new mexico on businesses
versus the multinational
corporations are you familiar
with economic theory of
regulatory capture.
Madame chair representative yes
I am.
And so manager my understanding
of of that economic theories you
have
essentially.
As a strategy you have these
large multi national
corporations who
try to work with government to
get restrictive regulations in
rules in place
knowing that your small business
people are going to extremely
hard time complying with those
regulations and laws
which would turn drive them out
of the market which in turn
opens up market space for
multinational corporations to
the capture that market and then
when they do so.
They control the price and so
manifer I I have some concerns.
About whether that is going to
happen with these new laws and
given that director fuse is
aware of that economic theory do
you have any similar concerns.
A madam chair representative
I think we heard the concerns
about the small operators a loud
and clear following hammer
henrick and the table that I
provided looking at the tears
and analyzing where operators
were.
Ninety percent of the operators
in the state would be under a
seven hundred and fifty thousand
dollar cap which is only a
tripling of where we are today
eighty one percent would remain
under a two hundred and fifty
thousand dollar cap which is
where they are today a potential
cap I anticipate in the war
making that there would be some
subtiers within these caps so I
think we've heard those concerns
through the changes made in the
committee sub and i'll defer to
the sponsor if she has anything
else to add.
Management
mentioner.
So.
The independence I was to see it
significa.
It's not lost in me that they
are the ones that are standing
up in voice in the strongest
opposition I don't find that to
be a coincidence.
I do think that regulatory
capture is a real.
Strategy and it's an effective
strategy and in a state where we
have limited.
New mexico business as is i'm
i'm worried this is going to
take us one step closer to that
manager sort of last line of
questioning and.
I.
I appreciate the interactive
part of your website I think
it's interesting I never really
played around with the being
able to look at the wells before
today
but I this to me I think at
least from my perspective of
where I come from and who I
represent I think captures this
do you know how many active
wells there are in touch and
santa fe counting.
Madam chair representative none
correct.
And manager do you know how many
active wells there are in san
wing county
madame chair representative I
think the numbers around forty
thousand cross all land tapes.
Managers thirty eight thousand
eight hundred and sixt.
The reason why make that point
and I it's a it's a vital point
to me as someone who was born
raised in that county and whose.
Whose livelihood of many of my
family and friends are going to
be impacted by this bill.
Is and and we heard public
testimony from from a gentleman
from farmington who I don't know
is coming back but my uncle
works for that company for fifty
years right this is this is my
family this is my my stopping
grounds if you will
and it's it's frustrating to me.
When we have bills that come out
of santa fe.
They don't have an impact on
santa fe.
But they have a major impact on
our other communities and this
is such a bill.
And I I don't think that the
independence are crying that the
skies falling I think it's real
I think there are real proms
with this bill that if this
could sign in the law there's
going to be real consequences.
And it's also not lost to me
that we just passed off the
floor today mansiera a budget
that was who is back bone is oil
and gas.
And i'm concerned about what
that does for us long term as
well and so I see this
legislation is as ironically
helping proper multinational
corporations.
I think it's going to drive out
small businesses in new mexico
it's going to drive up our
energy costs which is going to
hurt working class new mexicans
and the way I understand what
other states have done similarly
is these well transferred rules
and it increases the financial
inch assurances is actually has
a potential the increase the
number of orphan wells and
advertisingly so I have a lot of
concerns with the bill
appreciate the dialogue try to
be sustinged and as always
you're always a gentleman
appreciate that as well thank
you for answering my questions.
It's going to make a common and
then i'll take a motion so I see
it exactly the opposite of what
representatives just lane just
said those forty thousand wells
that are in his area and other
parts of the state are impacting
the citizens in those areas and
those folks should be very.
Interested in seeing that the
state is implementing a program
to ensure that they are
addressed appropriately not
abandoned and not the burden on
the state and that goes to my
next point which is when they're
not taking care of by whomever
is responsible whether it be a
major or an independent the
state takes care of that the
state is responsible for having
to deal with our problem so you
know I commend you for for
coming up with a solution that
is intended to balance the
interests of the smaller
producers I hear that you did
work with them you came up with
a tired approach so that
you know there were some
accommodations for those with
less
financial where with all to
address some of the issues so
this is something that every
member everybody in the state
benefits from not just people in
santa fe but the people who are
living right next though it was
dirty wells who are impacted by
the environmental issues that
are raised by them including the
potential for
water contamination and the like
so without i'm happy to take a
motion from represent a sapansky
thank you madame chair madame
chair would move a.
Do not pass on house energy
environment natural resources
committee substitute for house
but one thirty three and a do
pass and house judiciary
committee substitute for house
energy environment natural
resources committee substitute.
For house bill one thirty three
second
okay
we have emotion from
representative of sapansky of a
do not pass on house energy
environment and natural
resources committee substitute
for house bill one thirty three
and a dupass for house judiciary
committee substitute for house
energy environment and natural
resources committee substitute
for a house bill thirty three
made by represent senative
sapansky and second and by
representative ramiral which I
call the role please.
Representative of con.
Representative chasey
representative hembry no
representative lane now
representative martinet is.
Representative making yes
representative reap no
representative read no ma'am
representatives depends key yes
here yes
sure yes.
By voter seven to four you have
a due paris representative thank
you everybody can productive
