Louis.
Representative McQueen.
There.
Representative Nibert your.
Representative Rehm here.
Representative Townsend Here.
Thank
chair.
The president.
We we want to start okay thank
you so much we do have a farm
welcome everybody to our
Saturday afternoon we're going
to begin with yesterday's agenda
the first item is house bill one
ninety Representative Ely house
bill right Representative.
And we have Dr David Scrase is
the secretary of Human Services
Department.
And go ahead welcome you may
introduce all of your
Your supporting cast all right
madam chair we have I don't know
is it correct we have a gaggle
of experts that's that's what
I'll go with we have Paul
Richman you see HSD general
counsel we have Carl army ho I'm
I'm sorry carry on the HSD W.
secretary Jeremy to lose child
or director judge Jane levy
family court judge of course
before and judge Jane David R. I
hope I pronounced that right
whose economist child support
guidelines checks for the center
policy reserves are and they
will I think if they haven't all
been admitted that they're not
all here I think they're all
here so I'll be very brief this
is a this is the child water at
this point child support
modernization bill that has
already been through one
committee the law does three
things and I'll be very quick
and I'll turn it over centuries
faced requires consideration of
the noncustodial parents ability
to pay consistent with federal
requirements.
R. as modification of child
support if needed to establish
medical support also a now
federal requirements and changes
the look back period from twelve
to three years to improve
collection which is consistent
with national best practices are
we actually gonna lose a lot of
money if we don't do this and so
I want to quickly I will turn it
over surgery Scrase and I know
they have a slide show this
brief and I am absolutely grief
I know you all full of gender
and we also at the right time
madam chair do you have an
amendment when you're ready but
we can get to that after this
discussion because the amendment
is a technical amendment.
Thank you madam chair and
representative Ely and members
of the committee were delighted
to be here today we appreciate
your time appreciate all the
hard work you do an opportunity
on a Saturday and so thank you
we're going to I just walked
through the slides you have in
front of you and I'm not going
to spend a lot of time on my
many of them except for just one
everyone knows of the Human
Services Department covers nine
hundred thousand plus Medicaid
clients we've got are all over
now I have a million people on
our food program snap but less
well known is the fact that we
also coordinate child support
payments for almost two hundred
thousand families in New Mexico
and you can see on that there's
a map shaded in gray in a you
can look at your counties and
see how many folks in up your
districts I have their child
support coordinated by agents Dr
Scrase excuse me I'm not saying
are you Sir what is wrong with
us right now are you trying to
do.
I don't not seeing that yet I
don't have purchased opposition
but if I'm given permission to
share my screen I'll do that
quickly and also Dr germ I think
we got a message that.
doctor Jane venue R. as in the
waiting room as well so.
I can share my screen he'll just
come when conflict okay sure
right I would work just as well.
in order in place.
She's in now I just saw our.
All right so welcome back to the
north.
I can start talking about the
bill as you bring up the slide
the one we're looking for Senate
is entitled child support
modernization and it's got two
graphs on the right hand side.
So I'll just start talking up.
We go there we are wonderful so
what this bill really will
result in is there almost thirty
one million dollars overall
increase money to kids here in
New Mexico for under twenty
dollars per year which is a
significant amount of money
for families with very low
incomes and it also reinforces
what we're doing now which is
moving away from just regulating
child support and taking people
to court to doing that as needed
and when it's important but also
working with people to get jobs
and get them back to work so
they can earn income turns out
of the number one.
The best way to increase child
support payments is employment
for the noncustodial parent.
We received notification from.
The federal government that
shortly after the shots were
modernization act done in
Washington the states would need
to comply we've known about that
for some time our administration
at relatively new still is now
finally got everything together
to bring this to you today but
the bill we all require and the
federal government does not
consideration of the custodial
parents actual ability to pay in
setting your our current
statutes don't do that we have
to do that is to continue to
receive federal funding it also
allows a student parents as
Representative Eli said to do
ask interject support programs
for child support order solely
for the purpose of health
insurance and because we all
know that coverage of kids
having kids having health
insurance makes a huge
difference in them getting
immunizations and other services
that they need to stay and help
the kids and then lastly the
shortening of the look back
period I'm gonna go over that
little bit more detail in a
minute the veteran informed us
that if we did not make these
changes in this is new in twenty
twenty we got a couple letters
and will briefly share those
insights that told us we do not
make these changes we directly
put our tennis funding temporary
aid for needy families in
jeopardy.
Modernizing
in you know Kerry I think.
Given that they're sharing the
size I'm gonna keep going if
you're okay yes I'm.
But we will already you know
when we do this bill if it's if
and when this past week you know
we will see these changes and I
wanted you to know do that
Germany to lose our expert our
director of health leads that
several years working with the
courts to come up with the
modifications that are most
important in this bill to help
judges do the work that they do
and setting child support orders
but already mention of the more
money the children when we set a
high payment that is beyond
people's ability to pay and they
don't pay then that separates
the noncustodial parent most
often the debt but not always
from the kids it it tends to
break up families we also have
learned from the courts and we
sent at a higher amount to pay
then someone can afford a they
don't pay at it actually
disqualifies them for other
state benefits like child care
because the income is still
assume to the noncustodial
parent so there's a there's a in
a relationship between different
departments and budget their
affected here and there to
mention the emphasis on job
opportunities little bit more on
the sly just the top curve shows
how much in total we collect
when the case is has a look back
period of zero to one years you
can see is the highest forty
five million we goes from one to
three it cuts in half to twenty
two million and then anything
beyond three years drastically
drops off and so the idea of
this bill assuring the look back
period is to get more payments
and move people from that right
hand edge of the curve back up
to the left in up higher so we
can collect that money that four
hundred twenty dollars for your
for families we're talking about
that's one of the ways we do
that the graph below which looks
like to schedule aligns right
next to each other.
Illustrates a pilot that we've
done in Rio Rancho and that's in
orange and the blue line is just
everywhere else in New Mexico or
collecting in in managing child
support payments that we did a
very intensive effort since
March of twenty nineteen to get
people employed and while those
grant look almost the same
there's actually an eighteen
percent region map percent
increase in child support
payments for family as a result
of that you might be looking at
that big spike in saying what
happened in may twenty twenty
and we and that was when federal
stimulus checks came and we made
the decision as we do for tax
returns and other payments to
intercept those you are you got
some of the tax returns their
blended in but tax returns and
some months payments which were
intercepted to delinquent
noncustodial parents and sent to
the kids to help them catch up
in child support if we go to the
next slide I think it it will
live.
Just so this is what I was this
is the distribution of Tanith
recipients there's twenty nine
thousand two hundred twenty one
in New Mexico here's where they
live by county it's a it's a
program for very very low income
people less than the poverty
limit less than eighty five
percent of the poverty limit
which works out to a minimum I'm
very close to the minimum wage
if you're making ten dollars and
seventy one cents an hour to
work forty hours a week you are
eligible for tenants almost all
the recipients our kids are
based on that family income but
it's not just.
The tenant program we also send
sixty four million dollars to
ECDC day home visiting and child
care CYFD for supportive housing
almost a million dollars and PED
is wrong so that's why secretary
well I can and against your here
to speak on behalf of the bill
because this is important for
their programs as well next
slide and we're almost done I I
promise here
this is just a cut and paste
from the two letters we receive
from the federal government and
I'm not going to read through
these but
you know the overlap to talks
about immediate suspension of
all federal payments for the
state's child support
enforcement program that's
twenty five million right there
and then and the lower right
hand corner you can see that our
chance of funding is at risk if
we do not make these policy
changes here in the last five
years we had to do apologize
that we're I mean the last year
and will do better next time so
that's a real overview of the
bill I'm gonna talk up I'm gonna
turn it over to Paul Richman who
likely will be the main person
speaking on behalf of HSD also
general counsel this is his
second tour of duty as the Human
Services department general
counsel we've been really
privileged and delighted to have
him back in and he is the one
will be able to engage with you
on the language of this bill and
on this ammendment and if you go
to the next slide will do that.
Okay.
All.
Sorry madam chair we did not
hear you sent the audio is a
little distorted.
I'm having internet issues but I
said go ahead call because he
hadn't starts picking.
Thank you very much chair.
Madam chair members of the
committee
we we have a small amendment to
the bill and then when we get
into questions I can I can
answer those on a more legal
basis the amendment that we have
Is well first of all we have we
change this bill based on the
recommendation of the Courts and
we incorporated
a number of improvements to the
language in the bill and the way
that the judges have the ability
to look at including income and
taking into consideration the
number of factors that's one of
the biggest changes in the bill
legally the other big change in
the bill is part of the economic
analysis that we were required
to do to change the guidelines
to make them more right sized
and
they they were back in nineteen
ninety four was was the last
time that we triggered with the
with the guidelines and I I just
want to express that it's it's
not really helpful to use
nineteen ninety four as a
baseline for the old guidelines
those were set using I don't
know what economics but the new
guidelines that we proposed have
been have gone through an
enormous amount of review and
They are they are what the
federal government and what the
economists and the courts Lee
are the correct guidelines going
forward.
And with that I'll stand for
questions.
Madam chair I just wanna make
sure everyone's done.
we we do it when higher sure
it's ready I can read out the
two oh two number on the
amendment which has just been
described.
Representative Ely do you think
the amendment will affect public
comment.
I don't it's it's done I I don't
think so I guess chair just to
be clear and to be accurate let
me ask ask Mister rich like you
might have an answer that.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee the amendment that
we propose is really a a
drafting issue in this long bill
the Legislative Council Service
recommended that we not put
double definitions in the bill
so and just refer to things by
reference that's one of the
changes the other one was a
piece of language that was
supposed to be taken out in the
bill the original drafting was
not in the in the original
drafting and we're just taking
that piece out and it's the same
language that's taken out on
page three of the bill we're in
the definition of income and
we're proposing that that same
language be taken out of the
definition of income that
appears on page ninety one the
late so it's it's really just a
clean up.
I'm sure each of us has read
every word of this bill
I'm going to I I'm I'm going to
go to the audience real quickly
and see if we have from.
George will put up a little call
for about fifteen seconds to see
how many people are here in
favor of the bill and how many
are here in opposition if any
and so let's do that fifteen
seconds real quick.
Okay that's.
That we have six people here in
support of the bill and not in
opposition I want to offer an
opportunity for those in the
audience to make public comment
I have one hand up Maggie
McConnell in.
Go ahead.
Just on yourself.
Madam chair I'm sorry my hand is
that the wrong bill I'm here to
speak okay all right just put
me down Elizabeth Groginsky are
you here
House bill one ninety.
Yes a good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Elizabeth Groginsky I am the
cabinet secretary for the early
childhood education and care
department and I'm here to stand
in strong support of house bill
one ninety for three primary
reasons one it is so important
that we modernize our child
support enforcement system the
changes made here will also
ensure that our lowest income
families have access to more
revenues and the loss of the
tent of block grant would be
devastating for New Mexico and
for particularly the program
supported here at ECECD home
visiting our pre K. programs and
childcare we urged the committee
to support and to pass house
bill one ninety today thank you.
Thank you secretary but a lot.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I believe that the
cabinet secretaries children
youth and families department of
this bill is very important for
us to to me reasons as to why he
continues to work and move
towards prevention and upstream
upstream support for our
families attendance is such a
important component of that this
was modernized with the child
support is done intent of cases
which would help us strengthen
our families and
well strengthen our families so
that we as we work with them we
can help continue to keep
children at home with parents
and in the community where they
most need to be and then second
to ten o'clock grant is also
very important for supported
housing programs as we continue
to build housing out and really
proactively help our family
stabilized with housing and also
fight against you homelessness
for our eighteen twenty five
year old so we hear you to stand
strong support thank you.
Thank you very much that is our
public comment on that
legislation let's go to the
committee and I'll move state
won't I move it out.
Their second.
Thank the sponsor will probably
seconded yes Representative Ely
will second that let me see if I
have committee members who wish
to speak.
I don't see any questions
Regarding the amendment is there
any of should should.
What document management if so
will you please let me know.
Okay.
I I see no objections and
therefore please show all
members present voting in the
affirmative to adopt the
amendment so we have amended the
build a technical amendment and
on the bill representative
Nibert.
Thank you madam chair just one.
Question
Who is the
Person that's responsible for
collecting.
The.
Our child support monies that
are doing knowing
by the noncustodial parent.
Madam chair I think Mr Richmond
has the answer to that.
Yes madam chair Representative
Nibert that would be the they
child support division of the
Human Services Department
through court order that we
would obtain we would collect
the the rears and the child
support and then transferred
onto the custodial parent.
Madam chair and representative
Mr Richburg
All right
here.
Yes.
Been trying to get.
Payments made to the state for
individual atoms.
I never get a call back.
I just I just.
What level should I be
communicated.
Child support division I've been
dealing with the Roswell office
but I'm happy to deal with any
other offers.
This is more.
A question but I I just.
My own personal of interaction
with the child support division
as a.
It's pretty pretty lax and tried
to secure our
required payment or payment of
monies that are.
Do and I'm going to the state by
some of these
Noncustodial parents.
You madam chair at.
Representative Nibert really
appreciate the question I'm we
use these examples of sort of a
quality improvement our program
to figure out where these
breakdowns in our processes are
I apologize not
this is on the line actually
accountable for making sure it
goes well and so I'm not well I
know you well enough to know you
don't want any kind of special
treatment I will reach out to
you get the case information we
will track it down and I think
care of the issue and then I'll
get back to you about where we
found the what what what the
process issue was the cause that
selection the lapse there
appreciate your bring it to our
attention and I'll I'll send you
a text thank you.
Madam chairman and Mr secretary
all right I have a thirty some
thousand dollar check there's
just waiting to be delivered so
you know it's not insignificant
so anyway thank you for for that
our eyes support of this bill
thanks for your most cases
people are are get your arrears
and they they see this is all I
can ever get out of and so I
think this is about for to to
try to deal with with our
collection but at the same time.
Be realistic about it the only
other concern I have is on page
five.
Winds twenty one to twenty four.
And that's regarding.
The.
You tell you Center lack there
of of money while a parent is
incarcerated and.
Madam chair and Representative
could you all maybe our are
discussed why this is necessary
because there are people who are
incarcerated that have.
Meetings are to pay child
support I'm a little concerned
if we don't recognize that are.
The custodial parent may not get
the R. sure the child support
that they may need to raise a
child so could you comment on
that.
Let me just jump in and ask as
part of your question
representative Nibert because it
says a instead of shall so I'm
wondering if that's perhaps the
How that works.
I'm not sure which ones
answering this.
Madam chair members the
committee representative Nibert
I I I and me let Jeremy I've
been on this just a little bit
but we're may is is critical to
the it's in that section of the
bill is the part that we really
amended to make sure that the
courts can take into
consideration all the factors so
the court's hands are tied to
not impute money to the parent
is for Carson iterations it's
it's they can consider it and
they may do it but they don't
have to so I think in your in
your example if there was a
parent who had sufficient means
who's incarcerated they would
the the court would still order
child support payments and I can
let one of the R. also I believe
both of the judges that we have
online speak to that as well.
Yes leave.
And members of the committee
hello it is a
My answer to that is that it is
a may the I think part of this
has to do the federal
requirement just discussed but
what we have to do is take into
account and this bill changes a
lot of the factors to be much
more discretionary so that we
can actually match what families
are facing to the reality of the
situation and make appropriate
child support
payments occur based on that
language so that is I think the
answer is it's not a shallots in
may and that allows us to have
discretion to take into account
exactly what you said
Representative.
Madam chair that so all the
questions I have thank you and
and thank the secretary of and
his attorney for answering
questions appreciate it.
I just want to point out of
surgery came well arms and
that's why we brought the gaggle
to control these questions.
Yes thank you Representative
Rehm you're next our madam chair
thank you and I was just.
When I look at page five and
that was kind of look at in at
the dynamics
and maybe you don't need to do
this maybe the work has a form
that is a worksheet but comes
back to what we went through the
recession I had an individual
called me and I had been laid
off he was an engineer.
And he was trying to find an
engineering job well by this you
know well you could you could
get a minimum wage job well if I
am looking for my engineering
job and I can show you a list of
companies that I contacted that
you can verify that I contacted
I think that we do it might be
helpful because.
This individual was clearly not
interested in a minimum wage
job.
And that was one suggestion I
have there the other one that I
that I had
Is over on page eighty nine when
we talk about gross income.
Spoke I don't see.
Our per diem or reimbursement
for
Business expenses there.
But when I go over to page
ninety and I see gross income on
pay online six groups income
does not include I don't see it
listed there and I'm wondering
if we're being silent if we're.
If that could be an issue that's
brought up in court but those
are just two suggestions you
know I support what you're doing
but it might be something you
want to look at.
Thank you.
My comments Mr it's not our.
Madam chair Representative Rehm
thank you for that question I
what will we'll take a look back
and get back to you on that and
let you know if that's perhaps
something that should be in the
bill this so we'll get back to
you on.
Thank you that's all I it.
Thank you Representative right
Mr speaker you're not.
At your and.
Right thank you for reaching
out.
You Mr speaker but it might just
be me.
Anybody hearing him
we can't hear you sell bigger.
Can hear me now.
We can.
Okay that's not strange
apologize what I said want to
thank
madam chair US interest rates
reaching out yesterday I had a
yeah we have a full day
yesterday and I was able to get
contested depreciated reached
out just a simple question.
If we have a high income person.
I'm.
It is non custodial.
Is this bill going to lower the
amount.
A child support.
He can be assessed against
indoor collected from
a higher earning noncustodial
parent.
Madam chairman Mr speaker
members of the committee now.
Okay so those that the schedules
that with that we see in the
bill it looked like they were
like the numbers for.
Being.
It it downward did I just did I
just miss read that.
Madam chairman I'll I'll defer
to secretary Scrase yeah you
know there are changes that
occur at the lower income
they're more similar in the
middle and that there are some
changes at the higher income as
well we have our acting I kind
of missed on now and I and up I
think I should probably does
that there are a few decreases
their so Dr been are you are you
able to speak so we can hear
you.
These on mute if you can.
The season audience and asked to
be allowed to speak their.
If she if we can ever speak I in
Germany perhaps you could convey
what she's conveyed here.
There are some increased yes
sorry madam chair Committee
members Representative Egolf
speaker you off there are some
decreases you know the the
differences you know when the
guidelines were first made in
nineteen ninety four there was
no data for incomes over eight
thousand dollars a month so you
are the federal rules you know
that we're trying to become
comply with with this bill was
to take you know the economic
data your cost reach out you
know and the economy in New
Mexico you know into place for
all of the guidelines are all
the different income levels so
there are are some changes of
fire income levels like sectors.
The lower end of the meeting
will also.
Okay so so if we have someone.
So right now we whose monthly
income is over eight thousand
dollars.
Okay.
What is that what is the amount
that is collect that is assessed
each month.
In child support per child for
one child.
Madam chair a Mr speaker members
of the committee I I hate to use
a a law school answer but it
depends there are a lot of
factors that go into
the actual amount that gets paid
out and I if we had a
hypothetical we could probably
run through calculation right
now but
there's.
It would just have to go through
the process to give you an
answer like that.
Well so does the bills are read
lower we also state.
Let me say that we can have the
economist answer as well should
be brought to the general or she
can answer
Can allow her to speak as an
attending.
And madam chair if I could just
project as well that's why she's
here so anything your honor and.
Let us would be great.
Let's bring her up Georgia to
the panel.
Okay.
Your question and you see here
now you're on mute though
according to my screen.
Okay can you hear me now.
Thank you everybody this is
doctor James and or I was
economists with the to the
commission.
And there are some decreases in
the schedule at high incomes and
the reason being is that we have
better economic data now that
schedule the existing one was
based on some very old data it
was from ninety four that was
extrapolated to high incomes
meaning that ninety four we
didn't have folks that building
twenty thousand INR economic
data set so the folks that we're
on the commission then decided
to extrapolate the numbers to
hire ones in what they did was
they extrapolated to higher than
what the economic data today
shows in fact the amounts that
the very high end of the New
Mexico scheduler higher than
Arizona and Colorado and New
Mexico as you know is lower
income state relative to other
states even though there are
some highincome cases.
okay well I I I I don't want to
stay in the way to go because
you were getting laid the
session I understand the overall
policy goals are important.
I really however don't like
that.
The people at the highest income
levels are having the amount of
child support your record a
potentially be decreased.
With these are the these are the
folks that can most afford it.
And if we're trying to you know
change the system so that we can
get.
Funds from those at this middle
area of the people that are.
You know chronically unable to
pay and and and find themselves
in this whole that feels in your
never be able to do this self
out of I get that.
I get the reason for the change
but
In totally yeah I occasionally
will get stopped in the grocery
store by.
Hi very high income.
Noncustodial fathers you say
that the law right now New
Mexico is an out liar and
they're having to pay you know
large amounts of money each
month in child support they're
complaining about it.
And I always find myself
thinking you know the then I'm
very sympathetic to the
complaint that they're having to
pay a lot of money.
to care for the children that
are living with the
in these individuals in your ex
wife I I'm not I'm not really
sympathetic to that and.
So I I would ask the sponsor to
please consider maybe something
that we can do on the floor for.
Having in the Senate so that
we're cheating all of the.
Policy goals and lower income
threshold that that we not.
Eliminate or we're not a limit
so we don't decrease the amounts
paid you know by the highest
income earning.
Folks in New Mexico in the in
the state I.
A policy perspective I I'm not
sure why we would.
I want to do that.
If they have the income they
should be able to pay and
Okay.
That that just my thought emit
madam chair and in.
Representative do you have any
thoughts about that.
Now Mr speaker this point I
don't I look at it and is
certainly something that will
look at I I'm part of it is is
to make sure we don't lose the
federal dollars and I am
differences now with the numbers
I have a look at it has.
And you know I'm a I'm I I will
you know gladly vote for the
bill and I don't want to.
And I don't want to a wrench in
the works
Yes in the way of the progress
this bill Cheney chief if
there's some way that we could.
Not decreased or.
For reduced the reduction in
with the high income earning.
People have to pay I I certainly
would.
Would like to see that change if
it's if it's workable within the
broader context of the bill.
Madam chair and speaker that's
something to look at I just
you're just a number of factors
to look at collections being one
of federal dollars being
another.
Climb the sides to it I I that
is something that I think I can
answer on the fly and walked and
so but I'm I'm I'm committed to
looking at for those on the
floor and having a discussion
with you to see we got a
solution in a question and
concern I just need to look at
it I just can't give you that's
right now.
Okay
and madam chair and Greek
offered by might just also have
that.
Where is some benefit to having
a standardized economic process
for evaluating these income was
and there is every four year
reassessment one of which is
coming up and so those are I
mean that would be that
reassessment we do in
partnership with the courts and
others thank you very Lara be a
place where we could bring that
in what and then I because we've
got a number of questions about
the specific income bracket said
now those are managed I also
sought it out.
All I have is you're not madam
chair of this because we might
as well.
Yes ma'am Madam speaker of the
speaker Egolf I think judge levy
might be able to speak on this
pretty clearly about how this
works the one thing I would say
is these are guidelines the
judges always have the
discretion to increase that
based on the income ability to
pay all those things so this is
kind of the this is the bar and
then it goes up from there but
all all let judge levy speak to
that.
Thank you madam chair and the
committee I.
I wanted to speak a bit about
this is an income shares model
so what we do is we take both
parties income to calculate what
is the appropriate amount of
child support the child should
have in the state and what it
would take to raise a child
here.
And then it divides it based on
percentage so the two worksheets
in which a and working the.
Most families I would say are on
a worksheet E. which means it's
they're sharing Cassidy at least
thirty four percent of the time
with another parent so it's that
and the other is that the
increase getting rid of the
thirty thousand dollar cap on
that higher income level and
allowing for percentage
calculation will also reduce
a lot of the costs of litigation
which are pretty considerable
right now and given that it is
Entirely based on the
discretionary factors so this is
going to give us one way of of
doing a calculation but I would
say that we also do have and
this bill allows us to continue
to have discretion for upward
deviation as long as we find
reasons and often times there
are very good reasons for upper
deviation especially and higher
income earning brackets if
necessary.
Okay yes the question.
Thank you
I don't want to I don't want to
hear about you know.
Not custodial dad the.
Thinking campaign flew to dom
Perignon on their yacht off the
Isle of Capri.
Ation of the passage of bill
right so.
Like that's not gonna happen and
I appreciate the.
Appreciate the answer.
With all due respect to the
makers of dom Perignon I'm not
I'm not.
You madam chair.
Thank you very much Mr speaker I
I had a couple of questions and
and
I because I was actually I'm
years ago I had a transported
Forsman Division to carry a bill
that we did some things like
this but it wasn't of federal
went to federal it's sentence or
that's and
It was before I went to law
school and I know that with the
attorneys on judiciary so what
this this is a property right
for the child and we have to be
careful about what we're going
to let go in order to collect a
little bit more money.
So I'm.
I just wanted to bring that up
but it sounds to me that right
now we really have to do this
but I had a client who are owed.
Something like ninety thousand
dollars in the state of
California and he was indigent.
It was turning into the case was
indigent you never ever going to
get that paid back as a result
he didn't have a driver's
license so he couldn't make a
living in New Mexico and I mean
it was just.
Portable circle and I'm just
like Representative Nibert asked
who could be called to pay the
his child support check I
wondered
you know I kept sending my
client to the child support
enforcement division and I don't
know how much all the other
states and the reciprocity is is
is going to be realized other
states are following the same
guidelines you would just like
to speak to that and I'm just
going to reflect.
I read this bill and I saw those
pages and pages of the chart.
D. over the final.
Because we know that front of
the server computing child
support.
So madam chair I'm gonna make a
right common and turn it over to
either Boller germane but up
okay alluded to this in the
beginning but one one wrinkle in
this whole thing in your and
your client is a perfect
example.
If his wife with the New Mexico
is expired the New Mexico and
wanted child our child care
benefit.
What would show up on our
application with the state news
is the amount of monthly income
on the court order that which is
receiving and so why all it's
natural to want people to you
know have the responsibility and
believe me we do.
Resetting these are processes as
a lot of downstream actions one
mention that again and then
who's gonna have that answer
there of course the question
Boller gentleman.
Jeremy go ahead and answer the
question.
Madam chair of.
Committee members this great
question you know it with with
initially cases it's it's
generally the laws in the state
where the order was established
you know we has jurisdiction
carriers throughout the life of
the case in both parties can
agree to your domesticate a in
order in the in the you're
responding state those are terms
initiating responding.
But you know usually if it would
be the state where the orders.
If that is your question.
So there's pretty much no hope
for this client ever.
For being able to.
So New Mexico though and forces
that the lack of the license.
So.
It you madam chair you know.
Like you said I mean you know
that once those what's that
judgments established is owned
by somebody right you know it's
it's you know it's your own by
the state you know if if the
children were on on ten
persistence the family is most
likely it's it's owned it's
owned by the custodial parent
you know so it's really the
custodial parent would have to
agree to waive those arrears you
know to stop that with you know
with with us with the transfer
of forcing Division you know you
also the orders from California
than actual parents here in New
Mexico I mean we do control we
owe our enforcement activities
you know so if somebody came to
us you don't and you know again
we're gonna we're going to
identify the evidence on the
case of what's going on but
that's that's really what the I
was giving us the flexibility to
encourage people to come to us
instead of running hiding from
us you know it's it's much
harder to to to do that.
Okay thank you very much.
I'm vice chair has a question.
I'm gonna be ready I have a
motion a do pass on H. B. one
ninety as amended as amended yes
also.
Thank you very much a second by
Representative.
Armstrong is there for the
discussion of the bill.
A lot of people expressed
support so I'm tell me if I'm
wrong is there any objection to
the past motion raise your hand
if you do.
Object okay I'm not seeing any
hands so pre show all members
present voting in the
affirmative and you have to do
passed on house bill one ninety
as amended representative Ely
nice to have everybody from the
state with the.
Eight and the judges.
Thank you.
If I was going to explain my
vote I just wanted to give a
shout out to the fathers
building futures madam chair an
organization that has worked for
a long time with their
previously incarcerated fathers
to many of the same issues
trying to make sure that they
can get folks to compliance
which we know is really really
important besides just racking
up the that gigantic outstanding
debt so thank you all for your
work on this and and also to
fathers building futures for
raising these issues with me
over so many years thank you
madam chair.
Thank you.
So we will now go to our former
committee members who ditched us
Representative Chandler.
She's not a vice chair tax.
House bill thirty hello madam
chair I believe senator Wirth
and perhaps even Senator how to
meal maybe in the attendees
list.
Madam chairwoman this is Senator
how to meal and I'm here.
In Senator Wirth I know at one
point he was waiting on ice I
see on.
Okay I am here now.
Very good thank you and I
appreciate everybody's attends
attendance here on of my two co
sponsors good to see you all
again it seems like only
yesterday that we were all
together this is house bill
thirty as amended it is a bill
that amends a section in the
water leasing Act to clarify in
under score I guess I think we
should say under score the fact
that the state your needs to
provide
and notice an opportunity for a
hearing before an application to
lease Water is approved in the
reason we're proposing this
amendment as a few
administrations ago probably
during the Richards and
Administration.
The state engineer took adopted
what.
Something that he calls a
preliminary approval process
that process is not authorized
in law.
And that process has continued
to this day in such a way that
If the violation continues and
is causing some problems in
terms of the process and I would
also like to talk about section
seventy two six dash six.
Which is the provision in the
water leasing Act that talks
about the process that the state
engineer should be following and
just briefly madam chair that
the process is described in
seventy two six dash six as
first starts with the
application by someone who file
less.
and it says that the state
engineer show cause notice of
the filing to be published and
so there's no additional
individuals who may be impacted
by the request to lease water.
anyone who believes that they
may they may be adversely
impacted by the granting of that
lease has the opportunity to
protest and then the next step
is if a protest is filed it says
that the state engineer shall
hold a hearing on whether or not
the application should be
granted.
And lastly and perhaps most
significantly it's only if there
are no objections or protests
filed at the state engineer may
grant the application without a
hearing and that is the kind of
the crux of our issue.
With the preliminary approval
process runs counter to law so
what we have done is proposed an
amendment in section seventy two
six dash three which just makes
extra super crystal clear that
the state engineer needs to be
following the law that he has
not been fall and that that
office has not been following
for some about twenty years and
with that chair I might piece of
the presentations is completed I
did want to note also madam
chair that I do have an expert
David Benavidez so if you may be
allowed to speak at the
appropriate time that would be
much appreciated and lastly I do
have a very small amendment
which I'm happy to discuss at
your as as you see fit madam
chair.
Representative the.
Do you think the amendment will
affect the public comment I
think not it really corrects an
error that was made two years
ago only amended the statute
last time okay great.
I'm so go ahead who did you want
to speak next.
Work and then Senator Hotmail
and then our expert
David Bennett yes.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the house Judiciary
Committee good to see you all
are this is a bill that's been
around for six years.
In two thousand and fifteen
A version of this bill passed
the Senate twenty nine to nine.
and then since that time
Representative Chandler is
taking the lead and are a very
important.
Kind of carve out was done for
the acequia community and
etcetera are be able to talk
about that.
but it is it's a challenging
issue there's no question about
it I want to state that.
Representative Chandler and
Senator Mario and I are really
trying to get all the parties to
step down at the table in the
next three weeks and figure out
a resolution why is that so
important.
Well it is so important because
for the first time in the six
years that this bill's been
around a district judge a judge
Romero down in Roswell wanted by
former governor Martinez has
basically ruled that this
statute says what we believe it
says that the state engineer
cannot be using the process that
they've been using and all state
that it's been a process that's
been used since
it was first under the
Richardson administration with
the spaceport I it's a it was a
change in policy prior to that
time the statute it always been
followed with with notice and a
hearing before water was allowed
and and different provisions in
the water code were used for
emergency basis R. so so that
changed and you're gonna hear a
whole bunch of testimony from
impacted groups and I understand
why they're concerned about this
bill
and I understand why they're
concerned about the pending case
because if that case which is
Carlsbad irrigation district
against the state engineer if
that cases of firms are we're
basically going to be.
Back to the statute as we
believe that range and all of
these places will go away and
we'll have to sit down and
figure out a solution and so I
just want to stay for the
committee that I think a
legislative solution needs to
happen in the next three weeks
and it's really important that
it dots for those reasons that
have been stated you know this
this bill involves.
It involves rights in water use
that that involved both those
that are leasing them and those
that are impacted and it should
there should not be a situation
where someone's Water Rights are
treated differently than others
and the concern is that when.
There is a dispute of a
particular preliminary lease are
nothing stops the state engineer
if they do their analysis
believe it should move forward
from moving forward with that
lease and in effect the water is
then being moved well All the
dispute is ongoing and I think
that center our meal and
Representative Chandler on I
believe very strongly that the
statute does not allow that
judge Romero as agree so we're
in a situation where this needs
to be fixed and we need to come
up with a solution there is I
will no one thing there is
Representative Chandler did
agree to a two year delay on the
effective date of this bill and
nasty in there and that's
important because this is not a
hard stop if we pass this bill
the heart stops going to come at
the court rules in favor of
judge Romero so under this bill
if this were to to to be enacted
we have two years to basically
one place something so there's
not a hard stop and again this
is a we spent two or three hours
this morning in the Senate
conservation committee on the
Senate version of this bill on
it's one that's challenging it's
important it involves lots of
very important things for our
state both in the water arena
and then the economic
development arena and I just
want to thank Representative
Chandler for kind of over the
years picking up this discussion
and and senator our meal as well
and at this point Madam ideal
Senator army of thank you.
Thank you madam.
It's nice to meet you nice to
meet you Madam chairwoman thanks
for having this this afternoon
Madam chairman members of the
committee for centuries I think
it's a played a critical role in
our great state with nearly
seven hundred functioning aspect
yes in New Mexico two hundred
and twenty of them right here in
my home county of really but
they're not only part of our
cultural heritage it also my
community Senate district and
states lifeline our communities
receive an abundance of benefits
from the log into in a second
and they're very in a very
important part of our culture
and our important part of our
social fabric the resilient
communities of New Mexicans were
raised to believe that water SB
but but water is light and that
we must work hard to share and
protect our skaters and secret
resource.
Now the most unique aspect of us
I guess is that they require the
community to come together to
make decisions about water usage
and to problem solve and I want
to I want to acknowledge and
appreciate the hard work of
senator Wirth and that
Representative Chandler who put
that alright we're going to be
getting an exception to a
secular the past and I equally
appreciate the hard work of
every New Mexicans who values
and upkeep sort of secular model
a model that brings everyone to
the table to have discussions
that those affected and to work
collaboratively to address
issues and most importantly come
up with solutions yes thank you
a model of collaboration as an
example of active resource
management and how we manage
that and successfully maintained
our affected communities for
generations now all that's being
asked here Madam chairwoman is
that we continue to work in
collaboration the purpose of
this bill is to ensure fairness
and due process of water lease
applications to the state
engineer it's important to note
that this legislation does not
remove the ability of entities
such as cities industry farmers
or community water systems to
lease water water leases are
important water management tool
in New Mexico what this bill
does is help the state engineer
operate with existing legal
requirements and provides
clarity to introduce sticking to
lease water about the statute
requirements protecting existing
water rights with that Madam
chairwoman I yield and thank you
for the warm welcome and thank
you for listening today.
Sanchez did you have anyone else
to to do what Mr Benavidez to
speak Madam chair in if he makes
briefly.
Sure.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I'll just touch on
a couple of quick points.
This committee of course well
knows about due process but what
I think is interesting is how
the water court in our state
independently reinforces in
statute
the whole notion of due process
and water applications madam
chair we have hundreds and
thousands of water right owners
in the state our farmers and
ranchers and one of their worst
nightmares is that they would
wake up one day to find some new
water user upstream from them
taking water or drawing water
from their same aquifer and
threatening to reduce their
water supply and the only thing
that prevents that from
happening is to fundamental
features of our water code that
have been in the water law since
nineteen oh seven and before and
one is that.
State law doesn't allow a water
right a new one right to be
located or an old water right to
be re positions.
In a way that would negatively
affect existing water users and
then the second is that before
any new water use would take
place whether it's a movie or a
new water use the existing water
users will always have notice
and a chance to defend their
water rights by showing how the
proposed movie Water Rights
what effect and and sue these
protections affect not just a
sec yes not just certain water
users they protect everyone in
the state who has a water rights
no matter how small their
operation is or how junior their
water it is they have that
assurance in the law
that they will have notice and a
chance to defend their water
rights and the legislature as
you heard from Senator Wirth has
made no exception when it comes
to water leases the same
protections are there
and so just to final quick
points we know madam chair that
there are two sides to
everything and the people who
are asking for these our water
leases are going to say in their
application that they're least
won't affect other people but
the truth is is that this the
state engineer office should not
be giving people the go ahead to
take water based on only one
side of the story that's what's
happening now hi and finally my
final point madam chair it's
tempting to listen to folks
opposed to this bill and to look
only at the new use that's being
proposed and to think the what's
wrong with allowing this and I
just want to be clear that is
not the issue here we we have
many great ideas for the use of
water in the state there isn't
enough water to satisfy all of
them it's not an issue that
there are good ideas for uses to
put to water the issue is we
have to remember is that each
new water use takes place
somewhere somewhere where there
are other water users already
exist and are potentially
affected and we can't just sweep
those people's concerns and
rights aside and in fact or law
doesn't allow.
That so thank you madam chair.
Thank you Sanchez and experts
for weighing in we're now going
to go to public comment for
those of you maybe not committee
for the first time today we're
first going to begin a poll will
leave that out for about thirty
seconds those participating with
us on soon today would like to
wait and they'll have an
opportunity to do that after
that we'll go to public comment
starting with opposition will
have a timer up giving each for
just that one minute to express
their comments.
George I might we get that pull
up.
Thank you.
So please indicate whether
you're here in support or in
opposition to HB thirty.
I don't know if we've ever had
this happen so far need Stacy
this year but we are exactly
split we have forty folks going
in today half of those in
support and half of those in
opposition so I'm sure that's a
good sign that we're gonna have
a fantastic debate today
first we'll go to those here
that would like to speak in
opposition if you would like to
do so again in opposition to HB
thirty first please raise your
hands and we will call anyone by
one giving you permission to
speak at which time you'll need
to and you yourself first up we
have Catherine Goldberg.
I'm trying to unmute MI and
muted we can hear you go head
okay great my name is Katherine
Goldberg as you just indicated
that a lawyer with roti law firm
and we represent intrepid which
is involved in the litigation
before judge Romero.
And I know what was cited
earlier by certain of the
speakers in support of the
legislation that the judge's
ruling is in it is on the side
of those who are proponents of
the legislation and I would just
like to point out that we
I believe and expect that that
decision will be reversed on
appeal.
And it's important to note that
is just the decision of a
district judge and judge Romero
as you all recall in the recent
past I enjoined that for some of
the state's public health order
against the restaurateurs and
that was overturned and we
expect similarly that this will
be found to have been a wrong
headed decision and contrary to
the weight of authority the
decision.
Lies in the face of the state
engineers interpretation
statutes and there are multiple
thank you your time has elapsed
and we do have a timer up folks
if you can keep an eye on that
next we have not checkers.
Madam chairman needed.
Yes you are go ahead.
You madam chair my name is not
chairperson deputy general
counsel of the office of the
state engineer and I believe the
state engineer and is general
counsel the speaking as well but
I wanted to address just one
distinct legal issue that is
come up and it's it's in the
rhetoric of the proponents of
the bill and it's that this is
necessary to ensure due process
it is very well established
under New Mexico constitutional
law it is not a violation of
procedural due process for there
to be immediate uses of water
followed by hearings and if
necessary post deprivation
remedies the New Mexico Supreme
Court as soon as the firm this
in various well type
applications and so it's not the
case that this is a
constitutional due process issue
and thank you madam is almost up
our office is procedure will
mention does want to work
together for a legislative
solution.
Next we have Charles de Mars.
Yes can you can you hear me yes
we can thank you.
Great so I'm a professor of law
is a topwater Lawford twenty
four years at university of New
Mexico school of law I also
represent the middle Rio Grande
Conservancy district
and I represent and and
Representative intrepid and
continue to my biggest concerns
are the following this bill
appears to be like driving a
finish nail with a sledgehammer
it is as of the affect the nail
goes in but the consequences are
support sufficient really
significant first of all farmers
will have to sell their water
rights rather than lease them if
the bill goes through at their
crops will be dead when they
finally get a decision on their
at their particular lease issue
and if they will without the
least without this depart prior
approval they will not that
would not work second it will
breach the Endangered Species
Act because leases are the only
ways in which you can quickly
get water into the river and
satisfy the needs of the
biological opinion for the Rio
Grande thank you thank you so
much I think this is a friendly
reminder ex I want you to get
the best out of your equipment
if we don't hear you will let
you know and ask you again on
mute so otherwise just go ahead
and again and we'll let you know
if we do not hear you next we
have Carla New Mexico.
R. and M. to be exact.
Good afternoon madam chair it's
Leri Sonntag here representing
the New Mexico business
coalition.
New Mexico business coalition as
opposed to house bill thirty
because the current water
leasing Act has been in use and
provides adequate controls the
office of the state engineer
provides preliminary review and
approval which allows for
immediate use of water and the
office the office is decisions
have never been overturn better
standards ongoing litigation but
it's not customary for the
legislature to pass laws in the
midst of on going legislation
has not fully completed also
thirty eliminates the ability of
ranchers and farmers Revenue
when agriculture is not
economically feasible
Furthermore farmers sometimes
need the ability to lease
additional water supplies in
times of drought which we are
experiencing now New Mexico has
a sound Water System use for for
water usage and we urge you to
keep that in place and say no to
house bill thirty.
Thank you next is Tiffany
Rivera.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you for the
opportunity to come in this
afternoon my name is Tiffany
Rivera and I'm the registered
lobbyists for New Mexico farm
and livestock bureau I'm here
from here we support the
sanctity of private water rights
as defined by state by state law
and the individuals legitimate
privilege to utilize these
rights without undue
interference from government
this legislation will create
further interference and cause
undue delays in all water
transfer applications this
legislation by exempting
emergency applications will
create a backlog on the
applications currently every
application gets due process but
working continue to be done and
water utilize will be hearings
are taking place water use
during the protest process is
paid back if the office of the
state engineer find that they
should not have happened this is
literally never happened before
this bill will basically kill an
application and by the time the
protest is settled the need for
approval have passed the crop
will be dead and projects will
be abandoned thank you please go
in opposition.
Next we have Laura Riley.
Madam chair committee members
I'm Laura Riley I'm with gamelan
solutions many of our clients
are include businesses and
entities in the agricultural and
that inner extractive industries
are concerned with limiting our
our with the limiting and
flexibility of the temporary
leasing of water rights the
office of the state engineer
currently considers impacts on
existing rights with when
issuing temporary leases and the
and the impacts on any parties
that may be affected.
What this bill does do is
created time barrier which will
be detrimental to the beneficial
use of water in these times of
drought and economic uncertainty
in our agricultural sector
farmers and ranchers currently
utilize the leasing Act and crop
management in income
diversification this bill will
limit the market and
opportunities currently
available for full beneficial
use of these right for these
reasons as many stated before we
respectfully oppose this bill
thank you.
Next we have Patrick Killen
thank you.
Thank you madam chair committee
Patrick Killen registered
lobbyist for chevron we oppose
H. B. thirty is currently
written in our Permian
operations over ninety nine
percent of the water we use
including during hydraulic
fracturing is from brackish
recycle produced water sources
none the last we do still
require a small amount of fresh
water in our operations and H.
B. thirty could greatly hinder
our leasing of water and in turn
create significant regulatory
uncertainty for operations in
New Mexico chevron is also
focused on working with local
communities in southeast New
Mexico to make roads safer and
we share the department of
transportation concerns about H.
B. thirty isn't out in the FIR
we're alarm that H. B. thirty
could possibly lead to road
project delays increased costs
or even loss of federal funding
at highway project timelines are
affected by this bill other for
chevron respectfully opposes H.
B. thirty and we thank you for
the time.
Thank you next we have Jim
Winchester.
Madam chair and members of the
committee Jim Winchester with
the independent petroleum
association of New Mexico thank
you for the time this afternoon
we do stand in opposition this
bill slows down oil and gas use
of water that is necessary
really to perform basic
operations on a well site he and
as you've heard it hurts many
other industries as well you
know the existing process does
protect the due process of water
right owners to file protests
and then to have a hearing and
then to obtain a final decision
from the state engineer what
this bill does is that it opened
up protest to potential outside
parties which does set a
dangerous precedent of inserting
politics into water rights it
really makes it too easy for
special interests to protest
simply because they dislike what
the water is being used for so
for this reason and other
concerns we do stand in
opposition in thank you for your
time this afternoon.
Thank you that's a see what I
believe is our state engineer
we're going to actually ask you
I'm actually ask you Mr state
engineer to go at the end of the
opposition but you'll have a
little bit more time two minutes
as the next we're going to go to
therapy go ahead even.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Amy parity and the registered
lobbyists for the New Mexico oil
and gas association well the oil
and gas industry choose fresh
water is less than one percent
New Mexico we take the use of
fresh water very seriously that
being said there operational
points during which the use of
fresh water is critical during
the drilling and completion of a
while in order to protect the
environment we all call home
industry does need to use fresh
water oil and gas like most
industries is inter dependent on
various factors and other
businesses house bill thirty
would prohibit the immediate use
of water after the preliminary
approval of the office of the
state engineer we did stop oil
and gas operations in FY twenty
the oil and gas industry
contributed thirty four percent
of the state's general fund
revenues currently applications
to the office of the state
engineer for water leases follow
rigorous process that allows for
the issuance of a temporary
permit while simultaneously
allowing for the protest and
related hearings sometimes this
can take years that version of
the bill before you today is I'm
here time is elapsed next we
have New Mexico D. O. T. Liz
Travis.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative my name is
Liz Travis I'm the deputy
general counsel for in M. D. O.
T..
our agency respectfully opposes
house bill thirty as amended the
bill does not distinguish
between short term or long term
leases for the purpose of use
for which the waters being
leased.
In India T. and its contractors
rely heavily on the temporary
short term leases
in order to obtain necessary
water for construction
reconstruction and maintenance
of the state's transportation
infrastructure
the risk of delays to obtain
water to allow the protest at
leases to go all the way through
the appeals will cost increases
increased reliance on commercial
water sources and water hauling
to project locations the
increased costs will be borne by
the NM DOT and passed through to
New Mexico taxpayers is
increased project costs.
Next we have Missy career.
Madam chair and members of the
committee my name is misty car
you're a registered lobbyist for
strategies three sixty speaking
on behalf of our client
Occidental petroleum for the
reasons previously stated by
other industry leaders and
experts we respectfully ask you
to oppose H. B. thirty this bill
would limit and hinder both well
established and research
conservation efforts and
economic development
opportunities across our state
Occidental agrees that water
conservation and due process are
paramount but so is the need to
keep our economy and communities
moving forward during these
difficult times and always thank
you for the opportunity to
comment today.
Next we have Aaron bay lock.
You
afternoon chair and members of
the committee my name is Erin
Pollachi and the superintendent
of the pagus Bally artesian
Conservancy district here in
Roswell New Mexico I'm there's a
of a lot of good legal reasons
to oppose this particular piece
of legislation and its sister
legislation but I wanted to
point out to the committee with
over a hundred thousand
constituents and a hundred and
ten thousand your gated acres
within the boundaries of the PPA
CD.
This bill will make us less
responsive to an ever changing
climate and limit both ours and
the state engineers ability to
respond to that changing
environment is an integral part
of the way that we efficiently
use water here in the district
no we respectfully ask you to
propose thank you.
Thank you next we have Greg
originally.
Thank you madam chair my name is
Greg richly I'm the general
counsel for the New Mexico state
engineer I'd like to take a
moment to respond to the
criticisms of our agencies
practice of preliminary
approvals that's contrary to
law.
I'm like to point out that prior
to the passage of the water use
leasing Act the state engineer
could always issue permits for
temporary uses of water after a
full administrative hearing if
there are protests the purpose
of the the bodies the sing Act
was to allow an expedited
process with appropriate
safeguards to allow water to be
moved around quickly in non
emergency situations if if if
the interpretation of the
leasing Act is that a hearing is
required that renders the entire
leasing Act superfluous there's
no need to have enacted it the
state engineer has always
implemented it with appropriate
safeguards to protect from
impairment existing water rights
and in a very conservative
valuation process I thank you
for the opportunity to provide
comments thank you next we have
Michael Miller.
Michael if you'd like to make a
public comment we do need you to
underuse yourself on your end go
ahead.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Mike Miller and I represent
the Permian basin petroleum
association we respect
respectfully oppose H. B. thirty
is written one gas operations
are moving to use recycled
produced water in our operations
however we still need access to
fresh water through temporary
transfers the same as the other
industries as other industries.
Yes.
HB thirty eliminates the
benefits of leasing Act by
removing the ability use the
water after the state engineers
pulmonary View approval without
this feature industry another
short term use of have little
need for the leasing Act for
these and other reasons we
oppose H. B. thirty thank you.
Thank you next we have Liz
Taylor.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee I'm Liz
Taylor and I've been a water
lawyer in New Mexico for almost
thirty years I'm here today
representing the San Juan water
commission and this and select
energy services both entities
oppose house bill thirty is
proposed but we are willing to
work on a compromise in to fix
this law as you heard house bill
thirty isn't a facto ban on
fracking and that will have
tremendous impact on the state
the FIR should have included
that because the effect would be
in the billions I just want to
point out I am I tried to
participate in judge Romero's
case on behalf of select but we
were denied intervention in that
case so so the judge never heard
the harm that would be cost of
by these by eliminating
preliminary authorizations
I think the case will be over
turned on that basis and many
more so at this point please
oppose this bill and let's get
something better thank you very
much.
Thank you and last we have our
state engineer the Antonio
you'll have about two minutes
thank you.
You do need.
Thank you madam chair and
appreciate the extra
consideration of time of the
preliminary approvals there
needed to implement to the
intense at least an act without
an expedited process that would
be really no need to and
actively seeing that because the
state engineer would always
issued transfer permits we could
issue transfer permits for short
term periods under the existing
the transfer statutes with those
permits could be issued only
after hearing all protests which
would take probably a year and a
half to three years on a on a
consistent basis so one of the
and I want to stress another
important point preliminary
approvals are issued before
hearing but only after
hydrologic evaluation to ensure
no impairments will result the
other clarity based on some
prior hearings is that the only
water rights that can be changed
in the leasing Act applications
are valid vested Water Rights
that already can be can be
transferred because of their
Committee
I want to I want to stress and
and you're gonna hear on the
opposition opposition so I just
want everybody to note the
number of miss you folks that
are talking and talking in favor
of this particular bill and I
you know since I've been state
engineer in two thousand and
three we created a of an
opportunity to have the estate
yes have a veto power on
transfers would have the same.
Ability on water use leasing Act
it prohibits any leases of water
miss you unless it's required by
the acequia bylaws the state yes
good commissioners approved the
lease so there's veto power
there of the other thing it's
there's a wide variety of New
Mexicans that depend on
preliminary approvals under the
water use leasing Act I just
want to.
That everybody knows also that
the there's some very important
to other due process
considerations on emergency
authorizations we do have
domestic and livestock wells
temporary changing locations of
wells and replacement wells
within a hundred feet of the
original well there's there's a
lot of areas where of that
that's not a due process
violation but we have to be put
common sense why in the place
and nonstop thank you madam
chair members APCA Ewing and
today next we're going to
those in support of H. B. thirty
if you are in support of HB
thirty you're welcome to raise
your hands now.
First up we have the news
creased Dulu.
You said it like an expert.
Last time you appeared in front
of our committee thank you and
get.
Good afternoon honorable chair
committee members and especially
Sanchez my name that the
increased to do and I am other
political director for the
online to progressive caucus the
civil and environmental engineer
and I have a reader of the
Cadillac desert this bill seems
to right a wrong just in the
Nick of time as we said before
water is life I would like to
show that we need to make sure
we look ahead to climate change
happening as it's been mentioned
by the opposition and realize
that often times.
Suppose a temporary use becomes
permanent you because if it is
used in water that then is
injected hello way down
as it talks as part of a toxic
material then it becomes a
permanent use I would also like
to make sure we do with by and
for the people so thank you
invoke to pass.
Thank you next we have Terron
next.
Good afternoon chairman members
waiting is terror next and I'm
deputy commissioner for the
state land office we stand in
support of HB thirty we are in a
water crisis in New Mexico and I
want to let you all know that
ninety five percent of water
that is used in oil and gas
development can be done with
produced water there's
absolutely no reason to continue
to allow new freshwater
permitting for this use without
greater oversight delayed uses
necessary until final permitting
is approved because payment for
misuse of water does not return
the water needed for our
communities this bill has no
impact on the millions of
barrels of fresh water already
used for oil and gas development
Mr Garcia Richard has already
ended the reseller freshwater
from state trust land for oil
and gas use and on site went on
on on site use and our residents
is a yes land grants and prizes
are that access to fresh water
and it's critical that there's
more oversight committee from
OSC in either of reasons but
including this one so please
pass this bill thank you next we
have general Mundy with the.
commissioner I don't see the
full title you'll have to
introduce yourself.
Thank you madam chair nesting
Committee members my name is
Daryl Madrid I am a commissioner
on the Salazar a secular
community did share an innate
watcher on in Rio Arriba county
and I'm also president of the
real that Shamal secular
Association representing twenty
two a seculars and we're six
hundred landowners along the
confluence of the real trauma on
the let you down on.
We support this bill because of
the area I represent is arguably
the most regulated stretch of
water in the entire nation and
we are in constant
Tug of war with the our office
the state engineer over a lot of
things in the hold us to the
letter of the law and this will
bills will even though on the
playing field thank you.
Thank you next we have eight get
it up.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee we stand and I'm
representing the Rio Grande
chapter of the Sierra Club which
represents with thirty five
thousand members here in
southern New Mexico and now
we're here strong support of
this bill.
The language and the water
leasing Act needs clarification
requests for families sorry Mr
fairness and due process in a
away oversee grants approval of
water these application overseas
current practice of granting
preliminary water rules for
water these applications without
a protest period and hearing is
not supporting the current law
this illegitimate administrative
process that has been abused
exploited back from Marshall
interest to circumvent the
intent of the law well the
rights of senior water uses
could be impaired again just
want to I'm running out of time
want to just express our support
for this bill please bill yes
thank you thank you next we have
hello Garcia.
Good afternoon madam chair I
apologize executive director of
the New Mexico sic Association
and we stand in strong support
of this bill this is an equity
issue in New Mexico we believe
that by fast tracking water
leases the state engineer of
privileging applications over
the due process rights of those
with existing water rights based
on what on on lawful visas will
continue to circumvent basic
protections and not laws if left
unchecked house bill thirty is
necessary because the state
engineer a few years ago started
a new interpretation of the law
we maintain that as to and
gender male has agreed that the
state engineer procedure of
preliminary authorization is
unlawful numerous a second in
upper Honda were impacted by
this and despite hundreds of
protests water use was occurring
while the protest was pending in
another egregious example the
intrepid lease was approved for
five thousand acre feet despite
impacts to cross better
education district madam chair
we stand in strong support of
this legislation thank you.
Thank you next we have done with
us.
Madam chair members of the
committee I don't want to repeat
anything all of Garcia said but
we stand in support of
possibility already my name is
don Cousteau's I own a small
certified organic farm up in
northern New Mexico I'm a
commissioner on the S. seconded
Yano.
And the chairperson for that
real commodity of this through
and maybe this up that can
stream systems and US interests
associations.
Also.
In support of this bill to
protect the water in the
reservoir CENIC reservoir thank
you.
Thank you next we haven't read
Carol metal.
You madam chair and members of
the committee speaking to the is
a native New Mexican a lifelong
resident of nonbank New Mexico
my family has a small parcel of
land with irrigation water
rights with a second.
You hear these fast track leases
are necessary for economic
development in a more profitable
uses water need to get the water
they need as soon as possible
but I want to tell you this
policymakers at this is a false
choice we can find a proper
balance and public policy
between economic development and
protecting what is been here for
hundreds of years the state New
Mexico has rural communities
that are already suffer from
inequities and where we want to
protect our way of life and also
have dignified livelihoods we
don't believe we have to sell
our soul so that we can have you
development we just legislators
to consider that we not allow
unchecked procedure that
prioritizes the convenience of
the applicant over the due
process rights of those of us
with existing rights industry
and you are existing process
which they can acquire the
rights the need the need to plan
ahead for the time it takes to
get state engineer permit
moreover the state engineers
office needs more resources to
address increasing demands of
his agencies so that he can
process.
Thank you next we have Douglas
Michaela John.
Good afternoon madam chair
members the committee my name is
Douglas Medical CHANAP lawyer
with the New Mexico
environmental law center in
Santa Fe we represent
communities throughout the state
many of whom have existing water
rights as expressed so
eloquently by the sponsors by
former speakers and by Mr
Bennett PTA's this is an issue
with fairness the bill would
require fairness for holders of
the existing water rights whose
rights are threatened by those
who would use water leasing Act
to obtain permission quickly and
without the opportunity for
hearing to use that water we
urge strongly that you support
this bill thank you very much.
Next we have Garrett David
Klassen.
Good afternoon madam chair
members the committee care
better costs and from New Mexico
wild house bill thirty helps to
protect due process in water
lease applications the bill of
firms and I think that's an
important word the legislation
doesn't change existing law.
Actions in our laws that ensure
that public welfare and water
conservation are considered in
water lease applications please
support house bill thirty.
Next we have president of the
US.
Good afternoon madam chair thank
you members of the committee I
am up.
My name is Priscilla Torres I
may partially on to the were
used to in the in the Mexico
dating back for many hundreds of
years to identify people
involved in a sick yes and R. DH
goes back to eighteen sixty
three in in to twenty thirteen
the City of weirdos so of.
Ask for leases and move water
upstream from us despite over a
hundred and twenty protest the
water begin to flow well those
protest existed and continued
for almost six years two of the
number went for a couple of
years and one went for the six
year period before it was
resolved I ask that you consider
that the legislation does not
change things but just make sure
a clarity in terms of what due
process to really means.
Thank you next we have Elaine
have aired.
Something's shifted on our list
now yes Elaine are you for your
interest in making a comment hi
can you hear me yes we can go
ahead thank you good afternoon
madam chair and committee
members my name is Elaine
hammered I live in Albuquerque
as a retired chemist lawyer and
planner I have worked on
planning issues water planning
issues for more than twenty
years especially in the order
grant I do understand that there
are many benefits to leasing
Water however all leases
temporary or permanent let's go
through the same analysis and
due process required to provide
transfer especially since some
of these places are not are semi
permanent think of the one with
the village of oil furnace
allowed Niagara bottling plant
to transfer water rights it
leased from PNM into the village
wells to offset river flow
depletions caused by pumping
groundwater into plastic bottles
very quickly the surface waters
between elephant Butte are
already over perforated but
uneducated so adding doing is
leases without full evaluation
can lead to
our promise deliveries compact
appliance mortal much more
difficult thank you.
Next we have Jamie park.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Jenny park
and I'm a water law attorney
I've been representing very
stakeholders on both water
quantity and quality matters
throughout the state we're
hearing a lot of sky is falling
arguments by opponents who are
provided absolutely no evidence
that there access to water is
going to be cut off by each B.
thirty eight B. thirty doesn't
prevent industry municipalities
and big agriculture from leasing
water if the water use
application is in protest at
then it usually takes about a
few months for the state
engineer to issue a final
decision approving on protest at
least it's it's only protest
applications are subject to a
public hearing and therefore
they take longer to process and
those applications out
applicants should and can plan
for that it's very easy to
anticipate whether one's
application is going to be
protest it based on the place
abuse amount of water and
purpose of use plan for that
thank you.
Thank you next we have Caroline
Kennedy.
Hi good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee thank
you for the opportunity my name
is Caroline Kennedy I'm a
commissioner on the board of
last the sickest we'll see this
developed up with students in
Santa Fe County counties
domestic water safety system
which serves approximately a
hundred eighty members and posse
on days and has senior water
rights dating back to eighteen
sixty three I strongly support
HB thirty because it would
ensure do prosperity and protect
the rights of existing water
holders right rights holders
including those of us thank you
the unity Water System.
Our senior rights would be
subject to impairment if they
knew even culinary short term
use would take water from the
act before supplying our springs
for those reasons and supporting
what the others have said that
please support this bill thank
you thank you next we have set
up be not young dollar Marty.
Thank you and good afternoon
madam chair and members of the
committee I come before you to
ask your support for H. B.
thirty I am
on the board of the real Santa
Cruz stream system representing
over fifty seconds and thousands
of families who are not only
percent days for also well
owners members mutual domestic
and people depend on all these
other kinds of uses of water for
our livelihoods I want to note
that the two thousand nineteen
amendment was hopeful to a
secular as and addressing our
ability to beat those you these
issues but it did not address
the impacts multiple a secular
like we talked about in the
upper under scenario it only
covers limited instances of
leases into or out of our
individual sector as therefore
it's necessary that HB thirty be
implemented to protect our
communities thank you so much
for your service and your time
thank you next we have in our
final speaker is on the other
lack throughs proffered.
Hello my name is Andrea let
Chris Crawford and I am a
commissioner on the just to get
there like a yes in less and I
guess.
and I am here in support of
house bill thirty because.
Not here in Los to go we've seen
dramatic drops in our local
springs as a result of various
wells that I've been put in
place by Eldorado and the
penitentiary and we basically
would be in a situation where if
any water rights were least off
of our debt we would not be able
to actually get water to our
crops and I think that the
existing law it just does not
protect against that in in terms
of the impairment analysis of
staying on authorized by the
state engineers office.
Because it allows leases to go
through most of the time and
this would only apply again when
there is a protest application
and it.
Thank you so much madam chair
Casey do you want to pick back
up.
Okay okay let's let's go to the
committee members now and
one two two.
Given the sponsors that
opportunity to respond and then
we will act.
thank you madam chair up I think
my response in in terms of what
I've been listening to is the
point I'd like to.
My okay I'm I'm on I'm sorry the
point I'd like to make is.
People are focusing on how they
want to use the water and their
need for the water and we
understand that we agree for
Sanchez understand that there
probably is a need for an
expedited process that would
allow leasing to serve
commercial purposes but our
point with this bill is not that
our point with this bill is what
the state engineering is doing
is not authorized and we are
just under scoring that fact to
ensure that he follows the law
as it is presently written and
we are open of course to working
with the stakeholders to on the
next phase which is you know
trying to allow a process that
would support what they're
trying to achieve thank you.
Senator Wirth.
madam chair I believe senator
Wirth of the step off to deal
with I think he said I okay.
Okay.
All right well let's I'm of the
amendment for discussion
purposes and would you like to
just walking through that real
quickly
yes thank you very much madam
chair the two oh two number is
point two one nine eight nine
seven point one.
And what it does is on page two
it strikes one word the word
this through and and inserts the
word it strikes the word through
it inserts the word and.
And the point of that madam
chair
is to rectify an error we made
two years ago when we amended
the statute so if you look at
the bill and you go to page
three the current paragraph D.
relates to the acequia exemption
that was discussed earlier and
what it what we did was
he used to be the old D. N. and
what we're trying to insert back
in was what the original law was
which was ET so it should be
the initial or any renewal term
of a lease of water shall not
Xcent exceed ten years except as
provided in subsections C. and
P. it wouldn't be appropriate to
have do included in that
provision and I hope I was clear
when I was describing that madam
chair but I'm happy to answer
questions.
So we the amendment for
discussion purposes other
questions on the amendment or
discussion on the amendment
right now.
Madam chair of the claim I'm
okay.
Mr speaker go ahead on the
amendment yeah on the amendment
I so.
It is the amendment do something
with regard to thank you madam
chair I don't quite follow okay
so sorry madam chair and Mr
speaker no
Two years ago you recall we
added a provision that exempted
the X. APS and when we amended
the statute we created IT
paragraph do.
D. had brand the language that
relates to Pueblo water rights
in the original bill had been
subsection C. and D. meaning see
is municipalities and do was the
that the judicata Water Rights
secured to a pueblo and there's
some additional language.
What we did speaker we
inadvertently Sir inserted D. in
there which is the acequia
provision and.
In advertencia lady included the
acequia provision in this
not to exceed ten years
RAF and I I hope on.
I could just add to that thank
you we would help them to her
madam chair the cystic Sanchez
expert David Benavidez
madam chair and and Mr speaker
before the change in two
thousand nineteen what it was
was that
It said that at least should be
ten years except as provided
hello and then C. has always
been to expand that to forty
years for those entities that
are listed and then the Pueblo
section which is now he
basically said that the lease
can be whatever the act says it
should be in terms of the length
of the term and so that actually
got inadvertently changed in two
thousand nineteen because we
added a new subsection de and re
lettered and so now we're just
putting it back to where it was
where the folks in C. I have a
forty year period and the second
page of always had a ten year
period and the continue to have
the ten year period and the
pueblos are back to having it
whatever the term is in
accordance with the act.
Got it so the law as it is madam
chair and a law it would be if
all of this the docket does not
grant to stake is.
The right relief water outside
of the stated your process were
discussed that correct.
Madam chair
speaker I think that's correct
but please make my experts
verify that I gave you a correct
answer
madam chair and Mr speaker
that's correct.
Okay good I I'm in another bill
I've been dealing with all sorts
of thank you requests for
exemptions so I wanted of that
was happening here okay thank
you madam chair.
Discussion on the amendment.
Representative.
When did you have a question on
the amendment R. I know your
first on the bill but.
I'm on the bill chair okay thank
you all right
So I move to adopt the
amendment.
Second from representative Ely.
Will Clark please call the roll.
Yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Cook.
Representative Cook.
You Mr speaker.
Yes.
Yes Representative the line yes.
Representative Lewis.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative night.
Yes.
Representative Rehm.
Representative Rehm.
Representative Cook yes.
Representative Townsend.
Yes.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Yes.
Representative Rehm.
That was eleven two zero okay it
is adopted and now we'll go to
discussion of the bill and as
amended and first I have
Representative McQueen.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair representative
Chandler I I.
I don't really know how to ask
this question
Since I know you have a certain
point of view.
but might my question is.
I read through the the statute
this this bill with a man.
And and I don't I I'm not seeing
where the office of the state
engineer.
Feels that the.
The approval process can come
before their.
The the order Benson in the
statute.
This
is.
Necessarily specify it but.
So
I says to engineer shall approve
the application if these various
things happen but.
It doesn't say.
The statute doesn't address the
order of events and so I would
think all of the events in
statute would be required.
Can you shed any light on that
are help help me understand how
that offices seniors
interpreting this.
Madam chair representative.
Truthfully it's hard for me to
explain how the office of the
state engineer is doing this
because I do get as I said it's
not in conformance with the
statute seventy two dash six
dash six is the process that
outlines what needs to happen
and I mentioned it earlier madam
chair and it's.
Filing of the application madam
chair and representative
The ability for someone to
protest that paragraph B. if a
protest is filed the state and
then your engineer shall hold a
hearing on the granting of the
application and at cetera if no
applicant objections are filed
the state engineer may grant the
application without hearing
there is no mention of if the
state engineer has made an
initial determination that
there's no impairment and I
think there were a few other
things that and it will not be
contrary to the conservation of
water within the state he may
issue a preliminary approval
there is nothing in the law that
permits that Madam chair
representative and if my experts
needs to fills a need to
supplement I would ask that he
be allowed to madam chair.
Madam chair.
Representative McQueen I'm I'm.
Chuckling a little bit because I
believe the argument that the
state engineer office tried to
make in the district court case
that they were unsuccessful and
far be it from me to make the
state engineers court argument
for them has to do actually if
you have the other sections of
the statute with seventy two
dash six dash three.
Yes I believe that is in the
that's in the law chair or
that's in the bill Stewart says
the least may be effective for
immediate use our water or may
be effective for future use of
the water the problem is is that
if you go to seventy two dash
six dash six D. E. which is what
you're probably looking at if no
objections are filed the state
engineer may grant the
application without hearing well
the implication as if objections
are filed the state engineer can
only grant application after
hearing and so you look at that
immediate use raised in
subsection B. and you realize
that what it means is that there
can be a couple of types of
transactions that people have
they have a transaction where I
leave you my water right but you
don't start using it for five
years or you have a transaction
where I review my water right
and it's and you want to use it
immediately but that would be
immediately upon hearing
approval and that's where I
think the state engineer
hi Jeff is interpreting things
but I will see you say Madam
chair representative McQueen the
water usually statute was passed
in nineteen sixty seven and for
many decades the state engineer
never offered that
interpretation and always
treated water use leases on of
the what is the fact as if the
approval had to happen it's
really only in recent decades
that they have put for that
conclusion and began a practice
of telling leases that it was
okay to begin using water at the
new location immediately even
though there had not been the
legally required notice or
hearing.
Okay you know thank you for that
chair representative spend it is
We
Yeah we we put off the state
engineer at disadvantaged if
this is been interim committee.
Discussing the bill would have
you seen side by side and you
guys can hash it out in front of
us but it's not so
Thank you for that explanation
Madam chair representative
Chandler the other thing I'm
having a hard time with is I'm
trying to understand.
Harm to with the current
practice under the statute and
madam chair in in the present
Chandler the answer to that
question.
I would appreciate you taking
the we're protecting the acequia
is already so it doesn't seem to
be like this I think is a ring
are and whether the public
testimony.
A lot of people didn't like the
current practice.
Really hearing one that said I
think in my full delivery or
something that happened I I mean
I just.
The opposition seem to be
based on.
Just a general sense that the
the current practice whether or
not it's justified under the
existing statute was somehow
offensive but I wasn't hearing
specific parts and I wonder if
you could just
I will try and I think my expert
will have a probably even a
better answer but
This statutory scheme is the
designed to protect the right
the property rights of those who
own property rights.
And when the state engineer
develops his own practice that
is in violation of the law.
Everyone who owns a property
right who owns a property right
water.
Is has the potential for being
harmed because they do they are
being denied the process that we
in the legislature have created
to protect those rights and so
that's where I'm coming from and
from my advance my vantage point
has a lawyer who cares about the
actual honoring of the law that
the legislature has enacted.
And everyone is harmed when the
executive branch does not adhere
to what our intent is and
That's my answer as a lawyer and
someone who cares about
following the law and I imagine
of my expert Mr Bennett yes may
have the able to supplement that
from his perspective as a water
law lawyer.
Thank you madam chair
Representative McQueen that's a
good question and one of the
witnesses I think was trying to
get there but didn't quite get
there and in the time allotted
and that was and a real Lujan
though I think as it's important
to understand that the
protection that was put in the
statute in two thousand nineteen
four seconds said if an acequia
if there's a proposal to move to
release a water right into or
out of the acequia that the
acequia commission has the
decision made the initial
decision making authority over
that however it's important
understand that picture a stream
and a string of a sec is a
longer stream and a municipality
upstream from all of those just
seconds if there is a water
right.
D. I. downstream Water Rights
that leap frogs.
Your over all the SHS upstream
to that municipality which is
what was happening there with
the village of Ruidoso downs
That's not a water right if I'm
one of your sick is leapfrogged
over that's not something that I
have any control over through
the change that was made in the
statute because it's not one of
our water rights that's being
moved so any other water
downstream from me that get that
leapfrogs over me so that
someone now is taking water
before me who never.
A new use that's upstream for me
that was never there before I
didn't have a chance to say
anything about that before it
was allowed I can protest that's
true I can file a protest but in
the meantime pending the protest
the way of the the office of the
stranger practice works
the state engineer gives the
green light for the water to be
used upstream for me
you know
before the they're legally
required notice or hearing and
then really quickly the other
example would be intrepid
example and that's an example
that did go to court and is the
the judge Romero decision that's
on appeal and and the clear a
problem with that is that was an
application that was approved
through this non a non notice
not hearing process for five
thousand acre feet that's really
the problem there is the
quantity of five thousand acre
feet it can't help but either
have an effect on neighboring
water users or on state line
deliveries as in this case and
so those are two examples.
So.
Chair.
Representative Chandler you know
An answer I have we know that
your answer use the term
potential harm and Mr Bennett B.
this started with a hypothetical
example and finished with an
actual example that bought all
five thousand acre feet so I I
guess what I was looking for was
you know in this case you know
someone was hard.
And maybe that's the
interpretation I I.
Madam I don't know enough about
the case.
Madam chair Mr chairman I was
reading this.
I was reading the statute here
in the bill that my first
thought was it would make sense.
To have sort of an interim step
that you can't just **** nilly
lease water move it up you also
have to go through all former
performing process and I was
trying to think it's myself what
was that year of steep but then
I saw.
I saw it in the.
The FIR and seems to have an
interim step.
N. F. irises the C. argues that
those the they're allowed to
approve the lease application if
the applicant makes a showing
that these is beneficial you
will not impair existing water
rights.
And
it's not countries prostration
Water State and so if you know
if this intrepid decision one up
on appeal and
was a stain.
And that Senator Wirth noted
everything came to a halt.
You know I can see all the
people who
We're opposing this bill come
back and say we need that and
now we need to fix the statute
and we propose an interim step
like you know an initial review
and that seems to be how they're
operating.
So Madam chair representative
Chandler is that.
What would you think about using
that existing in our step.
I'm.
Madam chair representative I
would disagree with you that
sixty two dash six yes I which
is what I believe you were
referring to Madam chair
representative
Is an interim step.
it in my view it describes the
standard of review not create a
step so that's point one I know
that the state engineer madam
chair and representative have
attempted to argue that it is an
interim step but it isn't and
second of all
If if they if the state engineer
is permitted to use to you to
use the standard without any
yes any ability to test his
determination through opposition
he's making that all on its own
without any you know input from
those who may be potentially
impaired meaning the whole point
of having a hearing or the
ability to to challenge.
Allete one of these application
is to get to allow those who
might be damaged or injured or
impaired the ability to test
this initial determination and
that's being denied them and not
only is it being denied them
it's being denied them for long
periods of time while the water
is is being moved while the app
while the application
for a diversion or alternate use
is is being happening in that
could be multiple years so those
individuals who have the right
to challenge the did the initial
determination of the state
engineer are being denied that
opportunity for potentially a
relatively lengthy period of
time and I don't know if Mr
Benavidez would like to
supplement but I'd be happy to
have them help me.
Madam chair Representative
McQueen just a affirmed that
seven two dash six dash five the
criteria is on is the criteria
that was and that was put in the
original version of the bodies
conduct to be the criteria for
the underlying lease for the
main lease that's being applied
for and senator I'm sorry
Representative Chandler is
correct that it's not some kind
of criteria for an interim step
is the criteria on the
application itself and the and
the law never really
contemplated an interim step
that's something that was you
know that was made up by the the
state in your practice that
involves.
So madam chair Chandler I I
guess is my question so my
question is that one of
statutory interpretation you
know I I and so I think your
point of view that the statute
as written does not allow them
to use in an arms that.
But if we we're you can work out
something right that everyone
that's our live with I think it
interim step might make sense
and if there was an interim step
would kind of look like this
wouldn't look like these this
language in section seventy two
their success I and then
possibly your language that you
know if there is a protest your
lease is not renewed or can't
run past six months or you know
some some way to to translate
that into require the process to
be completed.
For
and not let the water to to
continue to be moved percent to
lease until it's complete like
if we were going to stop an
interim step this seems like
it's a decent start
Madam chair and representative
I'm not sure I agree it's a
start but I do agree that
sh should we agree that there
needs to be an imam process that
interim process would include
hard deadlines for by which for
which the preliminary
application could apply you know
they were it would have to be a
hard deadline
there might be one might want to
introduce how much water you
consider how much water is being
You know diverted because of the
potential for impairment I I
imagine would grow to potential
for a parent would grow
depending on the quantity that
was being is that was at issue
so there are a number of factors
that one could it could craft
into an interim process
The criteria that you mention it
madam chair representative might
be embedded in that process as
well but certainly there would
have to be a deadline any a
deadline for it for the how how
long the preliminary approval
could stand that would be I
think a key element madam chair
representative.
Okay.
Madam chair representative thank
you.
Thank you next on my list as
Representative Townsend.
Yes thank you madam chair
Thank you.
Is there.
Any documentation or are you
aware through here.
Review and investigation of why
is this.
Process was adopted by the
office of the state engineer.
Madam chair and representative I
can share what I think I know so
it's a little bit you know I
don't want it's not the final.
my understanding madam chair and
representative that this
probably started in the
Richardson administration
our governor Richards and
apparently was very interested
in and I'm pursuing the of
spaceport and water was needed a
of the leasing of water was
needed to help facilitate the
construction of that site and
as we all know governor
Richardson has was a very
the term.
You might say individual and as
a result he was able to suggests
to his state engineer that
perhaps they develop a process
that would satisfy his desired
outcome Madam chair
representative thank you I.
I wasn't aware of that being
tied to the space ordered all
but I don't doubt that
What I would tell you based on.
My experience
That are called pro business and
certainly and all guests
businesses that.
You know.
Value of that water is a private
property interest.
And water that you it's time to
end the.
It has to be where you need it
when you need it in order for it
to be most that you.
Now I understand your
I understand your argument that
you know this is not about that
this is about whether it's in
the law and the should it be
proper but I would tell you.
That but because it has been
utilized for a number of years.
That harm most certainly will
occur to many people in the act
businesses need for crops.
For.
Highway department when they're
building roads and.
Construction.
Groups all around the state.
Utilize this process all the
time all the all certainly does
that.
And.
And I was kind of struck you
you.
You said that it was wrong so we
had to pass this bill again you
have a two year moratorium.
And.
So.
How did you come to grips with
the two year mark for you.
madam chair and representative
yes the effective date is put
off by about two years and it
frankly a madam chair it was
intended to address the concerns
that you're sharing
Representative that
It's unfortunate that there was
this improper process was
created but individuals and
entities have come to depend on
it and it would allow those
involved including the state
engineer.
To perhaps develop an affair
interim process that the
legislature agrees is
appropriate.
Or for those relying on water to
develop other sources so the two
years was allowed was put in
madam chair and representative
to frankly offer these folks and
the ability to transition in
ways that we we may even be able
to assist them with by creating
an appropriate process that is
lawful.
And I appreciate that and and
But my my thought madam chair
and representative turned his
back to.
If we.
Our.
We believe that two year
moratorium is appropriate why
don't we just get out of the
land with the or have their
state there'll be two more
legislative sessions in the next
two years and while at many of
time reacting.
Madam chair representative I
think we as a legislative body
needs to step up when we know
that a practices improper and
address it and I think this is
what we have offered madam chair
and representative is a very
fair approach.
What do you say that and I and I
agree with yeah I'm I'm not
arguing that but the fact
remains that you're legislation
has a two year moratorium so
you're stepping up six something
that you're going to allow to
continue for two years but thank
you believe that's needed and
with that being said what I'm
trying to come up what I'm
trying to grasp is why don't we
just stay out of the way let the
courts do their job and will
react forty.
Madam chair representative I
believe I've answered that
question.
Well you
Representative and madam chair
with all due respect you may
have answered it but I was
trying to get a further
explanation from you is that if
you believe the legislature must
stand up and fix it today why do
we allow two year moratorium.
Madam chair and representative I
guess I feel like I'm being put
in the position of you're damned
if you do and you're damned if
you don't.
My original legislation had no
two year effective date however
in an effort to be accommodating
to the concerns that were
expressed by those who rely on
the process we are allowing a
transition period so damned if
you do madam chair met dance if
you don't.
We're often putting that step by
I would agree with you
wholeheartedly
Another issue that I think we
have to address.
We did the other night on the.
Alcohol license built we reacted
because people had invested lots
of money and issues and the same
thing is here Representative
this this water.
In the act world is extremely
valuable all and gas it's
valuable and the.
I
I think that this piece of
legislation.
As it's currently
Representative.
Is is compounding issues
especially with the decision and
from the judge for more out
currently so madam chair I will
continue to list some
Representative I appreciate your
your answers.
Next I have the speaker.
Thank you madam chair.
I Madam chair representative
experts I think it would hi.
Here the questions from
Representative McQueen about you
know what is the harm we're
trying to fix beyond the.
Topical.
Issue of.
Whether or not the laws written
is being followed
And I think we've got.
Probably pretty limited.
Actual.
Real world Harmon and it's a lot
more.
It would be kind of speculative
work.
Make people feel uncomfortable
because the you're seeing the
potential for large volumes of
water W. eight transferred to
different use different places
use.
Without the type of.
Process that is available when
it's a.
And in a full scale your
permanent transfer application
for.
Thank you for the diversion.
Purpose of use I should also say
I think folks in the know that
water law is a very significant
portion of my practice and I I
do transportation before the
state engineer very frequently
I've engaged in hearings before
hearing unit hearing unit we're
involved with education unit on
different cases.
And I've Representative my first
client actually when I left the
Mike Emery Anders law firm was
L. we could ditch and what he
and I got access to Santa Fe
Representative.
The Yano ditch up in questa
another one of my very first
client.
and we Representative folks who
are on the other side of the
state yes I've been on both
sides.
Of this
all of northern Mexico for quite
awhile.
And I I think the the the risk
in this approach.
I I worry about.
harm to our.
Efforts to diversify the
economy.
Directly in the Albuquerque
metro area where we're trying
very hard to have new industry
come into New Mexico come into
that area of the state we really
want every you know people to
bring in making investments all
over but right now Albuquerque
is the center of what happening.
And.
If there are uses of water
it require.
Temporary
there are economic development
projects that would require a
temporary use of water a lease
is the way to do it.
And we heard from you folks to
say will you need to plan for it
you know for the for the time
line.
It occurs you know any protest
did eight or app or transfer
application to Jewish and and I
feel like that's not really a
good.
Answered the state will be here
she planned you know for the
time it takes to go through the
whole process.
Because.
The the process.
Can
more than two years.
We had a here we internet and
application for a client that I
think was filed in want the.
Fourteen or fifteen and went to
hearing.
And I believe two thousand
eighteen.
In the state engineer signed
the.
Hearing officers order hearing
officer's recommendation I
believe in December of last year
so that was like a five six year
process and if you are trying to
unite I think of the Intel
simple.
We're several years ago New
Mexico lost out on the ability
to have.
Hello we tools factory for the
twelve nanometer chip.
Because of water right issues in
the middle Rio Grande.
I Conservancy district they were
able to get the water they
needed to construct the upgrades
to their facility and so that.
New facility upgrade facility
on the job to along with that
are are now in Arizona.
they don't have to.
Deal with the tremendous
uncertainty and.
Tremendous costs the comes.
With watery transfer
applications in eight.
At least approval.
So I I I think it is appropriate
and I appreciate the you are
think is appropriate to proceed
madam chair with very.
A very slow pace in this issue.
I worry that if we.
Disrupt the process in the
process that is being followed
may or may not be on lawful I
really don't want to I will
think I need to you know
expressed an opinion as to
whether the state engineers.
This is lawful because it is the
process is in place and there
are many many water right owners
and lessors and lessees Water
Rights who have missed said it's
settled expectations about what
they can do with their rights
what they can do with their
leases.
And how they can use them over
the next.
Five ten fifteen years that
would be disrupted if the
process changes are goes away.
So I.
I think you know what I would
like to see in in in Senator
Wirth mentioned it in the
opening comments I would like to
see this is an opportunity to.
Instead of.
Passing a law that says in
effect no we really meant it
when we did it the first time.
To try to take this opportunity
when everyone is at the table
to.
Look at the water leasing Act.
To specify the seeds and the
process by which the state
engineer may grant.
A preliminary approval and allow
for the use of least water.
without having to go through.
The full blown hearing process
on a limited and temporary
basis.
I sent in a United U. S. senator
Wirth.
Some ideas for how we could.
Chart the conversation of.
Changing the water use leasing
Act.
It would allow you know if an
application can meet certain
established criteria the state
engineer could grant an approval
I think a suggestion I made was
that you could grant approval of
up to one year for surface water
rights and up to two years for
ground water right.
Two two eight while the process
administrative processes is
proceeding.
I.
Briefly if you I think you
thought some of those time lines
might not be
the best Madam chair
representative that I'd be
interested to know.
What.
You know what you think about
how and how we move.
I move this bill forward
It is something that you would
like to consider.
You know as you know just some
amendments or as a committees
have how do you feel about that
Madam chair representative.
Representative Chandler your
muted.
Sorry madam chair and Mr speaker
thank you for those those
comments yes we have been
speaking about a path forward I
think the we should past this
bill through committee as I
mentioned to you in our
conversations
Mr speaker I think you're very
cognisant of the fact that when
there's pressure on parties that
there's a lot there's often a
motivation for people to come to
the table and
work through their differences
so I think this bill should move
forward as is as presented to
you with the commitment from me
and senator Wirth that will
continue continue having our
conversation about how this
might be amended to accommodate
some of the concerns about
pulling your approvals and
deadlines my reaction to your
proposal Mr speaker was that
there needed to be a hard
deadline on how long the
preliminary approvals could last
and I just felt that the
proposal that you that was sent
out did not have hard deadlines
and certainly there is an
ability to negotiate on how long
those deadlines should be but
that's kind of where we're
coming from in terms of working
with you you and others of
course on on accommodating the
need for short term relatively
quick additional approvals of
leases.
Madam chair representative I I I
would ask you perhaps consider.
Here here hearing bill again if
it's if it's acceptable to the.
To the to the chair maybe
hearing it again on.
Monday using you know they're
using the day tomorrow.
Division with.
you Mr Bennett is the state
engineer
if of his off in his office to
see if there be a way for us to
do a substitute bill.
the committee here I did I
always get a little nervous you
know once it leaves the house.
you know we don't really know
what happened Senate and yeah it
would really be your only you
know when days difference in
terms of the time the bill would
be going out so I would ask you
and and consider that may be a
brief you know forty eight hour
pause but I do think would make
you know Sir and it would make
me a lot more comfortable
yeah we can ever really say.
You know what what what focus
Senator gonna do you know when
it with the bills once we've.
I want to send them over
madam chair that last comment I
would make is
The idea that.
whether it's a mistake yes or
you know often I see you know I
think this I think posted here
see this.
What you see is
competing businesses in the same
industry will will typically
protest water right applications
of each other as a way to try
to.
Harm for you know because some
sort of detriment to a
competitor.
And
that I think is you know
something to think about in
terms of the application process
is that it's not always done
because the protest and and or
even really intend to show
impairment they're using the
protest period the weighted
delay a change of business
operations of a competitor you
know that that's very common.
and madam chair representative
maybe you know this to be
something for Mr Bennett is
answer but if there is which is
stated in the state The and we
have that leapfrog.
Of a water right over.
Thank you.
To me that there is a remedy for
thank you to feel that.
Water right eight.
If you are at least harming them
I think the remedy would be for
the party claiming impairments.
To bring an action in District
Court.
Inst the water user that is
allegedly causing the impairment
in other words just a direct
action for injunctive relief.
Thank you and they're in the
field that the use of the other
upstream or downstream farmer
not on their state yet causing
impairment.
You madam chair Representative
innovative can't you take yes it
is aggrieved.
File for injunctive relief in
District Court.
Temporary restraining order and
preliminary injunction.
Madam chair should I I
Representative Chandler
rejecting responded that.
If if you.
If you may madam chair.
madam chair we just what was
going to be just one of the
things my suggestion would be
that if you do that as sponsor
on Representative Chandler I.
Perhaps the others who are
waiting in line to speak might
want to weigh in before you take
it to the conference because
they may bring up a point or two
that has not yet been discussed.
Madam chair and speaker up I
appreciate the speaker
suggestion but I really feel
that this this bill should be
passed out of committee and we
can continue our conversations
in terms of how this bill could
be
could be amended assuming the
parties can come to an agreement
as to what an appropriate
pulmonary approval process
should look like.
You have the floor Mr speaker.
I'm just curious if if miss
madam chair Mister Bennett had.
the thought about the ability of
and take it in the injunctive
relief.
Court I thank you madam chair
and Mr speaker I can just tell
you a couple things anecdotally
I I I I believe that
That folks are funded from the
cells in the situation I felt
like they had to bring the
matter to the state engineer
first and if the state engineer
rules that that what they did
was lawful that it would have to
be yield from there I can just
tell you anecdotally you may
know Stephen on this.
Was a water attorney of Los
crucis and he testified but I
believe it was two years ago
could have been four years ago
Committee
that that's what he did you know
he object at the center level
appeal that the District Court
and a couple times when it
looked like it was going to be
try to District Court the
applicant simply withdrew their
application and kind of mood at
the with the situation out I'm
not sure that that's the only
process that's available to
folks but that is the process I
think folks are using I'm myself
I've never been involved in a
case like that in faced with
that decision about what
strategy has to take.
Madam chair representative it is
possible right me.
It I mean why why couldn't
initiate yes did field another
yes users use is causing them
immediate reputable injury why
can't why couldn't they just
take you go and get more in the
supply for temporary restraining
order.
Madam chair Representative Mr
speaker I'm not gonna say any
anything's impossible I just
wonder whether
what the other side would say if
you brought it to District Court
is that this is a matter that's
before the state engineer and
you need to exhaust your your
remedies there.
I'm not sure how court would
decide.
Well so madam chair and agency
budget so if you just simply
have someone using water right.
Using water and you feel that
that you are being harmed
there's no administrative
process the state engineer.
If I feel the some upstream
users over diverting I can
attempt to get a state issued
issue a compliance order.
Or I can just have a.
I can I can bring a claim
against the upstream user that
they are over diverting it
causing injury.
Without involving sitting here.
Madam chair in Mr speaker.
I'm not sure that that simple I
do believe that there is some
case law New Mexico you know
that says that in many
situations like that where you
object to something happening
upstream from you
that if you don't have an
adjudicated basin and so
therefore you can compare your
quantity in priority to their
educated funding priority
that you don't have remedy but
then there's some cases that
say in limited circumstances you
might have a remedy if there is
an education so I believe it's
hard to make a blanket statement
about that.
I'm last madam chair
Representative Chandler and the
committee is are you aware of.
The work
That is being done for thank you
is and your Gators on the Chama.
To.
In for leasing water right out
of the storage network you for
the benefit of small your Gators
on the Chama.
Madam speaker up.
Speaker madam chair Mister
speaker I am not but perhaps Mr
benefited as is.
Madam chair Mister speaker I'm
somewhat aware of it I know that
we had as one of our
I which witnesses who testified
this morning before the Senate
conservation committee a
gentleman who would certainly
know about that because he is
the president of the real Thomas
thank you so sedition
But but I know of a very little
bit about it not not as much as
I don't know what your question
is but I just know a bit about
it.
Well I thought the chairman
thank you association is trying
to set up of.
Process for them to leave.
Water right.
From.
Stored
water in AVIC you reservoir.
For times of shortage.
And if this bill goes into place
after the effective date that
program for the I think yes the
ciation.
Would be impossible I mean it
would kill the ability for thank
you users to have you have short
term leases of water from the
reservoir when it if there's a
protest the lease to be yeah
even a protester there be
several months of approval
process from the state engineer.
And and by the time you get
approval.
Your crop your.
Rob me the water or the dead.
So madam chair I I I.
Well I think I think my my
position is clear I have
enormous misgivings about
the unintended consequences and
I
I think it would be you have a
very good idea to.
It's a pause button for forty
hours the staff on the agenda if
you're willing madam chair on
Monday and it's been a little
bit time to get it right.
selfishly enough if the bill
goes over to the Senate
You know that if the Senate is.
Coming up with a solution and.
I feel like
we have the expertise in the
house to get it right.
Thank you madam chair and
anything else.
Next I have Representative Cook.
Chairman miss my hand down.
Are you done okay.
All right there you go
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair.
Our church.
Well so.
I think we have the state
engineer with us and madam chair
I was wondering.
If I could ask the state
engineer a couple questions.
I thank you is particularly
knowledgeable and interested in
the topic and is probably the
one expert.
That is so.
That that obviously has a
statutory role to play in the
state of this issue so would you
allow me the courtesy of asking
the state engineer few questions
with you so well.
That is fine let me tell
Georgia it's our John Deere
Torio and you should be in the
in attendee.
Representative he's got his hand
up now so if you would
Not him to speak.
That's good okay that's funny so
he's moved to panelists now so
we can are you can ask you a
question.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair of the.
I was kind of interested in the
process that the state engineers
office goes through we have an
application reaches the office
to release water on a short term
basis and in my area is
generally by a farmer needing
water quickly to get all across
it's probably going to die in
the drought otherwise so Mister
I guess I can't call you
Secretary Mr engineer could you
kind of explain the process and
tell us
whether or not.
The process and then whether you
can put any conditions on that
approval.
Thank you madam chair and
representative Nibert yeah of
the application process it's
rich relatively same as a just a
regular process the applicant
does ask for preliminary
approval we've got enough of
those over the years where they
know to ask for that up front we
do a complete impairment
analysis of hydrologic and
impairment ounces of this so and
then you give you an example of
it's a request for say a ten
year lease will look at the the
amount of water that was applied
for the move from location and
the move to a location we'll
check for impairments at both
the move from and move to
locations for the entire period
of the lease so if if the
preliminary approvals granted
and it's a and they're asking
for ten years will take that
amount of water
well for that entire period of
time and then we'll run a
hydrologic models to make sure
that there's no impairments of
and
Representative I a I we do put
conditions on those permits we
can put conditions on
preliminary approvals in fact of
any permitted the state engineer
issues is under the state
engineers continuing
jurisdiction so something
happens along the way and I know
there's been a lot of
discussions about discussion
about some of the intrepid work
down in the the rate goes.
Even though that preliminary
approval was issued if I'd seen
that there was some impairment
along the way that could have
been affecting our compact
obligations or is things I could
have interceded and acted on on
that particular application so
there there are a lot of actions
in place and I hope that does
answer your question
Representative and madam chair.
Yes Sir madam chair Mr chair of
the.
Hellman analysis that you
perform is specifically designed
to protect existing water rights
in that area.
Madam chair representative
Nibert to a yes that's what we
we re check on so if we if we're
looking at a a groundwater of
moving to a new location so it's
going to see said one spot and
and it's going to take up in
another spot the that new place
of use well look at all the the
wells in that particular area to
make sure that based on the
amounts on to and the duration
of pumping looking at the
drawdown of sex associated with
the impairments to that move to
location so yes it's so we look
at every existing water right
that's in place.
At both locations move from to.
Madam chair yeah Mister engineer
they.
What severity of courses what's
route Water you are Rossel
artesian basin
I'm not all that first yeah
surface waters and and the
appropriation waters out
strains but it is a process
similar between groundwater and
surface water and is the R. the
issue of empowerment of
similar as you go through those
applications to make sure that
if you're on a stream system I
think the simple was all of our
Honda over the real road does
are aware of the it also
our waste water from downstream
user you still want to add a
parent process our reserve bank
sure that there was still
sufficient water to meet the
other
priority water rights owners are
claims did you try to talk about
the difference of the two or if
there is any difference.
Madam chair representative
Nibert to there's really not a
difference of what we still look
at the the totality of the Water
Rights so surface water rate
goes through the exact same
impairments typically and in an
agricultural moved to of to that
come when this at that culture
to minutes full industrial move
we do give the water right
haircuts because we're only
allowing the the consumptive use
portion of that water rights to
be transferred so that the move
from location doesn't experience
any impairments and then and
then we look to the transfer
that right to the move to
location but the exact the same
thing we look at all the of the
impacts of existing water right
holders at both locations.
Your experience I guess you're
bit of the office off and on for
for quite some time now but in
your experience
As the courts.
Really way down of overturn
HSD apartment determinations on
a pulmonary approval.
Madam chair representative nine
birds there's not one
preliminary approval that's been
overturned.
After hearing about you know
with respect to the state
engineer administrative process
that's were protections.
Sent evidence of actual harm and
then there's not a case that I'm
aware of that preliminary
approval has been overturned by
a point after of fuel of the
state engineer decision so again
we're we're really we're really
careful there's there's I would
say we're at without any mistake
but it's minimal based on the
number of these preliminary
approvals that we do and the
benefits it provides of for so
many users across the state in
New Mexico.
Madam chair Mister engineer you
mentioned you're not without
state but I presume that the
mistakes made your continuing
jurisdiction over that issue
would allow you to come back
that I'm modify any prior lease
approval.
Madam chair representative
Nibert yes that's exactly right.
Madam chair I have a number of
other questions that I don't
know that they're appropriate
for the state engineer but maybe
if he would stay on if you would
so I have a couple friends but I
think most of.
My other questions for the
representative
expert all of.
Madam chair and representative.
I'm a little bit
I I guess so what.
At a loss.
Because I I I I heard a lot of
words about the diversion and
afterwards that I associate with
with surface use at my specific
issue forces groundwater yeah.
We we dealt with this issue I
thought two years ago yeah I
thought we have.
Representative tackle the the
concerns of the just like you
brought up and so the question.
That I have is.
Two years later.
Why are we dealing with the
issue or do you have yeah I
thought we we gave the a site
here is exactly what they wanted
which was a veto power over
applications
it two years ago.
Madam chair Mr speaker.
Madam chair representative sorry
The point you know I I've been a
little distressed by this a
fixation that we've been having
on the assay kias and in and
what I I think I hear the
question is and I don't mean to
be crass about it madam chair
and representative is look we we
believe we the committee and we
the legislature believe we
address the concerns of the
acequia is two years ago so why
aren't they happy and if that's
a I apologize madam chair and
Representative if that's a kind
of a really direct way of saying
what you said but if that's the
question is that the question
madam chair and and
Representative.
That's certainly a very blunt
way of saying.
Okay madam chair and
representative I'm I imagine
some of you miss me from
Judiciary.
So I can't speak for the sake
yes per se madam chair and
representative but as I said in
my earlier remarks this issue
has to do with how water rights
are treated in the state.
And and whether or not the state
engineer is following the the
the law as as created by the
legislature and I think everyone
in the state who owns water
rights should be concerned about
that that fact whether they're
in a state kia whether they're a
big ag or would you know whether
they are you know home home or a
homeowner in corral just so you
know I I I I'm a little I have
been a little been.
Been a little put off by that
kind of a question madam chair
and representative in part
because it it feels like you
want to put the SAT is in a box
and say okay here's your box and
stay in your box and you know
that's how it feels to me Madam
chair and representative so that
that's my reaction to your
question I I I it may not be
satisfactory but that's that's
my reaction to what you're
asking.
Yes.
My Smith my expert may also
supplement my answer madam
chair.
We go ahead Mr chair madam chair
and representative Nibert just
really quickly to get ten
seconds on on your question on
your direct question which is
that your you're correct that
surface water and groundwater
are two different systems that
are interconnected but they are
treated in two different ways
and are statutes are two
different systems but the we did
hear testimony again two years
ago four years ago from folks
who are in groundwater country
where wells are what everything
happens with wells agriculture
everything you name it and they
have the experience of of one of
these unlawful Water these
procedures are coming into their
neighborhood a brat a new water
use in their aquifer in their
neighborhood so I I do think
that there is a reason for every
water right owner whether
they're a surface water owner or
an underground owner to wonder
and worry M. is something new
going to come in my office for
that I didn't anticipate and
that potentially threatens my
supply.
Madam chair Mister Bennett is
you you you need state of lawful
and yet from.
Senator brought on as the
speaker pointed out many years
significant significant
developments have.
Occurred in the state are as a
result of.
These are.
Approvals we state our water
yeah and so I'm not sure that
I I mean I I see your word.
As an opinion not a statement of
fact and certainly the state
engineer our way of Senators
actions or waffles I.
To process the signs at and I
think the courts generally give
the HSD subbed out for us to to
be able to interpret the
statutes of direct impact yeah
and so madam chair
and representative
I would.
I would like to direct your
attention to section seventy
twos legislative staff story ask
you.
If these.
Approvals to be granted
immediately.
How does a how can the least
become effective for immediate
use of water.
Mr Chairman said director that
had me.
It was directed at madam chair
and representative.
Thank you Madam chair
representative if I might ask
you Mr Bennett beat is yes
answer that question.
I'm.
Madam chair and Representative
Nibert
We got into this a little bit in
with the representative on the
queen's question.
I believe that the way that
judge Romero interpreted the
statute is that
the the section which in your
Bill Page two section be
existing language that uses the
word effective for immediate use
is talking about two types of
transactions I can have a water
right that I want to least you
but we agree that the leases and
not gonna take place until five
years well we're gonna get it
taken care of in terms of the
permit right now but the other
kind is I can have a water right
anyone at least you and we agree
that as soon as possible we're
going to I have the least take
place and that's what I think is
meant by immediate use again I
would direct you to seventy two
dash.
six dash six of the law if no
objections are filed the state
engineer may grant application
without hearing the implication
as the state engineer if there
is an objection filed has to
hold a hearing before your grant
application so in light of that
that's what I think immediate
use means it's a type of
transaction rather than a
statement that
that the other set a sentence in
the statute is not applicable.
Well a practical terms madam
chair in Representative and Mr
better yes yeah and why the area
my district our.
When your crops that are.
Die because of the drought and
may need immediate use of water.
waiting.
Two weeks even.
Is not an option.
If your neighbor has some water
that they have not we're
I have not used for there are a
lot more
Getting so my appropriate waste
so that I can immediately turn
on my your gate is yes a.
Needed and that you're
reasonable backstop and.
For all by for for for most of
our your.
Public career either as a county
commissioner now the
representative
these things come up from time
to time and and we have farmers
to would be losing entire crops
that their work for the prompt
action of the state engineers
office and Rossell allowing the
application of water to be
released and a little bit route
almost immediately so that those
crops can continue to grow.
Oh now.
Sorry what.
I'm sorry apologies I my
apologies.
So you know the does.
The practical aspects of the.
Have the ability to waste water
and to allow it to be
immediately use is of paramount
importance
yeah Rossel I suspect and other
agricultural areas I believe the
speaker pointed out that there
are also very important in in
economic development.
Issues where you have our
cultural water that yes often
times least so that the factory
can be built for that
probably Facebook the bills that
I went to.
and the state highway department
is way down and set the.
The way roads are built around
the state for.
Maintained and repaired is the
ability to to waste water on a
temporary basis so that they can
camera.
Go forward on their construction
projects and so there's there's
a couple projects in the state
right now that are very
significant.
And if this bill goes through.
The ability of the state of New
Mexico to secure our those two
projects is jeopardized by this
by this one built.
And so madam chair and
representative.
This is not just a.
I between.
Owners of water rights
this this this this is.
The state engineer.
Is capable of and addressing
your issues of the they need at
the statute based be revised to
to to
What our current practice in the
particularly with respect to
groundwater that then we would
probably need to do that but I I
think that the state engineer
has consistently of.
Done this and.
Maybe it's because it's a mining
company I don't know why.
C. R. D. broader it's probably
because of the about a water
ball down across the but you get
to to the other areas of the
state where were you the quick
application of water.
There's gonna be.
A mechanism to address those
needs yeah it's not.
It's not that you're creating a
new water right you're just
simply we stayed water that
could otherwise be put to
beneficial use out of already.
Judicata place in your baby
movie that store you may be
using it for for the highway
department
Using it to to do some things
for their construction project
or in the case of a factory or
or another commercial facilities
being built are you your trucks
water to it to wherever it's
needed but that Water Rights
exist and that water right owner
could apply it right then and
there yeah and this makes
economic sense for a variety of
reasons the procedure I sat for
a variety of reasons number one
I will honor Water Rights jam
take some advantage of that one
that property right that they
all
yeah and so for me I think some
of the statements that were made
during the testimony.
Right right.
The statement was made water is
a lot of money community the
ability to move that water
quickly and to put it on
someone's property quickly and
expeditiously yes live because
we know what a matter of a week
or two those crops will die
without the ability to do this
also protect our way of life you
know our farming communities of
are are certainly
I would say under attack but but
that way of life it seems to be
getting.
Reduced in number most of us
used to be farmers and Alice
Paul percentage of us are yes
Sir keeping family farms
thriving and growing I think
it's an important
public policy
yeah and and I agree we need to
protect that way a lot allowing
the quick and propped leasing of
water an application about water
bears that out to.
Madam chair.
Representative
Talk about a court case
of the District Court level
always kind of bothers me
because we're we've done that
with respect to the so Senator
cases where subway.
But this is a District Court
cases are that has made the
decision.
That has been cited are.
Madam chair representative could
you repeat the question please.
The the the court decision that
that has been our talked about
regarding intrepid potash are
down there Carlsbad.
Is a District Court.
Decision as of not I'm Madam
chair representative yes it is
and yes it is on appeal and yes
madam chair I recognize that a
District Court case is not
presidential.
And so that really means we
should pay too much attention to
And so I hate to I hate to see
us.
Start arguing whether the
decision by Representative
Romero is used good batter
different.
yes yes District Court decision
it's all yield and maybe we'll
have some clarity later on but
Yet all all right I hope that
some of this is not a.
Effort to do an end run around
the the appellate process.
The.
There's a number of issues I
think that
This bill raises yeah
It will be interesting.
How it plays out but if I
understand.
Ministry of wall correctly.
Madam chair and representative.
It is my thought that
administrative agencies are
generally given a.
save some broad latitude in
interpreting
the the statutes that are
affect them and and as long as
they are reasonably
following those statutes are
usually given preferences yes by
recollection correct.
Madam chair representative I'm
not an expert in administrative
law.
All right.
I have been most of my career
involved to some extent with
with respect to administrative
law though not necessarily the
state engineers office.
Most of the decisions that I
reviewed all of the over the
years is that thank courts do
you have some deference to
administrative agencies and as
long as they're raised for your
for putting those statutes there
are interpretations generally
going to be.
Given the fact that so you know
the the state engineer as well.
Indicated that they interpret
this out those allowing this
procedure
have.
Have been doing it for for
twenty twenty years or so now
I certainly think that until we
get some some decision from our
point of saying otherwise.
We're going to.
One two cents I think we ought
to let.
Role play out.
I think we ought to your four
runner up
do anything.
We better have a bill that
recognizes Senator number one we
live in a desert number two our
farmers and ranchers are
dependent upon our water for
there's.
Being sustained and that we need
a mechanism that doesn't take a
year and a half or even two
months or frankly even two weeks
to get
Water waste and put on that crop
and so we're really want to deal
with practical plans we're we
need to do so I would thank all
water right owners would be
interested in.
And making sure that.
But that can be done which
Representative well I obviously
won't be supporting the your
bill I think that.
It brings up a lot of.
Issues around
That I have of.
Some purpose but if this bill is
instituted.
We're going to have a real
problem on our hands
particularly in parts of the
state where our ground water is
utilized for agricultural
purposes so thank you madam
chair thank you Representative.
Thank you Representative Ely.
Here I I do have
yeah madam chair which is going
to say I mean I'm hearing all
this and what I'm hearing is is
that
uncertainty is and delay.
Is what's going to affect
everything
the speaker and I have a
friendly disagreement about what
happened Intel's I was the chair
of the San Juan county
commission out of that and do
with water but I think it makes
the point that and so the
representative Nibert madam
chair that
Water's critical and moving
quickly is critical and I do
like the idea of keeping some
urgency to this process I don't
want to see this bill I die this
committee and if Representative
Chandler is committed to
continuing to work with
stakeholders moving forward and
heading into the floor
we Representative Nibert I just
finished a bill on exemptions in
homestead that she was
incredibly helpful on I don't
think that works seamlessly
urgency remains and if we don't
do something this time
there's gonna be tremendous
uncertainty as a fact in this
area given judge of marriage
decision in the appellate
process we're left left with not
knowing what's going on so I
think it's valuable to try and
solve this problem right now.
And it does seem to me that the
solution is in sight if we can
work out something that will
address those emergency
situations or those situations
where things need to happen
quickly and those were they need
to slow down in keeping with the
statute at the same time are
giving the public in the state
engineer very clear directions
to what we expect so I mean I
appreciate what the Sanchez I
supported by support because I
think are what's happening in
this session for whatever reason
as we do seem of the session
resolving longstanding problems
but only because
you know we're just creating
urgency to get things salt and
so I like the idea of doing that
and I am supporter of this for
that reason but I'd like to see
the process continue as it has
the floor thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative Eli
for.
Senator katana.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members I certainly appreciated
the long and lively discussion I
just first wanted to say as I
have other times I have surface
and ground water rights I think
I'm the only legislator coming
out of the nana County maybe
myself in senators about this
that still do and for me not
only as Ag part of my family's
legacy in the valley it's how I
afford to come up and be an
unpaid state legislature because
you all know that no pecans we
got a pecan check a couple days
ago and that means that can
cover I under and income when I
leave the rest of my life behind
to come and be an unpaid state
representative I just want to
name that the first time I heard
this bill was in twenty nineteen
when I was a member on the house
in Atwater Committee and since
then this issue this bill has
become something of a
fascination to me I've heard so
many reasonable concerns about
what has now been the practice
of the OSCE potentially over
decades and for me I want to
have a bit of a bipartisan
disagreement with both some of
the previous speakers that means
it's important that we got state
investments because of this
practice we want to keep growing
in New Mexico because we can
move water quickly whether or
not that's appropriate for me is
still a question and whether or
not this was ever lawful is
still a question that being said
just even during the course of
this hearing madam chair
representative I've heard from
many Mexican that's been waiting
seventeen months to move water
pool well with the court order
backing it up and no opposition
so I continue to ask just as I
did in twenty nineteen Madam
chair representative what we
need to do to invest and fund
and resource OSC so that they
can move through these hearing
processes appropriately and with
timeliness because frankly even
with the practice we have.
Of people are not getting the
the timely consideration that
they deserve on these transfers
also I do want to name again it
was mentioned earlier that this
two year moratorium was added on
in house day I think that's
really important and as
Representative Eli just named I
do think the legislative process
can put some urgency and fire
under figuring out this issue
and I think that two year
moratorium gives me room to
support this bill because we do
need to fix that this out of the
legislature I believe that I
don't believe they should be a
decision squarely in the courts
but I do think since this
practice is not currently lawful
if we want
and expedient and appropriate
and reasonable preliminary
approval process that's on us so
Madam chair representative I
don't quite have questions today
I think most of mine that I've
jotted down over the day have
been answered I support moving
this forward so that we continue
to feel the pressure of figuring
it out especially with the two
year moratorium giving us the
protection and our water uses
the protection to do that and I
certainly want to continue to
see the conversations clarified
about how we get a process for
preliminary approval right
certainly in my part of New
Mexico in elephant Butte
irrigation district central to
that conversation for me is
making sure Ag users have room
to sustain their crops and
sustain their livelihoods so I
am in support today madam chair
and wanted to keep figuring out
this process thank you madam
chair.
Madam chair when you're ready.
Thank you very much Madam vice
chair on Representative Eli I'm
sure I do pass.
I will second the motion.
Madam chair may I make a
substitute motion for a half
without recommendation.
The speaker makes a motion for a
pass without recommendation.
Is there a second for that.
Also in the.
Representative the.
Albert's second stat motion.
Is there discussion on the
substitute motion.
I guess my my senses let me just
why and here's I don't like to
send a bill to the floor with
the no Representative.
Judiciary but it's apparently
not it's it's not purpose right
so that's my my two cents worth
will be clear right call the
roll.
Representative Alcon.
The substitute motion we are.
Yes the substitute motion for no
rack.
Representative Armstrong.
Yes.
Representative Cook.
Yes.
Mr speaker yes and I'd like to
explain my vote.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Lewis now.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative Nibert.
Yes I'd like to explain more
about.
Representative Rehm.
Yes.
Yes is money yes ma'am
Representative Townsend.
Yes.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Now.
Mr speaker.
Thank you yes I did madam chair
I appreciate hearing all of the
COVID thought I've been.
Communicating on the sideline
with Representative Chandler
throughout the debate over the
last hour and I think that we
are going to be able to come up
with some.
The positive changes and the
bill gets ready to be heard on
the floor and I appreciate the
willingness of everyone to share
their thoughts and look forward
to.
good process over the next few
days.
As we get ready to hear the bill
with changes on a four thank
you.
Representative.
Mr speaker both voted yes on his
motion but I didn't hear about
announced I was letting them
explain their vote it was eight
to four.
In favor of that no.
Right okay I lost track because
of those strange boating
patterns here sorry.
But wanted to explain his boat.
Yes I know and I'm gonna tell
the representatives there on a
timer go ahead Representative
Nibert just kidding.
Thank you madam chair I I course
I'm not in favor of this
legislation hi I hope that the
our concerns can be addressed
and fixed and allow what I
consider to be a necessary quick
and prompt the ability to secure
water from a water right summer
at and I supported the the
motion because I didn't think I
could get any traction on
getting a table for that they're
not passed thank you madam
chair.
Who else needed to explain.
I think you explained already
Representative madam vice chair
right.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank.
Representative Chandler thank
you very much thank you can I
just say one thing I won't be
long sure okay this was one of
my first bills that I introduced
as a freshman Representative
madam chair and it may be the
bill that follows me through my
whole career in the legislature.
Thank you very much I had a
couple of ten year efforts.
Madam chair representative
initiative told is that it means
yes it's being another song for.
The
water related thing you you
don't want to suffer through
that again madam chair.
We could prepare you could get
in the car company but okay
thank you very.
Hi to me and that we'll see
everybody's to the rest of the
house Judiciary sticking around
we're gonna go with
Representative Hochman Vigil
your bill's right now because I
don't think they're going to
take as long.
And out where we'll do one
thirty seven after we do our.
Health and.
All the Water Rights folks for
now.
Thank you madam chair so I
proceed.
I think we're ready for you go
ahead great thank you madam
chair so I we are here on to
behavioral health built the
first of which is house bill two
fifteen for which I'll be acting
as my own expert so we'll keep
it simple madam chair what to
fifteen does is it seeks to
require the implementation of
what's called the spurts
protocol which is screening
brief intervention and referral
to treatment services for
suspected of substance use
disorder patients and are based
health care settings emergency
rooms
at your your normal family care
providers or anywhere where
these types of encounters can be
accomplished it I House Bill to
fifteen also requires codifies
that prescriptions for
benzodiazepines are are included
in the prescription monitoring
database so every time a
prescription for a
benzodiazepine Ms is written
requires that that that provider
are the pharmacist check against
the PNP to make sure that
there's no potential abuse
occurring for that substance and
then the third thing that house
bill two fifteen does is it
requires the
access of medication assisted
treatments for for those.
Individuals going to our county
jails to could have substance
use disorders and could benefit
from the delivery of such
services and with that madam
speaker I will stand for
questions.
Thank you Representative and I
know you have a proposed
amendment for our committee but
I don't think that's going to
make a difference in your
testimony right public.
I thank you madam chair I I
don't I can just explain the
amendment quickly if you prefer
we can do it later to go ahead
and do that okay the amendment
in the tier two number is two
two zero zero seven one point
one and all it does madam chair
is it's the strikes the word
enrollees and the title of the
legislation and also the phrase
eligible enrollees and the first
section because of the potential
conflict that was brought to my
attention with that a federal
law called and tala which
requires that those individuals
seen in emergency rooms that
that that we providers can't
determine whether or not they're
eligible or have eligible
insurance coverage before they
be seen as so we we wanted to
make sure that support services
are are provided regardless of
whether or not someone has
eligible as an eligible enrollee
for care and then also we add
discretionary component we don't
you know need podiatrists
utilizing support protocols if
they're not necessary.
Okay thank you very much.
Let's go to the audience is
we'll do a quick call here
fifteen seconds if you're in
favor of house bill two fifteen
please yes and if you're in
opposition please stop now.
Okay doesn't we have eight
people here in favor and that's
yes so my instincts about the.
Possible lack of opposition were
correct let me see if anybody
who
Okay we do have some wishing to
speak mag.
Alan.
Go ahead and yourself.
You thank you very much for
thank you for your public
service in your willingness to
stick with this technological
era that we're in I'm making
account executive director New
Mexico behavior health providers
association and our cessation
stance in favor of this bill we
know that when individuals are
engaged in treatment they
started treatment are there
considering treatment
particularly the medicated
assisted treatment models it's
very wise for them to continue
that process even if they are
incarcerated we think this is a
huge step forward and we're very
much in favor of the bill thank
you very much.
Thank you next I have cared what
law.
Thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee care the national
association of social workers
New Mexico chapter and we stand
in strong support of the stuff
thank you.
Thank you I don't see any more
hands what's going to committee
members and let's take a let's
take action on the amendment at
this time.
I'll move the amendment for
discussion purposes.
Second okay
Representative
How the hell explained it.
Are there any questions on it.
It is in the Here file.
Representative Cook moves to
adopt the amendment.
Second for Representative Lewis
on the amendment representative
Nibert.
No okay.
But because we're having a
little trouble because not
everybody's basically showing
we're going to go ahead and call
the roll on the amendment on a
docking in New.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Cook yes.
Mr speaker.
Yes.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Lewis yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative nightmare yes
Representative Rehm yes.
Representative Townsend yes.
Thank.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Yes.
Trump is here we need your
amendment is adopted
Representative Hochman Vigil and
so we have.
Great detail and for discussion
from the committee members first
I have Representative night
Thank you madam chair just one.
I noticed on day six of the
bottom section three.
When I first read it I'm I
thought it was part of the
existing statute but that's not
the case of and it seems to be
the Legislative Council Service
needs to note this material but
Madam chair representative you
kind of.
Tell us why the temporary
provision it is there are what
it is.
Thank you very much madam chair
representative Nibert it so what
a great the provision is
designed to do we have had pilot
programs for inmates T.
throughout the state one very
successful one the Bernalillo
county detention center another
one in Rio Arriba county at from
which we've seen great success
with the provision of these
types of resources to county
jail inmates what this is
designed to do is require a
pilot program to be expanded to
other county jails throughout
the state pending the
availability of funding which
are there there should be
through various federal grants
and also are grants available
through the HSD it is a similar
law Madam chair representative
Nibert it was introduced by
Representative Romero I believe
at twenty nineteen that just
require the provision about
services there county jails and
because of various issues with
infrastructure and the
availability of providers and
resources that was unsuccessful
so what we did over at the
interim or the last two in terms
actually met with a lot of the
the counties the association
counties county jail or County
jail share some mornings and ask
them you know what date what was
that they needed to start
providing these types of
services and this is the
language that we came up with so
as to kind of give them a gentle
I just don't push office so that
they can get the funding they
need to start providing that and
that once everybody sees that
this is a very successful
program I'm gonna be working
with the HSD over the next and
trying to make sure that we
secure funding through the
appropriations process so that
they can no longer be a
temporary provision but a a
permanent one.
So madam chair representative if
if there if it's not funded by
the state budget amendment I
guess our office work if they
are funded the night the night
do the I think you're supposed
to but
madam chair.
Representative.
Maybe we need to bring this to
rivals attention because I
didn't catch that this was very
mature usually we re seeing Jim
material Michael page one line
twenty two when it's inserted
and this is a lot of the
existing statutes so maybe baby
Legislative Council Service days
to change your so
what you're doing is tempered
provisions so that we well we're
right we know that it's it's
there that's.
While we cover madam chair thank
you.
You Representative Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you again Representative I just
wanted to speak in favor of this
medication assisted treatment is
I think the way to go we've had
a lots of hearings on it in the
interim as well as in previous
sessions.
I and the screening and I think
Medicaid the HSD is in favor of
of that as well and
so these are all I think good of
policy are in trying to address
substance abuse and and
behavioral health issues so I
just wanted to lend my support
and endorsement thank you.
Representative Eli.
Madam chair I I I just echo
something but I had the same
problem I'm looking at the bill
I thought that was in the
existing statutes section three
that is a little scary because I
I really thought that was the
existing law and now I realize
it's not it is something we're
gonna have to bring to Mr
Burciaga is tension I agree with
Representative not responding to
point because we are looking at
things with a certain format and
if it doesn't say it's a new
material we have no way of
knowing that it's not so I
appreciate the clarification
thank you madam chair.
Madam chair I might
representatives I just texted
the director I I I agree with
you I if you had the brought it
up I would I I would have
thought the same thing so thanks
for the thanks for the heads up
we'll get on it.
You know what we could do we
could.
We could agree to that
amendment.
The new rule is.
You have to get the council
service to prepare the amendment
for the committee report.
So we could agree on that and
the.
That's it we've got on that but
you get the
grafted.
For our committee report.
Just.
Sure madam chair absolutely I'd
be open to that I think it's
better than doing a floor
amendment.
I would agree yeah.
So I would suggest that
Representative I have you all
for discussion.
Madam chair if you're ready I
was going to make a do pass
motion but now I got confused
about which Bill number this was
of Representative Hochman Vigil
so I'm not quite ready as I got
drawn into the conversation
about the mistake in the LCS.
So my someone offer me that
which bill we are on is it to
fifteen or to change its ticker
so madam chair I had not not
next year ask on house bill two
fifteen as amended or okay.
All right Representative is
wrong with the second that okay.
I just want to say something
before we take the doctor and
that is that we had heard in the
interim and I think maybe the
regular session about the
amazing success.
The medical chair.
Medication assisted treatment.
In that
County detention.
But I heard a presentation on it
from Dr Andy she and Dr George
Davis to burst instance
pediatrician.
I'm the amazing success with
young people.
Who are experiencing addiction
or struggling with addiction and
in the juvenile.
The system and then really young
parents whose babies were
enrolled in the on the program
for drug addicted moms and it
holds great promise so I'm I
think this is a wonderful.
The puzzle for criminal justice
reform so I'm really happy about
it and and improving our Peter
Hall system so can we please
call the roll on house bill two
fifteen as amended.
Representative aucun yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Cook yes.
Mr speaker yes.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Lewis.
Yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert yes.
Representative Rehm yes.
Representative Townsend.
Yes.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Yes.
Voted twelve to zero we have a
two passed as amended.
Okay very.
Very good thank you madam chair.
Go to your second bill which is
two fifty three is that right.
That is correct madam chair
members of the committee house
bill two fifty three this is
another mental behavioral health
bill and it seeks to and then be
children's mental health and
developmental disabilities act
to allow for limited disclosure
of confidential health
information for research
purposes under certain
conditions and this bill also
seeks to bring New Mexico
statutes in line with other
applicable federal laws and
allows qualified entities to
conduct meaningful and
beneficial research into the
effectiveness of behavior health
programs throughout the state
and with that madam chair I will
stand for questions.
I was going to ask the vice
chair do Madam chair for just a
moment okay we're good
Representative do you have any
experts with you today that are
going to speaker.
I thank you very much madam
chair madam vice chair members
of the committee I have Dr
Robert Larson from UNM will be
joining us and also Dr Paul
grant from the county thank you
and I heard you ready for
questions but remember you
noting that additional you're
gonna have somebody so we'll get
them pulled in really quickly
thank you madam chair and and I
also I will defer to them if
they want to make any statements
as well.
Let's see if we have them in.
Robert Larson.
And Paul Garin.
Okay I see Richard Larson I'm
here I'm sorry Richard.
Both your Larson.
All and all is and is well thank
you all for doing it we're
either of you going to introduce
yourself to make a brief
statement before you went to
public comment.
Yes I would Richard Larson I'm
the executive vice chancellor at
the UNM health sciences center
and we are in support of this
bill and I I greatly appreciate
the opportunity to have
collaborated on this bill with
the representative as well as
with the city and county so
we're we're we think this is a
good bill and.
support.
Thank you and hall is there
something you'd like to wait
offered before we go to public
comment.
When introduction my name is
Paul Garin on a work for the
institute for Social Research at
the university of New Mexico and
we're doing some contracted work
for the Bernalillo county to
deal with this issue.
Thank you Representative with
that we'll go to our public
joining us today we're first
going to start by putting up a
poll if any of our folks that
had the committees over want to
weigh in you can please indicate
your support or opposition to H.
B. two fifty three.
We'll get that pull up now.
We'll leave this for about
thirty seconds after that if
anyone in the audience today
would like to speak in
opposition or support to HB to
fifty three we'll go there next
if you doesn't look like we have
folks in opposition today but if
there is somebody out there that
wanted to make a comment in
opposition to H. B. two fifty
three please raise your hand
now.
It looks like we had several
folks going in today all of
those in support of this bill
seeing no hands raised for
public in opposition we will now
go to those in support of HB two
fifty three B. like to make a
comment we will call on you one
by one you'll need to and you
yourself after we call your name
and please note the timer on the
screen as you will be needed at
the
end of your time.
First we have Barbara diamond.
Madam chair members the
committee US Sanchez day hot
would be here my name is Barbara
Damron chief government
relations officer and university
New Mexico and professor of the
school of medicine college of
nursing is Dr Larson stated to
you as work with the sponsor
here as well as with the county
for a few months now on this
bill and your version in New
Mexico supports this bill thank
you very much thank you next we
have Jason Weaks.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Jason Weaks
registered lobbyists from
Bernalillo county this bill is
actually to bring us into come
into conformity with what was
done in twenty nineteen and
house bill two sixty seven that
bill allowed us to do research
in certain limited circumstances
percent the adult behavior
health code we're opening that
seem availability up to the
juvenile code with this bill
really want to thank you NM also
CYFD we've worked with a lot of
partners over the interim to try
to get this language the point
that it's that it's really going
to help us get supplies into
exactly how are behavioral
health programs are working both
adult and juvenile makes really
good decisions about how we
improve them and how we spend
our money from the behavioral
health that point obviously it's
a huge need earlier County and
throughout the state data is key
Representative Eli has a
demonstrated that been proponent
in this bill is the next
progression in that evolution
thank you.
Thank you next I'm finally we
have cared would look.
Was.
Madam chair members the
committee chairman what walk
with the national association of
social workers New Mexico
chapter where we stand strong
support of this in order to get.
Evidence based practice you have
to be able to obtain the data
and this is a great way to do
that
thank you very we want to thank
the sponsor for bringing thank
you.
Thank you Representative is
there anything you'd like to add
before we go to committee.
I thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I'd I
think that's about it ready to
go to the the committee and see
if they have any questions thank
you we're starting with
representative Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you again Representative and
again I just wanna lend my
support and
offered to the committee some
clarity around questions that
came up in committee and that is
any research and I your experts
can we can from this but any
research around people has to go
through an institutional review
board that is highly regulated
by federal and law and and none
of the individually identify on
an identifiable information is
ever released this is for
research purposes only and it is
critical in order to monitor
trends and judge effectiveness
of of treatment programs and so
I I lend my strong support I
think this is really important
thank you.
And I am going to thank you
representative Armstrong I'm
going to give it back to madam
chair Chasey so that I can
participate in this discussion.
At
first I have next I have
Representative Eli.
So madam chair I was gonna make
a motion I don't want to go
ahead of the vice chair she has
discussion about I will wait.
You know wanted to make the
motion discussion because that's
allowed to we've never on the
table no problem.
That your house I'll second.
We do passed house bill two
fifty three and a second by
Representative Armstrong and on
discussion I have a vice chair
representative Cadena.
Thank you madam chair and
representative I certainly
appreciate the intention of the
bill but just want to raise
especially with our expertise in
the audience today the
institutional review boards in
place across this country are
not foolproof nor are they
guaranteed to actually protect
the rights and dignity and lives
of the honorable populations
madam chair representative when
I was in grad school UNM on main
campus I had to do my graduate
research by the standards of the
health sciences center because
at the time the I. R. B. had
approved projects on main campus
that exploited the lives in
information of incarcerated
people in New Mexico there is
certainly examples across this
country where the I. R. B. has
not done their job to protect
people that really need it and
again and again I've seen
examples and in projects that
I've been part of projects where
I've been a principal
investigator or co investigator
including at UNM where there was
a real questions raised about
whether or not the I. R. B. I
was meeting meeting their
ethical obligations to protect
vulnerable populations so I
certainly appreciate the
intention of this bill but want
to make sure we always do so
with a lot of caution and would
love to see in our institutions
that have higher bees in New
Mexico that we continue to build
in safeguards so that that staff
also has some oversight and
accountability beyond what
exists today on the really
important no race bye
Representative Armstrong about
de identified data or data in
the aggregate.
Yes that can be the case but is
also real that primary research
is are people that have brought
data how incredible vaults.
Really potentially sensitive
information and frankly there's
always human error involved
someone could have sensitive
information on a password
protected computer and their
home gets broken into and if
they don't have enough firewall
in other protection that data
can move quickly in the hands of
wrong people so I just wanted to
offer I support this idea I
certainly believe that our state
agencies need more information
so that we can build evidence
based and promising practices
this show up for our families
but I just want to question that
in my experience and across the
country it's been demonstrated
that IRB's have not proven
perfect in protecting the lives
of particularly indigenous
people black people and other
marginalized communities across
the country so I don't buy you
all you and our other
institutions to continue to make
these processes better.
Thank you representative madam
chair.
Thank you.
If I have anybody else here.
Okay.
I don't see any further
discussion we do have a motion
and a second so let's have a
quick call the roll please.
Representative Alcon yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Cook yes.
Mr speaker yes.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Lewis.
Yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert yes
Representative green that's.
Representative Townsend.
Yes.
Thanks Amanda.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Yes.
Voted twelve to zero we have to
pass on house bill two fifty
three.
Thank you thank you madam chair
not.
Thank you.
You bye at my my
right now three out of unanimous
votes and Judiciary this year.
Thank you you may be the only
one with that record.
I'm pretty sure you're the only
one without records.
Keep me apprised madam chair
thank you.
It was it was the it was your
bills it you know we love you
but the state of all you might
not have gotten that if if the
bills did about water or.
Electricity is which is coming
up.
To
reconsider our and can we reach.
Thanks guys.
You can find.
Representative small do you have
anybody who needs to join the
handle that thank you very much
madam chair can I have
Representative Hochman Vigil
Representative me in the.
Well for the we'll have to tell
her you said that thank you.
If you could let and madam chair
Mr Steve Michael and miss in the
Beatles please.
And of course chairwoman blue is
also part
part of this legislation okay.
Do you want
to ensure they get started wait
for justice in the state to have
the yes it looks like we have
I'm not sure we have everybody
you ask for yes go ahead.
Excellent thank you so much
madam chair committee members
deeply appreciate your time
today and the way the importance
of matters that you take up
madam chair and committee
we do have a committee
substitute which I know you all
have seen for house bill one
thirty seven Judiciary Committee
substitute.
before that's discussed madam
chair in committee.
It's at its core a simple piece
of legislation madam chair and
committee there are while we
have the climate crisis which is
affects us significantly here in
New Mexico including through
drought forest fire and in many
other sorts of ways.
Part of our response is to
diversify and grow the ways that
we power our economy
both here in New Mexico
in the United States and really
across the world.
And what that means is that we
are likely madam chair and
committee to see the steep
rises in the consumption of
electricity and therefore the
need to produce electricity to
serve.
Citizens in our state in the
country and across the world and
in fact these sorts of things
present incredible economic
opportunities for us is New
Mexicans even as they pose
significant challenges for our
state our country and our world
when it comes to the climate
crisis.
House bill one thirty seven and
the committee substitute.
Take those challenges on in a
market based way with some
significant changes that will
discuss briefly and we'll we'll
leave to both Mr Michael miss
Beatles to explain some of the
particulars.
But it takes these on so that we
can grow our electricity
production and consumption in
order to continue and in fact
prosper more economically even
as we face the grave and severe
environmental threats that face
us all.
And madam chair committee.
We know that these sorts of
market based solutions are
coming.
they stand they they pose again
economic opportunity.
But also risk madam chair
committee if we don't step up to
the plate and help.
Our state B. and the very best
possible place to compete and in
fact prosper through these
changes and through this on
going energy transition.
Very importantly and that will
go to this to the experts will
also address that I want to say
very clearly that the reason we
need this approach is because we
are in a race with the amount of
carbon dioxide mainly CO two
that's being emitted into our
atmosphere as a world and we
need to lead the way to show
how.
Reducing those emissions and not
sending as much up can benefit
us economically and of course
also environmentally and we will
need vast amounts of new and
additional energy that will be
central to our environment or
our economic prosperity.
And we need to make sure that
that does not.
Contribute vast amounts of new
CO two therefore further
contributing to some of the
climate.
The climate challenges that face
all of us.
Madam chair I know we'll have a
a link the and I'm sure good
discussion today on this
legislation as we noted we do
have a committee substitute and
make significant changes
responding to important
stakeholder input and very
importantly madam chair and
committee it gives a opt in
provision for our municipally
owned
electric generation and
transmission systems as well as
for our co ops here in the state
I'll stop there madam chair I
know madam chair Lewis as part
of this effort as well and then
we would ask briefly madam chair
for our two experts Mr Michael
miss Beatles to briefly offer
COVID if that is okay with you
madam chair.
Representative lost.
You madam chair and committee
members it's good to co sponsor
this with Representative vice
chair small everything he said
is right on point I think we
need to take actions really as
much as we can to address
climate change and I know we do
have a long term goals are long
term efforts but I think in
every instance where we can add
it benchmarks especially those
that could be beneficial to New
Mexico and really have a as
mediators in this bill is
excellent and so that's why I
signed on and I hope that we can
get everyone to act to pass this
budget I'm going to I I just
wanted to be brave and thanks
again Representative.
Madam chair.
Representative small you said
your experience wish to say
something thank you madam chair
briefly I go to Mr Michael and
then miss Beatles if that's okay
madam chair okay go ahead.
Thank you madam chair of that
committee members.
I was just going to address one
thing briefly because it's a
question that we've gotten over
and over again which is why is
this needed given that we passed
the energy transition act a
couple years ago and so what I'd
like to do is just demonstrate
why one it's different and why
that difference is so important.
Right now it is.
Under the energy transition act
there is what's called renewable
energy standard that's a
technology standard that drives
particular technologies and
increasing amounts of those
technologies particularly
renewables over time that does
not deal with the missions.
In New Mexico right now the
consumption of New Mexicans is
about twenty megawatt hours of
electricity twenty million
megawatt hours per year the
renewable energy act requires by
twenty twenty five to forty
percent of that the renewables
that means sixty percent is not
renewables that's sixty percent
or twelve million megawatt hours
can range in emissions from zero
if it's already locals and hydro
nukes to twelve million tons a
year of the total coal and so
there is a huge range of
difference in emissions that can
be achieved now I'm not
suggesting either of those
extremes are what's going to
happen in New Mexico but that's
the range that's left open
under current law and what this
bill addresses with a systematic
approach towards making sure
those emissions reduce over time
as we elector file other sectors
of the economy so anyway I just
wanted to you know that's.
Just wanted to make that
difference in trying to explain
why this is different and
important than what we did a
couple years ago which is
currently very important as
well.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members.
Madam chair members of the
committee if I may
the clean electrification Act is
a system of reporting.
Tracking issuing credits and
accepting credits for compliance
of reductions in CO two
emissions.
It is a it is a program that is
administered by the New Mexico
environment department and I
wanted to make that clear
because there seems to be a
little bit of confusion in the
agency analysis from the PRC dot
the PRC does have a roll it is a
small but not insignificant role
with clean electrification Act
has eleven sections only section
for requires the PRC to do
anything and that is a one time
requirement in twenty twenty
three to review and approve
beneficial electrification plans
filed by utilities after twenty
twenty three utilities will only
make such violence is necessary
they may perhaps not make
another one the PRC appears and
one other section of the C. A.
dot sectional Levin not section
creates an opportunity for
utilities to request the
environment department for very
ants from the clean
electrification Act and in order
to ensure that reliability and
affordability are not
compromised Environment
Department has a consulting
obligation with the PRC with
other than that compliance with
this act in the greenhouse gas
accounting reporting and credit
issue and so the secretary and
and and and acceptance that is a
program that is administered
implemented by the environment
department and they're the ones
who accept the small filing fee
and
just that's just a point that I
wanted to make clearly and I
don't know that I need to go
into anything more at this time
Representative is small and
blue.
You.
Thank you very much miss Beatles
thank you very much madam chair
we do we we again want to know
madam chair that we do have a
house Judiciary Committee
substitute.
Four house bill one thirty seven
it is so just substantively is
substantially different from the
bill that first came to your
committee madam chair and woods
would like to your advice on the
next steps to proceed.
I want to point out.
The numbers that we're getting
this is not your fault
representative what we're
getting a lot of bills that are
and will serve our analyzing
again and again because we're
getting so many amendments in
committee stops so rather than
three rate your nose this what
are committee I list has done
here is on the committee
analysis she if you go to page
four.
Is where she outlines all of the
provisions of the committee.
So
It's a purple so just so you
know you can just go to that
section on the analysis if if
members want to look that up and
down so I really appreciate that
and I appreciate appreciate our
analysts because they have so
much work to.
Are you ready for us to go out
for public comment now madam
chair.
We are thank you and and a big
thanks to the your analyst as
you know to madam chair thank.
Okay thank you.
Let's see we're gonna put up a
call for fifteen seconds if you
are in favor of house bill one
thirty seven please stay us here
in opposition the state now and
then we will
We will have public comment.
Okay it we have
thirteen in favor I in
opposition.
Seventy two twenty eight let's
start with public comment from
the opposition.
So Ricardo Gonzalez.
Good afternoon Madam chairwoman
and committee.
I. E. P. a past electric stands
in opposition to this bill.
We do believe that the ETA
provides a roadmap to New Mexico
decarbonization.
The.
This bill in front of us
provides all burdensome policy.
to both regulators and the I. O.
U.'s.
And to that point we are now
going through our very first
integrated resource plan there
is a twenty year plan that we
have it el Paso electric and we
haven't gotten through that one
plan yet with the ETA and then
you R. EA
well.
Positions and and we would like
to do that thanks for having
this type of of policy put in
front of us also from an
economic development perspective
we do think this does put us in
New Mexico at a disadvantage.
Thank you very much.
Steve Fishman.
Go ahead Steve.
Sorry there can you hear me
yeah.
Yes it's so I'm the chair of the
public regulation commission
thank you madam chair committee
and
We're concerned that it is a
very that what appears to be a
simple electrification plant a
lot of folks in fact it turned
into something pretty
complicated and quite frankly
duplicative.
And expensive for consumers
because when you start funneling
electrification programs with
utility you at expense whether
Sir program expense whether
surtax as are their profit
margin on top of the vendor
profit margins.
second we thank the clean
electric electricity credit
system is.
It are complicated and kind of
iffy about whether provides
advantages.
so for those reasons we oppose
thank you.
Thank you.
Michael d'antonio.
Thank you madam you thank you
madam chair members of the
committee we what with Xcel
energy which serves the eastern
part of New Mexico I want to
thank the sponsor and the
experts for meeting with us and
going over some of our concerns
however we weren't able to
arrive at something that we
support I guess I want to point
out that anything that affects
the ETA should get a lot of
scrutiny no that was landmark
legislation that passed a couple
years ago big stakeholder
process we were not able to have
a stable process for this
legislation so you know we were
afforded some input job
opportunity we just hadn't
gotten there I'll let you know
we're also disappointed costs
immunities are in this bill they
were originally we think there
should be a statewide efforts to
reduce emissions and if they're
not in it it's not a statewide
effort also say that our company
is close to fifty percent
renewables by the end of this
year ETA's working this is a a
change to BTA we think it needs
more scrutiny before we but
we're able to support it thank
you very.
Thank you I'm now I'll ask
for those who wish to speak in
favor to raise their hands.
Joan Boue.
Thank you madam chair and
representative of small and
committee my name is John Brown
I'm a Franciscan sister and the
executive director of New Mexico
interfaith power and light and
we support this bill but today
humbly I am reading a statement
by one of our board members
Terry Sloan.
I'm Terry Sloan I'm Navajo and
Hopi one of can Yanni and born
of two hockey leading I was born
in Shiprock New Mexico and M. an
Albuquerque resident I'm the
director of an NGO southwest
native cultures which I am
accredited member of the United
Nations Center board member of
the New Mexico interfaith power
and light I support H. B. one
thirty seven the clean
electrification Act.
It is twenty twenty one it is
still hard to understand that
there are still households and
communities in New Mexico in the
United States the greatest
country in the world that are
still without electricity when I
was growing up I spent summers
with my Navajo and Hopi
grandparents who lived without
electricity for many years until
one day they got electricity and
that change their lives
I applaud one thirty seven
legislation to provide funding
to help indigenous and low
income households that that do
not have electricity to get
electricity in addition it is
time of COVID we need to do
everything possible to save
lives having electricity will
help with heating refrigeration
internet access and overall.
Thank you very much time
Solomon.
Go ahead.
Yes this is sorry I this is Jim
McKenzie actually my screen was
incorrect I'm the coordinator
three fifty New Mexico chapter
of the international
environmental organization three
fifty dot org madam chair Mr
speaker I stand in support of H.
B. one thirty seven while there
are many important goals of this
bill I would like to draw your
attention specifically to
section four currency on page
eight of the original bill it
provides incentives for
electrifying existing of low
income indigenous households
presently without electrical
service the National Matt navo
student.
The Navajo Nation has an
estimated fifteen thousand homes
without electricity fully
seventy five percent of all
rural homes without power in the
entire United States there are
even low income parts of
southwest Bernalillo county
without utilities.
Thank you we stand in support of
this and I want to echo what
Terry son's comments thank you.
Yes we scan madam.
In the afternoon evening madam
chair members of the committee
this is for you to get out of
the legislative and political
organizer with the Sierra Club
Representative chapter
representing over thirty five
thousand members and supporters.
Throughout the state of New
Mexico.
The Sierra Club stands in
support of H. B. one thirty
seven the bill built on that you
need a setting a specific
emission reduction past three
point five to four percent per
year for electric utilities and
cooperatives to reach zero
emissions by mid century this
bill also generates funds to
provide electric service to
hundreds of low income
indigenous households that now
lack electricity it's a as it's
been mentioned allowing those
communities to be part of the
transition to power poles with
buildings.
With clean electricity I want to
take a second to think
Representative response for this
bill and please go to support
thank you very much.
Reporter.
Go ahead owner.
Good afternoon members of the
committee and and Gail my name
is Tony Porter I'm the founder
more discipline Energy leader
for prosperity works we see one
thirty seven through the lens of
climate justice while all of us
will experience the health
impacts of carbon pollution
certain groups like children
elderly and underserved and
marginalized communities are
less climate resilient and as a
result are more vulnerable to
the negative effects of climate
change when considering justice
another issue is the reality
that we have so many at the New
Mexicans.
And people within our power
systems that have no electricity
at all that is really I'm just
considering the impacts that
they endorsed very specifically
in the under the cloud of carbon
dioxide in their in their
communities thank you for the
support of this bill we
supported also.
Madam chair members of the
committee at Deborah Condit and
the registered lobbyists for
Interwest Energy Alliance we are
trade association representing
thirty of the largest renewable
energy development and
manufacturing companies in the
nation we're headquartered right
here in New Mexico and also work
across in the surrounding
region.
It was supports house bill one
Thursday thirty seven as it will
help set a clear schedule for
carbon emissions and accordingly
for the ongoing procurement of
renewable energy we're excited
to be part of a part of the
future of New Mexico utilities
as defined in the ETA but this
bill will help ensure that the
renewable energy procured by
utilities happens regularly
every year years as opposed to
one or two big bites of the
apple between now and twenty
forty having a predictable
schedule for decarbonisation and
accordingly renewable energy
procurement results in access to
better financing and smarter
internal planning this means we
can deliver power at a lower
cost ultimately saving racked
Tax ratepayers money thanks.
Madam chair members of the
committee I chair placed
director for energy and climate
policy at clean air task force I
am also a former commissioner on
Pennsylvania's public utility
commission P. H. F. and
analytical firm focused on net
zero energy systems and policies
house bill one thirty seven
sixty the central goal
technology neutral market based
environmentally and socially
responsible and focused directly
on the challenge not only to
reduce emit carbon to to do so
with the greatest care to the
states ratepayers that Khan me
are now makes clear that
technology inclusive that you're
pathways fiction years Elton
achieving decarbonization while
also delivering significant
reductions in air pollution
leading to public health
benefits to begin immediately of
the next decade eighty one
thirty seven is a valuable and
reason contributor to avoiding a
more costly human health
environmental and economic
future if no or delayed action
is taken thank you for your
consideration.
Thank you.
Madam chair can you hear me.
Yes go thank you madam chairman
named Jason Thompson that the
register lobbyist for western
resource advocates I'm also been
permitted to speak and support
on behalf of the national
resources defense council
briefly a I thank the sponsors
and the experts for all of their
efforts on this particular piece
of legislation
and I think the committee for
hearing it today
importantly the and clear
Education Act as previous that
would build on the success
framework of the Energy
transitioned Act helping our
state capitalize on its
abundance of carbon free energy
and to provide a revised New
Mexico response to the threat of
climate change and very
importantly to help bring
electricity service to low
income indigenous households
that now lacked that of those
lights power and for those
reasons I'll review reasons
previously stated we stand in
full support the bill
introducing a committee to pass
this bill today thank you for
your time.
Thank you timing.
I will court.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I am Tammy people
corn with southwest energy
efficiency project and we
support the committee substitute
for H. B. one thirty seven as of
all the previous speakers have
have pointed out there are so
many benefits to this
legislation particularly the
schedule for decarbonisation of
really moves us forward as a
state meeting our climate goals
I will echo the sentiments from
other speakers that one of the
best parts about this bill is
that it provides electric
service to those indigenous
lowincome communities that do
not have that now and so for
that and all the reasons stated
above we support the bill and
ask you to please support as
well thank you.
Thank you
this.
Right wise bird.
Madam chair and committee
members I'm here representing
Adelante progressive caucus but
also myself I recently retired
from UNM where I was an informal
educator with the school of
engineering and we over ten
years we went in again of.
Photo electric cars to kids all
over the state and a lot of them
were kids who did not have
electric capacity in their house
so here they were one learning
about the wonders of renewable
energy but didn't have
electricity themselves so for
that reason alone I support this
bill also I worked with a lot of
students who are very very
concerned about climate change
and I can say with this bill
that some adults are listening
to them for the first time maybe
so for that reason I support
this bill and Senator Adelante
**** is particularly the role
of.
Thank you so much.
Matthew Hotmail.
Thank you madam chair with all
due respect I was in the
opposition section.
Fine yes go ahead all right
thank you ma'am Matthew had a
meal with the public service
company of New Mexico and having
just received the new committee
substitute today it looks like
in a point all the restrictions
only towards the investor owned
energy companies unless others
opt in and with appreciation to
Representative a small in the
west our technical experts still
have concerns with this bill and
we really look forward to
ongoing conversation to work
towards the Sanchez to ensure
that we are all on the path
towards New Mexico's energy
transition act and it's your
carbon emissions I appreciate
the consideration it thank you
all for your time.
Thank you
So do I have any more yes here
we go.
The trial.
I thank you madam chair
everybody hear me.
Yes.
Okay thank you I'm thank you
madam chair members of this
committee and thank you to
representative Nathan small for
bring forth this legislation my
name is Samantha Calpine B.
crime and energy advocate with
conservation voters New Mexico
and I just committing to also
support house bill one thirty
seven I leave heard previously
this bill follows the spirit and
guidelines set forth in the
energy transition act as we know
New Mexico is a leading example
of the carbon free movement for
our nation and we need to
continue on with this progress.
And the call to be carbon free
by twenty fifty set forth an ETA
cannot just be a distant
aspiration we must move towards
a school by hitting incremental
goals over the next several
decades on in this bill
prescribes the thorough guidance
in organized steps to achieve
this goal.
And finally this bill was
created with our low income and
indigenous communities in the
forefront of our minds at CBN
and these communities are focal
point.
Thank you.
That's yes.
Or public comment to I miss
anybody.
Let's go to the committee now
and
The committee supper discussed.
Mrs.
I'm Representative small and
less would you like to say
anything before we actually take
any questions.
Thank you very much madam chair
I think we'll we'll look forward
to going to questions I have one
quick thing to to make
abundantly clear thank you very
much for moving the committee
substitute which has been
shared.
Madam chair committee
in order to go directly to the
issue of helping to electrify
and support.
Homes are currently lack that
there the committee substitute
creates the indigenous housing
fund and would direct forty
percent of the proceeds.
Into that fund and madam chair
that fund would be administered
by the Indian Affairs Department
thank many of the other changes
have been noted and I'm sure
will come up during committee
discussion.
Representative lost.
Any any any comments before we
got to the committee now I think
we're ready further questions
from committee members thank you
madam chair okay first I have
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair representative which
are.
This bill is coming on the heels
of the Energy transaction
transition act.
I'm just a bit curious as to
why.
We are we doing for revisiting
this issue.
With two years of the original
act.
I I know that we had some
discussions about maybe needing
to read this yes it became
apparent we could beat those
performance goals.
But this is.
Two years later there's no
evidence of the utilities are
beating the there are four forms
goals and making that
transition.
And yet we're we're reevaluating
so I'd like to know why why two
years later we.
This thing up and now.
Thank you very much madam chair
and thank you Representative
it's a an excellent important
question Madam chair
representative first to be very
clear this does not amend madam
chair and committee the energy
transition act in any way madam
chair committee it does not
supplant up and amend or
otherwise change the energy
transition act and so that's the
first point madam chair and
representative of second point
and and if experts want to add
anything to it.
The potential rapid rise madam
chair and representative in use
of electricity.
Is substantial we are seeing.
Large and we expect even larger
growth in the use of electric
vehicles which will add
substantial amounts of required
electricity you look across the
board
even into the.
In these emerging and already
very much part of our economy
ways the amount of energy to be
used can increase incredibly
rapidly
and and I would just madam chair
Representative Nibert I think
the illustration from GM to sell
no longer sell internal
combustion engines by twenty
thirty.
Commitments I believe from Ford
and others that are in different
parts of the world following
similar sorts of schedules.
That's going to mean there is a
vast rise in the amount of
electricity used not to mention
many other parts of our economy
and so during this time when
there's we don't want to see
madam chair and representative
the
that the increase in electricity
usage lead to a rapid rise in
the emissions of greenhouse
gases which under even under the
schedule with the ETA which is
on par with many other states.
Under that schedule that could
potentially happen if they
needed to procure vast amounts
of additional power and the the
greenhouse gases of that power
could significantly contribute
to climate change one additional
point madam chair
Representative is that the
beneficial actor for cation
through the creation of the
indigenous housing fund.
Is another
Feature of this legislation not
considered in the energy
transition act to help provide
power to New Mexicans.
Who currently lack that power.
Madam chair and representative
the fact that we may be
consuming more electricity
doesn't obviate the.
Goals that were set up not goals
the mandates that were set in
the energy transaction
transition that goes.
Madam chair representative it
certainly does not but Madam
chair representative if Mr
Michael wants to add.
The if our electricity use goes
up ten acts in say the next five
years while we're still at a
relatively madam chair
representative Lou.
Save fifty percent renewable the
rest of the very if it's very
carbon intensive that amount of
raw emissions greenhouse gases
released into the atmosphere
will could be extremely
significant and as we see these
increasing.
Aggressive nature of the
commitments to use to a elector
fi that potential for that rapid
rise and and no actress the use
is there and this is a way in a
regular schedule at very low
cost to begin accounting for
that in a market based system.
It doesn't matter whether goes
up fifty folder temp folder to
full the the fact of the matter
is you require them to get to
zero carbon emissions by twenty
forty five and twenty fifty M.
they are making progress toward
that if if I read the literature
correctly yeah and yeah two
years after enactment of the
bill we're we're doing another
bill that even.
Deals with I thank us all the
term ninety two percent of the
of the admissions at and so
we're work changes the goal post
on two years later.
I think we just what we
discussed earlier two years ago.
You know I had a conversation
about what happens if we
actually care B. R. can't get
their Representative carbon free
by twenty forty five twenty your
the statement was made that well
we can always revisit that
reject but some tweaks that
shows to be are impossible.
But.
They're making progress and yet
you're wanting them to make
faster progress all set.
I don't understand.
Thank you thank you madam chair
thank you Representative Mr
Michael white might want to add
this doesn't change any of those
requirements and and.
Madam chair
Representative it doesn't change
the goalposts it clarifies kind
of a regular set of downs Madam
chair representative who go with
the football metaphor to get to
first down to to get a first
down Madam chair representative
it'll simply be meeting some of
these standards over the course
of a young
Begin a every three years that
will ensure madam chair
representative again that we
minimize the greenhouse gas
emissions while we see that
rapid rise in the production and
the use of electricity and Adam
now if if Mr Michael our agency
Beatles wants to add to that.
explanation and analogy.
Just very briefly thank you
madam chair representative
Representative not for.
You know what what I would say
is the bill was very careful to
preserve the ETA and tend not
you know so to speak move the
goal posts the requirements the
off ramps everything in the ETA
has been preserved what this
bill does is always it addresses
the missions as Representative
small mentioned on the whole.
Issue around climate change in
addressing climate change has to
do with what's called the
atmospheric loading that means
how much carbon dioxide are you
putting into the atmosphere
between now and then or other
greenhouse gases and there's a
huge difference between waiting
until twenty fifty and then
going to zero verses a regular
consistent reduction trajectory
the difference in carbon loading
in the atmosphere is huge and
that's what this bill is
addressing that the EPA or the
ETA rather was not focused on
the ETA as you know I discussed
earlier is a technology standard
it's very important but
different than that what this
bill does finally I just say
that the reliability
affordability variants
capability that was in the ETA
it's replicated in this bill so
if if reliability affordability
technological MPs ability
becomes an issue as we get
closer and closer to mid century
those are things that can allow
off ramps to protect New
Mexicans.
Well paid search wind seventy
eight Tatum all right.
Investor owned utilities are bit
no more than ninety two percent
of its base period of missions
and twenty twenty two you're
saying that that insurance goal
posts that was originally there
in the Energy transaction
transition that.
Mr.
Sorry.
Chairwoman Chasey
Representative yes that's
exactly what I'm saying if you
look at the Energy transaction
Act there's a provision in there
that for example utilities that
take advantage of securitization
commitment no more than eight
hundred pounds of CO two per
megawatt hour by twenty twenty
three PTA does not act the ETA
says consistent and reasonable
progress that's what this is
that's what this is capturing in
these emission goals it doesn't
change the to hear at all
Representative.
So madam chairman Mr Michael if
if it already so the Energy
trans Act transition act why do
we do that here.
Madam chair representative
divert the reason we needed here
is because there is definition
that's provided in this bill
regarding the missions that is
not part of the ETA this is not
changing the ETA this is
different than the ETA ETA
requirements are still fully in
place they're not amended
they're not changed at all.
what this bill does his address
the nations that are not
addressed by the ETA.
Well which emissions madam chair
Mister Michael that we not
addressed ETA that we're now
addressing now seem to be that
we are addressing carbon
emissions in the ETA and it
seems to be we're still
addressing carbon emissions in
this act or this bill.
Madam chair representative
Nibert gets to the point I made
in my initial comments if you
about forty percent renewable
requirements you've got sixty
percent of your electricity it's
not covered by that that's sixty
percent were hoping is going to
grow substantially as we start
to look to find other sectors to
deal with climate change that's
sixty percent can Representative
I huge market of CO two
emissions and that's what this
bill is getting a handle on is
that sixty percent it's not
addressed by the EDA.
Did the ETA madam chair and
representative Mr Michel to the
ETA only concern itself with
generation within the state of
New Mexico.
Madam chair representative line
for help Representative it deals
with the generation that is used
to serve New Mexico customers
involved PTA and in this bill.
It is so the TSA dealt with that
issue.
This deals with that same issue
so you know I was trying to give
you the benefit of the doubt
baby you're trying to capture
missions from from outside the
state but if that was the goal
from day one thank you have I am
confused as to why we're
visiting this issue two years
later when.
We have what was represented to
be.
Bill and out statute that was
going to take care of this and
it was sold to to the New Mexico
Senator that we have dealt with
this issue we've given the the
utilities thank you twenty five
twenty twenty five to thirty
year window to figure out how to
get to zero carbon emissions and
now we're picking up the issue
two years later and you have in
mind by maybe not sure bonded at
my mic were telling of that's
not good about we know better
and we're going to force you to
do more things than what you
were initially planning to to do
with restore with respect to
your resource budget of how
you're going to find dependable
and reliable electric service to
New Mexico Senator.
And so yeah I'm IAD.
I think the timing of this
probably could be worse
and really concerned about what
my next question.
Goes to something that happened
on the side of the state a
couple weeks ago maybe we can
half ago
Eastern New Mexico experienced
routes.
It wasn't why.
In Dallas and you Sir but we
experience of brownouts.
Xcel energy of that services
eastern New Mexico was having to
allocate the electric service to
communities on our.
Schedule to make sure that they
didn't have a total system
failure.
And my understanding is that
that well.
A lot of that's due to the fact
in those conditions very little
solar was being generated and.
No Way was being generated.
Because of our by in another
problems
Which you know to me we've got
to get our arms around the
demands of the public.
To have reliable.
And dependable.
Electricity.
And the only reason why wasn't
worse was because there's a
couple coal fired plants the
Texas panhandle which out the
the baseload going.
Because of the energy transition
that we say in the last three
gas power facilities you have in
southeast New Mexico being
built.
if they have a life of the for
thirty years the last one will
reach its thirty year and twenty
forty five we are just in time
to meet at zero carbon emission
ball
yeah and I would I would
Submit to you again because I
think I did so two years ago.
But you can't have a credible
reliable electric service
produce for when and solar at
this point in time without
natural gas back up generation
which is carbon emitting.
At least for now the technology
may be there are a few years.
We we closed system for now you
can't do that and so what we're
doing these signs
we are not providing any
incentive for our.
Click utilities workout
differentiating public utilities
from the co op some of the this
fall yeah we're not providing
any incentive program to
Do a lot of the size of and I'm
really concerned about the
message we're sending them I
think that.
Eastern New Mexico is going to
experience bore
problems that we try to resolve
problems in terms of dependable
and reliable electric service
I think some of the some of the
legislation reenactment and some
of the legislation that's being
proposed is going to exasperated
that issue not help that issue
and so I am.
I am not happy to see a bill
like this come before us
Without.
See how that energy transition
that is going to work and saying
that they were for.
Capable of doing that this this
to me is just another.
Okay there are and frankly
I have some some very important
ramifications of the we all want
to see at least on the side of
the story
I certainly cannot support it.
The.
You know there's there's a lot
of a lot of problems are that
the I could probably take care
of most of the night arguing
about the it's probably not
gonna change anybody's mind but
I'm very concerned about the
message we're sending this out
two years after we did what was
Representative that is being and
very happy where you're moving
New Mexico to a carpet three
Electrical generation
Representative.
That all all be partners madam
chair what others thought thank
you.
Thank you next we have
Representative Rehm.
Thank you madam chair and
representative of more about.
General comment then you know
specific.
you know questions.
When we we're gonna move till
electric vehicles so in most
neighborhoods.
The power of the maximum power
to their house that they
couldn't sustain is a hundred
watts
and the seventy five what or is
seventy five B. up I'm sorry
it's a hundred a a service and a
seventy five amp service is
needed to go ahead and charge of
vehicle.
So most streets are most homes
in the US don't even have that
and even the.
The entire street doesn't have
enough service to support that
so it's a it's a bigger issue
than than that.
When we you know last night we
passed marijuana
And ironically if we look at
You want to.
The average home up there issues
and three thousand gallons of
water a day.
All right I mean three thousand
gallons a month and the
marijuana grow for medical
issues and twenty thousand a
month.
Are looking at some of the
marijuana grows their electrical
bills are four thousand dollars
a month.
When we look at the wind towers
that they built.
The base to support them is six
hundred thousand.
Cubic metric yards of C. meant.
They have a heater inside them
to keep the hydraulic fluid
warm so that it'll it'll
function.
We we look at
Texas just last month.
Those wind towers basically
froze up there were two issues
one they froze up the other
issue is that the ice buildup on
the wings was great enough to
throw him out of balance that
they had to shut him down.
So as Representative night bird
is said without the power back
up.
Of some type of fossil fuel.
We have an unstable grip.
California is going through big
rolling blackouts in the summer.
Anyway those are my general
comments about this anyway thank
you madam chair thank you
Representative.
Thank you next we have
Representative I've gone.
Thank you madam chair on madam
chair and representative small I
am.
Yes if I are.
In.
The computer here.
On the substantive issues it is
number two which is the lead so
low income perfect cation.
And the big question I reward of
increased one percent return on
equity.
What does that mean for low
income people.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
madam chair thank you Mr chair
representative Al Capone in the
committee substitute this is
been changed to send sixty
percent of the funds generated
to a new fund the indigenous
housing fund that would be
administered by the Indian
Affairs Department so madam
chair and representative that
That is how the funds roughly
the estimate Madam chair
representative that we have is
one point five million dollars
per year that would be
administered by the Indian
Affairs Department specifically
for electrifying homes that
currently lack of electricity
for indigenous New Mexicans.
The question madam chair and my
question is the loading of the
bill of the state of New Mexico
do not all live on a new
American.
So we remove the growing some
credits.
With your meal what are we going
to do for the rest of the state
and I can understand I really
love the idea that we're taking
care of the problem so we do
have other native American land
but.
If we were the.
We delete the certifications in
these programs what are we going
to do for the rest of the people
that live in state law.
Thank you Mr thank you madam
chair thank you Representative
for that the cost it was
originally at one dollar per
per tent for Tennessee to that
is been substantially reduced to
fifteen cents Madam chair
representative this would be
perhaps sense you know.
For the customers of investor
owned utilities Madam chair
representative there is an opt
in provision for customers
served either by cooperatives or
by municipal utilities that's an
opt in provision through twenty
twenty five.
And madam chair representative
that's one of the a point we
wanted to make.
Is that we believe these credits
for the the the avoided.
C. O. to the avoided greenhouse
grant credits one of the reasons
that the municipal or co ops may
want to opt and they're
currently not required but they
may want to opt in is that those
credits and there can be come.
Very valuable as there is
that as carbon is much more of
an economic factor in across the
country
I don't know if Mr might
hopefully that answers your
question madam chair Mister
chair.
If your customers and Milan are
served by a co op maybe
continental divide co up it
would be up to the coop to
decide whether to opt in and
they have until twenty twenty
five if they choose not to opt
in then this would not apply to
them.
Chair representative I'm you
know I'm not gonna pretend the
issue you're raising is not
important it is
this provides electricity on
indigenous lands there are
low income customers that don't
have electricity service in the
original bill we try to address
that we realized pretty quickly
that.
The reason utilities in coops
don't provide service to all of
these folks is much deeper than
what this bill could have solved
it's an issue we need to address
we need to address it going
forward
you know what I would say to you
is this bill helps a lot it
doesn't it doesn't solve every
problem and the issue you're
raising is valid and and you
know we need to be looking at
that and figure that out on so
that's.
You know I think that's the best
I can CENIC
Thank you.
Madam chair is as simple as rate
stability County.
The new farm grandfather raised
me that.
The when I was a kid in school
it that property still doesn't
have electricity there's still
no power lines running through
their so I'm just asking about
there's just native American
land that is lacking there's a
new American land throughout the
whole student New Mexico that is
lacking.
Go through the day and the
problem is and then the.
And I just want to the other
implied.
My whole crew is going to live
with the madam chair and the.
The small Michael Fishman called
a little divide.
Is.
Thank you a.
Well.
It was ninety two percent of its
base period emissions in twenty
twenty two.
How are we doing.
Thank.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative again in in our
committee substitute it with its
only if they choose to opt in
madam chair and representative
so that decision rests solely
with
the decision makers at the
individual co ops as well as at
the individual the the municipal
utilities eighty percent of the
power in New Mexico is generated
and serve through investor owned
utilities so they it's only upon
their choice madam chair
representative we have heard
testimony from some co ops again
they would voluntarily decide if
they want to participate or not
if they choose not to none of
this would apply to them that
have been able to access.
Very significant and low cost.
Renewable plus.
At a restore edge options that
have been very attractive to
them and we heard that madam
chair representative for farmers
coop that serves some parts of
the state with incredibly low
prices but it's very is totally
voluntary madam chair
representative for co ops and
municipally owned utilities.
The representative madam chair
and Representative small where
in your bill doesn't say that
they can opt out.
Are you madam chair
representative in our could the
committee says to to the madam
chairwoman Chasey has moved.
This is the committee substitute
To.
Sorry yet in the committee
substitute two two zero zero
three zero point four that.
That is where madam chair
representative.
And madam chair representative
I'm looking at the now this is
which is the the verbal part the
chairman Terry Casey mentioned
about.
I am reading right off of the
purple part of the US's.
Does thing about opting out.
Thank thank you madam chair
thank you representative will
get to it's in section nine.
Madam chair representative I'll
just read it briefly at the bot
beginning at the bottom of a
page fifteen new material opt in
requirements cooperatives and
municipal utilities continuing
on to page sixteen madam chair
and representative.
the ciation only applied or
rural electric cooperative or
municipal electric utility if
there if they opt in to the
provisions of the act.
The further it continues on
madam chair representative
They may opt in to the
provisions of the clean
electrification Act by filing
with the department on or before
July one twenty twenty five.
Thank you madam chair if I could
just clarify for Representative
I've gone and build on what
Representative small just said.
In my analysis is it does
indicate the probe news section
that Representative just small
pointed that out on page five of
my analysis is it talks about
section nine that adds the news
section on opting in you won't
find the words opt out in the
committee substitute it you'll
find the words opt in but not
opt out.
Thank you Christina
going you still have the floor.
I just.
No worries and problems is that
we've just we went through okay
two years ago that last meal.
You're getting beat up over it
because everything that in my
area shut down because of the
bill that I'm everything
everything that could go wrong
went wrong and now this is John
make us that won't be it'll that
we've just two years ago.
So of course.
I see elected representative
madam chair is not.
Representative I'm still the one
who blames because our budget
down I'm still under the in
relation because the.
The the refinery shut down well
my fault because I will.
That bill two years ago and now
we can record this one.
I'm just we're just.
A little too fast because we
still don't know what we did two
years ago we still don't have
any idea of what we accomplished
because we don't have any staff
we don't have we don't know
anything of what we've done.
So my problem is but I do want
to stay this okay madam chair I
do have state is that grows
revenue must be Mustang Maliki
to Santa Fe yesterday.
The electric car the.
It's really cool.
Rise in reading.
Ford is not made by the other
calls in the attic.
You people.
It drives like a dream and
everything the only problem that
I had is had to wait forty five
minutes to charge it up a little
more time that was a negative
green.
But I know that the
representative from okay you
said that you have a special
charger for the automobile four
Mason Chargers that you'd pull
up to your home I'll go ahead
and start your car at your house
you don't have to drive you
don't have to put it on the
dryer cord or you don't have to
put it out of
your station you can just plug
it into outlook outside your
house.
Charger car days.
But it does charge.
And I just want to know that but
I know we've drives I just
didn't like sitting at Walmart
for forty five minutes well of
charge to a hundred percent.
It costs fourteen dollars to
charge it up so.
So I want to go and I'm here to
everybody okay.
You're going to now we're here
for a second reading sixty.
Say that public.
Anyway.
Madam chair I I'm having
problems is legislation just
because I just can't.
I just I'm still waiting to see.
That was so horrible to wake
people madam chair and
representative in my family and
in my district.
If it was a safety or not and we
don't have anything to say
whether it was or wasn't.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative next we
have Representative Eli thank
you madam chair Representative
yeah I continue to go back to
the store on us for additional I
mean it's not that I I'm just
much more concerned about the
impact this is going to have a
on repairs and I just never seen
that analysis I know the TA did
versus to shareholders but in
this case it again is the same
question I'm you know the City
of Albuquerque I'm not seeing
them wearing and maybe they are
I know there's not FY are
committee so studios not one
that I've seen but I continue to
be concerned about the impact
this is going to have on people
particularly with fixed incomes
but I'm repairs in general has.
There been any kind of analysis
on that that I could look at
before this hits the floor and
has you know I have government I
know Bernalillo county had
concerns about the chase of the
City of Albuquerque do they have
concerns about this bill in
terms of rates are gonna pay or
you know large providers that
would tell me something into I
have large users rather that'll
tell me something about you know
what's really going on so I
guess what I'm asking is has a
real analysis been done if this
bill passes what impact it's
going to happen ratepayers.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Mr Michaels do
you want to add to that please.
yeah I can
Madam chair representative I can
maybe shed some light on that
utilities in New Mexico
routinely submit water called
integrated resource plans were
they look at a resource
portfolio that is going to be
most economic for their
customers the resource
portfolios and all three
investor owned utilities show
that they can comply with this
trajectory and do so in a way
that's most economic for their
customers so what that is saying
is that deploying lowering
nation or zero emission
resources right now is a very
cheap way to supply electricity
needs what this bill does is it
recognizes that as we electrify
other sectors those are going to
grow and we want to be sure that
those resources are similarly
claim one of the advantages of
the growth that electrification
will provide is is you know it
will spread fixed costs among a
greater number of Caroline hours
and that should have the effect
of reducing rates for customers
you know can I tell you exactly
you know how much per kilowatt
hour rates will go down or up
within without this bill no I
can't do that but I can give you
those general trends that leave
us you know we've made
comfortable that this bill is
not going to have an adverse
impact on customers and if it
does there are provisions to
protect against that including
exit ramps and off ramps
the other component you know
that Representative small
mentioned which is that the you
know as he mentioned that's
going to be a few of the seventy
dollar electric bill.
it may be eight cents it it's
it's very small that part adding
up all those amounts for all
those customers is going to
provide the ability to provide
electricity to you know a
hundred fifty maybe two hundred
helpful to here that currently
lacks service all.
Madam madam chair and and
Representative Michael I am not
a hundred years ago I did
utility so I I'm familiar with
some of these some of the rich
spent a long time but it's been
a hundred years I have to tell
you that there's just no way
that there is an analysis the
PRC would've done something
Has to be some documentation
better than yeah I think it's
going to be okay and we'll get
back to you that does not make
sense I gotta tell you I need to
see stuff in writing before I'm
sure on the floor that this is
something we're supporting I I
don't think I fundamentally
disagree with Representative
night I I do think that these
provisions then the ETA I don't
see how you get around that
but I I'm okay with that because
I'm I'm working towards I I
realize to working towards
alternative energy we need to
push that but I also I'm so
worried that there is you know
it's it's almost like what we're
saying is here our climate
changes so budget we're not
gonna worry about the rate
payers so much focus on that I
think we can do both and I think
it's just one of those were I
just need to see something real
analysis of this what is gonna
head with repairs and I know I
think if I got to go to the PRC
to get that answer that's where
I'll go somebody should be able
to give me some expectation of
the impacts of this bill
operators that just does not
rock madam chair then mention
actually something on that
point.
Speaker it off on that point we
should really listen to
Representative Eli we talked
about the work you did on the
utility law because there are no
regulation however then.
Our strong carriage and buggy
whips.
Mastered that then he can master
anything madam chair and and
speaker I was waiting for the
slaps a whole Senator we're if
you go and select I got it I
just I mean I'm trying to be
responsible Representative and
madam chair I'm not trying to be
difficult I really am trying to
say to all of you look I support
an agenda clean environment no
question about.
But I do think it is fair to
give us real information on how
this is going to affect the rate
payers and I didn't see that
with the ETA and I'm not seeing
that with this and it just
continues to trouble me that we
either don't have that
information which I think is we
years or we do have that
information on I can't say
either way that's troubling to
me so I mean for what it's worth
of somebody to get me real
information on our workers if
this is a fact that would help
the.
Going to move that forward but I
I need to know that districts
that trouble with each year
troubles with this thank you
madam chair and if I just just
briefly thank you Representative
Eli.
And we hear your point loud and
clear Madam chair representative
Ely the PRC has and retains
their full jurisdiction to
ensure projects that they
approve for New Mexico's
I'll use investor owned
utilities are the lowest cost
projects Madam chair
representative they are doing
that with vastly lowered
renewable energy rates Madam
chair representative I know the
issue of Texas has been brought
up multiple times to be very
clear madam chair and
representative.
That failure substantially
rested upon one the deregulated
nature of the Texas utility
environment where and they're
not they're their own utility
grid disconnected from the rest
of the country number two madam
chair and representatives in
committee the failure of other
fuels including natural gas
which was the substantial
portion based upon Martin the
invested on going investigations
and to market manipulation
around the supply.
Of natural gas and that that
substantially that seem to have
substantially contributed to the
horrible situation in Texas and
third madam chair representative
just to briefly address that.
Well I will address will address
more on Texas at the and madam
chair representative but to be
very clear we hear your point
about specific analysis as it
relates to the clean
electrification Act and will we
will work to provide that to you
and to all members of the body.
The PRC continues to retain
their full authority to ensure
that New Mexico's customers are
afforded reliable and affordable
energy and we think that this we
will get you the analysis as it
relates to this this specific
piece of legislation Madam chair
representative Madam chair
representative I I bring up
Texas I guess we're on the web
don't care it's New Mexico the
actor and instructional repair
Senator about so there's even a
contact person was frustrating
for me at all in all of this
discussion both in the ETA and
now this is a really isn't
anybody that can just sit down
with me and say okay here is
what we you know no or a suspect
based on modeling what is going
to happen to the rate payers if
this goes into effect I just I'm
I'm frustrated as a legislator
why don't have the instance
questions because it seems to me
that's a basic responsibility we
all have just like we do to the
taxpayers in New Mexico because
these are regulated utilities as
well as to the rate payers there
are many ways well they are a
captive audience that we should
be worried about I know the PRC
is regulating yes yes that so we
passed your piercing reform and
we waited a that and so anything
you can do to get your contact
person or metals or something
that would tell me how it's
gonna affect readers really help
some I'm really just cheating
with everybody that I think we
need that information where it's
four chair representative there
are those studies that you are
looking for they're called
integrated resource plans we can
get those to you their file by
utilities every three years what
does show is that utilities are
going to be compliant with just
for the position foreseeable
future and that's their.
These cost alternative
a colleague of mine had
o'connell's former resource
planner for public service for
the New Mexico we can absolutely
make him available to you to yes
Representative specific
questions you have about that
it's pretty simple I want to
know what impact it's going to I
can't do any military that large
small moderateincome for income
that's where and that's where my
head is if I can get that
information would help me I
don't care how you get it thank
you.
Take a summer stock thank you.
It next we have representative
madam chair Chasey.
Thank you madam chair and
I was checking to see if the
speaker would to talk before me
that let me go I had.
first of all.
You know we had.
If you answered yes but because
there was quite a bit of
information but there was
testimony about the fact that
This was going to provide
electricity for low income
people but that section was
eliminated in the committee
stop.
Have you address that.
Thank you madam chair
the the yes.
Madam chair in place of what was
in the original bill.
The committee substitute in
section ten creates the
indigenous housing electricity
fund where and
Proceeds as well as gifts grants
donations or otherwise would go
to then be administered madam
chair by the Indian Affairs
Department for that beneficial
electrification for indigenous
New Mexicans so thank you madam
chair for pointing that out in
in that in now instead of.
Incentivizing.
The electricity providers to
carry out that electric
for electrification it.
Creates a fund that was would
then be administered by the
Indian Affairs Department to
carry out that purpose.
So.
Madam chair representative small
will this have to go to
appropriations because you're
not.
Create a fund and that's usually
part of the process.
Or or does it already go to
appropriations.
Madam chair Rep
that that that's it is not yet
been referred to appropriations
but that is something that
absolutely could.
With the new approach madam
chair with the creation of this
fund which was not in the
previous legislation that could
be a feature of this Madam that
could be as a next step with the
creation of the fund and the
committee substitute.
Thank you.
Okay so that would seem to be
appropriate so I I wanted to
and.
Yes you representative madam
chair and representative that
The first version for the
second.
It seems to me that the.
PRC was being.
Was not.
Overseeing but one of the state
agencies one of the state
department's once overseeing
this effort rather than the PRC
which seems kind of strange sure
thank you madam chair for the
question madam chair because
this regulated area missions
that is emissions of greenhouse
gases that is the appropriate
that's currently the province of
the New Mexico environment
department it's the appropriate
province madam chair also it's
my understanding madam chair
that when this is been a a
similar approach has been
brought up to the PRC in
in in our earlier configuration
of the PRC the P. Garcia was
very clear that they did not
regulate G. greenhouse gas
emissions they said and and and
that the appropriate.
Place for that to happen would
be with the New Mexico
environment department that
currently that has and and will
continue to oversee that area.
So.
This seems to be fairly
complicated.
One criticism is that.
You're finally this whole all
these projects through the
utilities which could increase
the cost of electrification to.
The numbers and potentially
could slow electrification
process down you want to respond
to that thank you madam chair.
I don't think that will be the
case madam chair
what we're seeing is a rapid
electrification commitments
madam chair and committee from
very large multinational
The company's lie and and the
Big Five the automakers are no
exception madam chair committee.
That are.
Edging to go all electric and so
madam chair committee in fact we
think that we're we may be a
little bit on the front and with
the policy but it seems madam
chair very very much that this
is where the policy is going it
to.
I have to electrify segments of
our economy
that in so doing actually have
more economic opportunity for
places like New Mexico if we
approach that in the right the
right way.
What madam chair and
Representative small.
Did you.
We sponsor of the ETA I can't
remember if it was.
There were so many people ended
up signed on to it but thank you
madam chair I was proud to be
one of the leading how Sanchez.
For the Energy trends okay.
So.
Does this bill duplicate the
zero carbon mandates of the AGA.
Madam chair my response would be
that it simply.
Clarifies the standards within
the existing structure it does
not change the standard madam
chair it does not modify the ETA
it's it puts guideposts in
between now and in the
intervening years all the way to
twenty forty five and then
twenty fifty and then it tries
to get us
To you especially if we have a
very rapid rise of use of
electricity in the near future
when that ended with the
renewable energy requirements
through the ETA are relatively
low compared to the amount of
electricity that we're using if
we're if it's forty percent
renewable but the amount of
electricity that we use grows by
fifty or a hundred percent that
is a very large amount of
greenhouse gas emissions that
will substantially impede our
progress on addressing the worst
impacts of climate change and
then we'll frankly have to be
drawn out of the atmosphere at
even greater economic and
environmental costs so this this
tries to get us there.
Within the same framework but
with very subs with regular
progress as opposed to progress
at a and a few central points.
Progress every three madam chair
progress every three years as
opposed to progress in five and
ten year increments.
So madam chair and
representative small.
Did
you have a working group or did
this go to any interim committee
thank you madam chair while this
concept has been studied
extensively it's been brought
before the PRC previously as I
mentioned madam chair we did not
have this legislation before
interim committees this past
session now okay well I guess
one of the.
Madam chair one of the.
Issues I have I have a
constituent who's an attorney
and
No is your child ready.
Issues that he's one of the ones
who was just yes
about that in really angry that
the ETA didn't.
Protect rate payers ultimately
and he it commands to number of
senators to try to propose an
amendment to the ATA.
Which they did this session
about tabled and conservation
and so the message I'm getting
and I'm.
I'm here I am saying something I
rarely stay although I really
like this individual.
I hear myself echoing
representative Nibert in state I
thought we weren't supposed to
touch the ETA.
And.
The senators got their hand
slapped down trying to make sure
that ratepayers were protected
by amending the ETA over there
in the Senate and conservation
just.
What's that after.
So here we are.
J. cells is only thank you thank
you madam chair putting things
in.
That are additional goals in
each year I know you're not
going to that section of law
but.
It.
But.
Representative you're both
coming in a little bit shaky
might I suggest that you turn
your videos offer a couple of
minutes so we can hear you more
clearly.
Thank Representative.
Thank.
Unless it's my internet now I
can't hear anybody it looks okay
good Representative small thank
you madam vice chair and I
turned off my video I appreciate
very much the suggestion madam
vice chair madam chair the ETA
to be very clear has lowered
electricity rates for.
Consumers especially madam chair
madam vice chair for
customers of public service
company of New Mexico who would
have been paying higher rates
for
more greenhouse gas intensive
energy.
Madam chair representative madam
vice chair we're not touching
the ETA we hear very clearly and
appreciate deeply the.
Amendment and concern the
concern for and commitment to
rates and we believe strongly
that in the emerging economy
We will be it the lowest
possible rates for all New
Mexicans will be connected to
the best.
The least intensive greenhouse
gas emission for electricity.
So
but but.
And and a knowledge you madam
chair madam vice chair that the
the concern about being
addressing this soon we we hear
that a madam chair madam vice
chair it was just earlier this
year that G. said they were
gonna not have internal
combustion engines by twenty
thirty.
The world is changing rapidly
and this is the most economic
way madam chair madam vice chair
to address greenhouse gas
emissions.
We believe.
And I'm I I appreciate that
madam chair and down
Representative small what the
amendment the senators were
trying to put on was not about
current rates it it was about
future
when when when PNM house to
divest itself of some beta or
purchase something
there was that and I can't
remember the details but they
were told you cannot address
this at this time so I know that
Madam chair and Representative
small Representative Ely with us
four figures
and you said you can get that to
us I I think that we have
you know we probably have need
of those because what what you
don't want to do and I I really
I want to do everything this
bill aims to to which is to have
electrification and
decarbonization goals that work
our our our state in our our
whole planet really.
It's a matter of how to get
there the best way and I I the
certainly don't want to stand in
the way that I I want to make
sure that I complained before
and I don't know if you've.
Listen to me about it but when
we went to Medicaid managed care
we created so many levels here
are the state we reduce the
actual number of dollars that
we're going to patient care so I
don't want that sort of that
here that's that's what I
one of the things I'm concerned
about.
So
I I just I'm I'm really not.
I want your goals but I'm not
convinced you have the vehicle.
fully designed for that purpose
yet.
Without madam chair I will be
able to.
Thank you madam chair next we
have speakers off.
Thank you madam chair and I I
will try to keep it under sixty
seconds because the late hour I
want to commend.
I'm sorry I said Georgia where's
our timer.
yes so I I there's been a couple
references to the power outage
situation the rolling blackouts
in Texas
I I wanted to mention for the
benefit of the members of the
committee.
That
well I'm one we experienced very
similar in New Mexico two
thousand eleven.
When.
Extremely cold temperatures
caused the natural gas supply in
West Texas and southeast New
Mexico to drop dramatically
because of the fact that the
equipment that was there to.
Ezzell aghast flow from your in
the pipeline and sometimes the
pipeline sales were frozen and
so many natural gas suppliers
chose to stop producing from
their natural gas wells and that
resulted in New Mexico two
thousand and eleven.
Booster pump that ran on
electricity generated from the
burning of natural gas to go
offline when the electricity
went away and we saw a drop and
natural gas supply because of
wells being shut in by their
operators on a temporary basis
when I understand shut it is not
the correct term but they were
they were a.
Their their production was
reduced dramatically in two
thousand eleven I was on the
phone with the leadership of the
New Mexico gas company in real
time when the
rollouts recurring in Texas the
concern was that.
New Mexico gas company in
response to two thousand eleven.
And problems redesigned quite a
bit of their natural gas
delivery system in New Mexico
and purchased natural gas
storage facilities.
And the least in natural gas
storage capacity.
Association in West Texas so
that they would be able to to
supply gas.
Even in the event of natural gas
wells being shut in due to cold
weather and during those calls
they made a point to me that the
rolling blackouts in Texas were.
Domino only attributable to the
decision by natural gas
operators in West Texas to slow
down or stop their production of
natural gas which hindered the
elect electricity generating
stations ability to supply
electricity because their supply
of natural gas have been.
Curtailed substantially or
eliminated.
so that this this notion it was
because ice was developing on
wind turbines you just simply
not factual especially when you
look at the percentage of
electricity in the state of
Texas from wind turbines and
other renewable sources as
compared to what is generated
from natural gas
you would not the rolling
blackouts on a scale of the site
all when power in Texas went
away this one was a problem
arising from the fact that in
the deregulated electricity
market in Texas there is not
sufficient preparation on the
part of the utility.
To be ready for a sharp and
immediate decline in natural gas
supplies so I I you can see and
all those longest sixty seconds
madam chair that up if you times
that I want to.
Make sure that the committee had
accurate information on that on
that situation thank.
Thank you Mr speaker and seeing
that at seven o'clock on the dot
what's the pleasure of the
committee.
Madam chair.
Representative madam chair tasty
I'm just wondering if
If the sponsors think that they
would be able to address any of
the concerns expressed if they
had more time and.
For K. feel that everything's
perfect
thank you madam chair.
I would be happy to bring back
to the committee madam chair
additional information showing
the modeling that this is the
most efficient and economic ways
to address climate change madam
chair committee I know there is
deep concern there's deep
commitment amongst the committee
while there is also concern
about making sure there's the
clarity of that information I
think it's certainly fair for us
to work to bring that
information back to you madam
chair and to the committee in
order to finish knowing that
we've had the majority of our
discussion today to be able to
finish on a few of those points
at a future meeting madam chair.
So if you if I think if we need
to roll to that time that's okay
madam chair and.
So I'm I I would I know managed
care that I would appreciate it.
Thank you madam chair we would
then request respectfully that
you roll this legislation and we
look forward to bringing some of
that back.
Thank you very very much
appreciate it.
Thank you
Madam chair I believe we're at
the end of our agenda for this
evening.
Yes we are.
Okay all right thank you.
Let.
I really appreciate the staff to
thanks so much bye bye.
