This will be on the internet.
madam chair members of the
committee thank you
for this opportunity what are
all I'm gonna say to about what
is to me about what has happened
is that
we came into your committee
we're all scrambling.
And I think that this committee
allow us.
The the my clients in the in in
gene to set of the table as
equals and have a fair
discussion about this issue and
as a result of the opportunity
you provided us we figured it
out number of proud of that and
that's really all I'm gonna say
when state thank you for doing
that he did a good job and we.
I just think you need may want
to get into some of the
technical things but I'll let
him do that thank you.
Thank you go ahead Mr downs.
Madam chair Jean here I think
you're still on mute sorry.
Madam chair members of the
committee I'm gene Vance and I
am general counsel for the
purpose of ciation New Mexico
yep twenty five years ago this
is what we did and this is how
we did the last three right and
I and I I want to thank the
committee for all the input we
got and that got us into a
position that perhaps that's the
way we can do things in the
future because it was a very
productive process and
when everybody hears everybody
everybody else's position we.
We make progress and I I
appreciate everybody that work
with us and I appreciate all
members of the committee that
had some excellent input that
gave us guidance on what what we
needed to address
I am willing to stand for
questions on
on any of the items I can there
are some that since I've gotten
questions for my own client I I
know our our questions.
such as why we agreed our eleven
day notice up and I'll I'll put
that of us playing there because
it looks like an odd number.
About but that number came about
because of rule six AM the
Of rules procedure and if we
make it a ten day notice it's a
fourteen day notice if you make
eleven day notices on eleven
days notice because you have
weekends and holidays.
Up and.
So because that question I I'm
I'm anticipating that and in
advance up I'm also willing to
answer any other questions we
we've attempted to address
The speaker's comments
and I think that might have been
Representative McQueen comments
as well about the burden of
proof we basically brought in of
the the way that for retaliation
claims the the.
The the way the burden is is
handled and employment
discrimination cases under the
United States Supreme Court a
ruling forty seven years ago in
McDonnell Douglas versus green
and that gives us fifty years of
case law we're gonna know what
we're doing.
so
those are the two biggest
changes the other thing is that
that
With the help of
of.
Search Martinez who are at the
university was helping on on the
provision about the.
Pandemic
we.
were able to
get a more narrow.
The definition of an emergency.
So that's that's my
introduction.
And and madam chair I apologize
I don't mean to keep
interrupting this Representative
be like you are the one other
person that I had neglected to
mention Mr Myers and I don't
know she's a participant I know
issues involved in this as well
and I think may want to speak
yes madam chair Karen was in the
attendees that now I see
promoted.
Karen.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee
I just want to think of
everybody who participated in
the negotiations particularly
gene and Randy as well as the
other attorney advocates
we just think have achieved a
strong bill that protects
tenants and also recognizes the
need for landlords to get paid
and so I'm hoping that this will
help of the state weather the
pandemic and the crisis in
objections and often for
questions thank you.
Thank you
Let's go to the committee for
questions.
Agency if there's a state of
emergency somebody here it is
our job.
Give me one moment madam chair.
And.
This.
I would like to know in the same
position as representative
Nibert trying to read the bill.
I didn't realize it was coming
forward and had not seen the
committee so so.
Madam chair maybe I'll have a
few questions together
Representative queens and time
but R. I'm looking on the
Canadian side of which is the
point six version on page twenty
one we get a wind seventeen.
This is back.
Constructs question I've had
with respect to a lot of these
bills that are now putting.
What happens if we're
integration of emergency yeah
and again my my point is that
there are a lot of declarations
of emergency issued by the
executive that are.
Limited in scope impact ninety
nine point nine percent of the
emergencies issued are are
limited and yeah Ariel what
staff.
And yet are we have a provision
upon reading this quickly and
correctly
Declaration of emergency or
disaster issued by the governor
of the their service that go
into effect.
And.
And.
I'm not sure that it's the
object of the parties to allow
every declaration to affect the
signs particularly one as well
the declaration of emergency is
so isolated that it would not
possibly affect the obligations
of the landlord or the tenant
that are greatly removed from
that area so so madam chair and
and representative did you give
me some assurance of so this is
somewhat limited or does every
emergency bring up this clause
Representative Nibert keep
reading a sentence it says that
the emergency include would have
to include quarantine isolation
or social distancing.
It might there's the waters
out in the San Juan river.
It's Chris chair and
representative if you do
continue to read down it does
talk about
the okay yeah also on page
twenty two line.
Wine four four three four.
Okay so you dress the concerns
that I raised earlier.
and I appreciate that.
And all parties are comfortable
that the breadth of that.
Adequately takes care of
everyone assumed.
You're not looking at the screen
well maybe you are but there's a
lot of nodding heads
Representative Nibert okay.
Yes the my to be so once that's
for sure
Madam chair
I'll just say that I am pleased
to the Representative two.
Sides got together and work the
work this out
I.
I'm not sure whether I
understand all of the provisions
of the changes that were made
but I'm I'm certainly pleased to
hear that both sides are are we
still are comfortable moving
forward and and believe that
it's of a piece of legislation
that but you can both.
But what we're doesn't work out
maybe I do burdens on on either
side so
I guess thanks for bringing that
board I may have.
Representative some questions
are almost four food banks of
two or because I'm not going to
be able to go through this
carefully right now but the
thank you for your size together
and resolving the important
issues and and
With that I hope I gave
Representative McQueen enough
time to.
Careers that are not thank you
madam chair.
Thank you Representative McQueen
did you want to ask questions.
And I appreciate the additional
time but I guess I too will read
it for the for thank you.
I don't see.
So I'm we have we're on a
mission.
For do not pass on house bill
one eleven in a two passed on
House Judiciary Committee
substitute point six version of
house bill one eleven.
Well we're we're please call the
roll.
Yes.
Representative Armstrong.
Yes.
Representative Cook not quite
yet.
Mr speaker will.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative.
Representative.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert.
The chairman of a no Sir now but
I'd like to explain more about.
And I I'm really happy about
this and I have to tell you I I
told representative Ely this
yesterday I read the grocery
store yesterday morning.
Before I started working on my
legal basis.
And I was leaving the store in
the coop it's not very crowded
they only let a few people that.
Wearing masks and.
Madam.
Stop me on the way out and sent
is house bill one eleven dead.
He said I think there may be an
agreement and she's all I hope
so.
So I was really happy when
Representative you like call me
later.
So.
Good work everybody thank you
it's going to our agenda.
We have one fifty six
Representative by Adam.
Good afternoon madam chair but
if we can bring my expert
witness doesn't I have
Alexandria Taylor next video and
audio host that is cutting.
Okay let's get all of them on
board here.
Hi this Taylor hello how are
you.
Do we have everybody in
Representative yes madam chair
in regards.
Madam chair and members of the
committee I'm here to present
for your consideration house
bill one fifty six.
In the summer of two thousand
sixteen I was geocaching with
the for.
Geocaching if you don't know is
a bit of a treasure hunt.
We were in a park looking for
treasure.
As I was looking under a bench I
noticed a police officer Dr a.
We were the only two people in
the park I became nervous.
I told my friend let's just get
out of here we got in the car
and as soon as we drove off the
officer all orders.
Over about a half a mile down
the road.
The officer came first to my
side of the car the passenger
side.
Call the two people were smoking
marijuana and part.
I immediately stated that we
weren't smoking.
By saying I smell in the car
where is it.
I didn't lie to him I told him
that there was a backpack in the
backseat with a pipe and one
bowl of marijuana.
He grabbed the bag and pulled
out a bag with exactly what I
had sent a pipe and unburned
full of marijuana we were not
smoking.
He asked me where the rest was
he said he knew there was more.
I told him what was in that bag
was the order was strong in the
open and some of it he would see
that.
That I was lying I insisted that
I wasn't.
He said you know I can arrest
you for this.
I said if you're seriously going
to take me to jail wraparound
the we.
You tell me to get out of the
car so I did.
He walked to his car and told me
to spread my feet so you can
search my pockets I did.
Hi Ingle area really hard to
spread my feet further.
I said what the F. then.
He pushed me hard against the
car and put handcuffs on me you
told me I was under arrest and
put me in the vehicle.
The car and air conditioner work
on when our when I entered it.
He walked around and turn the
air conditioning all they want
to talk to my friend who is
still in our our.
I later found out he was telling
her not being out with someone
like me.
It was really hard in that car
my adrenaline didn't help.
When he got back to the car I
told him I will call you turn
the heater on.
I started crying and I was
sweating.
I told him he was contributing
to a problem in my neighborhood.
I also told him I bet your lapel
camera isn't on is if.
I have here and I started to
hyperventilate.
I told him that I have heart
problems and I feel like I'm
going to pass out.
He pulled the car over on the
side of this level of our.
He opened my door and pulled me
out by my right arm I couldn't
get my feet out and under me I
fell face first into some loose
dirt.
My face for sweat and tears it
was now more in my eyes and nose
and mouth.
The officer called an ambulance.
They came and asked me what
happened.
I was explaining what happened
and I clearly remember another
paramedic asking the officer
what happened.
I was driven by ambulance to the
hospital.
When my breathing and heart rate
were stable I asked the nurse if
I was going to jail.
She said she had no idea what I
was talking about because I was
not brought in by office.
I remember her saying that if I
was going to jail I would be
happy to the hospital that and I
wasn't.
Report this incident to anyone
because I was scared and I was
also oddly relieved that I
wasn't going to jail.
Sexual violence is also an under
reported crime.
Police sexual violence are even
less likely to report because a
police officer position of
authority and abuse of power.
Police sexual violence are more
likely to be the Google the more
vulnerable.
Women and communities of color
LGBTQ plus individuals.
People with disabilities and
people with lower incomes.
According to a recent poll
published by the ACLU in New
Mexico nearly half of all voters
polled say they or someone they
know has been harassed or harmed
by the police.
In that same poll nearly one in
five voters polled say they
would not feel safe of pulled
over by police.
Toxic displays of aggression and
sexual violence by police
officers that go unchecked
because legal towards community
members.
In a former IPRA request it was
found that four out of the
thirty five reports made against
a former local police officer
aware of sexual misconduct.
Former Louisville metro police
department detective Rep Hagen
Spence who was one of the
officers who fired ten rounds of
shots into Brianna Taylor
Department murdering her has
been accused of sexual
misconduct and assault I nine
one.
House bill one fifty six would
dress this abuse of power by law
enforcement and hold accountable
those actors of the state they
use their badge to sexually harm
the the people they are
entrusted to protect and serve.
I do also have a an amendment of
for your consideration if if now
would be the appropriate time to
bring that up.
If your amendment would have an
effect on public comment if you
could just explain it briefly
we'll discuss it will discuss it
will decide whether to adopted
after the public comment but go
ahead and explain it.
Thank you madam chair.
It basically just adds probation
and parole officers to this this
bill winning just via of police
officers but that's that's
really what it significantly
birds.
if I if I could madam chair you
allow my expert witnesses to
introduce themselves and talk a
little bit about the bill
briefly I have Alexandria Taylor
the deputy director of the New
Mexico coalition of sexual
assault programs she will be
followed by Mexico a clinical
director for the rape crisis
center of central New Mexico and
we'll finish up with the money
Jose Rodriguez for these
executive director director of
all of our prices treatment
center thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative go
ahead Liz Taylor.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I want
to thank Representative but at
us for the courage in sharing
your story today my name is
Alexandria Taylor and the deputy
director of the New Mexico
coalition of sexual assault
programs where we leave states
efforts to reduce sexual abuse
and violence by providing
training and technical
assistance to service providers
law enforcement officers
prosecutors medical
practitioners and all health
professionals HB wanted to
Griggs is necessary for our
state because the intersection
of use of force and sexualized
violence continues to exist in
the power structure of our
society that harms the most
phone vulnerable there is a
clear power imbalance between
police officers and the members
of the public they are in
contact with this power
imbalances recognize to exist in
our current statute by
explicitly meaning that a person
who is incarcerated or confined
in a correctional facility or
jail cannot consent to sex with
the perpetrator is in a position
of authority.
H. B. one fifty six makes clear
that peace officers and
probation and parole officers
hold the same position of
authority and we are clear that
coercion currently exist in
statute however the data the
literature and the stories that
we hear directly from survivors
has informed us that is not
explicit enough as we talk about
police brutality and excessive
use of force addressing the
sexualized in gendered violence
that occurs by police it's of
critical importance the
victimology of police sexual
violence is deeply
intersectional as police
officers typically target the
most vulnerable women of color
transgender and gender non
conforming people victims of
domestic and sexual abuse people
engaged in sex work people with
disabilities and those suspected
of engaging and criminalized
activity.
These groups are perceived as
less credible and H. B. one
fifty six may that consent is
not a defense because police
officers probation and parole
officers hold a position of
authority.
I will never forget watching the
verdict if you hold our an
Oklahoma City police officer who
was convicted of raping eight
women of color and I additional
women also reporting being
assaulted by him most of them
black most low income one of
them seventeen years old and I
watched the jury delivered its
verdict at my dinner table on my
iPad on a live YouTube stream
because the rate of thirteen
women of color by an officer who
had a position of authority a
gun and the full power of the
state behind him didn't warrant
prime time coverage.
Former police officer turned
professor bill Stinson conducted
a national of analysis of more
than five hundred officer arrest
for sexual misconduct you found
us on to the fund that and noted
that off duty misconduct often
disability it by the power of
the bads where the presence in
official service well.
In a second study funded by the
National Institute of Aston's
arising within sixty seven
hundred officer arrests
nationwide and found that half
of arrests for sexual misconduct
incidents involving minors
according to the ten Cato
Institute to review.
Sexual misconduct is the second
most.
Department please contact after
excessive force we know from our
work through the prison rape
elimination act that sound laws
are one important step in ending
the culture of violence and
abuse of authority but is not
the end of it the abuse of state
actors position of authority is
documented a Santa Fe New
Mexican article from January
tenth two thousand and one
highlighted the systematic
sexual.
Eight men women's prison led to
provide oversight allowing the
abuse to occur it is even more
challenging to hold police
officers and race probation and
parole officers accountable
without being explicit.
And I just I want to acknowledge
schools who have contacted our
office since the first committee
hearing hearing their own
personal stories the sexual
violence and I want to say you
are great you are courageous and
we here we here you must be
preceded by accountability thank
you.
Mr city I think you're next.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee thank you for
allowing her to be here and to
speak with you all today so I am
the city on the creek
independently licensed mental
health provider and the clinical
director for the rape crisis
center central New Mexico also
therapist with the organization
so we provide services to
survivors of sexual violence and
their family I'm in my role as
the clinical director I review
the clinical assessments for
every person who seeks are
counseling services and the last
two years an overview of over
three hundred survivors
experiences shared at the
clinical intake it's shocking
the number of people who have
disclosed experiences in their
lifetime of being sexually
assaulted her after coerced into
sexual acts well being question
detained or transported by put
by peace officers I'm a common
theme I've observed is that
promise of being not being
arrested or reprimanded in
exchange for sexual acts and
when the act is been completed
the individuals taken to jail
for booking or otherwise
sanctioned unfortunately many
human trafficking victims are
put in these situations and with
the trauma that they're already
in during I do not see any other
options other than to comply far
too many people have been
impacted by access disease which
results in a long term damage to
their mental health I can also
tell you that none of the
survivors have chosen to report
these assaults knowing that
their voices would not be heard
I'm truly grateful that this has
the potential to change here
today by adding protection such
as these shows New Mexicans that
there is zero tolerance of
sexual acts by perpetrators in
positions of power using consent
as their defense of their
actions we work closely everyday
with passion and caring peace
officers and sexual assault
attractive and know that even
one person in their field using
their position to perpetrate
sexual violence can put a
negative light on all of their
roles in our community this
protection would also empower
survivors to report these and
hopefully other assaults and
potentially aid in their healing
process madam chair members of
the committee on thank you
again.
For your time in recognition of
this issue and the impact of
this change can have on all the
survivors and our community.
Thank you Mr Vegas I can't see
that other part of your last
name because it's too long for
the screen so.
This just in.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I
wanted to thank you for allowing
us to testify in front of you
today I also want to thank you
for your service I know how many
things you have to do in your
lives are both professional and
personal to abandon all of that
for becoming that these amazing
a role that you that you are
with the legislature so I really
want to thank you for that I
have a lot of respect for that
you're correct madam chair my
name is way too long for just
about everything it is many of
our state wrote that he gets cut
these and I am the executive
director with the solace crisis
treatment center which is one of
our rape crisis centers in the
state of New Mexico is the one
that is located in Santa Fe it
is the one that serves the first
judicial district Los Alamos
requests and that Fe counties
and also with other rape crisis
centers we do our very best you
to bridge the gaps in areas The
New Mexico where we may not have
a rape crisis center for state
we work under the under the
umbrella of the New Mexico
coalition of sexual assault
programs.
And through my experience and
this is what I want to speak to
you today or is I have had the
opportunity for nineteen years
to at witness stories from
survivors either at the level of
being myself a direct service
provider when I was an advocate
for survivors of sexual assault
or when I was different
again during your for survivors
of sexual assault which was
named nine years of my tenure
but also through my last decade
as the executive director of the
agency where in that particular
role I have had the opportunity
to actually work at a high level
off policy at a level of multi
disciplinary approaches that
will be centered to survivors in
that can be really really center
you legislature that needs to
change constantly to better the
lives of our communities and to
minimize the incidents yes
sexual violence.
That is my role in I want to
share with you some of my
experience under those two to
rules that I help.
It is they've been stated to you
do you witness dories that are
of sexual violence perpetrated
by people even station thirty
because they're particularly
long lasting in their effect
they they can actually
create situations of trauma that
we call in clinical work complex
trauma which means that they can
really be devastating at many
different levels in the life of
a survivor in so for have a much
more long lasting effects in the
reason is because I mean think
about it.
We can be.
Sure we can be heard by those
that we conceive are either of
the individuals for the
institutions that have been
appointed for asked to trust
in to protect us we can it's
very hard to not believe that
everything else can happen that
anyone else can have an
opportunity to hope heard as if
they themselves could.
So that particular type of
violence can really tear up hard
some reading in your court sense
of safety that translate into
many areas often dive of the
survivor but also when he's
witnessed by the community by
any of that he has also one of
the most devastating effects of
all kinds of sexual violence.
We just heard from our previous
testimony that it is actually
one type of violence that is
chronically under reported.
you you can think why how much
more difficult you might be for
that person to have to report.
Having being hurt by the people
to the people that are already
costing that that high it is it
is illogical to think that that
is going to be an easy path for
a survivor in so because it is
under reported.
Goes unaddressed because there's
no belief that there is even a
problem much less that we have
to have policies in that we have
to have laws PPAs to prevent it
from happening in to hold
perpetrators accountable so you
may see that that circle
taking place at best we have
seen how is being addressed in a
way that presents an opportunity
for defending the acting saying
that it was something that might
happen consensually.
But you have heard testimony and
you find in the standings quite
well yourself there is no
potential way of giving consent
while undergoing any kind of
nine point two million here or
detention and discuss why we
have made tremendous progress
already in our state in
nationally to have word that
applies specifically to people
under detention in detention
facilities County detention
facilities or in prisons and
jails.
Reasons as well.
That is why is so it is
happening at that level but we
don't have the same parameters
for other types will be moments
where people are under
detention.
You also have heard that if
there are enough studies that
are already
showing there's enough data that
is demonstrated that sexual
violence happens to be second
place from other types of
misconduct misconduct by police
thank you police to excessive
force.
We know that we are engaged as a
nation I'm not just in our state
and locally as well to address
police misconduct and excessive
force this is the right time for
us to include sexual violence by
police as part of the same
conversation.
I didn't tell you when I
introduce that way that we
working right crisis centers but
I'd like to tell you now because
I think it's very relevant that
so you know that we have done
incredible amount of work to
have very very effective.
Relations with our law
enforcement in every one of
every crisis centers areas of
our state to that effect
particularly at solid since two
thousand and four we made it our
mission do you have an entire
unit of the Santa Fe police
department under our same roof
and the reason behind this is
because we believe we have to
have.
Very good collaboration with law
enforcement when law enforcement
in service providers come
together and show up together to
encourage of survivors and
survivors see us together they
know that they are in good hands
so what we are justifying on two
days is not based on the greater
mac Chilton majority of the
contact off the least that we
know and with whom we work you
know day in and day out it is
specifically to those that are
capable end up costing harm in
not doing so.
So I respectfully request your
support for H. B. one fifty six
to be you create check to your
understanding in a clear
extender to address police
sexual violence by making it
against the law which will
require police departments to
regulate through policy and the
deal you heard it or wait before
through other testimony provides
a clear definition that person
in police care any kind of care
appropriations as well any kind
of care or custody is incapable
of consenting to sexual activity
with with with those they are
under the care of it is for that
that what thank you thank you
the state discounting I'm going
to have a super tired and the
thank you thank you so much for
giving me that much time I
really really appreciate well I
appreciated that at the end
there you were talking about the
fact that you had you were co
located with they lined well
first spent.
And the you need law enforcement
and the truck want to build that
kind of trust so I think that
was helpful.
ready Representative I'll go to
the committee it's gonna go to
the audience and will take a
call for fifteen seconds those
in favor the bill will indicate
their favor by saying yes to
those who oppose state now and
that let's go to the polls first
and then we'll take public
testimony I had.
We have thirty percent thirty
people in favor and in
opposition.
So let's let's hear from the
opposition first so if you raise
your hand if you are in
opposition to the bill.
House bill one fifty fifty.
Six.
Thank.
Your first.
Go ahead.
Thank you very much madam chair
representative and committee
basically what I'm hearing.
As the first expert witness and
said there's already statutes on
the books to penalize law
enforcement.
For participating in sexual
misconduct.
also.
The only examples I heard of
sexual misconduct did not happen
in the state the data provided
was national was not statewide.
I did not hear any data
pertaining to the state of New
Mexico and the anecdotal stories
we heard the beginning had
nothing to do with sexual
violence whatsoever I see this
bill as we done it to what's
already on the books and we have
a better use of our time with
other bills thank you for your
consideration.
Thank you John black.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is John block united New Mexican
and I propose HB one fifty six
state law already protects
victims against peace officers
who commit sexual crimes per
state statute thirty dash nine
dash eleven and the criminal
code because of this this fact
it proves that this is nothing
but a smear bill aiming to build
public opinion against law
enforcers by maligning them as
predators and rapists these are.
Mr block.
The pre can appreciate your
opposition but I don't want you
into the motives to the sponsors
that are disrespectful.
Yes ma'am well this this anti
police rhetoric in the attempt
to squash opposition to this
bill is nothing but a dog
whistle for hatred of law
enforcement so please oppose H.
B. one fifty six.
Derek Scott.
Hi my name's their stock I'm not
close to the problems that have
been persisting as opposed to
what has been said I'm not
saying that people don't have
their stories that affected them
in some way or another I think
the bill should actually
represents a way of education to
people on what their rights are
as the stories that I've heard
all Senator cinema prior law
enforcement officer who became
disabled over ten years ago I'm
a little confused why the
mention disability as Monty.
Deal with officers when I was
not an office service results
since and never had a problem
that's been talked about so I
don't know why disabilities
racked up in this Furthermore I
think education is the more
problem that needs to be dealt
with your rights so that people
understand what their rights are
and how to make complaint and
how to bring a complaint to the
department and or to the.
So it's not an opposition it's
thank you for this thank you Mr
Scott
all right I'll take those in
favor please.
We raise your hands.
Daniel.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Tracy McDaniel and I stand in
support of HB one fifty six is
an advocate and public health
practitioner before moving to
New Mexico in two thousand nine
and worked as a sexual assault
victim advocate house within a
large metropolitan police
department person crimes unit.
In that role I worked side by
side with detectives and I saw
first hand the power imbalance
between police officers and
community members most officers
recognized balance it interacts
with crime victims legislation
this is another community
members actually this bill is
fundamentally about
accountability for those who
push the boundaries of propriety
it is important that the law to
draw a clear line to ensure that
any ambiguity is eliminated.
Making clear that any sexual
activity between officers and
those in their custody is non
consensual coercive and harmful
please vote yes on H. B. one six
thank you.
Thank you.
Not gonna be test Sierra sorry I
know.
Hi good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my
name's Margarita study on all
I'm with the ACLU of New Mexico
and we stand in strong support
house bill one fifty six well
public attention needs towards
visible police crimes of
violence and corruption police
sexual misconduct remains headed
in a jobs ambiguities thank you
to the sponsor representative
but as for bringing this
courageous conversations to the
table on how to address and
prevent police sexual misconduct
from happening because we know
first hand how polarizing police
accountability and oversight can
be we urge the committee to vote
yes thank you.
When I was called.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members my name is
Wendy Basco in on the staff
attorney for the southwest
women's Law Center the Southwes
women's Law Center stand in
support of H. B. one fifty six.
Which is a common sense
amendment to the already
existing law pertaining to
credit criminal sexual
penetration.
We are horrified and saddened
that this is a step actually
necessary that such abuse of
power and authority exists
within our state it does exist
and so we must move forward with
this first step in addressing
these abuses of power and
authority and get this issue in
the sunlight.
Thank you for allowing me to
speak on this bill and again the
southwest women's Law Center
Justice Committee to vote in
favor of HB one fifty six thank
you.
Thank you Nicole Martin.
Yeah.
madam chair and members of the
committee.
Apologize in human donor
parking.
When you miss more in and
economic going command which is
not and the going up hello
Representative territory.
And I am one of the co founders
for indigenous women or anything
and.
I just want to reiterate sexual
violence to report a crime
victims of sexual violence are
even less likely to report
because of police officers
finally and however the police
sexual violence are more likely
to be more vulnerable women of
color LGBTQ individuals people
with disabilities and people
with lower incomes.
C. members
the committee the table in favor
of H. B. one fifty six thank
you.
Janet Williams.
Hello thank you for hearing me
I'm Janet Williams president of
the Santa Fe national
organization for women and we
strongly are in favor of HB
fifty six HB pit one fifty six
will address the abuse of power
by law enforcement and hold
accountable those actors of the
state that use their badge to
sexually harm the people they
are entrusted to protect and
serve please support H. B. one
fifty six thank you.
Andrew ankles.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Andrew
Ackles I'm the community
organizer for a quality New
Mexico an LGBTQ civil rights
organization and I'm here today
to show strong support for H.
two one fifty six as we know
where entrance individuals are
more likely to experience
incarceration and sexual
violence transfer in particular
face these issues are alarming
rates H. B. one fifty six takes
the power dynamics between an
officer and a detainee into
consideration a person who was
detained or in custody is
expected to follow the orders of
a peace officer and it is up
appalling to consider that any
sexual act could be included in
such orders a person being
detained or incarcerated has no
power in that situation and they
could never fully consent to
sexual activity with an officer
not only what H. B. one fifty
six gray avenues for
transparency between police
officers and the communities
they serve but it would give
space for accountability and
provide concrete support to
those with marginalized
identities thank you for
allowing me to speak today.
Thank you Erica Davis county.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee I hope
this finds you well today
women's history month in this
binder for women making history
my name is Erica Davis from on
the culture for respect Mexico
women and families a coalition
and I am a co founder for the
New Mexico Black central
organizing committee and New
Mexico just second generation at
Blackpool Mexico this bill is
very important and that
according to a recent poll
published by the ACLU of New
Mexico nearly half of all voters
called saying that them state
bay themselves or know someone
who has been harassed or harmed
by the police in that same hold
nearly one in five voters said
that they do not feel safe or
would not feel safe if pulled
over by police so this is.
Definitely something that I can
say that with respect New Mexico
men and women and families
coalition supports we ask that
the committee does too thank you
so much.
Thank you.
Commo.
Hello and can you hear me.
Thank you sound.
I'm thank you madam chair
members of the committee and
Adrian but at today I'm here as
on the policy director for four
together action I'm I'm I hope
that most of you that the
thought of offices violating
people in this most dramatic and
violent way in the shop I hope
that it comes as a shock to you
every single penny here it
because I can say that as a case
manager who worked with young
people that where I'm navigating
the table now yes this is and
facing homelessness programs for
years that it would not a shock
to them it was not it was
actually a pretty common
conversation that they would
have with the tab there about
how to avoid it about time that
they maybe got out of something
because of that or that they got
in more trouble or released
because the threat into call on
the officers that had that had
even tried such abuse I'm it was
a shock to me the first time as
well that I heard it but the
more money I heard it was it no
longer became a shock even
though it's a pain I think that
every time I hear it.
So you can imagine that in two
thousand nine when the women at
the west mesa or where found
we I was at the time executive
director of young women United
and we were waiting to I'm we're
trying to get the media to stop
calling are women prostitutes
and drug addicts and at that
time you know the media with
with calling them that and we so
we gathered women who have been
engaged in the street economy
specifically facts change and we
talked to them.
And Mike that still hurt every
single time that I heard every
single one of the sex worker
women that we had talked to and
then they had experienced this
is well I share these today with
you because I family they're not
disposable because women that
are people that decide that they
that their best places in the
sex trade industry or because
people are facing a crime that
they're worried about that they
should not have to enter that
from our police officers that
are meant to protect their thank
you for your time.
Thank you counselor nonsense.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee last
silent a city councillor and
have also chair of our public
safety committee you're at the
council.
We met last Tuesday during our
public safety committee in
support of this of my memorial
that is also in support of the
one fifty six during public
safety Albuquerque police
department noted that their
current standard operating
procedures prohibits sexual
conduct or perpetration by an
officer or person in their
capacity they're also currently
revising their respective SOP
explicitly prohibit sexual
relations I officer with any
person off of their health
detained also won fifty six with
further efforts to keep officers
who can't use their position and
advocate their responsibilities
to the public and this may
council conduct it passed
unanimously across party lines
that I urge your support house
bill one fifty six thank you.
Thank you very much.
Okay.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I'm
Susan Loubet with the New Mexico
women's agenda we worked on the
earlier law that was referred to
doctor
of problems in the prison about
sex be illegal in the prison and
we we support we worked on that
with senator Cisco make sorely
and and so we support the
continued to public attention to
this problem thank you.
And I rushed for.
She doesn't have updated
version.
Okay the land mine and.
Hi can you all hear me yes hi my
name is Elaine my Estes and I
just really wanted to thank the
sponsor for bringing this bill
forward and urge each of you
offered to pass of this bill for
all the stated reasons.
Thank you thank you gentlemen in
Sanford.
Thank you chair and members of
the committee my name is John
the money and Sanford of the
executive director of the New
Mexico religious coalition for
reproductive choice.
And the people of faith and
conscience that make up the
religious coalition stand in
strong support of this bill
house bill one fifty six thank
you very much thank you the
idea.
Yes.
Thank you so much yes I'm here
with us southwest organizing
project currently head is gender
justice to strongly urge you to
support this bill.
The.
People who are in care of please
should feel safe when they're.
He is supposed to be
Prioritized in therefore we
think this bill is just common
sense thank you so much.
Thank you.
Their insurance.
Yes thank you madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Erin Jones and I stand in
support of this legislation and
I find it sort of it's sort of
blew my mind what I'm a coworker
of mine came to me and said that
we need to sort of support this
afternoon and and after all my
years on the street and living
with homelessness I just
couldn't believe that we needed
something right now offer the so
I urge you all to support the
some wonderful let this smart
legislation that will help
reduce are more people on the
street is thank you.
Thank you that seems to do it
for public comment let's now go
back to the committee.
And let's.
Let's work on the amendment at
this time.
Yes madam chair do you need the
to the two oh two number for it.
Yes.
Yes point two one nine five
eight six.
Point one.
Okay that's in the Here file.
Go ahead and just
explain your purpose.
So mentioned earlier madam chair
it's just adding
the roll officers and probation
officers to this bill I'm not
sure if you are
miss Taylor would like to go
into it further but that that's
pretty much all right guards so
you've added that to the title
and then you put it into the
body as well yes madam chair
okay right.
Discussion of the amendment.
Representative.
Thank you madam chair
Sure and
Representative future explained.
Rio or share our forty that's
contained in paragraph two of
your the.
Yes madam chair and the
Representative library I'm going
to let Alexandria and answer
that for you thank you.
Thank you madam chair
representative Nibert I think
real or apparent authority yes
at the officers ability to in
any situation or scenario use
their batch to commit criminal
sexual penetration care and
custody at which was in the
original version to me is
restricted to situations
when a person is seeking the
assistance of an officer or
rested while the officers on the
clack but it it's not always
clear and a police officer when
someone is actually in the care
or custody by the public it's
not always clear when they are
in the care of and custody of an
officer and so
we know that a police officer
always has a badge that
contention could that can
potentially be used to commit
criminal sexual penetration so
that's what that clarification
seeks to do.
Do your needed it.
Are you are you.
Not no ma'am hi I was in the
middle of questions and I did
notice that got.
In another context Madam chair
representative the the term up
here are already.
Is one that is well defined by
the courts and have.
By my knowledge of that word
revolves around
who has the authority to bind of
Business and to date and that
issue's been litigated for for.
Sentries actually
in the context of.
Lease officer.
Probation officer parole
officer.
We're a parent authority has
been subject to litigation so
that there is some common long
nap or we're where we drawing
for about forty in this context.
Thank you madam chair and
representative I will turn again
to Alexandria.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Nibert I will
disclose I am not an attorney
and so I do not know the answer
to your question.
Madam chair representative so
That does give me some pause for
concern
I understand the real authority.
But up to forty
It is more.
More of a concern here because.
You are.
Yes I'm trying to find some
examples where the person would
have real authority but they
would have a parent forty that
would them subject them to the
Strict liability to all
of this of cents and.
All right.
I'm.
I'm at a loss trying to think of
some some examples of where one
would have real authority would
have.
Of the forty over that person
that that that
rise to the.
Our issues that we're trying to
address here
I was.
I was I was going to say if one
of the our criminal attorneys
who on our staff
hello this is the committee
analysts to this so maybe she
can address your question I'm
with you I I I don't know that
so.
Yes madam chair and
representative Nibert apparent
authority would be when the
officer does not actually have
authority that is the person is
not under arrest well he acts as
if he hasn't already eight the
other person to believe that
he's acting under under his
badge reels already is when he
has actual authority and a
parent authorities when he
creates the perception of.
Yeah that's that's totally
normal light why barbel
definition remind normal
reaction to were for the the two
words account for the.
The other contacts and it's a
judicial determination that part
of the Ortiz is.
Actuals forty that can be
assumed by the public as a
result of COVID that office in
order
our.
I may be operating under some
bias because of why you why
You so that for in other arenas
of.
All right I see the point all
all.
grapple with that not thank you
for the the news time with that
that's the word I have looked at
some thank you madam chair.
Representative Nibert that's why
we have both criminal and civil
attorneys to advise.
In our
that really I call them the
brains of the outfit here.
So.
You madam vice chair.
Your question.
Madam chair if you're ready I
don't see any other hands I'd
like to move it to pass on H. B.
one fifty six as amended.
If we did we need to actually
adopt the amendment R. Scott
let's want to move to adopt the
amendment you got the amendment
and.
Okay great I'll second that.
Well the clerk called the roll
and adopting them the please.
Representative Armstrong.
I apologize madam chair what are
we voting on.
Adopting the amendment of that
yes.
Thank you.
But.
Welcome.
The
yes okay.
Your do you have a bit of an
echo if you want to try to get
closer to your laptop or
whatever you're using I don't
know if you have a microphone
It's close as I can I think it's
because we Senator in the same
room as better.
Representative Cook.
Yes.
Will.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Rehm.
Representative Townsend yes.
Mr speaker.
Representative Rehm.
Yes.
Yes.
Okay.
Okay so the amendment is adopted
and
I'll come back to you for the
motion in the a little bit that
vice chair Representative
just wanted to divert on the
bill as amended.
Thank you madam chair.
I'm.
The only thing that
we we we all.
The ones that you're visits
forty two to engage in these
activities.
I am a little that it's and I'm
gonna use the wrong wrong words
from a from all contexts this is
really strict liability
yeah and when I was a county
commissioner we we have a.
Terminate.
Employees are that.
Was engage with the.
Are you in may.
For for obvious reasons but.
As the story unfolded.
The.
County employee of the detention
officer was really kind of set
up.
By the end but that the
I'm concerned about.
That officer not having at least
some defense from a criminal
stand for it.
when some things like that.
Could could could happen and if
I read this bill correctly
there there really is no
difference for that officers so
so madam chair and
representative
of
the bill correctly that
basically anytime there's sexual
interaction between these
People listed here and someone
under their authority of they
really have no no dissent so to
speak
Yeah and being convicted for for
the right.
All right.
By reading.
Madam chair and Representative
Nibert I want to thank you for
always bringing for study get
oxygen few are any questions I'm
gonna turn this over to
Alexandria I believe that you
are reading it correctly but I
want to I want to have a
Alexandria your are you thank
you Representative.
Thank you madam chair and
representative yes you are
correct we are making it
explicitly clear that you cannot
consent
to an officer who holds a
position of authority which
matches the same definition in
the same statute for
correctional officers.
Yeah my simple madam chair
representative
Really the the officer.
got set up
The.
I just.
Find it real difficult for that
person even though I'm a week we
have the as mentioned after
terminate that because it was
obviously gets the
Rules but.
For them to face criminal
liability that they themselves
go to jail jail on a felony
conviction because of what
happened.
Are not have the ability to
defend themselves.
Is there a problem for me I
think that's what the bill plus.
Maybe there's there's no our.
No finding some middle ground
there I think we're we're
basically creating a crime.
That the.
The
has no ability to raise a
defense.
You are happened or did and
there's no extenuating
circumstances that can get them
out from under a felony
conviction for right.
Our.
You know I I just have some some
real real concerns we're we're
that issue
because generally the law.
Our.
Affords well one of the only
raised about some and and show
some birds are
would preclude the that being
convicted of a crime
something all wrestle with.
Your it does it does really
concern me because I think of we
we we can point to some examples
where the officer
get set up it probably happened
on that the tension setting then
that we are we support
Representative but I I I can see
where some people would get set
up on
By an inmate and engage in.
Improper activity no doubt but.
To make it why it will be with
you it is.
Is this something that the the
hi I really have a problem thank
you madam chair.
Representative Eli.
Yeah madam chair
When they're oftentimes
Representative night would and I
agree on issues this is not one
of them.
Are and what the it the the the
French that the officer would
have is it didn't happen that's
the defense for the defense hang
on just when you guys to that
door shut.
Hold on I'm sorry.
There always seems to happen to
me when I'm talking and then
there's talking here
the the package the defense that
is taken away as it should be is
consent.
And that should never be a
defense when someone's in a
position of power I mean the
horrific examples of course that
everyone would agree on is a
pandemic K. I mean you don't
have to argue that the child
consent you just don't.
That's because that's not just
because our children and because
of the incapacity to the power
structure.
On it is also true in a
detention center.
I was a county commissioner also
seems like speaker referred to
my early days the practices the
horse and buggy days which is
probably right but I had early
on in my practice a woman that
was right to the Roosevelt
County facility by detention
officer and the argument was
that she set him up.
And that in my mind should not
ever be a defense this is
someone in a position of power
if there is a sexual
relationship in this situation
the law should say that's a
crime period and the officers
defense is it didn't happen it's
not consent and that's what I
understand this law is taking
away is the defense of consent
as it should and so I'm very
much in support of this and if I
misunderstood the law let me
know but I think that's what it
does it takes away the defense
of consent because you have this
officer either with real or
apparent authority in a position
of power you know I stated that
wrong Representative Barreras or
your experts let me know but if
I'm understanding that correctly
I'm in strong support of this
bill thank you madam chair and
thank you Representative.
Thank you very much I'm I'm not
a vice chair.
Madam chair I was also compelled
to speak after the last line of
questioning I'm again as I often
do in this committee I'm gonna
refer back to my time in which I
served in New Mexico corrections
department as the bureau chief
of recidivism reduction.
Under the previous
administration and certainly I
so much appreciate the
intentions of this legislation
because we are moving standards
we've already established for
peace officers are for
correctional officers and have
seen those first of the federal
law and then of course in other
ways with pria into of the
responsibilities and obligations
and expectation of safety we
might expect the peace officers
but certainly madam chair
and representatives I was
reminded to several occasions
when I was in that position and
supervised via educational staff
of all New Mexico's eleven
prisons that even in my short
time at the corrections
department there are a couple of
folks that I had to terminate
because they had engaged in New
York for an appropriate behavior
with with offenders that were
incarcerated in the custody of
the corrections department and
every time Adam chair
representative it would surprise
me because we hear this argument
about how.
The incarcerated person
the inmates had consummate into
this how they trapped them how
they'd set them up and certainly
being incarcerated I'd imagine I
haven't had the experience but a
lot of that is about day to day
survival and people managing the
best way they know how to take
care of themselves and get to
the end of that prison term but
certainly what I understood as
someone in a position of
authority within the agency is
it was my obligation to make
sure the staff we brought on and
training and and employed
understood full well what the
law was and and made it very
clear it doesn't matter who's
coming on to you who's sending
notes who's trying to call you
on the side if you'd like to be
employed with the responsibility
of incarcerating someone then
you don't get into any business
with anybody and so madam chair
representative well there's no
way that I would deny that this
certainly it happens in the
prison system it all comes back
to this basic premise who has
power and authority whether it's
an appearance Authority in this
case it's it's an appearance
it's a perceived and it's an
actual authority and what that
means for our New Mexicans that
are working to navigate their
lives moving through there days
whether their system impacted or
trying to get away from a cop at
a park or being followed by a
cop and I certainly like so many
New Mexicans have had my fair
share of law enforcement
interactions that were
potentially inappropriate I've
also gotten to know and respect
some law enforcement officers
set up hold the integrity of
their job every single day and
so for that madam chair I just
want to again say this year is
about our values as a government
and the kind of expectations
we're going to set so that our
citizens can have an expectation
of safety and dignity and
respect when they have it have
interactions with our lawn for.
And officers and ice I strongly
support this bill.
And I did talk instead of having
a motion but maybe somebody
else.
Thank well
I'm I'm I did want to say
something and not just that as a
proponent of criminal justice
reform.
Not.
I'm a big fan of creating new
crime.
But.
When there is an arguable.
Res.
For it.
I can I can get there we already
did this for prison.
Person.
Because there's no such thing as
consent in that situation.
Banister pointed out but I know
that
in our committee analysis and I
know our programs attorneys who
advise are fans of creating new
crimes spot because there's
often no deterrent effect I
think.
It's arguable that increased
penalty may have an effect on a
law enforcement officer because
here she is only.
Where.
Next.
Once statute and what is laid
out there I also think that it
will be much more part of the
training and I've been advised
the City of Albuquerque's in
favor of this and what it will
of course follow through with
their training of officers so I
also am in support of the
legislation and I I really
appreciate the perspective of
each of the experts who spoke.
And also of our sponsored so
thank you very much by chair you
can now make your motion.
Madam chair I move.
You know still one fifty six as
amended.
Second.
Representative Armstrong well
the clerk please call the roll.
Representative Alcon yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Cook yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Lewis.
She may have had to stop off
she's juggling two committees
right now.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative Nibert.
Yes.
Representative.
Representative Townsend.
Yes.
Mr speaker.
Thanks.
Yes.
Yes.
You have a ninety yes do have on
house bill one fifty as in
past Representative and thank
you and and all of your experts
very much we appreciate it.
Madam chair and committee thank
you so much I was a I was warned
that you have to have everything
perfect the county judiciary so
I was so nervous and you've all
been a bunch of features the
thank you so much I appreciate
that.
Thank you.
Now we have all members present
for our last two bills
Representative Nibert and in
light.
House bill forty four.
Thank you madam chair four years
house bill two forty four which
is a.
Clean up bill that
Representative Ely and and I've
been working on it so are trying
to further to five the rules of
the secretary of state's office
and the ethics commission with
respect to
violations involving reporting
of Janet's reporting parties
reporting of lobbyist and where
the where the role of the two
agencies are are get handed off
our one to the other it also
deals with some other issues
regarding reporting by political
party treasurers
and we do have a couple experts
that we need to be brought in
yes they have already and that
is the Jeremy for us with the
ethics commission and Jerry
frescoes with the secretary of
state's office.
And we're here Representative
number okay.
Basically what this bill does is
yes try to define the role of
the secretary of state's office
and and the role of the ethics
commission I am aware of our the
ethics commission takes over our
jurisdiction of matters okay
bill also.
Provides for a maximum level
fines for candidates to our out
are not reported timely or have
otherwise not the.
Public filed paperwork that's
necessary
the secretary of state's office
is is
Given an opportunity to secure
voluntary compliance with the
reporting measures that all
camera staff to do this spam and
parties and about voluntary
compliance is not secured on a
fairly timely basis then the
matter gets sent to the ethics
commission which has the
resources and the ability to do
further investigations to step
in our our witnesses and then to
actually perform some of the
heavy lifting that baby
necessary to to advance that
matter to bring that issue to
conclusion it also
Does a couple things that
the first graph.
I was not.
Fully on board I'm on board with
this measure because it does
clearly state that the secretary
of state's office has the
ability to deal with that I felt
it was important for the elected
official to be able to deal with
other elected officials and
candidates are in the
preliminary process and try to
secure that voluntary compliance
because I I I think the only
elected officials can appreciate
some of the things that a
candidate has to go through that
and all the balls I have in the
air the ethics commission is not
they're not elected officials
are appointed officials I don't
go through the election process
so I personally felt that that
was important and we've reach
some accommodation there
without all turn it over to my
co sponsor representative
realized that we have cared for
us is in Germany for astute and
maybe point out some of the are
you to your details briefly of
this bill that will stand for
questions.
Madam chair representative thank
you all the very very brief I
just have two points to make one
is is that this is not a
surprise that we would be coming
back in fact it was anticipated
the original ethics bill that we
would be coming back to
constantly redefined the
relationship particularly
between the secretary state the
ethics commission I would expect
to see bills like this in the
future as responsibilities get
redefined and the second thing
is it is critically important
from my point of view all of
these measures relating to the
ethics commission remain on a
bipartisan basis we never want
the ethics commission to be in a
position where it's viewed as a
tool by one party the other and
so I think we'll Representative
Nighbor have really tried hard
to work together on anything
related to the ethics commission
to make sure it continues in its
approach of being a nonpartisan
body with that I'll turn it back
over madam chair representative
divert.
What we might even turn it over
madam chair to to carry
thrusters to Representative
secretary of state's office sent
to Germany for us with the
ethics commission for any points
that they would particularly
like to point out right before
we go to questions.
Mistrust.
A good afternoon
I'm chair members of the
committee thank you to both the
sponsors of this bill and to Mr
fair if it's been several months
of work and negotiation for some
at bill language that I think
really will bring some benefit
to the the shared access that
the state ethics commission and
the secretary of state both will
share it it really does work to
delineate the administrative
functions of the bill to be more
in the wheel house of the
secretary of state's office and
then providing the enforcement
to be more over in the in the
state ethics commission so we
appreciate that also from it
secretary of state perspective
there's some a couple of I'm
very beneficial administrative
sections of the bill that I'll
point out
for example and one of the the
issues that that we tend to
experience as administrators of
the campaign reporting act is
that we have political
committees who don't necessarily
keep their treasurer and
organization information up to
date with our office
they they organize but then
things change and so we don't
necessarily have the most update
to date information on how to
reach the organizers of a
political committee so our
compliance phone calls and
letters in going outdated people
that are no longer associated
but this this bill does aim to
help address some of those
issues by putting a fine on a
political committee if if they
don't keep their information
updated.
it also provides that a a
treasurer has to sign a
statement of acknowledgement.
Regarding their responsibilities
as treasuring for a political
committee and that and one of
those commitments that they have
to sign off and a knowledge on
is that they remain responsible
for those duties and tell the
submit a formal resignation to
secretary of state so we think
some of these important
provisions in this bill will
actually aid in helping us with
our administrative efforts and
if there's any questions about
how the secretary of state
operates or how we go about
administration or anything I
should be able to answer those
questions for you think thank
you so much.
Mr Chairman thank you good
afternoon madam chair and
committee members on Jeremy
Ferris and executive director of
the state ethics commission.
The state ethics commission the
secretary of state's office
share responsibilities for for
statutes the campaign reporting
act financials closure Act the
voter action act in the lobbyist
regulation Act.
In twenty nineteen the
legislature asked both agencies
to come before this session of
the legislature with any changes
recommended for the efficient
administration and enforcement
of the staff statutes and I want
to thank the the Sanchez
representative Ely
Representative Nibert for
working with both agencies over
months diligently on bill
language for those recommended
amendments you have been before
you.
The purpose of the bill is
really three fold the first is
to separate the administration
and enforcement and adjudicatory
functions for those statutes
between the two agencies the
second is to preserve
opportunities for voluntary
compliance under the statutes
and the third is to make the
both agencies respective work
more efficiently with respect to
the agencies limited resources
for debt during educating and
enforcing security risks.
And last different more cities
built madam chair
Some of them go to to that the
different agencies with respect
to the state ethics commission
you'll notice that there is an
amendment both to the state
ethics commission act and the
financial disclosure Act the
subject to the seven state
ethics commissioners themselves
to the duties imposed by the
financial disclosure Act the
commissioners thought that that
was an important amendments
given their position of of
ultimately educating
administrative complaints
raising financial disclosure
violations and madam chair
members of the committee and
happy to to stand for any
questions that you might have on
the bill.
When I just want this it's just
it's just so amazing to me that.
All the years we were talking
about having ethics commission
and the length of time that it
took to get that bill passed the
number of people who worked on
it
Representative
You know it's one of your.
Representative dines
Representative dines worked on
it Senator Lopez at
oh my goodness so many it is
just wonderful Mr for us to have
you with us and have this be a
reality now for us I'm very very
grateful thank you very much.
I'm and.
Let me go to the
if you're ready go to the
audience for feedback yes ma'am
okay I want to invite the
audience to vote yes if you're
in favor of House Bill Evans.
Two forty fourths.
Yeah I've got it right actually
have it on the other screen is
to just look that way.
House bill two forty four if you
like that they'll say yes don't
like that they'll say no let's
see how that goes will have a
fifteen second all.
Okay we're finished and we have
six in favor and one in
opposition so let's go to the
we'll just take public comment
as it comes up if you'd like to
speak on the bill please raise
your hand.
Either way.
Yes.
Good afternoon.
Chair and members of the
committee my name is Sydney yes
I'm with common cause New Mexico
and we stand in strong support
of H. B. twelve to forty four we
would like to thank the
secretary of state and the state
ethics commission for their
joint efforts in crafting this
legislation and for the bill's
sponsors and their support for
bringing four as it was
discussed earlier this
legislation helps with the
enforceability of reporting and
disclosure requirements under
the various statutes and makes
the process and administration
of the complaint process around
violation of the statute more
efficient we have seen proof
recently that entities
organizations spending our state
elections have been compelled to
register however they have not
done this without great
hesitation at times it seems
that failure to comply with a
governing statutes has been seen
as a cost of doing business with
groups or in organizations
wanting to play political ball
in the state the public always
wants to know who is spending
and that in their elections and
who is spending to influence
their opinions so for all these
reasons that we ask you to
support this bill.
Thank you so much I don't have
any more hands up.
So let's go to the committee and
first I have Mister speaker.
Thank you madam chair thank you
sponsors I I will confess I did
not know that this bill is
coming up until a few minutes
ago each and that and I need to
if I may madam chair
Representative Eli.
I think I.
I mean this is sort of strange
but can I mask Mr Ferris a
question.
Madam.
Madam chairman Mr speaker.
One of their experts.
Thank you for.
This Madam insecure sorry my my
question is why am I allowed Mr
fares in your and I understand
this is just completely
not much warning but am I
allowed to vote on this bill
sure I recused myself because I
I am the target of the complaint
pending before the commission
and I I don't know if if I am
prohibited from voting on this
bill or not and I ate thank you.
I really deserve it I feel
awkward asking the question but
I I don't want to vote and then
find out that I should have
refused I don't know if Mr
Ferris.
If you feel comfortable offering
opinion either way I.
I want yeah I tend to want to
vote on bills this is clear I
shouldn't but I.
Madam Mr Ferris what do you
think.
You madam chair Mister speaker
two things to say the first is
I'm not sure attorney in this
context and and can't provide
you any any kind of legal
Legal guidance with respect to
that question
also generally two things the
first is that the ethics
commission offers advisory
opinions both formally and
informally to members of the
legislature on questions of this
sort and the commission would be
happy to receive any any request
for an advisory opinion along.
This kind of this kind of topic
madam chair Mister speaker I
will say that this particular
bill
makes amendments to the
administration and enforcement
of for statutes the campaign
reporting act the voter action
act the lobbyist regulation Act
and the financial disclosure Act
to the extent it makes an
amendment to the state ethics
commission acts the amendments.
Go to.
Parts of the state ethics
commission's work and disclosure
responsibilities that really
don't affect the commission's.
Adjudicatory process for
administrative complaints.
And so with that Madam chairman
and Mister speaker I think
that's that's what I have to say
but we response okay Madam chair
Mr speaker I could let me see if
I can make everybody comfortable
I I happen to know a little
about all of this and my short
answer is yes you can vote on
this is that it is it is it is
not in any way affect full of
anything personally and it is
incumbent upon all members are
and to be part of the body and
be representing their
constituents are in this
situation reviews would make a
difference but I can tell you
pretty emphatically what on
something like this in the bill
which before you madam chair
Mister speaker you would not
have a problem voting on this I
I could not see the problem I'm
certainly not acting as your
lawyer but I'm acting as the
rules chair and I would tell you
in the parliamentarian you have
no problem starting on this okay
thank you Madam chair
representative Mr verse R. are
requests for informal opinions
have to be in writing or can
they.
And and how how how long in
other words if I were to recuse
myself today and ask you for an
opinion as to whether or not I
can.
Vote on this on the floor is it
something that.
Could be.
I don't know how long it takes
to I need does need to be a
written request could could this
request now count is a request.
Chair representative Mr fares.
Madam chairman and Mister
speaker I'd I'd I'd point the
the chairman Mr speaker to the
the provision of the rules.
In the New Mexico minister of
code that the the commission
issued regarding probation
opinions and madam chair Mister
speaker that's at one point
eight point one point nine in
mac
and.
The.
Madam chair Mister speaker the
the.
Under that that roller request
for an informal advisory opinion
must be in writing.
and madam chair and Mister
speaker the the commission it
turns around the commission
staff turns around and formal
guys you can is relatively
quickly and
madam chair just as you'll know
the.
The commission has in this
legislative session already
issued an informal advisory
opinion with respect to refusals
to to members of the body and
and indeed of of this committee
so madam chair and Mr speaker
there are there is already some
guidance regarding refusal and
potential conflicts of interest
that the commission is issued
through an informal advisory
opinion and madam chair and and
Mr speaker the the staff would
be happy happy to do so again
but again Mister speaker it's
the the role as one point eight
point one point nine in mac.
Thank you thank you Mr.
Madam chair I'm sure you're here
to.
All
right you are you're right.
Are there other questions from
committee members.
What's the pleasure of the
committee.
Madam chair wishing thank you
representative Nibert would do
this but I will move it to pass.
We wouldn't you the second okay.
Motion from representative Ely
and a second for Representative
night
So quick to call the roll.
The
neighbor delay bill I guess I.
He.
Yes yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Cook.
Mr speaker.
Present not voting.
Representative Eli.
Yes speaker did not follow my
advice but yes.
We could use measures like you
said you were my lawyer.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative Nibert.
Yes.
Representative Rehm.
Representative Townsend yes.
Yes.
Yes.
I
wanted to make that portion but
I was snacking and couldn't on
mute get on camera on time so.
What are you like combo today
thank you madam chair.
Thank you.
I think we have to pass what was
the vote Georgia yes your honor
thank you okay thank you very
much and what did she.
Yes Representative Nibert thank
thank you madam chair for for
the time that you give us M. I
would just point out the the
only provision of the bill that
I think would cause a
Representative were Senator to
obtain from above would be if
they are subject to a fine where
those fine is being maximized in
this bill or or that we're
putting some limits of funds of
this bill and I would be subject
to by the voting on a bill that
they would personally
financially benefit from so
hopefully there's no one serving
that's in that category the that
that would be something that I
would think grow would would the
only thing I see in this bill
that would prohibit somebody
from body on this Madam.
You have to do passed and you
get to stay with us for the last
bill and thank you very much Mr
president and Mr Ferris for
joining us for this.
This time and we will now go to
the vice chair for house bill
two oh one thank you madam
chair.
And I think you have some people
to elevate right and vice chair.
Yes madam chair
I have with me today the
corrections Eric's Terry
definitely set up.
At least FY and the set up.
She's with us I see very good.
Go ahead.
Okay good morning I mean.
Good afternoon committee of I am
excited to present today house
bill two oh one this house bill
comes from the New Mexico
corrections
Leadership team to figure out
what it looks like when the
agency comes in presents a
really thoughtful and
transformative criminal justice
reform proposal themselves so
I'm grateful to have the the
trust in partnership of the
agency on this and to be working
with them to move this important
change forward I am grateful
again to have our cabinet
secretary with us today and I
will turn into her and just a
second so that she can briefly
name out their intentions where
this came from and the important
impact they imagine it will have
as we work together to improve
public safety across our
communities also this
legislation is pretty
straightforward.
and what it says is that a
defendant shall automatically be
released from probation if the
defendant is a minimum or medium
level classified in may and
that's done through validated
scoring instrument and if the
defendant has meant all the
obligations of the defendant's
probation and finally the big
key here is that they will be
released from probation if they
again are many minute meeting
our minimum security have met
all the obligations of their
probation and have completed one
half or more of that period of
probation I also think madam
chair I'd like to turn to
secretary the oily settle up to
explain the corrections the the
work of the department on this
issue.
Secretary a good afternoon and
thank you very much madam chair
thank you also Representative
Lara kind enough for carrying
this this bill forward
so as as stated the bill is the
intent of the bill really is to
allow for an incentive for
individuals who are on probation
supervision to complete their
supervision early if they meet
all the conditions of their
appropriations so if the judge
orders that restitution be paid
or that the person enter into
eight treatments a program or
whatever it is that the the
judge orders that the person has
to complete those things before
they can be considered for early
release and we know that study
show that people who are on
probation for a longer period of
time don't that doesn't that's
not an indicator of success in
and also doesn't have a
significant impact on public
safety at all and in fact it
does also negatively impact
possibly the prison population
in that people might be more
susceptible to be coming
violated for technical
violations if they are on
probation for a prolonged and on
necessary period of time so what
we're what we're hoping to do
here is to say that anybody who
supervised on medium supervision
are low supervision once they
complete those items that the
judge has ordered them to do and
at least half of their time on
probation that we automatically
stop them from being on
probation completely no
supervision no unsupervised and
supervised probation but that
they would be done and complete
with their obligation.
On their probation term and I
want to be clear though that the
bill itself I know that there's
very little language but the
process that's involved when a
person's being placed on lower
medium supervision it requires a
validated scoring instrument and
that process and the way that
people are supervise would
prohibit a person who is a sex
offender of any type of person
who has a felony level D. D. Y.
and that's the case that they're
serving and a person who is a
violent offender those people
would not be eligible for early
release off of probation and we
we did that specifically for the
public safety concern but also
ultimately the goal is to
incentivize doing well up front
for people who are low and
medium level offenders at and
and really just give them a
strong incentive to work hard to
complete as early as possible
I love course will stand for
questions but I just want to
make one more notation that
there was some questions as well
about the scoring instrument
that we use and.
We are using a validated scoring
instrument we think it's
important that any scoring
instrument is validated
and we just didn't want to tie
the hands of the administration
in later years to a specific
tool and so we didn't
specifically name as a tool
thank you thank you very much
madam chair.
Thank you very much Secretary
are you ready to go to the
audience.
Yes madam chair thank you.
Okay I'd like to see by a show
of hands those here in favor of
house bill two oh one and the
way we.
This is how we do it the real
committee but the way you get to
do it now is you get to vote for
the balanced you like it and if
you aren't opposition but now so
yes or no and we'll have a whole
lot for fifteen seconds.
Okay we're good.
We have twelve in favor wanted
opposition let's hear from the
person in opposition first.
Representative wishes to speak
Representative you know good
luck to you.
I don't see hands.
People wishing to speak.
Those in favor do you would like
to speak please raise your hand
Rikki Lee Chavez.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Rikki
Lee Chavez appearing on behalf
of the New Mexico criminal
defense lawyers association we
stand in support of H. B. two oh
one thank you to the sponsor and
her secretary for their work on
this bill we believe that
probation is a place it's a
difficult place for people but
recognize that it does have the
incentive of not being
incarcerated and we think that
the what the bill intends to do
is just another incentive in our
communities as people return
from the criminal justice system
and we hope that in returning
and setting these people up for
success that we reduce the rates
of recidivism and so we
encourage you to also support
thank you.
Thank you.
Kim Chavez Cook.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
Kim Chavez Cook with the law
offices of the public defender I
also want to thank the sponsor
and the secretary for bringing
this legislation this is one of
various reforms that we have as
a group of stakeholders at the
sentencing commission been
talking about for a couple of
years and trying to identify the
best way to do it and this is a
very clean and very simple way
to basically awarded functional
good time for us successful
appropriations also the majority
of probation revocations do or
violations do tend to happen in
that first half of the term and
so I think this bill provides a
really good opportunity to
identify the people who are
motivated to succeed and allow
resources to be diverted to
those who may require additional
support to succeed and so for
those reasons we do stand in
strong support of this bill and
asked the committee to do the
same thank you.
Thank you.
Campos.
Good afternoon chairman members
of the committee my name is Lucy
the compass I'm a policy
associate gold futures formerly
known as young women United we
strongly support HB till one as
an organization for athletic by
people of color we know the
impact the cycles of policing
and incarceration have on our
communities.
HM often acts more as an
obstacle to humane and equitable
reintegration into society other
people have been physically
released they still feel trapped
because they're unable to obtain
certain opportunities of
employment because technically
they're still on paper still
understood my supervision having
constant check ins and at risk
of being incarcerated at any
time for a technical violation
we must support individuals as
we strive to move on we must at
the very least minimize
unnecessary and prolonged
periods of probation that simply
keep our people trapped in the
cycles of incarceration please
vote yes on H. B. two oh one
thank you.
Thank you.
Our.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Bennett
power in the chief public
defender of I think the FIR on
this is fairly thorough but I I
just wanna let you know that the
reason that the public
defender's office so strongly
supports this bill is that first
of all it's resulted I think
several years of communication
of brainstorming amongst all the
stakeholders in the system to
sentencing commission through
interim committees and with the
secretary and and the sponsor
here about the best and most
elegant way really to make sure
that we released people from
supervision we no longer need it
to us so that we can create the
resources of probation officers
to focus on those who will still
do benefit from supervision and
I think this method is really
the best way I I agree with the
secretary on this.
Anchor and ask you to support
the bill thank you.
Thank you.
Yes.
Good afternoon madam chair and
committee members my name is
Elaine Maestas and I am with the
ACLU of New Mexico we stand in
strong support of house bill two
oh one for the many reasons
already stated it is time to
reform our broken probation
system that ties the hands of
individuals who are trying to
move forward we thank the
sponsor for bringing this bill
forward and ask each of you for
do pass.
Thank you I don't see any more
handsome let's go to the
committee
Madam vice chair to chairman and
you want to say before we begin
questions from the committee
ready for the committee madam
chair.
Okay.
Would you please let me know if
you would like to speak numbers.
Representative night heard.
Thank you madam chair just this
one question on page zero.
Right.
First line.
Matt all obligations of the
defendant's probation I know we
talked about some other areas
about.
Meeting obligations I was
wondering does that mean the
restitution portion of it as
well Madam chair representative.
Madam chair representative ICMA
expert nodding so imminent enter
cabinet secretary to clarify an
issue on that point.
Madam chair in Representative
Nibert yes it does if the judge
orders a certain amount of
restitution than we would expect
that that restitution would be
paid in full before we would say
that the person's met all
obligations of their
supervision.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you madam secretary.
That's all I.
Members.
Madam chair over the past.
Okay we have a motion for two
passed house bill two oh one.
Also.
Second Representative Armstrong
that motion.
Call the roll.
Chair yes representative would
you want to speak.
Yes.
I think the vice chair needs a
motion to table just for.
How do you get back sorry.
She's got there but she can send
it over the wires to use so
called shanks.
Hello.
Yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Cook.
Representative.
Mr speaker C..
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Lewis.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert yes.
Representative Townsend yes.
Just to explain my vote.
Madam chair.
Yes.
And Bystrica that.
Madam chair thank you I just
wanted to apologize for my
frenetic communications when we
started I was receiving a text
right then that the chair and I
had a different bill to
different committee so courses
trying to get someone else on
that fire but madam chair if I
didn't say it clearly enough
I again was only for the correct
at the corrections department
for a minute but this secretary
and her leadership team have
built their careers parking to
improve public safety in New
Mexico and as so many of us do
our part to bring are to bring
reform ideas it means the world
to me that the agency has
stepped up to offer something so
concrete so simple so
transformative in in the face of
of what it looks like to get
things right New Mexico and
really be building a smarter
justice system so so many
accolades to the Department I'm
just honored that I get to be
part of it and I look forward to
your support on the house floor
thank you madam chair.
Thank you members if you can
believe that we have completed
our agenda.
You have almost forty five
minutes before we go to the
floor this is on her lap.
Really amazing.
Probably because one of the
bills was roled through
Wednesday.
Thank you everybody we're tired.
