Here.
Here we have a core very good
and I we are first bill and let
me talk a little bit but our
schedule our first bill will be
on senate bill five then we're
going to do
house bill three sixteen that's
representative ream then we'll
do senate joint resolution
sixteen
and then senate bill seventy and
then we'll do
house bill to to five so just
just that's what we're looking
at
representatives sapansky you are
a co sponsor on so senate bill
five floor is yours thank you
madame chair and members I am
here today to present you said
it judiciary committee
substitute for senate bill five
the aim of this legislation is
to
equalize.
What is allowed at pulling
places at around new mexico
currently firearms are not
permitted to be
within a uh school zoner and so
pulling places that are located
at schools our firearm free
this bill seeks to extend that
you all pull in places so that
we have consistency for voters
and for paul workers the bill
was actually rough forward by
constituents who were concerned
about this and I will say that.
The bill is different from the
version that this committee
heard last year due to the in
the senate judiciary committee
substitute and there were a
number of changes made to
respond to some of the issues
that had been raised
and I think the bill has a
been significantly tailored to
ensure that people carrying
firearms that were simply
driving by a location or simply
a visiting a neighboring
business night engaged with the
polling side or entering the
pulling site the the bill has
been tailored to prevent those
situations from being
unintentionally captured in this
legislation
it also
makes more specific the
reference to
the boxes um.
Earned.
Addresses some of the concerns
that occurred around pulling
places within shopping centers
law enforcement officers
that maybe i.
Continuously carrying a firearm
even when they are not formally
on duty so that has been
streamlined similar to other
pieces of legislation.
And addressing arm security that
may
be appalling places so I also
have with me miss lindsey
barclay in from office of the
secretary of state I will stop
there and see if maybe she'd
like to add anything.
Thank you representative madam
chair representatives I don't
have much to add other than
thinking the sponsors for
bringing it forward.
Think you made him share that
concludes our presentation case
thank you.
What i'd like to do is take
public comment and the way we're
going to do it is we'll do
fifteen minutes for each side
ninety seconds per person emiled
first do on the audience and
then more will go to online as
we're in each category if that
makes sense so
right now those wishing to speak
and opposition please raise your
hand.
Okay yes sir with the blue
jacket and then terror behind
you.
Yes sir
out of chair members of the
committee.
Ah representative i'm doctor
william fire
computer scientists here in
santa fe.
This.
I'm one of the forty five
thousand licensed and trained
new mexico concealed carry
licensing I bought an every
election and I see no reason to
prevent me from carrying my
conceal fire.
I understand the issue of
intimidation in open carry of a
firearm but I am not a threat as
a legal concealed period.
I couldn't possibly intimidate
every.
As low biting new mexican I will
certainly comply of this bill
passes but I don't believe that
anything is accomplished by
excluding concealed carey I
respectfully ask you to.
Madame chair
thank you thank you better.
Terror.
Hi madam chair of members of the
committee terribly with the
national roadful association in
opposition to selling bill five
generally we oppose the creation
of gun freeze on they do nothing
to discourage criminals from
bringing guns on
and they only serve to disarm
citizens like mr.
There's also no notice or
scientist requirement in the
bill
and locations are generally easy
to discern but a mobile voting
site or valid drawbacks might be
a little more difficult for
somebody who wants to legally
carry.
To
identify we also feel that the
bill is inconsistent with the
bruin decision as it sweeps and
not the actual not only the
actual building we're voting is
taking place but a hundred but
zone around it
for perspective a hundred foot
zone is about the size of the
basketball court like some of
you were on last night.
So that's my test money thank
you we oppose
thank you anyone else wishing in
the audience wishing to speak an
opposition.
Those online wishing to speak in
opposition raise your hand
please okay
nate eski.
Thank you madame chair members
of the committee may ask you
here on behalf of zero rifle and
crystal club number seventeen
hundred members here in the
albuquerque area
for us as before there's two
major issues a first we feel
right in a fence here should
require some kind of enhancement
brass statute bendra requirement
so that we don't criminalize
people for doing what they've
done their entire lives the
public defender department's
possibly addressed this issue in
the fire secondly if this bill
is about intimidation there's
something for statutory
intimidation already so this is
grey space below that it's
targeting not actual
intimidation but the fact that
some people have a fear of
firearms in the hands of their
fellow citizens I submitted of
someone doesn't vote because
such a fear they likely don't
participate in many other places
of public life thank you.
Madame chairman members of the
committee planning to exactly
what I know just like a fair
soft surface mexican shooting
sport association we're opposed
to senator five while we
appreciate the changes that were
made to make sure that someone
carrying a fire that send to his
toilet but other business is
that impacted by this
legislation we fundamentally
feel that our right to carry
arms as found decision in order
to vote on both important
illegal rights and not conflicts
we thought this perfectly
opposes you know if this is
about stopping people from
intimidating others going that
is something that we all share
and interest in stopping but we
think there's other ways to do
it up and just like it down
curious we can still carry where
you wouldn't even know someone
thank you for your time.
Derek scott
yeah
scott I the chair of the free
new mexico party which is
formally the free libertarian
party of new mexico
we startly are against this bill
for multiple reasons why we feel
that this would actually bali
the rights of our voters that
would be coming to the vote
center who had wanted to carry
concealed or otherwise they
would then be blocked from
wanting to do an exercise their
rights to vote and would violate
their rights under also multiple
other federal codes to allow the
vote for them so you're putting
a voter that for one bro out of
another it would be intimidation
just the other direction so I
would ask that you both do not
pass upon this because of the
fact that you are wanting into
territory that is places of the
law that would be intimidated to
others aside just card it just
because somebody's emotions was
heard in santa fe thank you
thank you and larry santag.
Good afternoon madame chairman
members of the committee
speaking as a private gun owner
and individual and a lot of the
comments that have been made
earlier by mister fortnister asp
I agree with I won't reiterate
but i'd just encourage you to
not pass this bill a country
zones has been previously
mentioned only impact law
abiding citizens and don't
provide any increased safety
thank you thank you larry
nina I see you but we haven't
gotten to support yet so i'll
i'll get to you and a little bit
okay
so we now let's go to the
audience and i'd like to see
those who wish to speak and
support raise your hand please
okay and will go this way in
that way and please and max well
with new mexicans to prevent.
Guns are.
And then private spaces
in our society.
Exercise their constitutional.
Thank you yes mail.
L.
Years and to me this one of.
Run I think it's run height.
Fight or something
it was terrifying and I feel
that
the right to vote is.
And this bill just equalizes all
the places that people you
already can't hold.
Yeah.
Thank you sir.
Thank you matt chairman.
We run an electric effective
program every j.
Volunteers outside monitor the
polls with of course the
fighting judge and we have had
some of our list protection
workers tell us about instance
due to firearms on the front.
Any case of older
size
huge loss no matter what the
causes and because we already
have these rules that don't
allow fire arms and other places
I like with an earlier comments
I think it's important.
Thank you anyone else on this
side of the room no okay now
we'll go to the other side yes
mail.
Thank you
community
I worker in santa fe.
It's obvious.
Actually happens in your poly
place to people.
Brought my own pen and you know
we come to recognize our short
public spaces.
Thank you next over here on the
side of the room anyone else on
the side of the room.
My left okay will go now to
those online nina sayer.
Nina.
Good afternoon my name is name
affair I stand in support of
this bill I believe
and I represent the five hundred
members of au we are in new
mexico.
We strongly feel that are a
safe.
Secure
environment is what is needed
for voting and I stand in
support or to this bill thank
you thank you nina janet
williams.
The.
Hi i'm janet williams i'm
speaking for the national
organization for women and the
alliance regard violent
solutions we support this bill
strongly we believe it will
protect paul workers and people
going to the polls who do not
want to feel intimidated thank
you very much please support it
thank you.
I lean.
Miller.
Eline yes elaine mellon thank
you yes we did believe that voda
intimidation is a crime in every
state but only twelve states and
the district of columbia
explicitly perhaps it carrying
guns at polling places and the
supreme court has acknowledged
that the mere presence of guns
can be intimidating so i'm with
marm's demand action and we
strongly feel that guns do not
belong at all in places because
they are essential for the
functioning of democracy thank
you thank you regina greego
chair and the members of the
committee I would like you to
vote in favor of this bell
voting is a fundamental
constitutional right every
american should be able to but
free from intimidation and every
american should be able to have
their boat counted fairly I go
to a pulling place not at a
school and when I walked into
areas where there is a gun it
does scare me and I and I think
it keeps people away especially
people that are are you know
just not as
you know not going to take on
the gun the you know a person
with a gun if they should get
intimidated thank you very much
and please support this bill
thank you
married as nation
madame chairman member to the
committee I married may i'm
speaking on behalf of the legal
women voters in mexico and
obviously we support having
accessible elections and we know
that this has an intimidating
effect on voters
we also know that now that
schools are closed on election
day we need to have a provisions
in a lot of the alternative
following places for the
children who are coming into
these polling places and they
need to feel safe
it is
not true that somebody said on
the.
Who are supposing the bill the
brutal one does not allow for
this provision it does and other
states have have
competitive and it did really
help voda confidence in voter
turnout so I do
too support this bill and get it
across the finish line thank you
so much there thank you and
allison anderman.
Good afternoon share channel and
members of the committee my name
is allison and her mind I am an
attorney a gun policy expert
consultant with the brennan
center for justice a democracy
focused organization and
gifford's loss center to prevent
gun violence on behalf of these
organizations I offer our
enthusiastic support of sp five
the supreme court has explicitly
stated in the hellar and bruin
decisions that polling places
are sensitive places where it is
presumatively lawful to prohibit
guns reflective of this taxes
arizona georgia florida
louisiana and several other
states have long prohibited guns
at the polls these states
recognize that guns can be used
to intimidate and harm people
exercise exercising this
constitutional right while
people openly can't carrying an
intimidate people carrying
concey old may use or display
their guns when arguments get
heated and we all know the
twenty twenty four election will
be heated as the law stands
today new mexico false behind
these states in protecting
voters and election workers from
intimidation and violence in
light of this the branning
center and gifford's law center
urges you to vote as be five out
of committee thank you
and the last person john
martinez
thank you madame chair and thank
you members of the committee my
name is dumberton and I am
you're representing conservation
voters new mexico
the environmental community has
come to understand that in order
to tackle climate change and
reserve our planet we need to
have a healthy and driving
democracy and in order to have a
healthy and driving democracy
people need to feel as though
they can go and boat in safely
for that and for all of the
other wonderful reasons given we
are due to support this thank
you very much thank you that
concludes our public.
Comment segment of the
conversation our representative
anything further before I go to
the committee no madam chair
would stand for questions very
good thank you representative
lane
thank you madame chair.
Uh some i'm curious so I
appreciated the the point that
was brought up in public
testimony about the
sort of understanding the
rationale for for open carrier
whether or not that I discrete
but I can lease understand that
russian albert i'm having a hard
time understanding the rationale
for prohibiting consider carry
as I understand the premise for
the bill is to
prohibit intimidation of both
voters and poll work.
So matter chair would you mind
explaining to me the thought
process is to why we're not
exempting can silk carry permit
holders.
Yeah.
Thank you madame chair and and
mr leader
the
idea with this bill is to
standardize the requirements for
school based pulling places with
other appalling places and
because concealed gary is
prohibited within school based
pulling places that is one
reason the other reason is
really just to create a bright
line that is an
clear to everyone involved
including the policr themselves
do you know what the penalty
level is for some of that
carriers a firm currently on a
school.
Matt madam chair and
representative I do not have
that I don't believe but I am
happy to look that at
during this discussion.
Met
manager I can tell you it's not
a petty mister merrit's of four
three felt and so when we talk
about uniformity you understand
that discrepancy.
That if I
carrier firm to go watch best w.
The career firm to go boat it
seems that this bill would say
it's a.
And state same location for both
instances so again I I have a
hard time seeing the uniformity
argument when the bills doing
the opposite on another area
sure do you know the the process
for becoming consilicary permit
holder
madam chair sad.
Manager would you mind
enlightening us about sort of
what what is involved to be
common considered carry criminal
holder.
Briefly briefly the point
basically is there's a
background check in all that so
feel free but madam chair really
yeah i'm asking my questions
please thank you
madame jeremy leader is
certainly know that it involves
background check application
process as well as I training
course some of which is relates
to
the legal foundation for the use
of firearms.
The.
So madam chair that the the
point is that visa typically
you're responsible gone olders
and gun owners.
Who have gone through an extend.
As this bill moves forward I I
hope you will consider exempting
those persons.
I'm curious about the decision
to make this a petty message.
Madam chair representative I
would guess although
i.
I would say that madam chair and
mister leader that the
concept was not to undually
criminalize individual.
At the polling.
So
manager I guess it's hard for me
to.
To find this.
Serious problem if we're just.
The potential penalties are for
a.
Yes madam chair and leader lane
less than six months in county
jail at fine of not more than
five hundred dollars or both.
Typically we talk about gun
offenses there significantly
higher than a petty misdemeanor.
Again take this seriously that
this is a such a pressing
problem in new mexico you know
we have
a lot of real crime problems in
the state and so it's positive
to me.
The.
Especially since we're just
making a period mister winner
but those are my questions thank
you very much thank you present
of ring
the man of chair and
you know I can see
in my fifty summer years of
voting i've never seen anyone
carry a fire under the polling
place so you know I find it time
it in a resting that we've got
to address this but madam chair
and represent less go to
a page to and paragraph a so
when we talked about an lawful
possession we don't have a
knowingly standard you know so
it's a not a specific intent
crime let me give you new
example so let's assume there's
someone that's going to go vote
and he has an open carrier
pistol on his heart he walked up
to the door and he goes my gosh
I need to put this in my car and
he turns around he is now
committed crime there where is
if you had a knowing standard
to interrupt poll in place it
would be more specific
do you have a comment on that.
Out of representative at least
microphone was not when I did
that
thank you very much
so
madam chair representative I
think the the insurers that if
someone were to approach and say
oh my gosh it made a mistake or
or they see a posting and say
they walk back to their car
you know I think the the the
moment would be when someone was
asked to comply in a reviews I
think then we would get into.
This bill is seeking to address
but certainly the ideas not to
aggressively go after it simply
to keep paul workers and voters
feeling safe and secure and able
to freely.
The.
Madame chair and reps the
neighborhood I agree with the
concept you just said however
that's not what this bill saids
so you may want to look at it
madame chair and represent let
me give you a different so now
it.
So let's say that a person has
pistol and he's going to open
carry and he's going to go in
and vote but what he's done is
take the trigger group out of
his pistol meaning it is non
operative.
Is that a violation of this or.
Mat madam chair representative.
It it would be
a and I don't know how common
that activity might ebid it
would be under
page three lines for through
seven the definition
madame chair and representative
lists look at page three in a
served fire means a weapon that
will or is designed to or may
rattle
be converted to expel a project
that doesn't have a tragedy
group it can't fire.
So if you will it is it is piece
of metal in some shape setting
in a holster.
So if the purpose is to
intimidate a pole worker
that person could do it in that
manner
and not violate this build.
Did you see my my point or do
you have a response to it thank
you madame chair and
representative ream so and the
builders contemplate
the bill defines the firearm as
the frame or receiver.
Um if it is missing the trigger
group at that trigger group
could be rattly and reinserted.
And which I think would be
dependent on what type of
firearm then it would fall under
this.
Okay madam chair i'm going to
make it even more complicated
and then shragger group can't be
reinserted in like over evolver
quickly okay must take the
barrel off the firearm.
And go he hadn't said it's now
done have a barrel nor does it
have a trigger
so in essence it doesn't have a
chamber to put around it.
The.
Madame chair and representative
there are so many types of firms
are still very difficult for me
to answer.
That specific
hypothetical scenario so all I
can do is point you to
the definition on page three
and if
for example if atf would define
that as a framework receiver
regardless of whether it had the
barrel or not
trigger group then I think it
would fall under the spell.
Man chair and reps is any by
disagree with you won't fit in
the definition of a firearm and
page three let's go back to.
The school building because
representing lanes brought up an
interesting point on the
election day is it a school.
Leading a fourth degree felony
because there's no kids there or
is that a pollute place because
there are no kids.
And maybe the secretary state
expert can answer what is school
voting on cation on the school
day.
Because there's no children
there
is it now a poline place.
Madam chair and and represent
every more you asking which
penalty would apply
for spill were adapted.
Madam chair and representing i'm
seeing on them so we take a
building
and on every day but the polling
day it is a school there to
teachers there there are
children there on the voting day
there are no children there
remember we put that in statute
that it's a holiday so is that
now a school or a polling place.
Madame chair and representative
room I believe that just as as
with a drug free schools on and
the prohibition on firearms and
school sound is not dependent on
whether the students are in
school or or children are
present
and madam chair and
representative one of the
problem says for law enforcement
is we have to charge in the
specific.
So this says it'll be a I a
petty misdemeanor versus of
fellowing but I don't know if
you have a comment if not will
move on.
Okay manipchair and
representative we go to the next
paragraph and we're talking
about hundred feet from the
front door or we go ahead and
say fifty feet from a ballot box
was take the ballot box for a
moment and just talk about it
what if an individual decides I
want to walk from point eight
point b and back and forth
and i'm carrying a firearm but
i'm not in a mocking through
that fifty five foot area do you
see that as a crime
madam chair representative
excuse me
that is addressed on the bottom
of h two.
Section c lines twenty one
through twenty five so that
would be a person conducting
lawful non election related
business
is not guilty of unlawful
possession of fire and at a
pulling place and that was
brought forward specifically.
Because of some
um helpful examples related
during the debate on this bill
last year
in man of chair and reps and I
want to thank you because this
is a much cleaner version than
last year in many of the
comments that we have have been
fixed I still see some areas of
that there are problems
madame chair and representative
it's more of a comment when I
look at page three you know and
i'm glad that you've exempted
you know a firearm in a car but
there's been criticism at this
legislature for individuals
leaving fires and cars and does
being installed so that's just
one of the points but.
Let me go to one other and
madame chair in representative.
Can.
The county courted higher a
private security guard armed
private security guard to guard
at a polling place or is he and
violation of this
of the statute of this bill
madame chair members of the
committee therapederalized the
prohibits the posting of.
Of law enforcement and pulling
locations
mentioned in
the secretary's state this is a
private security guard not a
long enforcement officer.
Madame chair members of the
committee there still could
potentially be a federal
violation if there's an armed
security guard posted a pulling
location.
Thank you manager
thank you representative reeb
thank you managed here
I kind of had the same issue as
representative remaining for
ream case
please to see you have the same
problem yes
in office so more difficult but
madam chaired representative
I have a problem that again that
it's it seems to be is this a
strict liability crime
because there is no intent in
the crime no only your
intentionally and it concerns me
that there isn't type of intent
you don't see that that often
and it was kind of digging
around under the school premises
when I haven't kind of gotten
that far but um.
I feel like madame chair
represented that it should be
that they intentionally are
knowingly carried a firearm into
a polling place understand
there's going to be signage and
things like that but it really
doesn't give someone much of a
defence madam chair
representative if they
accidentally forgot or carried
it in were caught so i'd
wondered if you kind of just
following up and represented a
free matter of you thought about
putting some type of intent in
their as most criminal statutes
have strict liability is
really kind of unusual you see
it in travel cases d w i's and
we don't see it in a lot of
other crimes I wanted to see if
you what you have thought about
that if you had considered that
manager.
I'm madam chair and
representative reaving members.
So the
yeah I think the
the scenarios that were raised
around people making mistakes
were you know unintentionally
violating submitted they weren't
aware of it mean I think the way
that this is constructed it
would just depend on law
enforcement discretion or
prosecutorial discretion to
decide I mean we
when you look at the
intimidation
statute for
intimidation of elections
officials and voters that was
enacted last year
adam chair and and represent
every curious weight how you
would see that in parallel with
this but I think this is more
parallel to you know if you
unintentionally write a weapon
into tsa for example and.
Like a night for something that
was not permitted to be carried
on to a into one to an airplane
in manager representative and I
get you know your prosecutorial
discretion or what not but
strict liability is just so
different I mean it's not an
element of the jury instruction
as far as intend to end you know
it can really be argued that
they're does you don't really
have a defence to it because
you're really need a defense
it's like a a dwive strick
liability you're going to get
charged in and you might have
legal defences but I that that's
just something I wish I would
encourage or hope that you would
look at to see if we could
actually put some type of intent
in there to make it more
consistent manager
representative with what
criminal statute statutes
generally do because generally I
think it's it's the code the
traffic code that is pretty
strict liability and again I
haven't looked at that other
statute and that's brandishing a
firearm or at a threatening
summit at a polling place madam
chair represented.
And representative it's
it's specifically related to
intimidation of election
officials or workers
other participants and
I i'd be happy to follow up with
you I I don't want this to go
into that yeah it's a separate
start you but.
We could look at it together
potentially right thank you
matter and represent just that's
just something that might I
think would be really helpful in
this bill to protect people who
are just accidentally make a
mistake if they don't know or
have not seen the advertisement
people walk in all the time to
the places gas stations with
alcohol in them and they're
carrying a firearm and i've seen
them prosecuted because it's
just a strict liability crime
and even if they just didn't
know i've seen him sided by
officers and and so I thought I
think that's just something I
would ask you to look at
the other questions I had madame
chair and representative i'm not
really clear
and page the re section c can
you explain what that means that
that actual paragraph.
The.
That exception I guess matt
madame chair and representative
read that was added as to
address the issue i've say you
have I know in an albuquerque
for example there is appalling
place that might have a star
books right next to it or in its
an abstract mall or it a
shopping center or you might
have appalling please they gave
it I believe otero county one of
the polling places is in the and
so you may be walking within a
hundred of the door of the
actual holing place because
you're you know then a go get
eliminated the neighboring
spirit and so the idea was not
to capture that or to create a
problem where people were
driving on a road might pass
within a hundred feet of the
physical building okay thank you
madame chair and and represent
my thought that's what that
meant and it would also capture
people who may be live like
right behind appalling place
that have a gun in their house
madam chairman representatives
okay and then just kind of
lastly immediate I know
manager representative you
talked a lot about or somebody
did about a complaints from
constitute from pole workers
that they feel threatened or can
you like narrow down like how
many people have come up to you
and said that this is an issue
or I mean is this when you say
people are you talking a handful
or you talking because I I agree
with representative dream madame
chairman I don't think seeing
anybody in a pulling place with
the fire that I knew about
in a pulling place I understand
what the intent of the spellers
but I wondered if you could
maybe narrow down the numbers on
that a little bit madam mountain
to a representative i'm glad you
asked that an I have gotten a
lot of emails over the last
couple of years just regarding
safety at pulling places.
You know I I personally have
spoken to a few that have
experienced something that they
felt was intimidating route
related to a firearm in the
vicinity of the point place but
i.
You know I say I I do see this
as we tend to do also here in
this building is just how to how
what are all the ways we can
just sort of turn down the
temperature on some of these
very high moments when people
are extra sizing their you know
they're their right to take to
free speech to their opinions
here how do we
allow them to cast their ballet
and make those decisions and in
a way that feels very free from
any kind of interference or
intimidation
and honestly I think that's
partly why you know you can't
election year within a hundred
feet of a pulling place just so
that voters can enter those
spaces and make those decisions
without feeling concerned for
their safety you're feeling
concerned you know it within the
case of election earring that
they're being pressured to do
one thing or another and so it
is just about keeping that space
as clear as possible folks can
feel
that they are
without thread being able to
cast their valid.
You know I think that you know
unfortunately the today's
environment is is very harsh at
times and so anything we can do
to turn the temperature down so
that we can all make these
decisions you know the with the
way that we should which is just
you know sort of privately and
respectfully okay and so madam
chair and representative you've
gotten some you've talked to a
couple of people that you don't
have any stats or any people
like I i've talked to ten pole
workers that have felt this way
you need hard numbers on that
manager
madam chair representative I
wouldn't want to
put a number on it but I we
could probably go through my
email some numbers
and intention in rubs and my do
appreciate how you've taken out
the private automobile in the
the pulling boxes I think that
definitely helps
I I again elsewhere agree with
leader lame that at conceal
carry I think should be an
exception with the training to
go through madame cher
representative but I think
that's pretty much all the
questions I again it would just
encourage you to possibly think
about putting intent in there I
think that would be great if the
spell well is is this bill goes
forward that we we have an
intent element in there to
protect people that are making.
Representative
thank you madame chair
representative and
from the secretary of state's
office correct i'm sorry
I believe you said earlier that
there were something like twelve
states who have of enacted law
similar to this is that correct
madame chair representative that
is correct there are twelve
states in one minute.
Prohibit
and the district of colombia
that prohibit both open and
concealed carry in polling
places
there are seven additional
states that have restrictions on
one but not the other and they
some of them pro some of those
seven
concealed carrier but not but
allow open carrier others
open carrier allow concealed
carry so it's kind of but
thank you madame representative
chair representative
of those say
twelve and in the district
columbian and the other seven so
will say twenty
how many of those have a
knowingly standard in them or an
intent standard.
Madame chaired in representative
i'm looking i'm not sure that we
have the all over this statutes
here and the materials that I
have.
Compiled
hi I am sorry I do not have that
i'm certainly happy to look at
that.
Okay thank you
and madame chair and and
representative I I would have
appreciate that because I think
as a number of us uh have
expressed and I think you even
said you don't want to undo
criminal eyes activity that I
think and intense standard is is
very very important to this
legislation and so I would just
think that that.
Ought to be considered as as as
being put in as as this goes
forward thank you and thank you
madame chair thank you anyone
else
have been to entertain emotion
representative chassis
second okay let's hear it
properly
worded i'm sorry
than slipping my pages around I
think it's a house senate
judiciary substitute okay so we
have a due past motion on the
senate judiciary substitute for
senate bill
five men
made by chassis seconded by
representative ramaro.
Would you call the role please
representative outcome
representative chasing
representative him no
representatively no
speaker making it yes
representative but yes
representative read nope
representative no matter.
Yes
matter yes.
Yes.
Thank you.
Representative ream we are going
to be hearing house still three
sixteen.
And we have a substitute also.
The.
Okay it's being passed out.
Okay
the floor is yours
representative.
Before you move out do you want
to shall we move the substitute
for discussion i'm assuming
you're in the discussing the
substitute okay
yeah I knew
surprisingly quiet
representative
so
what we have in front of us is a
two two eight zero nine three
point one is that the correct
matter of chair yes status the
correct so okay and do we have
emotion to consider it for
discussion purposes okay move by
represent every second to buy
him represent hembry okay now we
can start formally thank you
chair
medicare this substitute deals
with felon in possession of a
firearm when we look across the
state what we see
will more looking at murders and
I have been assisted here next
to me to talk about some of
those.
Is
bonds in possession of firearms
are right at the top of the list
involved in murders and then
others are drug deals that have
gone bad.
When we look at this legislation
what i'm proposing is the first
offence would be a five year
penalty and the second of fence
would be a nine year penalty.
So many times we hear the
statement that the da needs to
take this case federally why
because the penalties are
harsher but one thing about the
federal system is if a firearms
involved.
You can not have probation.
So probation is not an option
for the judge in the federal
system where is in might
legislation this is not a
minimum mandatory.
This leaves it up to the judge.
To go head and decide if he
wants to do apply probation or
any jails time to this
one of the things that I ask in
is we have the one of the ada's
from the second that I want to
read an incident because it
highlights how the firearms move
in the criminal world.
And this is from our second
judicial's office of second days
office one may fifth twenty
twenty two home side detectives
were dispatched due to a
reported gun chart when they
arrived at the scene the victim
was breathing but unconscious.
The victims suffered around
eight to thirteen gunshot would
he was bleeding from the armed
face and body and do the
severity the wounds he did not
survive is injuries according to
the defendant statement he had
gone
to the target at eleven thousand
one hundred and twenty longest
to sell a bag of blues blues are
fatimals.
Defendant stated the victim was
attempting to rob him the
defendant took the gun and
blindly opened fire that
offended thing drove to dallas
and zoony and gave the gun to
someone to sell and that's how
these guns continue in the
underground world
and market.
I would like now for my
expert to identify himself and
to go ahead and make some
comments.
Hello chair members of the
community thank you very much
for your time when he dropped
hard i'm the director of the
organized crime commission i'm
also prosecutor from the second
judicial day's office a couple
things I just want to add on
here you know this this crime we
think is targeting the the big
movers of crime I know you've
heard a say that you've heard
people from our also say that
but this isn't the kind of crime
that criminalizes somebody who
is addicted to drugs there is
just a your normal possession of
a controlled substance this type
of crime is targeting the types
of folks that are the actual
drug traffickers the actual war
or and it's not just drugs we
also see it with the stone car
theft rings with the gangs and
as far as you were in his crime
goes even see it as you're
getting into the human
trafficking organizations and
some of the higher ranking
cartel lutenans and that kind of
thing so what we're seeing time
in time again as that these
types of folks and a lot of them
are previously convicted serious
violent offenders are continuing
to carry guns the continued
shoot at other people within the
the community and it's extremely
dangerous we see a lot of repeat
phone in possession type crimes
and it's really difficult for us
as prosecutors we believe this
would be a very useful tool for
us and something we could use to
hold these types of folks
accountable.
Show are we ready to go to the
audience representative and
matter chair with that will
stand for questions okay so
those in the audience wishing to
speak an opposition to the
substitute for house bill
three sixteen please raise your
hand okay I have two hands in
the back here.
Good afternoon my day and the
cash um one thing I want to
point out though is there a lot
of people who have the
conviction of that money.
Precisely the scary folks that
these guys are talking about and
I think it is tempting to think
put in our efforts into changing
sense the instructions will help
reduce crime but it hasn't been
shown that increasing penalties
and more time in prison does
what we hope it will do five
years in prison seems over the
top form possessing if I run the
stop
threatener cause harm and I can
imagine the situation where
people might feel they must have
a fire on to protect themselves
from harm or death I know of at
least one person who testified
to get someone who's now serving
twenty five to wait and I don't
think his family and his cohorts
are very happy about that I hope
he never gets a firearm of his
own but he has one in this home
at some point thinking that they
might come for him I think that
spending five years instead of
three in prison with not and I
don't think we should be paying
for it.
Thank you
thank you madame chair and i'm
committed my name I johnny
the liberties union mexico is
being on behalf of the mexico
today and then we oppose this
bill as we pose most bills to
seek to increase sentences
because there's little evidence
to suggest that increase is have
a significant positive on public
safety in fact there's plenty of
evidence that shows the hard
do little to deter crime and
little to reduce versus a visit
the only thing I think is that
increasingly sentences further
strain on our already
attention facilities and put
more taxpayer money towards
incarceration when those
resources could be used for more
proactive measures or other
investments.
This building also be redundant
for the most part it doesn't
address people using guns to
commit crimes if someone does
use a gun in a crime there are
existing enhancement options
that could be used they can be
charged with the crime
classifier i'm enhancement and
probably in this case
enhancement lastly we're still
struggling with the disasters
are she sentencing that or
introduced during the so called
warrant drugs let's not repeat
history and instead see evidence
based solutions especially when
it comes to violence thank you.
Anyone else in the audience
wishing to speak and opposition
to the bill.
Anyone online wishing to speak
an opposition to the bill
please raise your hand.
Anyone online wishing to speak
an opposition raise your hand.
Okay no one those in the
audience wishing to speak and
support other bill please raise
your hand.
Yes ma'am.
Thank you anyone else in the
audience wishing to speak and
support the bill.
Yes ma'am hi good afternoon my
name is liana derek and.
Like to speak and support adding
on to the fact that I am a
travel member so I do believe it
is a tool you'd be very useful
for our prosecutors as a travel
member of the example that the
gentleman referred to is that we
have that is sovereign lands and
that is an issue among our
people of having guns being
moved back and forth through
into and and it does hurt are my
people so i'd like to speak and
support this bill and ask that
the committee also support thank
you anyone else in the audience
wishing to speak and support of
the bill.
Okay those online wishing to
speak and support the bill
police raise your hand
right let's start with larry
santag
good evening madame chairman and
members of the committee and
slary santed here on behalf of
the new mexico business
coalition in nbc strongly
supports the hdcs substitute
increasing the penalty profelon
in possession of firearm on each
bill three sixteen.
Unlike several other pieces of
legislation proposed this year
HB three sixteen correctly
targets offenders of crime not
law buying citizens who are
victims of crime we've seen the
terrible harm that violent
offenders who have previous
criminal convictions can cause
to innocent new mexicans when
current laws do not allow for
meetings
from a business perspective new
mexico's crime rates have driven
some of the worst in the
national rankings as a result of
some businesses are choosing to
leave new mexico so they can
open where they feel they're not
at risk for armed robbery
stuffed and endangering their
employees while this bill is
aimed at previously convicted
felons it should have a positive
infect on all crime.
For the reason stated in nbc
strongly supports hp three
sixteen and we encourage you to
do so thank you thank you derek
scott.
Hi my name is scott I would like
to just comment on this bill
with bill dream first i'd like
to thank the members of the
committee and the chair for
letting me speak
this bill I have seen the
effects in the work that i've
done with consulting with
lawyers and stuff as a parallel
enforcement officer and i've
seen it get ranked down because
of its low sensing and we've
seen it sometimes you put down
to a misdemeanor so I would
really appreciate that this
that you guys do a do pass on
this as to help with the
district attorney's office so
that they can go after more
extreme prime year that would
allow the fact for them to push
more heavy sense of singing on
people that are getting away to
lower sentencing from sometimes
even the judge and so I would
have really appreciate you guys
do a new path thank you thank
you
I don't see anyone else online
representative ream anything
briefly before we go to
committee a manner chair I have
a message from bob martinez from
the f o p use trying to log in
and is having difficulty can't
get in so he just wants me to
say that they are in support of
this and the point he was
reminding as about three or four
years ago there was an
individual that came from
california and he ended up he
robbed a kid on street this is
in northeast heights when four
officers confronted him he shot
all four officers he was also
shot but he came to new mexico
because our laws were lacks
thank you representative so I
helped my list represent a rear
macqueen and then speaker
martinez so represented thank
you madame chairman
representative
I i've really I want to go
through some of these things in
the bill that a lot of the
different people on the audience
commented I and just so that we.
Connect can be clear on some of
these issues and I know one
thing was brought up that
increased penalties don't affect
crime rates
madam shared representative and
and mister district attorney
which means there
manager representative rob heart
rob heart mister heart
just an in my experience mr
madam chair and representative
and mister heart.
When I prosecuted murder cases
over the year I would say
probably eighty eighty five
percent of the time there is a
felon in possession charge
attached to that murder would
you disagree mr heart in your
experience madam chair with what
you're seeing in district
attorneys officers as far as
when I have a side occurs
madam chair representative say
it's pretty close to that and
when you talk madame chair and
representative
in mr heart about well there's a
fire enhancement that you can
file so there's really no need
for that what is the penalty of
a fire enhancement.
In general on a cried let's
start there
and your representative read I
believe it's a year and a half
okay and if it's a murder case
made of chair representative do
you get that penalty also or
let's say it's a life sentence
do you get to tack on the one
year and a half honor let's see
a lace sentence if you have a
fellow in possession charge
manager representative I
actually don't believe so I
think it has its own sensing
provision rate and so a fell in
a possession of charge manager
and representative reading costs
were home having a day
represented ream can you tell us
what the actual type of sentence
is that you have to have before
you can actually prosecute
somebody for a felon in
possession of a fire meaning is
and i'm going towards
conditional deferred suspendeds
if you can explain those to
the panel and what those
different senses mean in order
to actually charge somebody with
this crime to represent so if I
believe if I understand your
question if the sensors deferred
or if it's a conditional
discharge you cannot be charged
with the fellow and possession
so it's not even going to be
every single felon every single
fellow new charge if the sense
has fallen to one of these other
provisions you will not be able
to be charged under this statute
under thirty seven sixteen so
madam chair and representative
mister are you actually have to
be convicted of a suspended
sentence or serve jail time in
order to be convicted for fell
in a possession of a firearm
madam share representative read
that's correct and madam chair
and reversing every mister heart
is this considered a serious
violent offence or a fifty
percent good time crime
managers and
just to clarify so this
particular case for the actual
phone in possession charge this
is not considered a serious
final offence I mean there's the
bridge provision of if you're
previously convicted but if I
understand you're correctly your
question correctly this is not
considered a serious violence.
So this is a fifty percent crime
basically for good time correct
now and you've already mentioned
man of chair and representative
and expert that this is
discretionary with the judge
it's not mandatory
manshare representative that's
that's correct it's up to five
years it's zero to five
and manager and representative
mister heart going back to the
habitual enhancement part does
this effect habitual
enhancements would say you have
a prior one prior felony offense
and then you're caught in a
robbery with a firearm
can you enhance this penalty
madam chair and expert with
unhabitual offense in this
situation mountain chair
represent have read no you could
not if it was just a single
felony that you previously had
you could not enhance if there
is multiple fellow news you
possibly could but you basically
have to choose if you want to
chart if you only use one for
the phone possession or for the
and so the repeat offender have
statued madam chair
representative and expert you
have to actually use that first
felony to make it a fellow in
possession of fire and then if
you have additional felonies
after it then you start with
your wine your fault what it is
you know whatever it is now to
enhance a one four eight within
ten years madame chair
representative read that is
correct so I I guess my point
being made and share and
representative of an expert that
they there are a lot of things
that have to take place in order
to inhance a sentence under this
charge memter rebs and every yes
that's absolutely correct there
are a lot of exceptions to this
and a lot of ways where you
wouldn't even reach this point
in manager representative and
expert I think why like this is
because there is it is
discretionary and it isn't just
enhancing penalties medicare and
representative of and mister
heart I think you see these
charges with repeat offenders.
Misses are repeat offender
charge and well I know a lot of
people's position is increased
sentences doesn't help with
crime my position is in a
situation like this these are
repeat offenders that are going
to be punished harder more
strenuously and will be offer
streets and possibly then not
commit the murder or the robbery
or whatever it may be and so I
like this bill I think it's time
that we finally got to do
something a little bit more
aggressive with felons and
because you tend to not just get
one prior you tend to do this
over and over and.
And is felons I have multiple
charges generally but the first
chance you still have to use it
to enhance it and and I know in
my experience generally half the
time those are probated
sentences if not all the time
user to enhance and then you may
do a suspended sentence if it
even is was was a suspended
sentence the first time does
that make sense yes madam chair
represent a rebuild I think on
that point in a good point you
raise typically if you have some
type of possession of a
controlled substance or a lower
level foney just minor property
damage those are exactly the
sentences that are going to be
conditional discharges deferred
and in that case once again
those are not the people who
would even be eligible into the
statute like it like you're
saying it's really just going to
be the true drivers of crime the
the violent felons the drug
traffickers the repeat repeat
repeat offenders the the other
folks who already are going to
get a conditional discharge
whatever deferred sends this one
applied to them and thank you
madame cherry just wanted to
make sure we made those
distinctions with the spell and
I appreciate representative ream
ream not really but also
bringing this bill and thank you
manager thank you
conventure
manager
ream.
So can you help me service
history of this because.
You've been here longer than I
have but i've been here for ten
years where we see a film that
possession bill every session.
So and I pressure we passed a
couple of them.
Maybe the least one yeah madam
chair and representative mcqueen
yes i've worked on this for
quite a while what we did is we
increased it from a fourth
degree felony so eighteen months
in prison to three years that
it's didn't seem to have the
horse power that the federal
system has and that's why
not only
the public is asking for us to
address violent crime but are
days across the state or asking
as to increase the penalty to
mirror or close get closer to
the federal system we see this
legislature is very attoned to
firearms and firearm crimes and
that's what this is is too
addressed that
unlawful use
in manchester and website
reading
so this discounts are the polite
there are sessions seems to have
come up a lot in this session
can you can you cover the
history of.
Following the possession bills
in our current session
madam chair and reps in the
queen that's correct and should
this pass I won't be back next
year with a fellow new
possession
we're gonna hold you to that
representative
i've got a long memory
firm terribly observed right now
I won't come in on that
but but you had another found in
position
bill that was tabled the
sessions are correct
madam chairman represented my
queen that is correct.
The.
Okay.
And page two line sixteen it
looks like ratting destructive
device.
As a as a addition.
Can can you just or walk me
through.
Why and in whether to structure
devices
mounted representative of
macqueen really it's not
necessarily adding it in the
statutory since you'll see it's
actually already listed in
several places throughout the
statute really this just makes
the language more consistent I
think it's just cleaner and if
you noticed if you pull up the u
j I fourteen seven one it's also
destructive devices and there as
well so this isn't actually
changing the largest making it
more uniform throughout the
statute.
In mantarooms and expert
so on piece three the definition
of the structure of the device
the first
arms and grenades and rockets.
Probably not to please used in
chromes the second
is this is the second like
what
i've heard referred to this zip
again like your home made fire
and what what is what is the
unsuring of mine fourteen so
section b
I am trying to understand what
the destructive device is.
Yeah.
Madam chair represented me queen
essentially yes it is like a
homemade
destructive device I mean you
can modify shock and shows you
can do a lot of things too I
won't say it's like a homemade
grenade launcher but there are
many different people very
creative and the internet gives
people a lot of inspiration
these days so it becomes a
basically a homemade.
The mini grenade launcher I
think it's something like that.
And remain expert
based on the discussion we just
heard about how often do we
really see cons at polling
sides.
I got asked how often do you
really see
phones and possession of rockets
and grenades and what that.
Madam chairman of macqueen just
because we don't see a lot of
rocket launchers doesn't mean we
should not make it criminal.
But it does actually happen
probably more often than
you would think and madam chair
I would add representing my
queen
when I was an officer we had
theft of interstate shipments
of for the army and a lot of
very bad stuff was stolen will
say it that way but where we
typically see this is someone
making their homemade bomb.
And in you hear that all the
time when the bob squad was
called out and then they found a
device many times thank goodness
it's not a homemade device but
we do see how many devices.
Okay
appreciate that I I just.
It's a little cures to me than
the last bill we didn't think it
was something some of us didn't
think it was something we need
to drastic as it happened very
often but here in this bill is
something we should address even
though we know it doesn't happen
very often just
just trying to think my way
through that
manchester rivers of dream I all
support this bill
I believe in can safety
and I think
the felons in possession of
fires is something we should
take seriously and is the other
side of the coin of gun safety.
So thank you member thank you
representative arms speaker
martinez thank you chair and
think your percentage ring for
your.
Tireless efforts and and also to
your other sponsors I know
they're not here but the
percentage is little and how to
meet you and others who have
worked on this
you know I cut my teeth ma'am
chairs of baby legislator
sitting right there as leader
chases vice chair for a couple
years
and took a lot of pride in
insurance I don't at a very
interesting time in her state's
history with the previous
governor when every single bill
that came here seemed to be he
so called tough on crime bill
with very little sign sometimes
and and really just.
You know not a whole not a whole
lot of evidence
over the years I think i've been
able in preview to a lot of the
good work that may be on this
committee including
representative of ream have done
over the years and I have become
better versed I think when it
comes to
some of our criminal statutes
in some of the areas where I
think there's some some blind
spots
I I do think that this bill is a
good compromise I know they're
several others that we've seen
already in other committees
big props to our staff as well
make indoor sea in mark baker
who work with representative
rame and the other sponsors to
time this up a little bit and to
really be targeted in the
approach I think that that's the
key to some of these criminal
penalty enhancement bills that
we see is is for them to be very
very targeted so that we don't
innovatively end up casting such
a wide net that we're bringing
people into the system don't
belong in the system right I
mean I think we we we've we've
hit that balance with this bill
so i'll be supporting it i'm i'm
excited to get this to the floor
and debated on the floor and
through the senate because I
think the people of new mexico
expect results and I think that
this is an example of what comes
out.
When we work together and come
up with ideas now that's not to
say that
you know some folks may not be
able to support this because I
think there's their fundamental
differences sometimes as to how
we see this and that's okay
that's fine but i'm looking
forward to to voting yes i'm as
bill and to get it to the floor
thank you manager thank you
speaker representative el con
then chase well actually chasey
our corner.
Sorry
you'll get your turn thinking
out of her representative on
page two.
Line fifteen
the way the law works for
federal offenses I mean you have
someone who was the balance who
committed to felony and served
his or her time
is that person always called a
felon.
Mancher
reps and chasing no they are not
it so under the federal law they
defer to actually the state
definition of what you're fell
in it would have felonious so
are because our virgin is here
is laid out we have our ten year
requirement
they they typically look at the
three prongs of its really a
restoration of rates voting
rights right on guns and writing
public office so they deferred
to the state.
Uh the state rules on that so
for person has had those rights
restored and it spent ten years
they're no longer considered.
So.
A former balance after ten years
can own again is that correct
number.
So you're asking under federal
line and i'm sorry I don't need
to be asking okay
tell me that new mexico so in in
state law after ten years
I believe so I actually feel
like under the statute as long
as they've had their rights
restored and they no longer
it's but you they've it's mainly
the ten year marker that we rely
on I guess none of your
representative
I I wonder about
somebody who just has a gun who
was a former felon and beyond
whatever time period info
here she's not doing anything
illegal could that person would
be sense to five years in
present.
Sorry look if it's been over ten
years is that the question or if
it's been under.
Manager whatever the criteria
are for getting to a point where
you are not a felon anymore but
you did
commit a felony earlier in your
life.
Could that person who now
possesses the dear rifle be
charged with the crime mentioner
representative chasing no if
it's been if they're no longer
into the criteria is past the
ten years we wouldn't be able to
charge them with the statue.
Okay
six
actually helps if you look first
on page five representative room
manager.
The fellow classification on the
basic sentence those with the
two columns turn over to
and
online fourteen is where we have
this new
affairs third degree felony for
possession of byro or
destructive device by a felon
five years imprisonment that
sounds determine it to me
do one answer to that
manager representative chase
this is the sense and guidelines
for for all phones everywhere
this isn't a maximum this is a
maximum so it's zero to five
this is not mandatory time and
you'll see this is the already
the sensing statute that we use
it it is not a mandatory five
years imprisonment it's up to.
Alright thank you very much
monte.
To your turn representative
elkon.
That okay chair
leader chase he was I was hoping
we didn't get to my point I
wouldn't as question.
The way I don't see this we have
seen the way i'm reading this
like the old judge.
If someone that is a fellow it's
working now the street and
caring a good even if you're she
is not convinced in the crime it
can be stopped and charge with
the third degree felony
possession of the firearm.
Membership representative
outcome let's be clear as I
can't just be stopped finally
there would be a violation that
the constitutional violation so.
Um they would have to be doing
something there would have to be
reasonable suspicion they would
have to expand so i'm not sure I
understand and an officer notes
that person is the fellow and
sees that person holding their
gun in his hand he give
therefore charge him with third
degree felony for possession of
a firearm sorry better
mancher was in of our con if he
was holding his firearm he's
probably brandishing that's at
least a mister minerso if the
investigation led that way yes I
believe they could be you could
be charged solely with felon in
possession as a crowd so madame
chaired mar representative to
react creating the completely
new crime here
no madam chair representative on
we are not that's true today
that doesn't actually that's
true right now even if if this
won't know where that's still
true.
Thank you represent
representative hembry
thank you madame chair
I just wanted to.
Follow up on I think what was a
interesting invalid point that
representative mcqueen made and
see about the sort of rocket san
and things like that not being
how often they're used I think
that's a valid point
with madame chair
representative.
I mean that that definition is
currently in the law isn't that
correct
mancher resin november that's
correct we haven't modified that
in any way shape reform ends but
madame chair and representative
handberry I thought of the
perfect example of that and that
was if we remember the olympics
and I think it was a way on a
and it was the pressure cooker
bomb that or do it was the
boston marathon i'm sorry
that's.
Thank you thank you manager
thank you represent of anyone
else.
I'm happy to entertain a motion
speaker.
Yeah.
The.
Okay.
And seconded by reb so we have a
do not pay us on house bill
three sixteen but a dupa and
host judiciary committee
substitute for house bill three
sixteen made by speaker martina
second by representative rebe
which you call the role please
representative our corn.
Representative chassis
representative hambury yes
representative lane.
Speaker martinez.
Representative
yes.
Representative read yes
representative green yes ma'am
representatives of.
Yes.
Representative of colon
representative chasing.
You know.
Yes.
I vote of seven to three.
We have a do not pass on house
bill three sixteen and a due
power sound judiciary committee
thank you.
Next we are going to do
this
j sixteen senator demill is
here.
Oh great okay
hello representative delay crues
good afternoon chair one good to
see you
at the floor is yours.
Okay thank you madame chair but
i'm sure this is us
constitutional moment that six
two change or weather are care
claw that we have constitution
that requires connect
commissions or counties to come
to the legislature of refer
years usually with a election
cycle to adjust salaries so they
can keep their courts paid
appropriately and so forth what
happened with the restrictions
of not getting past and things
like that from time to time
we've
got most of our deputies or
undersheriffs and so forth
earned considerably more than
that the elected position this
would change the constitution
with a county commission can set
the salaries and essentially
that's it's simple it's pretty
much what it does and there's no
reason we don't do this for
cities any other entities that I
know of and state so without my
co sponsor might have a couple
of comments representative thank
you chair woman it's my pleasure
to be here with all of you
having many former county
commissioner I first had no that
this is problematic certainly at
the time that I was on the
county commission we didn't know
a lot of money in they still
don't and it be nice if that
nice had been logical for them
to be able to set her their own
rates and and and be able to
keep up more with her the staff
thank you venture thank you miss
crochetority wish to say
anything our experience is
miscrucial added from the new
exclusion.
Thank you madam chair members on
just a couple of things the
counties haven't been able to
raise the cap since two thousand
eighteen and so I just wanted to
note that and I I have with me a
list of salaries and information
detail information where the
deputy does make more than the
elected if if anyone has any
additional children's thing okay
got it
i'll let let us go to the
audience and then more come back
so those wishing to speak in
opposition to sjr sixteen please
raise your hand in the audience
if you're in the audience.
I don't see any hands raised
those online wishing to speak in
opposition please raise your
hand.
Don't see any hands race those
wishing to speak in the audience
in favor of the bill please
raise your hand yes sir.
Good afternoon manager and
representatives my name is
michael I want to take out a
clerk and as you hear earlier
that it's been since two
thousand eighteen since the
elected officials have had a
raise and I sport who raised.
The.
Thank you anyone else in the
audience wishing to speak and
sport in the bill.
See anyone anyone online wishing
to speak and support the bill
please raise your hand.
I don't see any hands raised
back to the sponsors any thing
further before we go to the
committee I think we're ready
for questions thank you
represent mcqueen.
Thank you
mancherps and center so
if this is adopted who who does
said the salary for kelly
commissioners
this would allow the county
commissioners and to set all the
salaries for county officials
the elected officials in each
county.
So you can do it now currently
up to a cap that the state set
and that cap may or may not be
appropriate for the county but
it's it's but they haven't been
able to change that cap for a
number of years just do the
various factors but be thousands
whatever pocket vetoes I think
so so man chair and center count
measures will now be saying
their own salary with no cap
they would they currently do
that as well within the cap this
would take the cap away they
could get crazy but in reality I
would point out in this if you
look at city governments and I
have some statistics for citi
governments that doesn't happen
in fact the reverse is true
because of the political
pressure that is put up on the
city commissioners they don't
raise their own salary so it's a
this would if if that's your
concern I think that would be a
it would probably put a lot of
pressure on county commissions
to not raise their salaries very
often
i'm cherry represent my queen it
it would said the solid but not
for the city commissioners are
sitting electricity
but for themselves where would
it be for the next group.
The.
They'd have to stand for
election.
Them chair present to the cruise
where is it.
Managers represent mcqueens to
statute already.
I believe what they're saying as
it's in a different doubt you to
current statute of elsewhere
it's not in the constitution
understood manager.
So.
The.
Yeah I mean all over for this I
I do have that concern to some
sense and
ma'am cher recent deal accrues
and mention keeping up with
staff.
Like you know some of the the
managers in her counties he
heard our companies quite
significantly some carry
commissioners might feel that.
You know if they're there the
county commissioner and the
supervised that manager maybe
they should be at the level it's
it's not a term.
Start without concerns thinking
about you.
Madame chair make a motion that
we do pass on senate joint
resolution sixteen second.
One little question managed here
here for give me
here a bill that's like this
that already sits the salaries
earlier or am I in another world
I don't have a recollection but
I may be to represent it of
chasing us
i'm sure I was thinking the same
thing senator and representative
and I noticed the I was like
quickly on that to the fire
because they always relates to
house bill two forty one and
senate bill one seventy seven
and increased salary caps and
newly elected county officials
though by different amounts so
those are probably
in conflict with well not really
because this will have to go to
the voters and once the voters
decide it will
supersede mine
that at least on that indicator
here
okay so I think of the
representative on you still of
the floor to anything else you
want to.
Anything representative on
anything else okay any other
member wishing to ask a question
or make a comment.
Okay so we have a motion
for a due pass on senate joint
resolution sixteen made by
represent a real second dead by
speaker martinez would you call
the role representative of our
con
representative chasing.
Representative hamburg yes
representative lane.
Speaker martinez yes
representative a queen yes
representative read yes
representative
madam vice chair yes adam chair
yes.
I have a nine to zero we have.
Very good you have a due pass
thank you and I understand you
told me you were a former county
commission I was very good thank
you that he mattered share thank
you members
okay we are now going to go to
senate bill seventy
I believe so we've got two
minutes representatives
presenting this bill
representative half day half
when vehicle and speaker
martinez the floor is yours
thank you madame chair members
of the committee onto this year
I always get a little terry i'd
when I come back in here miss it
center bill seventy is a mirror
bill of household one forty one
that we just heard on the floor
a little earlier this afternoon
it changes the statutory
formula for judicial salaries
and with that stand for a
questions and will yield to my
co
presenter hope present thank you
chair and
let me representative
we're we're carrying this bill
church and but this has the
senate version this morning we
passed out of the house of the
the house version we just want
to make sure this gets done so
we're moving both bills forward
in hopes that we can get this
done this year without certain
questions
those in the audience wishing to
speak an opposition to the bill
please raise your hand
those on line wishing to speak
in opposition to the bill please
raise your hand.
Don't see anyone those in the
audience wishing to speak and
support of the bill please raise
your hand.
Those on wishing to speak and
support of the bill please raise
your hand online merit is mation
madame chair members of the
committee i'm nature speaking on
behalf of the american
association university women and
urge you to support this bill
judicial salaries have been way
too low we need to have this
remedy i'm very glad to hear
that speaker say that he thinks
if you get it across the finish
line this is why I think the
sponsors for working on this and
the both chambers
thank you thank you anyone else
online I don't see anyone else
presenters any of the further
comments before I go to the
committee nobody better manage
her very conditions manager
yes like him overdue pass.
Alright so we have a due pass
motion on senate judiciary
committee substitute for senate
bill seventy made by
representative ramiro seconded
by representative him bree does
anyone wish to comment before we
go to the motion no I don't see
any comments so would you call
the role please represent
representative of.
Representative chassis.
Yes
representative lane speaker
martinez
representative clean yes
representative yes
representative ring.
Yes
representatives the parents key
madam vice share yes madam chair
yes.
I have nine to zero we have a
due pass on senate bill seventy
ninth you have a dupous thank
you
so thank you very much who
passed off.
Representative hernandez is on
his way.
The.
We are in house bill to twenty
five create the crime of hazing
we have representative hernandez
here
the floor is yours thank you
madame before we get started I
was like my what has turned into
an army of experts introduced
themselves.
Hello I am stephanie where three
years and I am the cabinet
secretary of the new mexico
higher education department
peter
thank you I have peter peter
haven't
done no council with a hire
education department
good evening madam chair members
of the committee my name is
brian began ima an attorney with
department of public.
The.
No secretary
medicare and committee members
p two twenty five creates the
crime of heasing
new mexico is one of the handful
of states that doesn't have
heasing in its statute as we
continue to see more and more
issues of hazing within our
within our higher education
scores
right now is really the time to
put this in the statue it's
about protecting our kids
you know as time goes along or
keep it super short because I
know we're on the forces
we do have a
committee that we would like to
move okay
so if we could discussion
let's review the number it's too
too seven seven four four point
six is outright representative
correct okay so we have a motion
for discussion persons from
representative ream and second
and by representative
okay.
So madam chair and committee
members the the large portion
of the committee substitute
takes out key through twelve at
the request of the PED
secretary.
Then that that concludes your
initial presentation yes and we
stand for questions very good so
let's go to the audience those
in the audience wishing to speak
an opposition and keep your
comments to ninety seconds.
We certainly appreciate the
intent of this legislation of
course hazing is
we do support more training or
reporting the we're not
supported creation
in particular in this case much
of the behavior that would be a
fourth degree felony under the
speed under the bell as
aggravated heathing it's already
criminal
we also leave that this is the
kind of thing that we need to be
exposing more people to the
criminal legal system
particularly as you know a time
when our jails and prisons are
not really safe and.
Really understand too many cases
so we thank you for your
consideration as a particularly
that criminal aspect of the
whole we have.
Thank you anyone else in the
audience wishing to speak an
opposition.
Okay those online wishing to
speak in opposition please raise
your hand.
The.
You don't see any hands raised
those in the audience wishing to
speak and support of the bill
please raise your hand.
Okay we'll start over here and
then we'll go back to the fact
that management members between
when it is my policy with the
university of mexico I want to
think the secretary of sponsor
for keeping attention on this
issue I think you heard or one
of only six feet doesn't have a
statute on the books this is an
issue that deserves a lot of
attention some resources you
will let you know that there's
already requirements that you
know we have to follow federal
requirements related to this
type of issue I want to give you
very big examples for revenue
but our student athletes have to
sign up policy of years
mandatory training athletes we
have our office of compliance
and our time for each week with
coaching staffs
so the fact that we're bringing
attempting to this one I think
for your time.
Thank you in the back chief
you actually mexico stick
please.
Very good
thank you matcher was the coming
marks better than mexico council
university presents a
representative for universities
in mexico just want to reiterate
what mister college is
advocated we stand for support
is absolutely bring attention to
section three of the decision
from the matches of the criminal
part of it that the education
are this helps with all of our
universities to also find a
support that education that they
helped prevent heasing and
having the.
Think about the chairman
of the sector
thank you anyone else in the
audience wishing to speak and
support.
Anyone online wishing to speak
and support this bill.
Mere information.
Madame chairman
members of the committee I
married it's making speaking on
behalf of the au web union and
we definitely support this bill
we need this wall
and unfortunate that we have to
educate people about the
dangerous of hassingin although
consequences that can occur to
people who
into his lives can be ruined by
hazing so we take the sponsors
bringing for this bill and we
hope that will join the rest of
the states who have laws against
thank you
thank you mirrors okay.
I have on the list
representative
thank you manager
memchair representative.
First of their with me I I have
substantially marked up the
point three version of the bill
I think they're I I have the
point six version I think
they're mostly the same
but if I
am asking questions about
something that has been changed
please let me know mancher
representative.
So first of all um.
The crime created am I reading
of this
that the chrome of heasing a
applies to any school in any age
is that correct so madam chair
and representative so in the
point six version it does take
out the case of twelve arms of
this would just be post
secondary so you have to show me
how that works because I see
references to keep cater twelve.
When it comes to uh reporting.
But in terms of the definition
of the crime I don't see that
limited to
those occurrences occurring in a
key through to twelve
environment.
Mancher representative the
definition of educational entity
is now just high red
institutions and the student and
perspective student so it has to
be commentable against the
student practice student of an
educational entity which is just
a higher education institution.
Look for private.
So I see.
So on teach.
One point twenty three
in connection with the
initiation into affiliation with
holding of officer meeting
membership and then the student
earns ation turned by the
student athletic team or club
regardless of whether the
student organizations somebody
or student ethic teamer club is
officially recognized sanction
or authorized by an educational
entity
so I will I would guess that a
high school team is not
authorized by an educational
entity
regardless madame chairman
representative bottom of page
three in the
letter or sorry let her I was
using this section quote on
court educational entity means a
public or private post secondary
educational institution
to reps I understand that and
going back to the paragraph I
just read.
That says it's a chrome
regardless of whether or not
it's affiliated with educational
entity.
Madame chair representative it
is only a crime of the victim or
alleged victim is a student or
perspective student at a higher
educational institution.
Ma'am chair expert where is it
say that so
the beginning of the world
hazing sister and act
intentionally rectively
committed against a student or
perspective student of an
educational entity that's a.
And then the cattle to sub I
page three lines twenty three to
twenty five educational entity
is defined as a public private
secondary okay
okay got it thank you
memchair reserve an extra so
then looking at we have a and b
on page one and two
in there really similar
so is an act.
With substantial risk of fiscal
hearn he is any act.
Likely to cause physical harm.
So what's the difference between
substantial risk and likely.
Manager representative
so you'll notice that the first
subsection you read says means
and the other says includes the
reason be as included broadening
the specifics there were some
issues along the way of drafting
this the people said it was not
specific and did not drill down
to the conduct that was the
agreement and so they includes
was the broadener without i'm
doing the definition so one is
me
means
that answer your question.
Mentioned in this right
I understand there's a
difference there it is.
Uh I guess
thank you I think the definition
heating could be.
Tighter.
Um
and I was thinking about this
mountain
reserve an experts
are trying to think of what the
substantial risk is a school of
psychological her.
The.
Was.
And it occurred to me that.
And.
I don't mean to pollute the bill
but I think there's a subsean to
risk a pisco recycling harm from
serving the legislature
so so I wonder
is that just a fact question for
a try effect.
What whether or not the actively
concluded substantial risk.
Madame journal representative
mcqueen it could be yes a
factual question but when we see
hazing we see examples of
students who are being
too I guess.
To say they're embarrassed but
to an extreme extent to where
you can think of examples of
a students that would have to
you know run around need it or
they'd be forced to strip or
something like that so that
could cause a substantial risk
of psychological harm that would
be you know above and beyond
just a typical sort of balling
or um.
Okay man chair reserve an extra
and curious about the online
reporting.
So I think this is the same
phone page two section d teacher
professor coach or other staff.
Member of an educational entity
who nearestly should have no
activity and did not report the
incident to the online reporting
portal.
Yeah I guess
we've seen
he's in bills before
um
my concern is I feel like
the universities.
Or exporting responsibility for
enforcing this
to the criminal justice system.
Um I think are universities have
dramatically failed.
To protect the students and the
new mexico state
the situation would be a prime
example and they had a horrific
filling and then just continued
the best ball program sired
over.
I I think that program should
have been suspended for a period
of years at least.
I don't really want the colonel
justice system to get involved.
I wonder
if we're automatically reporting
to it in online personal.
The.
Is that the best person stepped
worshier there be an internal
step first like.
Should the
athletic director be involved
should the university president
be involved is there's something
that this could be addressed as
a disciplinary matter before it
becomes a criminal matter.
Mr chair representative thank
you for the question so we only
have one two three four five six
seven eight.
Nine higher add institutions
with anti hazing policies in the
box of those minds institutions
are hope would be that the
student can report the instence
to the institution and be helped
there immediately and the higher
education department would get
involved in a situation to just
make sure it's been handled
properly and correctly and the
student was being heard and
handled in a way that the
student would like to proceed so
criminal liability is not the
first place we would like to go
to unless it absolutely has to
go there in the student would
like to report however we do
want to make sure that there are
cheques and balances with our
institutions to handle this in a
way that is suitable for the
situation to prevent what
happened at new mexico state
university.
So many chair resume and expert
I I appreciate that that this
look I read this as the
reporting to the online portal
is automatic
like whether or not it's being
handled in internally it also
gets reported to the online
portal otherwise the people who
were aware of the situation
would be
guilty of a mister
mister chair that is correct the
online reporting would be
retired of the individuals that
new of the hazing and that is
once again to make sure that it
was handled in the correct
manner and the student feels
like they were heard which is
what not what happened at other
institutions when this happened.
So many chair or seven expert.
You're you're saying that in
every instance.
There would likely be
a parallel process that there
has been internal process in
this online portal.
Mr chair there will be an
internal process with the higher
education institution per their
policies procedures and there
will also be a parallel process
with the state.
The.
Okay and ma'am terrorism and
expert we had a.
The.
Linked the discussion the other
night on the floor but the
informed concern act and just
meant yes and the right of a
victim.
Tonight report it.
How is the right of a victim to
not report an incident of
heasing a dressed in the s.
Madame chair representative
mcqueen we did not want to
put that burden on the on the
student victim or the one that
would be reporting we only have
the
the crime related to a an
employee or someone affiliated
and adult with the with the
educa.
Uh
maintenance and I would
appreciate that I I guess.
I'm I can imagine situations
where the victim doesn't want it
reported and that's not the ill
and i've make feelings about
this
but in the context of the this
bill that's not allowed it has
to be reported or another crime
is committed.
The.
Um madame chair representative
macqueen there is no requirement
that the victim report it is
that only the individuals who
work or affiliated as in
volunteers let's say i'm with
like athletic booster club or
something reported.
And man terrorism extra I
appreciate that my understanding
of the informed consent process
is that a student can go to a
university official but that
university official doesn't
automatically report that this
was an issue on the floor there
is I think a proposed amendment
that university officials would
be required to bring in the
local law enforcement and it was
that amendment was resisted and
I think it's only defeated based
on federal total mine that
people had a right to not move
forward with with uh.
Along forcement process that
right doesn't appear to be
present in this bill.
Madam chair represented my queen
what would happen is they would
be required to report it to an
online portal now whether or not
they do subsequently or
during the same period call on
voicemail then that would be
processed but once it gets
reported to the online portal
then there would be a process
that it could be referred to law
enforcement there's no mandatory
i'm reporting to law enforceme.
So
man terrorists have an expert.
Um
it's a different page there
staff shall work in coordination
with the permanent public safety
and enforcement agency having
primary jurisdiction over the
incident.
To report his increments that
that's not
unfortunate.
Madame chair representative of
me working in coordination would
be too to work in coordination
not necessarily have to formally
initiate an investigation so
there is no requirement that an
investigation ensue and my
background is a prosecutor
generally speaking if there is
an investigation that would
insure it would speak with the
the victim and they would make
that determination to move
forward based upon that so there
is no requirement that if you
reported two law voicement the
initiate an investigation.
Ma'am chair sent extras thank
you for your answers.
I continue to have concerns
about this I
my opinion it's not quite there
and i.
I I take this issue very
seriously
and.
We have this legacy of heasing
again in our own institution in
the legislature.
Which
always run me the wrongly and we
still joke about it and still
rubs me the wrong way even
though we don't really do it the
way we used to.
But it isn't and that's you know
that the serious incidents are
paising.
I think start inside enough and
they get more extreme or they
can have control.
And
young people don't exercise
adequate judgement.
And I think are universities
should be.
The first.
Why any defense of that and I
don't I think they're failing I
think bringing in enforcement in
criminalizing it.
I'm just i'm just not satisfied
the death
the right approach.
Reserve a did you have a
response madam chair and
representative I wanted to agree
with you on a portion of that
part of the reason that this
bill got brought into no friends
of any of the here at
institutions I feel like with
the continue with the continued
amount of hazing that we have
had it's time for us to step in
because it keeps happening and
it keeps getting worse and add
you know.
This is too empowered and help
the higher education.
Two get up handle I mean for the
lack of a better dr.
Ma'am chairs the
i'd like to see a bill that
said.
Public sports seems to engage in
hit hasing or be defined
yeah thank you mountain
thank you representative read
them romero and then chasing
thank you madame chair
representative and experts I
wanted to focus more on their
penalties as I just had some
questions on page two and three
to me madame chair it doesn't
lay out right and the penalty so
you start on page two with be
hazing and you describe what it
is and it's a misdemeanor but
then you go over to page three
and aggravated hazing which when
you define it is actually the
definition of misdemeanor
aggravated battery but then you
make it a fortunate felony so it
doesn't make a lot of sense to
me because then I would think
that if you had a hazing that
had great bodily harm you'd want
to make it a third degree felony
instant match it to with
existing criminal statutes are
manager and representative and
experts and then then the other
part that I think needs to be
specified when you put a statute
like this together hazing now
you have to go to the more
specific statute when you're
prosecuting something so I don't
want to lose an aggravated
battery felony.
Backed the statute and so I and
then or if you haze madame chair
representative and experts and
somebody is yet a force to drink
themselves to death you have a
harmer side how is that going to
play into this so I think this
just needs some work I like the
idea but I think you need to lay
out your penalties more in line
with what the criminal status
are and definitely differentiate
between the different degrees of
harm because they're they don't
play out like they do in the
criminal status and then what is
going to happen if there's a
homicide I don't want to be
diverted back to this statute
and and be forced to go under a
lower penalty statute if I were
a copper law enforcement madame
chair representative so I think
you need to work on this a
little bit I like the idea
support the idea of of doing
something for hazing because I
know it's a problem but the bill
just doesn't lay out with what
the current criminal statutes
penalties are if that makes
sense to the committee and to
guess it's just something I
would like you to think about I
I would support this bill you
know moving forward but I think
it just needs a little bit of
work so that's really the only
common I don't know if you if
you want to respond to that
madam chair representative.
Madame chair representative read
appreciate that prosecution
background we did do a pretty
good survey of the of the
statutes and there are an
alleged ones for a fourth degree
and that would be aggravated
battery upon a peace officer and
that's thirty twenty two twenty
twenty five fourth year felony
for aggregated battery on a
sports official is thirty ninety
one one and thirty ninety dot or
ninety thirty dash nineteenth
two is the fourth degree again a
battery on a health care worker
and then there is a fourth
degree fell any of aggravated
battery on a school employee and
that does follow that similar
language that we see there would
I recognize your n I see that
cause I remember the aggravated
battery misdemeanor
in my prosecution day so I know
I see we are coming from but
there is other statutes with
fourth degrees i'm and that's
where we were looking at it in
manager in
expertise I understand what
you're saying I just don't see
this crime is is jumping to the
level of those crimes
um I know curious building
aggregate battery in a piece of
sir and I think I cared at last
year that should be a second
grade value to shoot a police
officer because you're shooting
if you should regular person
it's the same are caused great
body harm but he distinct this
rises to the level of these
higher penalties but madam chair
and experts in representative so
just so i'm also clear you're
not foreseen a child or
university student to report
they don't have to report that's
correct madam chair that is
correct and then if another high
school student say in at high
school star university student
in it let's say fraternity to
whatever witnesses a hazing
incident they are not required
to report either under the spell
matter that is cracked okay I
appreciate that clarification
thank you madame church
representative remarried
thinking about i'm sure I just
first want to appreciate my
colleagues here for bringing up
a lot of the.
Questions that I had
and I think I I share the just
general sentiment that it feels
like we need to sort of tie the
riven around this and it's not
quite there yet as far as the
broadness of the language so i'm
just gonna flag the things that
I am concerned about and then
i'll probably have a few
questions with my stream of
consciousness if you well
so first just sort of dubtailing
with they think what
representative of queen brought
up is the sort of openness of
page two line wind the word
regardless
the regard regardless of whether
it's sanctioned or authorized by
that educational entity which
means like someone could
potentially just be on campus
the way that I read this
and
and I guess like we're the
barrier to that is it I attended
a baseball game or a football
game and i'm just somebody there
and now i'm engaging in hazing
and subject to the statue
I I think just wrapping the
hands around
where the confines of what we're
talking about when it comes to
that educational entity the
regardless to means like
where are we in that if I go to
school there but then this
happens when I met home you know
it where where is that.
But you can comment on that if
you like but I it
gets a bit right
you would be helpful maybe if
you go through all I mean it's
going to be rough going back and
forth okay i'll just i'll go
through my flags
thank you
sure sounds good okay great
the other question is definitely
on
a lot of just defining what
these terms mean substantial
risk on both of physical and
then of course psychological
harm how far are we going on
what psychological harm could
potentially be
and just I think drawing into
the statute will help us wrap
around what that could be
the definition of he's ink
including all of this list from
wines eight through nineteen
should be I think a definition
section on how we're actually
looking at all of these
different entities and what it
is that we're defining is
harmful versus
the elements of food liquid
alcohol you know all of these
things that could be
deemed as substances that could
be directed as hazing this
definition for me just I think
we need to split it up and
really clean up howard we're
trying to define hazing
generally.
And then i'll just go into the I
think just what was just shared
about the panel tea provisions
it would be helpful to me to
understand under you know as a
student in a university setting
you already have an oath you
have certain protocols that you
would go to should you be
subject to just the
you know being on countess being
part of that community what's
the difference between needing
to go speak to you know your
counselor or your adviser or the
folks that can hold you
accountable and when does this
come in
versus when it's a criminal
penalty and I think just that
whole line of i'm a you know
learning an experimenting and
trying to figure my office hope
out may have gotten myself into
trouble when is that criminal
and when is that just like a
violation of perhaps like the
ethical code of the of the
campus and I think those
divisions are really important
as folks are you know on their
journey to be coming you know
adults and the people are making
mistakes but are we now
criminalizing those mistakes or
is there a venue in a safe space
for on campus to have that
dialogue
and so that the criminal
penalties are quite alarming
including the reporting and the
mandatory and again i'll just
echo representative mcqueens and
discussion about the yes means
yes
and they're reporting
requirement again could be life
ruining for somebody now that
everything is online everything
is subject to inspection and
you're starting a young adult
out with that record of
something that was simply
reported as now potentially
attached to their entire life
and so and then finally.
Madame chair representative is
just the wears the educational
component of heasing and
informing students about where
that where we draw the line and
how we're attaching to this
large appropriation
what we're trying to do to
educate folks about where those
lines are drawn what he's in is
why it's unacceptable
and I would love to see an
educational component to that
too about how we prevent these
things from happening
so i'll just say that
thank you represent him chasing
commentary representative.
You're going to be hearing a lot
of issues with the bill I mean I
think you're getting a feel for
that so for us to be able to go
through everyone is going to be
pretty rig difficult so broadly
yes
madam chair representative I
just want to address the first
question you had about
regardless like if that could be
you or any other student
not necessarily no unless you
were being initiated into or
affiliated with a student club
barty so i'm looking at page one
lines twenty three.
Twenty four and twenty five so
there has to be some sort of pre
cursor relationship or
I guess i'm sort of
organization.
Madam chairman representative
real quick I wanted to take on
to the other ones there is an
ipad section for.
The date there is exceptions to
ipra for any
any of this information and then
the educational component is
section three that requires to
provide hasing prevention
education so some of them have
been at least touched on.
Oh you're through
sorry
okay representative chasing
thinking about him chair and
think a representative for none
does
we've tried a number of times to
get a hissing
in place without success and not
even sure we've made it out of
the house in the past there are
some dealers I really like about
this bill
I really like section three.
The.
Where'd your providing history
prevention education I really
really like that a lot and I
think it kind of goes well with
them the affirmative consent
fell that the house is passed
over to the senate now
to try to
help people understand what.
What they're right so what
what's available to them
the question I have were you and
if you're going to be looking at
the signal is one of the
criticisms I had heard is a lot
of these.
Specific crimes described here
are actually against the law in
other in other settings and what
i'm not sure of is if it's
permitted simply to reference at
another section of la
instead of
creating a new crime if if you
can say that this is
if that's the possibility in
pittering
just that particular.
Madame chair representative yeah
in the discussions and the
previous versions of the bill
that I looked at while in the
disc.
It became clear that the
difference really in the stores
of third party
of the educator is and that is
the new crime that has.
So madame to represent it that
that's the only new cri.
The there is also the crime of
hazing an agreement
the hazing by the student
that is alleged to have done the
act
but the part that is not a
current crime because many of
those would already be crimes
right would be the third party
liability for the.
Unch three lines fifteen through
night to wondering if that's
necessary which you're saying is
if somebody's under the edge of
eighteenth the perpetrator
should be considered for
services entered the delivery
isn't that always the case
madame chair representative
it that was part of the bill
when I was still included well
but then it became clear that
there are people that are
shipped
college.
But I just wonder none of her
that isn't.
True of any any crime that's
if the perpetrators under the
age of eighteen the prepatators
considered the juvenile statutes
madame terrible limit of chasing
um the gall of that including
that was to show that there
would be some discretion for
young children and that was
included when we had our key
through twelve where we kept it
in as my colleague is a cover
not mentioned that they're could
be children under the edge of
eighteen and so we just want to
make that clear the delinquency
act allows for
children to have their first
three messed immediate within
two years processed through um
like a pre education process
until we wanted to leave that
alone and we want to make it
clear that this type of crime
would also fall under that okay
I like that quest that response
that was going I think I just
had a one work question
did you are you gonna strike the
appropriation or is that still
on here in this does where do we
stand with money.
Um madame chair representative
we are still waiting to see this
senate version of house bill too
but if there is no appropriation
we will strike the appropriation
in the next committee.
It is going to appropriations
i'm finally here you're
effective dates sections one
three and five or this year july
first of twenty twenty four and
section two the only portal you
need to hear to plan that and I
would get that get that up
because you can't get it done by
july first
that it's very yes
madam chair yes that is correct
so the penalties will go into
effect immediately once we've
reached the new fiscal year but
it will take us about a year to
hire create training and
establish the portal
thank you very much that's all
thank you why I have represented
him brief and then
thank you madame chair and
this may
shock some people but I agree
with and share some of the
concerns of representative we
but I do think this is a very
important issue and I I do
appreciate that that this is
coming here but and I understand
it and appreciate that under
this a victim is not required to
report or another student who
sees it is not required to put
report but a coach walking
through a locker room who sees
it is required to report even
though the victim may not want
that report done could you
address that as we we talked
about at least the other night
madame representative thank you
for that it seems you are an
agreement with your colleague
there but I will again re
iterate the fact that it the
reporting requirement is not to
law enforcement this is not like
our mandatory child if you
statute it's to to report to the
online portal and you know that
online part will be created.
They will be discussing with
department of public safety how
to do that and how to fund on it
and you're right there will be
instances where victims will not
want to participate but they
will still have that opportunity
this is holding the people and
you know ran these institutions
accountable and requiring them
to say something I mean we side
in the new stories that likely
these coaches knew about this
and am I heard about it and so
we want to recognize that and we
want that training that we have
there that some of your
colleagues liked to address that
and the importance of that so
and especially if we had the key
to twelve you could see why
mandatory reporting that be
required but we wanted to leave
it and we want it to be a
message we want people to be
able to report anonymously and
so a victim who may not want to
even prosecute the case could
report anonymously and then make
that decision okay thank you and
madame chair and and
representative and experts I
have an issue also with the
effect of date because the
effective date of section one
which includes the crime of not
reporting to the online portal
takes effect july one of this
year but the online portal
doesn't isn't going to exist
until july one of two thousand
twenty five how do you reconcile
those.
Represent madame chair and
representative it would need to
be an amendment I think it was
just an overseas on our end to
not have the ma.
Okay yeah I I would definitely
suggest that because I I think
it is problematic to have
a crime to not report something
to something that doesn't exist
madam chair representative
absolutely
so people to fail here
again I like I said I like what
you're doing and where you're
going
I think it needs some clean
happens of tightening up
but you know I I support what
you're doing I just I think it
needs some some work thank you
thank you manager.
Yeah manager I mean this is very
important rather than drag it
out I think what we ought to do
is role it we get a working
group I volunteered myself in
representative read and anyone
else on the committee and you
know get with you and see if we
can fix it thank you fair enough
but I think people realize we're
working against the clock so the
likelihood that we'll be able to
bring this back and this is a
house bill
there's an appropriation there
is the senate remember we do
that there we have it's we're
buy camera system I did think
that it's likely we're going to
have a a bill that's going to be
able to work all you know by the
end of the session I just want
to alert you there is a group of
people here it's clear to me who
are interested and see this as
an important issue are happy to
work with you it's certainly
something we could bring up
during the.
Because i've been thinking i'd
like a segment on hazing in ccj
we have not discussed it and I
think it's important that we
review some of the cases that
have happened over the few years
and have a real conversation.
My suggestion as we roll it and
try to work with you moving
forward because cut many good
concepts definitely many good
concert and is an important
issue madam secretary and
representative madam chair where
we would be amenable to that I
am curious what speaker martinez
has the safe he still wants to
say it or is one hand so i'm
happy to delegate you mind
chairmanship if that's okay
we can all go home
thank you I appreciate the time
that that is going to cut out
here
at a bunch of questions but I
guess I guess I won't ask
well welcome security of the
congratulations on your
beautiful baby and thank you for
being here I just wanna express
how important this is I mean we
had a permit of consent them for
last week and it was sort of the
same conversation and some of us
were once out of the argument
others on the other side and
it's complicated stuff.
In a way comes to two
young people in college
you know in in a way it's too
bad that we've got to teach what
I think are just basic live
skills like not he's not
harassed
in the fact that.
Eighteen nineteen twenty year
olds feel.
Like there's a license to do
those things perhaps you know
i'm not sure why that is
certainly when I was in college
I would say that.
Um
I was part of suiting groups you
know I was part of different
things in
your hazing a so subjective
right I mean we heard an example
here from several queen which
you know I I would probably
disagree but it's you're right
mean some people i'm i'm sure
some people who have been made
to sing on floor nine percent of
him probably have an anxiety
attack you know and and that
that is heavy right.
I think you heard a lot of good
feedback today from from very
well intention legislators who
want to help get this through.
I would disagree on one point
the sessions you're starting
with the next four days like it
happened so if you guys figure
out a way to address some of the
concerns you hear you today in
and you find a way to bring it
back to this committee you mean
you might you must have shot but
it will take a lot of work in a
brief to to all of the members
of this committee who are
volunteered
suggestions and I volunteer
their time to help make this
bill better but it is something
that we've got to address
unfortunately I wish we didn't
you know wish kids weren't
hazing each other in college but
it's happening so we're gonna
have to step in thank you madame
chair and thank you
representative and secretary and
thank you for your hard work for
sure thank you madame chair
thank you well we are done with
urgent so we are adjourned to
and we'll be starting the four
