Uh, we already took our vote on
the Super Bowl halftime show.
Um,
So you've got the agenda, a
couple of things. Senator Souls
109 will be rolled over and not
heard today.
Um, Senator Wirth, why don't you
have your Senate bill 21 and 22
top of the agenda. Why don't you
explain what we're gonna do, you
and I've conferred, I know the
uh ranking member has expressed
some concern about the timing of
some committee subs. So why
don't you take us through that
where we're at and give us an
assurance. I'll give the
committee assurance we're not
going to act prematurely today.
No, I appreciate that, Mr.
Chair, and I did just visit with
the ranking member, uh, so there
is a sub for 21 and there's a
sub for 2.
too. Uh, we're not gonna do the
sub for 22 today. It just came
in this morning.
Haven't had time to look at it.
21 came in within 24 hours, but
we're, we're not gonna push that
through and I'll explain the
process. The 21 sub is
0.229946.4. Uh, so what I'm
gonna do today is explain kind
of in a broad lens what Senate
Bill 21 and Senate Bill 22.
do and what they're designed to
do, then we will go through and
I'll explain exactly what's in
the sub for 21.
Um
Not going to ask the committee
to take a vote on 21 because the
plan is to come back on
Wednesday and we'll have the sub
for
We have 22 different subs. We
have a sub for 22, which you,
you all have now and I want to
make sure everyone gets that and
has time to look at it also for
the audience. I want to make
sure everyone understands what
changes are in that.
Well, here 22 on Wednesday and
then the plan is to have 21 and
22 put into one sub, so it'll be
a Senate Judiciary Committee sub
for Senate bills 21 and 22. They
both deal with
Same primary issue, uh,
This, you know, I'll explain
upfront, they both come out of
the Clean Water Act, uh, and so
we'll actually have that
combined sub, which will just be
the two that we've heard
separately put into one for
mechanical purposes to come out
of this committee. So that's the
plan, Mr. Chair.
All right, let's just take a
moment and make sure everyone's
clear about that, especially
those in the audience, uh,
again, you're seeing on our
agenda Senate Bill 21 and 22. We
have two committee subs, um,
the, the sponsorsen works right.
We got the, uh, one could be sub
timely, although again, 24 hours
we're early in the session.
There's no reason to rush things
and of course, when you receive
it on a Sunday, we don't have
staff working here and so forth,
so they're, they're seeing it
for the first time, um, in, in
at least to the extent it's
changed any, um, this morning,
and so I appreciate your
At the same time, I want to make
progress with her, uh, effort
here and this is a complicated
area, complicated bill, so we'll
hear it, we'll hear your
presentation. We will hear from
advocates and opposition,
according to our rules, we'll do
all of that work today, but
there will not be a vote on
Senate 21 and then on Senate 22,
uh, we won't hear any uh
discussion or presentation on 22
at all today then, is that
right? So Mr. Chair, it's up to
you. I could certainly do kind
of upfront just an overview of
how both
bills tie together, but we won't
get into the sub for 22. I do
want to go through the sub for
21, right? And, and I, and I
would like you to uh consider
presenting at least the overview
of 22 of recognizing that we may
have some specifics on the sub
once folks have had a time to
digest it, but I do think they
go hand in glove, and it's good
to hear them together, plus we I
think we're gonna be good on
time today um and make some
progress with our agenda. We
have a, uh, 3 other bills apart
from yours that all.
Be pretty quick, I think to say
words, so let's begin then with
Senate 21. If you're ready to
go, um, we have, we do see real
quick on the opponents or
proponents. I want to thank
everybody in the room and, and
paying attention to our, our
committee rules.
Um, and honoring those committee
rules. So we have a number of
people registered in opposition
and um and then organizations in
support, which I'll, I'll read
through center work but uh go
ahead and you've got um
Experts and you've got 15
minutes.
Are you wanting to reserve
anything at all?
No, I think it's important to.
Yeah, reserve a couple of
minutes and I want and I wanna
make sure because I think I
also, it's important to explain
what the sub does up front,
because I think a lot of the
opposition, quite frankly, is
going to go away once they hear
what's in the sub.
Uh, so I'm gonna do both. So let
me just jump in. Uh, thank you
for hearing Senate Bill 21 and
22, uh, these are sponsored by
myself, Representative Ortez,
and Senator Gonzalez with me
today from the New Mexico
Environment Department Service
Water Quality Bureau.
Chief Shelley Lemon and counsel,
general counsel Zach Ogas.
Uh, so Senate Bill 21 lays the
groundwork for the environmental
environment department to
implement the federal Clean
Water Act in New Mexico,
including permitting compliance
and enforcement. This is a
federal statute that's been in
place since 1972.
Uh, what this bill does is give
New Mexico and New Mexicans
control over our water. Uh, we
are one of only 3 states now,
uh, that don't assert primacy,
all the Western states do. New
Mexico, I believe New Hampshire
and Massachusetts are the three
states that don't, uh, exert
primacy. So that means that
issues involving surface water,
uh, that's covered by the
Federal Clean Water Act. I'll
talk about that in a minute, are
being
handled by the Dallas office of
the EPA under current um
Current regulatory oversight.
So, what is the clean Water Act
do. It deals with what are known
as waters of the United States
and this term, uh,
Basically has
Within the last 2 years in 2023,
2022, the US Supreme Court in
the sackett decision
substantially narrowed the
definition of what waters of the
United States copper, and this
is why 21 and 22 are important
and need to be addressed
together. I just want to read
from the Supreme Court's
decision, uh, because the issue
is whether wetlands that were
adjacent to uh waters of the
United States free-flowing
rivers. What's
task to determine whether they
are also included in terms of
the regulatory oversight. The
court took a much narrower
approach to the Clean Water Act,
and it, and I'll quote, it said
the Clean Water Act extends to
only wetlands that are quote as
a practical matter,
indistinguishable from waters of
the United States. This requires
the party asserting jurisdiction
to establish quote first that
the adjacent body of water
constitutes waters of the United
States. In other words, a
relatively
permanent body of water
connected to traditional
interstate navigable waters. And
second, that the wetland has a
continuous surface connection
with that water.
Making it difficult to determine
where the water ends and where
the wetland begins.
Well, this interpretation in the
Sackett case basically resulted
in about 95% of the
Water in New Mexico no longer
being covered by the Clean Water
Act and Senate Bill 22 is
putting the environment
department into regulatory
oversight for those 95%, um,
that are not covered. Why is
this important?
Uh, obviously,
Water is of critical importance
here in New Mexico. Experts are
predicting 25% less water in the
next 50 years, and
Again, both Senate Bill 21 and
22, Senate Bill 21, has, has the
Environment department asserting
the primacy to be able to
implement the Water Act and then
22 expands to allow us to cover
um
What are called ephemeral
streams and waterways, so those
that are not covered, I would
say the ones that had been
covered for 50 years from 72
until 2022, those were all
covered under the Clean Water
Act, but once the Supreme Court
narrowed the definition, it
shrunk it down substantially.
So, Mr. Chair, I can explain 22
highlights and then go through
the substitute, which I think on
21, so 22 basically has two
prongs, as I mentioned, uh,
prong number one is to deal with
those ephemeral waters that are
no longer covered, uh, by the,
um, Clean Water Act based on the
Sacket decision. The second
thing that it does, uh, is
create a new, and I can go
through the specifics of that,
but given the time, I think
we'll do that through.
The experts when we get to that
point. The second thing Senate
Bill 22 does, it deals with
groundwater protection, and it
provides authority to hold
polluters, and this is different
from surface water, but whole
polluters responsible for
groundwater pollution and soil
contamination that threatens
groundwater. It establishes
authority for the water quality
control commission to issue
rules and clarifies cleanup and
financial liability for
environmental contamination. It
creates a new fund. In effect,
this is a state super fund and
there's
Lots and on Wednesday we'll talk
about how we adopt that and, and
what's put in statute versus
what's going to be done in rule.
What I'd like to do, Mr. Chair,
is just before we go out to the
audience, I want to walk through
the judiciary substitute to 21,
because this is important
because it's changed
substantially from what was
introduced. It does carry over
the two amendments that were put
on in Senate conservation.
Number one, it removes the
phrase produced water, uh, and
other language from the
definition of pollutant.
Um
That this was causing a lot of
confusion that this might be
somehow a produced water bill,
it's not, uh, so it took that
language out. It also added the
in section, subsection E and
section 3, page 5, lines 13
through 25 and page 6 lines 1
through 20. It basically lists
all of the exemptions that
currently exist under the Clean
Water Act. What we're trying to
do is have a status quo
regulatory environment and as
originally
introduced, it didn't track
exactly. We lined it up to
track.
Um, the substitute adds a new
subsection B in section 4 to
clearly state that the water
quality control commission's
rules must include a public
notice process, specifically
including Indian nations, tribes
and pueblos. Uh, this came at
the request of the Tasuki
Pueblo, uh, wanted to make sure
that notice was part of the
bill. And so that's been added.
Uh the 4th change is section 4
subsection C deletes pay and
inserts support.
Uh, there's going to be a lot of
discussion and this bill goes to
Senate Finance. How are we going
to pay for this? Uh, it
currently was designed to and
