Here.
Representative Luis.
Representative McLean.
Representing the queen is
chairing energy and here they
come if you can.
Representative night we're.
The representative green.
Representative Johnson.
Vice chair because they're not.
You're here not I'm chair.
And present.
We don't have a quorum.
Well we just.
You
should.
Representative Nibert.
Because I notice he's with us.
To.
We have a quorum.
I'm not a vice chair.
Yes.
Good morning.
She started that yes.
Welcome to Saturday and House
Judiciary we're going to get
started this morning with house
bill forty six which madam chair
will be presenting so I'll be
presiding for the first part of
this meeting at least and
potentially longer
madam chair do you have your
experts in now.
I I want to make sure that we
get we have such Jennifer
Delaney.
And Alyssa Davis.
My co sponsor.
Senator Lopez this year thank
you for joining us senator.
I also have justice Brian is a
lot of.
Office.
Sure my computer.
We repeat those names one by ten
madam chair to make sure we got
everyone.
I'm going to take this off
because we are a pod in here and
so.
That's going to make it a little
easier judge Jennifer Delaney
okay we have the yes merry and
changing I still don't see
Marianne.
I think she was having trouble
with the late
justice Bryan Adams the monitor
is with me.
And then Alyssa Davis good a
list is here.
You can
come in.
We're
gonna be a challenge even though
there's no.
Okay I believe it just allowed
Marian the capacity to speak as
well so we should have Merion
now okay I I think we're ready
then.
Please go ahead with house bill
forty six.
I wanted to just introduce the
experts along of course with
Senator Lopez judge delayed it
has been the chair of the family
representation commission that
has been working now since
twenty nineteen.
And Merion Cheney is the
consultant who has done a just
an amazing job in bringing us
all together.
illicit Davis is the she will
describe her experience with you
and she has also served on the
commission.
So we will create the office of
Family representation and
advocacy this office will
strengthen the legal
representation we are
statutorily required to provide
in the children's cuts for
children parents custodians and
guardians in all child abuse and
neglect cases.
Similar bill was introduced in
the twenty twenty one session
Senator Lopez is Senate bill one
twenty seven.
It was unanimously approved by
three Senate committees it went
three and a majority on the
Senate floor it was also
unanimously approved I believe
it was by the house Judiciary
Committee only to be left on the
calendar as we ran out of time.
The
legal representation is
currently provided by about a
hundred attorneys under contract
with the AOC we want to move
this out of the AOC because they
do not have the budget or other
resources to monitor quality and
improve representation.
As a result current legal
representation candies standard
this is been documented in
multiple studies over the last
two decades and we have been
working over the past two
decades to get to this point the
office of Family representation
advocacy will be overseen by
thirteen member family
representation at the C.
advocacy commission similar to
the public defender commission
the law they have a they oversee
the law offices of public
defender.
The office will have dependence
and I'm sorry to create policy
and budgets that will
immediately improve legal
representation the office will
have both include attorneys.
As well as contract attorneys
across the state we anticipate
that many of the current
contractors may apply to work
with this office or they will
apply to be appointed by the
office with there's a complex.
Over time the office will add
interdisciplinary legal teams to
address the conditions that
brought families into the child
abuse and neglect system K.
workers navigators and care
managers and help address issues
such as housing food insecurity
employment as well as behavioral
health issues the attorneys at
this office and
interdisciplinary legal teams
will complement the work.
Recording in progress CYFD
community providers classes and
other advocates we are part of
this community of stakeholders
who are committed to improving
outcomes for our children and
families it should be noted that
the inner discipline that Canary
legal teams are established best
practice this is recommended by
the American Bar Association.
Interdisciplinary legal teams
contribute to shorter time and
care in fact the research has
shown considerable return on
investment for New Mexico our
studies have shown that this
could amount to about five to
twelve million dollars per year.
We have the budget to transfer
into begin to strengthen these
attorneys services now money's
included the court appointed
attorney fees.
Fund excuse me the fund that
will eventually be transferred
and house bill to HSD to the
office as well as title for each
funds partially matched by the
the fund.
Will seek appropriations in
subsequent legislative sessions
to add more interdisciplinary
legal teams and to create
regional offices New Mexico
needs to do more to secure
positive positive outcomes for
families and SB forty six will
contribute to that goal the
Supreme Court the children youth
and families department the
children's court improvement
Commission The New Mexico
behavioral health collaborative
New Mexico can.
The American Bar Association
center on children and the log
and many others are in complete
support.
With that I'm going to turn the
floor over to judge the lady
who's the chair serves as the
chair of the family
representation commission which
is now
under the Supreme Court of the
state.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I actually believe
machining is going to go first
if that's okay with you and then
she'll turn it over to me I will
take my cues from you yes so
merry and training will be
first.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee and thank you for
allowing me to testify on behalf
of this committee substitute
that passed the house consumer
and public affairs committee
just a couple of days ago I have
a small consulting firm in Santa
Fe and I have been working with
numerous entities for decades to
improve quality of
representation and I've been
involved with a whole lot of the
studies that.
Have demonstrated this need in
fact the very first time we
documented the need for improved
quality of representation was
nineteen ninety five since that
time we have made modest gains
are not enough and the more
recent data point to the fact
that we still have more to do
and the data show that we have
inadequate funding we have way
too much sure no over there's
not enough oversight and quality
monitoring and in fact one of
the biggest sentences is the
location of court appointed
attorneys in the administrative
office of the courts there is
simply no way building located
in the administrative office of
the courts that we can get the
budget and resource so in
response to all the studies I
think you know that there was
the Senate Joint Memorial in
twenty nineteen it created the
task force that developed.
The plan in reported to the
legislature in twenty twenty
after that the Supreme Court
could created the family
representation commission and
that commission which I've
facilitate and judge the rainy
chairs are that commission has
done yeoman's work in terms of
creating the structure the
policy the budgets the funding
the entire plan which is
Actually quite tight and with
that I think I'll turn it over
to judge Delaney at that's okay
madam chair to talk more about
the commission and how it ended
up.
With the bill before us today
thank you.
Thank you madam chair members of
the commission as you've heard
I'm chief judge Jennifer Delaney
from the six judicial district I
have been doing work in the
children's court arena for over
the past twenty years as a
parents attorney the guardian
Adlai item are you the tourney a
foster parent a proud adoptive
parents and now is a children's
court judge it is been my
pleasure to chair the family
representation task force and
the New Mexico Supreme Court's
family representation commission
both of which are collaborative
bodies made up of of wide
variety of stakeholders
including a liaison from the New
Mexico Supreme Court children's
court judges contracted
attorneys representatives from
CYFD the law office of the
public defender New Mexico
legally in national
organizations and most
importantly people with lived
experience like Alyssa Davis who
you'll hear from today.
We also had over sixty
interested parties in addition
to committee members who joined
in to our commission meetings
and gave us input about the
outcome of the the report that
we deliver to you all and to the
statute that you see in front of
you today through extensive
research which include
nationwide review of
representation of parents and
children in abuse neglect cases
and collaboration with
stakeholders we created the
structure and the budget for the
office of Family representation
advocacy which has a thirteen
member oversight commission that
will oversee the office hybrid
Robert model of route
representation as you've heard
which will have conflict I'm
sorry contract attorneys as well
as employed attorneys as well as
inter disciplinary teams we
already have the initial budget
that you heard from
representative Cheney Chasey
from the administrative office
of the court court appointed
attorney fees fund as well as
title forty funds that the
federal government has
designated to support high
quality representation in each
of the state most importantly
what the office will do that the
administrative office the court
has not been able to do over the
past twenty years is create a
highly qualified attorney
workforce with reasonable
caseloads and decent
compensation it will provide
training for all staff to
institute quality control and
performance monitoring and it
will develop support for
attorneys which they don't have
now which includes mentors
paralegals investigators and
administrative staff as well as
access to experts it will engage
appellate attorneys can develop
collaborative interdisciplinary
teams one of the biggest things
that I know has been a concern
for a lot of parties that it
will have independence from CYFD
the rules of professional
conduct required for attorneys
to have independence in
representing these children and
parents in these cases and they
will still be required to do so
under this office I thank you
for the time at this time I will
pass it to justice of our thank
you madam commissioner Madam.
Realized and it.
Hi good morning by checking any
and members of the committee my
name's Breanna Simona I need
justice on the New Mexico
Supreme Court I'm the liaison to
the family representation
commission the children's court
improvement commission the
children's court judges
association I was a trial judge
for a decade and I just finished
my thirty years an appellate
court judge
so I have the perspective of
both when it comes to children's
court issues I want to thank
Senator Lopez and Representative
Chasey for taking on this
legislation and today I'm just
going to briefly tell you why
the Supreme Court supports this
legislation as you know we
rarely take positions on
Senate Bill this was extremely
important to us as this
committee is aware children and
young people come into care for
a variety of reasons related to
abuse and neglect and they
become involved in children's
court cases.
As judges we are tasked with
determining the best interest of
children each and every child
that comes before the court.
And as judges we want to make
the best and most informed
decision possible which requires
that all parties including
children and parents have the
best quality legal
representation.
Last year over eighteen hundred
children were involved and if
you think like cases so we're
very well represented but
something's not and many
children have cases pending too
long which means that they were
in foster care longer than
necessary their lives were in
the state of limbo longer than
necessary and their time to
adoption or reunification or
guardianship whatever permits
the eight they ended up having
took longer than necessary.
This cannot continue and neither
can the status quo.
The agency has been managing the
representation of children and
parents in abuse and neglect
cases since the early nineties.
and that's been through its
court appointed attorney program
with funds allocated from the
New Mexico legislature to
provide this representation AOC
contracts with approximately one
hundred attorneys it's unwieldy
and the AOC has neither the
staff or the structure to
monitor these contracts to
ensure quality representation.
This year he has as you probably
know has a broad spectrum of
these.
The court appointed attorney
program cannot grow in the way
it needs to to provide high
quality representation.
The New Mexico Supreme Court in
its justice partners are
committed to increasing the
quality of representation of
children and parents and
children's court cases and
achieving better outcomes for
children and their families and
child welfare matters high
quality legal representation for
children and parents and abuse
and neglect cases is critical to
ensuring due process.
And procedural fairness
improving judicial decision
making by making sure that
courts are provided with
accurate timely and complete
information about children and
parents and create better long
port term outcomes for children
and their families including
higher rates of reunification
and as I talked before reduce
time to permanent state.
House bill forty six creates the
office of Family representation
and advocacy as you know it's
very similar in its modeled the
LLP the law office of the public
defender it includes a
commission that will provide
oversight and the agency will
have budgetary independence to
request on its own behalf of
funding and.
Advocacy on it so be here I hope
we have your support today I
believe and as does the Supreme
Court and it's imperative that
New Mexico undertake the staff
to provide high quality
representations to all children
and parents in New Mexico.
Working collaboratively
collaboratively with the eyes
CYFD and other stakeholders we
will create better long term
outcomes for children and their
families including what's most
important to me which is timely
justice for children in foster
care which means reduce time in
foster care whether it be a
reunification guardians stripper
adoption Alyssa Davis will speak
next and she's an amazing and
I'm so glad to see you again
shall provide real life insight
about why it's so important high
quality representation in
children's court cases.
Thank you I'm and thank you
madam chair and members of the
committee
I am also Davis you fabricate
spent twelve years in foster
care as a child and again as a
teenager after being adopted.
I think I waited over fifteen
placed in a single year.
Nine high school changes and
have had a better relationship
or even stayed with my
biological mother and sisters.
We all have lawyers that were
communicated consistent with the
representation.
This.
Most families this opportunity
this stay together well
accessing resources that they
need
to pass this bill prevent
children from staying here is in
foster care and some never
finding permanency.
Thank you.
Madam chair we're ready for
questions.
Thank you madam chair.
I also just want to name again
that we have Senator Lopez then
as as your co sponsor I believe
and just on name that she's made
it to the panel.
We will first go to the audience
if you've if you've been
familiar with a Stacy over the
course of the session you'll see
that we will first put up a call
if you'd like to participate
you'll be asked to indicate
whether you're in favor
opposition to HB forty six so
we'll get that pull after that
we will start public comments.
We will start by asking those in
the audience that are opposed to
HB forty six should there be any
that would like to speak to
please raise your hand so
looks like so far we have
unanimous support of HB forty
six.
We have almost twenty people
here with us today in support of
HB.
HB forty six so again we'll go
to the audience now for public
comment please raise your hand
if you'd like to speak in
opposition to HB forty six he
will go to opposition first if
there's any.
Okay seeing no hands will now go
to those in the audience and
support of HB forty six.
Starting at the top we will go
to terra very high school.
Members of the committee thank
you for letting me talk speak.
I
have gone through that CYFD
where they took my children.
And.
Thank within days of taking my
children I was told that.
File something in court to keep
my children.
What they did was have my X.
rate of false restraining order
on me.
The family choir.
What CYFD that I no longer had a
case with them and they only
have been less than forty eight
hours.
I.
Thank you.
Turning off my own.
I did not have an income at all.
The of those Kerry disability
which I'm trying to get all of
because it's financially
affecting my life.
But the money for an attorney
meaning that I had to be able to
help me and now I a lot of money
like almost a hundred thousand
dollars I think.
And.
I would like
to help out with.
The only way you can get help if
if your children are in the way
of tier three of my children
were in CYFD custody and we're
given away to somebody that
might have been incident of
them.
I don't have any proper with
the.
Representation and then I was
represented by my attorney at
the time and things have gone
down hill and staff and family
court I do need an attorney I
can't afford an attorney I can't
afford to pay anybody else back.
This is really hard for me to
deal with and.
My children thank I want things
to go back to the way it was
with the appropriate services
that are needed if needed
currently I am working on myself
and I have been to do this all
on my own but I thank you for
listening thank you thank you
for sharing today or expertise
next we have Mike of that city.
Hi good morning chair members of
the committee my name is Mike
about setting and I am a policy
fellow with gold futures and we
stand in support of HB forty six
as a young child I witness my
mother struggle with my siblings
who later found herself in
protective in juvenile systems
my mom was often stressed and
confused by navigating the legal
system and accessing affordable
representation she often turn to
other parents that were in
similar situations this bill
would provide support to
children and families and deeply
stressful times with greater
systems to support families
could overcome temporary
barriers and move forward
together providing children and
families with the experts they
need gives children a better
chance of driving thank you to
the sponsors for bringing this
crucial bill forward we ask that
you support XP forty six.
Thank you next we have Karen
Witt lock.
Madam chair members of the
committee Karen what lost with
the national association of
social workers New Mexico
chapter and we think the sponsor
for putting forth this important
legislation we are in strong
support of the family advocacy
and representation act we
appreciate the involvement of
social workers repair experts on
the legal team and the power of
the multi disciplinary model of
representation that provides the
best possible and competent
support for families again we
stand and strong support thank
you.
Next we have W. secretary Galia.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee I'm that W. W.
secretary for CYFD CYFD stands
in strong support of HB forty
six for a variety of reasons
primarily that it creates the
inter disciplinary structure and
supports that attorneys need to
provide meaningful
representation of children and
families in the child welfare
system our of our current
contract system does not allow
attorneys to have the mentoring
coaching training support and
oversight that in office will
provide and this office will
also provide a model of
representation that's not been
consistent across the state
before we stand strong support
and believe that this model will
change outcomes for families in
the state and thank you for your
time.
Thank you next judge Angie
Snyder.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee I'm judge Judy
Schneider I am the chief judge
and the twelfth judicial
district which is Lincoln and
Otero counties I've done
children's court work for over
eighteen years as a guardian of
item and use the tourney and now
as a children's court judge and
I've done this work for the past
eight and a half years I am also
a member of the children's court
improvement commission and the
vice chair of the juvenile
justice advisory commission I
chaired the children's court
judges association I am here in
strong support of HB forty six
and thank Representative Chasey
and Lopez for bringing this very
important legislation forward
for all of the reasons stated by
my judicial colleagues and those
who spoke before me this morning
I urge you all for do passed
today the office of Family
representation and advocacy
advocacy will elevate this work
and ensure the strongest legal
representation for our most
vulnerable population thank you.
Thank you next Erica Sanchez New
Mexico can and.
Good morning chair members of
the committee my name is Erica
Sanchez I'm with New Mexico can
an organization that partners
with young people impacted by
foster care to improve their
transitions with our we stand in
strong support of the committee
substitute for house bill forty
six in our work with young
people coming out of foster care
we see the impact of inadequate
representation including young
people remaining in foster care
for periods longer than
necessary having numerous
negative consequences for
children and their families our
families deserve to have highly
qualified attorneys who are
properly trained have support
staff in multi disciplinary
teams are decently compensated
and receive oversight of their
work we ask that you please
support this important L. thank
you.
Next maybe later.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my
name's Mimi labor and I am the
juror.
Secretary legal representation
at the ABA Center on children in
the law I'm also honored to have
been on that Representative
legal representation task force
and on the commission that put
together all of the information
that you've been able to review
I also work with colleagues
around the country focused on.
High quality legal
representation and I can assure
you that house bill forty six
and the office of Family
representation and advocacy
would.
Move New Mexico's level of
representation for children and
families to a real leadership
role around the country we have
data to show that high quality
legal representation.
In any legal teams supported by
training and reasonable
compensation and reasonable
caseloads leads to quicker
reunification more placement
with can and less trauma for
children and families so thank
you for allowing me to speak in
strong support of this bill and
for all of the work that you're
doing.
Next race injure.
Looks like prices dropped price
if you'd still like to raise
make a comment please raise your
hand again next we'll go to
Marco Martinez.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is mark
or Martinez and I myself was in
foster care at age dot O. foster
care Wallace in foster care I
had really poor legal
representation
I just feel that if I had better
legal representation I would
have been able to be reunited
with my biological siblings or
have more business with them and
actually my time in foster care
could have been a lot better I
am a strong supporter of this
bill because.
I don't want any other young
people to have a harder time in
the system that's supposed to be
helping them and support them
through this difficult times
they're going to ask you all to
support this bill as it would
help a lot of individuals within
our communities thank you madam
chair members of the community.
Thank you and the last time we
have up is by getting here
against the rest go ahead.
Good morning madam chair this is
priced at more can you hear me
yes we can thank you
Again my name is Bryce Binger I
am the CEO the behavioral health
collaborative and I stand here
today and support both
professionally individually as
and as well
on behalf of members of the
executive departments that are
in the behavioral health
collaborative I've worked for
the last.
Probably twenty five years in
the field of child abuse and
neglect in behavioral health for
children and see this as a
critical partnership between
between the judiciary and those
who are advocating on behalf of
both their behavioral health
needs as well as that permanency
and cultural needs so I ask that
you please support this bill and
thank you so much for your time.
Thank you we are done with
public comment on H. B. forty
six madam chair is there
anything else you'd like to add
before we go to committee.
Thank you madam chair go read
had okay Committee.
Okay.
Representative Nibert.
Thank you thank you madam chair
Madam chair and and madam chair.
We have a the other bill last
night that we spent quite a bit
of time on your ball cream the
sign
general subject matter anyway
and so my my first question
would be.
how does this.
He's a legislation.
In our relate with the birds
then legislation that we heard
last night or is it a one or the
other situation.
That's a very good question
thank you madam chair
Representative Nibert.
No in fact some people were
saying to me last night will if
we passed house bill forty six
why do we need the augments
the those of us who work closely
working on this attended the
good presentation for courts
corrections and justice last
I've been trying to member was
August or September but
That is a totally different
functions this is like.
A look the law offices of the
public defender if you will so
that it's like those who were
involved in this system would
have been a turning on.
Appointed for that I didn't
mention this last night because
I told you that.
I had met with some of your
folks in Travis county about a
terrible situation there and I
told them that I believed.
in addition to other potential
solutions that we discussed and
we will talk about it on that
for CYFD when I visited with
them but I one of the things I
said is those children were not
well represented.
They didn't have an attorney
who.
Was advocating for their best
interests when they were saying
I don't want to go home I feel
unsafe.
And so that's the relationship
that I see and I think I also
told you that in the R. told the
committee last night and
Representative Fajardo
that I I've spent I spent more
than eight years actually
litigated
Vigorously against CYFD
sometimes and
I wish there probably have been
another way to get somebody's
attention it depends on the the
county that you're in and and so
forth so I don't see
a conflict and I don't see a
solution by.
This is not the solution to the
on that issue the on that issue
is not the solution to the
That need for high quality legal
representation I think.
Both kind of see look at it and
improve department which is the
goal of the secretary and this
offense providing high quality
legal representation and
figuring out the best way to do
it but for CYFD as all
strengthening the whole system.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you madam chair the of.
Well what's what's let me just
get the Roswell situation that
out of the way because it really
You know it's it's on my heart
but I don't think it thank you
for all those baby this
discussion as I understood the
Russell are it's not the Ross
was really dexter Hagerman area
but the Travis county situation
All right I was under the
impression having talked to of
our local class so that that the
decision rendered by CYFD to
return that item for back to the
parents.
Was really not far enough along
in the system to really engage
the attorneys so you know I
don't I don't know where the
attorneys really come in because
as you know this is our.
A distance from from my our
practice of law
but it was my understanding that
the only.
People there were basically the
because of all of tier of the a
sheriff's deputy and maybe a
representative from the DA's
office that were discussing the
matter with CYFD as to why that
infants should not be returned
to the to the.
Current so I'm not sure was far
enough along in the system where
all the sudden attorneys will be
representing our.
The parents and and others in
connection with that I suppose
that would be it further on down
the line but
It ultimately resulted in the
tragedy which has our sense that
time has
Because both Representative
Townsend and I your baby
have to learn a lot more than
then we what otherwise would
have learned and in this
particular area
that that I was totally
unfamiliar with until about
three months ago so I approached
both both pieces of legislation
with a keen interest and I
approached both pieces of
legislation with it looks to me
like these are honest efforts.
To try to address what I learned
last night is is a critical
problem it's not just a Chavis
county problem apply understood
the testimony correctly last
night that the this this is not
an isolated and it that was not
an isolated incident and yeah
my.
Counties that I represent it it
is much broader than that and so
I applaud the Sanchez last night
I applaud you as a sponsor to
today to bring forth legislation
that.
Hopefully we will get us to a
better place in dealing with.
Our children who are in the most
unfortunate of all situations.
And to me
Taking steps forward to protect
those children in the Travis
county K. and M. for
it is something that we need to
our advance and to collectively
put our minds together to to
tackle this problem and not just
a are not just turned a blind
die and let the situations to
continue to occur so so I thank
you for for bringing that
forward
my mic.
A yes.
I look at this legislation and
and so I I see where this
commission is going to be
responsible for possibly
appointing multiple attorneys to
represent diverse interests is
that accurate.
madam chair I'm madam chair and
representative either the
attorney's.
Would be in the office employed
by the office.
let me just say that when I was
doing this work I'm not doing it
right now but I was in Sandoval
county in the Leinster county
and in those counties when.
I was awarded it with the
request for proposals I wanted
to contract and there were
several of us in the Santa Fe
County
pool of court appointed
attorneys when it would come up
women please assigned to
Representative is there a mother
a father or a grandmother to put
into the custody of the child
was.
For a used.
Or a group of children so if the
children were under the age of
fourteen.
And there might be as many as I
I had a case with five children.
And the landscape County I was
there only continent wide.
And then one of them became
turned fourteen and I suggested
that she that her own internet I
I use attorney and because at
that point the internet is to
advocate for what the wants and
then in that case the
the father and mother each had
attorney says you have responded
internet just for the adults you
have the internet is for the use
and guardians of light and for
the children so they would all
be in this office and one of the
things I we talked about in C.
pack is that it's entirely
possible that there will be some
conflicts because not parents
aren't necessarily always
aligned indicates and so there
has to be at the Chinese wall
between the tornadoes for the
the attorney for the parents
they have to be separate and if
the user.
Want something and this whole
mom contemplates a continued
A continuation of the contract
attorneys on the outside just
like the public defender to us
but what it does have that the
with the AOC cannot do now is it
would monitor the quality of the
contractors.
Now nobody can do that the judge
the judge could complain.
Which I hope some of the judges
have complained about some of
the attorneys but there's no
methodology for.
The quality so on the whole
model it's it's not.
All the people who represent.
All internet to represent people
in this system will not be
employed at the office of Family
representation there will be
contractors still so that's that
that's who it is I'm I'm hope
that I answered your question
that I'm not sure if I forgot
some of it.
Thank you madam chair and and.
Now my my but for just a
That this effort is to.
As I stated.
Representative if I'm wrong.
Is to provide legal
representation and ensure that
the child Representative.
And.
Possibly the parents are like
waters Representative
which is a different
Situation than what we have at
the present time.
R. so so.
If I read it correctly the the
the child will receive legal
representation from this office
will not.
Yes but the children receive
legal representation now by
court appointed attorneys.
You
madam chair and then this office
would expand that because legal
representation would be provided
to the our parents as well well
the parents get legal
representation now the question
is the quality and the
consistency throughout the
state.
Well wait wait to talk about
quality of will will use me as
an example are it in December I
was appointed by the judicial
district to to Representative I
believe a pair of.
As you well know I am not
qualified in this area of the
law to to engage in that
unfortunately the firm by then
we contract out with a private
attorney to take our place with
those appointments are made so
that happens automatically
because a parent or a child
would not want the
are representing them in these
types of cases are so what
you're saying is that if we.
Have this commission the
commission has a mechanism by
which you can ensure that the
attorneys either.
Else as our caller maybe that's
the wrong word but in house for
those are private attorneys who
are contracted turns that they.
The.
Subject to some review and that
you ensure that the those folks
are being properly trained but
they are competent to handle
these types of cases and that
they are actually as well as we
representing the interests of
their clients indicates is out
what I am to understand.
It is a is that a accurate
understanding of how this.
I'm folds yes I'm sorry maybe
you didn't hear me I I suggest
you're right okay now I do I did
not hear risk okay
so.
So you know it.
If I can liken it to yeah my
simple mind to an existing
situation this would be alive
maybe the public defender's
office and child.
Our.
Abuse and neglect it's very much
so okay.
That helps me we have a better
understanding of the.
Madam chair of.
We we have.
Have have a little bit of a
discussion on maybe some
language that but I would like
to see at and let me just say
In my mind.
This whole effort.
The effort of what we're trying
to do here is to.
Advance the best interests of
the children and I think that
was true with respect to the
legislation we heard last night
and it's my hope that this
legislation is also to advance
the best interests of the of the
children because frankly I have
no.
Separately.
For parents who abuse and
neglect their children I'll just
get that out front I have those
separately for.
This whole effort needs to be
focused on the children and
their best interests I'm not
saying don't represent the the
parents of the they're entitled
to representation but the whole
effort why we're engaging in
this discussion is to make sure
that the best interests of the
children are of.
Our advance in whatever whatever
a program we put together.
And so
I would really like to see some
acknowledgement of that in the
statute and I I don't see those
words and I understand that
there are attorneys who will not
be advancing the interests of
the children because they
themselves are zealously
representing the parent who is
representing someone who is
going to try to secure the best
interest for their client.
But the over arching.
Concern.
The public policy concern the
interest of the state.
Is to ensure.
I guess a couple things number
one the parents constitutional
rights are violated number two
that the best interest of the
children are more so I would
suggest to you that are this
commission.
Thank.
In section parade which begins
up the bottom page to all one
seventeen.
This this commission is is
created this offices created and
then it has some duties
associated with the number on
page.
Page three.
Wine Hey.
Seven eight.
It says that it's going to
develop and this is the office
it's going to developing
continuous continuously approved
practice models and standards
based on child welfare best
practices.
Again that nice language.
But I sure would like to see are
some language it says after the
work practices.
To ensure the best interest of
the child.
The best interest budget for all
of the child our our.
Our.
Once but I can't read my
writing.
Our.
Secure
Because I think that's the
overarching goal of this we're
we're doing this to make sure
that the children in the state.
And this whole process is being
set up so the best interest of
the children our server
And so I'd like to see that
language put in there and
frankly if it were there I would
jump on board with you on this
legislation and I'm I feel
strongly that that that should
be in this M. S. statute I
disagree that it would do
anything.
To compromise the zealous knows
by which the attorneys who are
part of this process
representing the parents of
would I don't think it would
compromise their.
Ability or there are.
The strength of their arguments
or anything else but the office
itself.
This entire this entire
mechanism that we're setting up
is is really to serve of the
children that are being.
Tremendously impacted by these
issues that frankly I wish we
weren't having to deal with.
It's just
important to me that that that
we we would have to deal with
these issues Representative but
we do we say basis not just in
Travis county we see cases
throughout the state according
to the testimony last by and we
have to do something so I would
ask that you consider that
seriously consider that are and
if you reach a point where are
you can insert that language R.
I would I would like to join
you in this effort.
And I sincerely mean that so
madam chair of I think it's a
step forward I.
Want to get back to the initial
question on house.
And that was the relationship
between this.
Office and the ombudsman
legislation.
If I if I can view both pieces
of legislation at one time and I
know you're not sponsoring the
other piece of legislation but
if I if I you both of them.
All right together it seems to
me that there is some synergy
Madam chair of madam chair would
choose some synergy between the
two pieces of legislation or do
you see that one really a would
not be needed yes this
legislation were.
Placed on the wall.
Madam chair and representative I
thought actually you asked that
question earlier.
And I'm.
What will my response was my
response is based on what I
thought that I the question I
thought you asked which is.
We need to improve the
department and the secretary is
committed to that in changing
the culture we need this office
to ensure the quality of legal
representation and we need I
think.
Program.
They aren't.
They one does not obviate the
need for another.
I apologize if you're I have our
asset before and maybe didn't
get the full breath but I I do
appreciate that response because
I think you're saying that
similar to the way I'm seeing
that is that.
This.
It would be so legislation
really deals more with the legal
side and have taking care of
some of those deficiencies that
we're seeing in the system the
bugs been program really is more
of oversight and may be
supplying some some
of our feedback to the secretary
into the department R. as to how
things could be done differently
R. it really doesn't get into
the legal legal type prospects
of outside order so I think
it's.
Possible for us to support both
pieces of legislation I don't
see them as mutually exclusive
and think that they can go
through the process together and
I would really our.
Really like to see us do
something are significant so
that we don't see.
In the papers and read a our our
see it on TV that we have these.
Representative H. conditions
continuing throughout the state
the.
We we.
We we do have a a system that
appears to be broken I think
that these these two things are
are.
Matters that we just take a step
forward and.
What I'll some issues to be
addressed that are currently not
being addressed and our bank
it's is
but I can't be a step in the
right direction but I.
I I do implore your to consider
the amendment I'll be happy to
make the amendment if you would
wish Burke the.
At least want to think about it
R. during the rest of the debate
thank you madam chair thank you
madam chair.
Madam chair I wouldn't
Representative night or not have
been texting and I and I don't
want to go back and forth any
further but it would like him to
hear from the judge about his
proposed amendment and then she
can just explain it will go on
to the next person and thank you
and I can continue talking about
it later.
J. eliminate.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I appreciate this
opportunity so the the
children's code has current
provisions under which the
guardian Adlai item is required
to look at the best interest of
the children and to provide to
the court what is in the
children's best interest and so
there was already a separate
section in the children's code
that requires that a guardian ad
light items we cannot put it in
this piece of legislation
because as we heard from
Representative Chasey it will be
the office will Representative
parents and use and they are
also directed in a similar
section to the guardian Adlai
item section that requires them
to represent the direct interest
of their other client and so if
we were to add in here that
policies look at the best
interest of the child we would
be asking the attorneys to
violate their representation of
parents and use and kids in
extended foster care since now
foster care goes up to twenty
one to so those attorneys would
be required to violate their
duty as required in the
children's code now if they were
to have the best interest of the
child in each one of those
policies what what I can say is
that the office will look at
what our evidence based best
practices with regard to
representation for children you
young adults in extended foster
care and for parents and ensure
that they are all zealously
advocated for which isn't
happening under our current
system now.
Thank you.
Madam chair if I may respond to
the judge in our our I learned
early on it's not good to get
our argument with the judge but
I do think that in
In the direction provided to
this office in this legislation.
That you can find that same.
Overarching goal without
compromising the integrity of
the
of attorneys who who may serve
in a role representing one
client or or the other because
this is really directed to the
office the guardian Adlai item
is any of them are really part
part of the state so you know
the fact that the best interests
of the child are are in the
guardian Adlai item statute
doesn't do anything for for this
particular legislation and I
think that that the that this
office in developing and
continuously and continuously
improve practice models and
standards based on child welfare
best practices.
Could be enhanced by stating to
ensure the best interest of the
child are secured because.
That's why we're doing this
whole thing will be.
Were were engaged in this debate
because the best center so the
children are not being met in
that state
and that's why we're we're here
today and so putting that and
that subsection three on on page
three.
Of section three I guess that
story what B. three B. are very.
I think is it is a step forward
because it recognizes why this
office even exist and I I do
feel strongly about that.
And like I told the madam chair
I would even sign on to this
legislation if if if you could
see fit to put that in a it's
not important so thank you madam
chair and thank you judge for
for your explanation but I don't
think that language in the
guardian Adlai item statute has
anything to do with what we're
doing here today and that is the
overarching concern that faces
us today thank thank you madam
chair.
Thank you next we have
Representative Eli thank you
madam chair madam chair I it's
interesting because I was going
to talk about another subject
which I will talk about but I'll
respond to that as a lawyer that
is very familiar with conflicts
here's the problem.
The problem is if you have a
statute that tells the lawyers.
The.
Sorry I muted my can you hear me
now.
Sorry about that so I I in
talking about this issue if you
if you at if you have a statute.
In this section of the act.
What you're doing is you're
telling the lawyers do you have
to make an independent judgment
as to what's in the best
interests of the children your
client may not agree that that's
in the best interest of the
child so now you have a conflict
between the lawyer that is
trying to follow what their
client believes is in the best
interest of the child but has
also been told by statute that
they have to make an independent
judgment as to what's in the
best interest of the child that
is going to create not just a
headache but in my mind
something that would lead to
something that is very different
not with the CYFD system well
with our legal system lawyers
have to act with loyalty and a
fiduciary obligation to their
clients and you don't want to
have our legislature tell
lawyers gatt you can't do that
you got it you got to do
something independent I don't
like that language and I don't
think it belongs here I'm I'm
only familiar
with some of this because of the
work that my wife did before she
went on the court that she had
some involvement some appellate
cases involving best interests
the child and I'm satisfied that
that is the guiding principle of
everything we're doing I do see
however that there is a
distinction between this bill
and the bill we heard last night
this bill are specifically has
the comments from CYFD that they
are fully supportive of it
because they want to have an
aggressive and confident
our representation of all
parties involved we're as what
I'm worried about with the bill
last night more looked at after
what I thought was an excellent
discussion for many of the
committee chairs was you know
that's one we're CYFD with a
brand new secretary that seems
to be.
Aye all accounts be doing a
great job in a very difficult
and frankly busted Department is
starting to move in a proactive
way and she's got Casey family
the program that was discussed
at a CCJ with the report coming
out in June and so I'm worried
and I'm just alerting everyone
that when it comes to the other
bill I am concerned that in that
bill we're overlaying some extra
bureaucracy at a time that CYFD
might not benefit from that and
frankly children might not
benefit right away that in this
budget and program seems totally
appropriate to me I just like
the timing but on this bill this
seems to complement what it is
everybody's looking for which is
we want as many competent people
in this system as possible and
particularly lawyers and madam
chair Madam chair of the sponsor
I'm looking to you to see if if
I said that correctly is this
are an approach that CYFD is
supporting.
Madam chair representative Ely
yes I'm we do have state wide to
support I mean I'm assuming I
said that correctly because they
they want to have competent
representation right that's what
I'm reading the analysis.
Madam speaker and representative
Ely the way I think of that is
the prosecutors we need
competent prosecutors.
Prosecutors need competent
public defenders or criminal
defense attorneys or otherwise
their case falls apart on
appeal.
Same here.
Everybody needs to be competent
so that when a decision is made.
It's appropriate and is elected.
It doesn't get overturned.
Yeah I mean I I I'm madam chair
and madam chair I appreciate
that I mean I I see this just
like I see the criminal justice
system it's a system
everything's got to work and to
properly funded and properly
reviewed
in order for that to work I
agree with Representative
Representative night bird that
the best interest of the child
is should be paramount but in
this situation I think you're
this is I in my judgment it's a
mistake to be sticking it into
the system it would be like
telling the public defender's
you know you gotta be putting in
statute things of the public
defender can't be focused on you
you want lawyers to be focused
on their clients and the judge
ultimately will make the
decision as to what's in the
best interest of child I mean I
hope I'm saying that correctly.
Does that make sense madam chair
madam chair.
Well it does to me madam chair
having practiced law.
We we are when we're in court.
Presenting apparent.
The judge is.
Just focused on the children.
Sometimes he is a client of
mine.
Your son is telling me.
He wants to be with you but not
if you're using.
Right to my clients.
So my client.
The best course for him is for
the judge to be focusing on what
the kid wants because the judges
telling them exactly what
legislators to do.
So and that's why these cases go
that makes sense to me all right
thank you madam chair madam
chair.
I don't see any other hands
what's the pleasure of the
committee.
Madam chair still if I can I'll
be glad to move it to pass.
I'm happy to move a do pass if
it's more appropriate madam
chair.
I will take the best motion for
Representative Chandler.
With the second.
To call the roll please.
Representative Alcon yes.
Representative Armstrong.
Yes.
Representative Chandler yes.
Representative Cook yes.
Mr speaker yes.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Lewis.
Yes.
Representative McQueen.
Representative nightmare.
Representative green.
Representative Townsend.
Like to explain more about.
I share convention yes.
Madam chair.
Does Representative Townsend
need to explain his brokers.
Sure.
Madam chair.
I think.
This bill does not do in the I
think this bill.
Should the amended.
I think there's much to be done
in CYFD.
And I see this bill.
Is really not.
What I was hopeful that it would
do to protect children in the
future thank you.
I am voted nine to one we have a
two passed on house bill forty
six.
Thank you very much madam chair
just continue.
Representative Chandler I'm
going to.
Let you continue to preside
thank you sponsors and advocates
out today and congratulations on
you do passed next we have house
joint resolution one as amended
I believe we have both Sanchez
Representative Chandler and
Representative also with us
today are you already for your
joint resolution.
Yes madam chairman I'll defer
first to Representative Allison
okay Representative also hi
there experts that you'd like to
join with us today.
Good morning madam chair.
I don't see anybody on my screen
so I'll just go ahead and start
I believe that my expert witness
is going to be my co sponsor.
Thanks.
I wish I had the LA Quincy to
introduce this bill and she
does.
Then thank you.
The
one poses a constitutional
amendment allowing an exception
the state and because of basic
structure profit.
In water wastewater services.
Other services
then your please don't you on on
the on just get started.
The COVID.
Highlighted huge based school
services in New Mexico.
Rural areas including our
nation's tribal lands and
pueblos it is.
To take to fix these inequities
even in twenty twenty two tens
of thousands of families in New
Mexico still live with without
basic utilities like the
internet water and electricity
and it's high time we change
that.
I believe with the onset of the
pandemic it highlighted a lot of
deficiencies that we have in New
Mexico as a state for example
one of the first requirement on
getting exposed to the pandemic
was to reduce the term you need
to frequently wash your hands
that to us as a indigenous
nation was of.
Easier said than done because
some of the schools in my
district have to haul water
seventy miles one way and when
they get their water the load up
a truckload of barrels and
sometimes three four maybe even
five drums of of water so they
have to come.
And serve that in order to
minimize the trips and they get
some of these waters directly
from from Wales and you don't
know help your they are so that
was a hindrance to some of my
people who have to we're
required to wash frequently.
And then the second was of
social distancing.
They were we were told to social
distance and minimize contact
with one another again that was
easier said than done because
most households in my district.
Because of lack of electricity
you have no electricity you
can't have a refrigerator so if
you don't have a refrigerator
you have to make more frequent
trips to the.
To the urban sides of the border
towns to replenish your supply.
And then the third requirement
was in order that we slow down
the spread of the pandemic we
need to close to schools and
require the students to
You virtual learning.
Yes estimate that requirement
not knowing that they're a rural
areas and limited to almost no
internet.
I was campaign.
I would make a quick stop at one
of the sandwich shops like the
Burger King in the thank
Donald's and I would see small
clusters of children eighteen
year olds teens they would be
huddled in the corner with their
laptops and I used to think that
these children today.
They have time to play games
they don't.
I have responsibility for it.
Little did I know that they were
there use the free internet do
their homework and some of these
children were driving
forty miles that's the nearest
distance forty miles one way to
get to a McDonald's or Burger
King you're on the internet some
of them even seventy miles is it
to get the same distance as
their parents into that water so
That.
COVID nineteen the onset of the
COVID nineteen early up to the
surface.
We're eight the line last year.
I found out that was expressed
in the problems experienced on
indigenous nations that a lot of
rural New Mexico shared the same
concerns as our indigenous
nations.
What the rest of.
New Mexico was pretty much urban
but to my surprise a lot of it
was still rural and I have a lot
of people only from all over the
state want to jump on their on
H. B. line back then so I know
we're gonna get a lot of support
four eight zero one of this
year.
It hurt.
Because of the lack of.
As.
They.
Cannot cook or heat our homes
and the lack of running water.
Also creates health issues.
Especially for.
Rural communities are.
Is
that what Representative in
suburban.
New Mexico takes for granted.
When I saved a lot of people
take things for granted it's
nice to water your lawn and make
your home look nice but in a
sense your waste and water
precious water because as we say
in the images communicates Water
is lie we need to the.
If this amendment.
H. A. R. one will allow the
state to invest.
All the bricks X..
Basic infrastructure necessary
for life thank.
Just a very quick short recap of
that madam chair I would like to
ask if my co sponsor can add to
that thank you madam chair.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you co sponsor representative
Allison I I think the eloquent
one our team is Representative
Allison I'm the the legal do
here to talk a little bit about
the constitution and and just
put some perspective on that
this bill as my colleague said
he is in would amend the what we
often call the anti donation
clause of the New Mexico state
constitution that anti donation
clause certainly and definitely
does serve an important purpose
and it certainly does protect
public funds and that's what its
intent was however it's long
been recognized that there it is
appropriate to amend the
constitution to serve important
public policies it has happened
in the past so for example there
are exceptions to with that
provide for thank for programs
to students of healing arts.
Certain veteran type programs
economic development programs
that's often referred to as that
under that is the underpinning
of the Lida Act it's cetera and
these exceptions were deemed to
be significant enough to warrant
an exception to the anti
donation clause so that the
state and in some cases local
governments could could provide
direct support using
appropriated monies if as needed
to support the goal of the
particular exception well in
this case I can't think of a
more important exception to the
anti donation clause then
supporting New Mexico families
rural communities students
people in need of health care.
Because what I will do it will
allow the state to invest in
infrastructure that will support
broadband access to heating
water and electricity and I
can't think of a public person
purpose that is more important
than that and
And I would urge the committee
to support us as you did last
year when we presented a similar
version of this bill to you
thank you madam chair.
Thank you representatives we are
soon going to public comment to
the poll I just wanted to
announce very quickly in case we
have audience members watching
other sponsor did roll H. and to
I guess today evening so we will
not be hearing house memorial
two today I'll just in case
anyone's listening and watching
H. M. T. is not happening back
to this important resolution in
front of us H. chair one in our
committee we will first put up a
poll and if folks in the
audience would like to respond
either in favor or in opposition
to legislative resolution we'll
get started there before we go
to public comment Representative
Allison.
So madam chair I think a I was
listen to earlier presentation
and member meeting and they had
shared of the status of a bill
that was run last year and when
we ran with house joint
resolution nine last year on
October the second it was sent
to the transportation public
works and at the conclusion of
that meeting we had a do pass
recommendation and then it
further went to the house
judicial and that was also a do
pass with the substitution and
then it was passed on.
The house and in the house it
was passed forty four to twenty
four and then it went to the
Senate rules and the Senate
rules committee also recommended
if you pass on that and then
they went to the Senate Indian
rural of cultural compare
affairs and I understand it had
a due pass recommendation but it
just ran out of time to put a
vote on it or just for your
information I would like to go a
little bit further and get it
where I can say can I get
unanimous support for this since
the
one of us and I'm so we're going
to the public now we're will
first put up our pull if those
with us on this you would like
to participate please indicate
whether you are for or against
H. chair one.
Okay I will let it run a few
more seconds we first when we go
to the audience are going to go
to those in opposition to H. J.
R. one so I'm gonna ask folks if
you're with us today and would
like to speak against age share
one to please raise your hands.
It looks like we have
almost ten people participating
today and they are in a hundred
percent hundred percent in
support of H. R. one I'm gonna
look for opposition first if you
are I'm here to speak against H.
chair one please raise your
hand.
Seeing no hands raised am going
to go to those that would like
to speak in support of age chair
one.
Starting with and McCartney you
will have one minute please
watch the timer on the screen.
And McCartney's hand has been
dropped and if you did want to
make a comment just get your
hand back up otherwise next
we're going to Bob de Niro.
Yes thank thank you madam chair
of this is Bobby nail director
of external affairs for eighteen
T. in New Mexico and I'm
speaking today in support of
house joint resolution one want
to thank Representative Allison
and Chandler in the other
Sanchez for bringing this
legislation eighteen T. as a
provider of wireless broadband
in New Mexico we are continually
expanding our network to reach
more homes and businesses and
we're building a dedicated
network for first responders we
do want to be part of the
broadband solution eighteen T.
eight H. J. R. one is needed if
it's passed in a brace by the
voters we think this legislation
will help the state move faster
in getting affordable broadband
out to places in the state that
don't have a today the bill
would give the state and our
local governments something that
other states have already and
that's just one other good
option investing money in more
wired and wireless broadband
across New Mexico thank you very
much madam chair.
Thank you next we're going to
Dick Wilkinson.
Good morning madam chair thank
you my name is David Wilkinson
good morning members of the
committee I'm here on behalf the
Democratic Party of New Mexicos
veterans and military families
caucus and I'm a member of the
committee for veterans out of
the city we stand strong
supported H. J. R. one in the
fact that our veterans that live
throughout the state are often
in the populations that the
sponsors of this bill It
mentioned we stand to benefit
the veterans around the state
especially in rural populations
with expanding access to
broadband and essential services
many of these folks are on fixed
incomes and have limited
resources and they do struggle
to maintain these more advanced
access to resources such as
broad grant internet and that
enhances their chances to get
medical appointments and other
critical services for their
veterans needs we stand and
support and thank you for
listening to me today.
Thank you next we have steep
wise bird.
Hello madam chair and members of
the committee I am a member of
the deep PNM rural caucus and
also at three fifty New Mexico
real advocacy
we have not actually considered
this a joint resolution so I
can't speak on behalf of those
organizations but as an
individual I do strongly support
this resolution it the anti
donation clause well having a
good intent in practice does get
in the way of a lot of good
programs for rural residents of
New Mexico so I personally I do
or urged support of this joint
resolution I think the sponsor
for bringing it up thank you
very much thank you next we have
Charles good marker.
Madam chair members of the
committee this is Charles good
marker I'm speaking on behalf of
the New Mexico Public Health
Association support of H. here
are one we want to thank the
sponsors.
Everyone knows our public health
consequences even during normal
so called normal times much less
during the pandemic for any
homes or communities without
these essential energy water and
wastewater services internet
also impacts public health issue
can't get current information on
where to get a COVID tester with
the latest provisions in the
health emergency how can you
keep your family healthy but a
lack of internet is also part of
an unhealthy circle of course
the lack of internet affects
educational attainment for
students throughout the state
very directly but also
educational attainment also
affects health outcomes and vice
versa so a lack of internet
hurts public efforts to improve
both health outcomes and to
increase the effectiveness of
public education spending.
As a judge noted in the Yazzie
Martinez case we urge a yes vote
on HDR one thank you very much.
Next we have John but all.
On the okay yes madam chair this
to John but outline founder and
the CEO the sacred wind
communications we started of
about fifteen years ago
providing broadband and voice
services to underserved areas of
the Navajo Nation in our service
territory we have about eighty
eighty five percent coverage of
broadband outside on Navajo
lands in our service territory
anywhere from sixty to eighty
percent of arms do not have
broadband telephone service as
we attempted to expand it even
farther into other rural areas
of New Mexico we've run head on
into this anti discrimination
clause attempting to strike
partnerships with local
governments and we've had have
had a very Hey
poor success rate in in doing so
in even as small example of a
problem we run into we attempted
to do it a power swap with the
state of New Mexico just a
trading.
Equal amounts of us space on
towers so that we could reach
our.
One served of peoples in various
parts of New Mexico without any
further infrastructure the one
construction and we haven't
turned the corner on that
problem yet and we haven't
received in over a year any
positive feedback from the state
on that so we strongly support
the passage of of this HBO are
thank you.
Thank you next we have Marco
Gonzales.
A good morning madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Marco Gonzalez and I'm the
registered lobbyists for Verizon
we want to thank both Sanchez
for bringing this a critical
issue to the forefront of the
legislature they've both been
really light hearted in terms of
addressing done New Mexico's
broadband.
Needs there was a excellent
vetting of this issue during the
insurance this is a joint
resolution appropriately
addresses the issues that were
of concern of rising
appreciates the sponsors to
bring it up for we supported and
for many of the comments that
have already been mentioned as
well we support it
wholeheartedly thank you madam
chair and members of the
committee.
Thank you next we have get a Pat
taking.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Gary Payton
representing the coalition of
sustainable communities New
Mexico our coalition is
comprised of the mayors and
councillors and appropriate
staff from the cities of
Albuquerque Los crucis Santa Fe
Santa Fe County Los Alamos
County we strongly support this
proposal because of its impact
you've heard specific references
already to potential broadband
expansion but it goes far beyond
that it has implications for the
expansion of the community solar
act passed by the legislature
recently in terms of potential
offering of land that could be
used for supporting a community
solar project it has
implications for the ability to
support additional energy
efficiency projects for the
multiple reasons that have been
cited here today our coalition
strongly urges members to be
able to support H. A. R. one
thank you very much.
Thank you and appreciate all the
offering in state public comment
and now for our committee.
Representative Alcon.
Right thank you madam chair and
not.
Representative Allison I really.
Support I just want to know that
I am in support of your
resolution I think this is
something that is needed during
the time that the lock down
started and they are.
Navajo Nation.
We found the getting a lot are
just laying Water your homes.
Was almost non urban it was
horrible it on the Navajo Nation
yet hope people we're just
twenty feet away from the
restores of water and that
couldn't connect just because a
write aways or stuff like that
and they're just no way that
they could get everything done
during this time and these are
people that are living I mean
you got to three families living
in one house and some of these
instances and I got a lot of
calls on this during that time
mostly because I ask forum.
The doctor was the speaker of
the the Navajo Nation who lives
in my district and I tried
different ways and approaches to
help some of the people are not
district was in DC at all I can
say.
But I don't want to say this
okay I do want to say this and
this is just.
You know if this bill of this
piece of legislation would have
done to House stacks.
A house that it would be and
said that we know that this is
needed but we don't need to do
state funds to do this.
So I just wanted to know that
that I think you're lucky that
the this bill did not go to the
next community and I'm really
hoping
the vote for this bill right now
thank you Representative
Allison.
Thank you your Egolf.
Do pass.
Thank you IDC's Representative
Eli would also like to weigh in
on this Representative Eli you
up with the second I'm I'm all
the second madam chair thank
you.
Thank you Committee do we have
further discussion.
Seeing no hands rates let's go
to roll call.
Representative Alcon yes.
Representative Armstrong.
Yes.
Representative Chandler.
Yes.
Representative Cook.
Mr speaker yes.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Lewis yes.
Representative McQueen.
Representative Nibert.
Representative Rehm.
Representative.
No.
Yes.
Madam chair.
By a vote of eight to one we
have a due pass on H. J. R. one.
Thank you very much H. chair one
as amended thank you.
You madam chair thank you to the
committee.
The shares Sanchez I'm the last
item we have for today it was a
rollover from yesterday evening
I believe HB ninety nine.
Will.
Ninety nine.
I don't know how we did not no
no no never mind I I I got my
nineties mixed up.
We see airport H. B. I. H. B.
ninety nine.
The.
My apologies I don't remember
who the sponsor that was I'm
looking it up now
Representative lane and Hochman
Vigil chair Hey thank you
Representative Eli.
Do we have the attendees that
state.
I don't see the representatives
with that's I will send them a
quick message we do have
Representative friendly with us.
Representative Ryan main are you
ready on H. B. ninety nine.
Yes madam chair and I have I
want actually to people I need
to point if you do not mind
thank you what.
Our Chief Justice the hill and
Matteo page.
Just give is excellent make sure
they're in with us.
We had chief justice B. hill in.
Now we have put their page I'm
go head Representative with HB
nineteen ninety.
I'm sure.
R. I will be brief I know this
committee had a long night last
night is watching with and with
a bag of popcorn watching the
show and we have a floor session
coming up so we we actually
shorten our presentation quite a
bit so what this bill does is
that essentially there's two
questions to this bill the first
creates a fourth degree felony
and the second portion creates a
new misdemeanor now regarding
the first section what it does
is it makes it unlawful to
threaten a judge or her affect
her immediate family members
with great bodily harm.
to prevent the judge of doing
his or her job or retaliate
against the judge as a result of
action taken by the judge in
court regarding the second
section what it does is it makes
it unlawful to share the
personal information of a judge
in order to cause harm to the
judge ordered tried to interrupt
the judicial proceedings in my
mind I I think there's two
rationales for bringing this
bill and why I think there's a
need for it and and the Chief
Justice will speak more I think
probably to to the overall need
for this bill but one of those
is it's it's vital as as we I
think understand uniquely as
lawyers and as Judiciary
Committee no doubt understands
but it's vital to keep the
judiciary independence so much
of our system depends upon
having good laws yes but when
there's a dispute those laws
need to be interpreted and
applied evenly and equally and
especially when you're talking
about the criminal context when
you're looking at the
possibility of of taking away
someone's liberty so that's part
of the aim of this bill is to
make sure that we really do
safeguard the institution of the
judiciary and make sure that
they're able to stay neutral and
independent and then did you
know the lesser point I think
but I think it's still worth
mentioning is I think this will
actually help with with judge
recruitment
wanted one efforts that we have
done HB to this year that I'm
proud of what I think is
important as we we've taken
seriously increasing the
salaries of judges to make those
positions more attractive and
competitive but the other issue
with trying to convince members
of the the the private bar the
public sector the company's
bench is the tremendous heat
that the judges face when the
make unpopular decisions and so
I think if we can put some
protect for print season some
protections and sprint
parameters around them
to not have to fear for things
like great bodily harm those
kinds of things I think it'll
help you sometimes well so.
That's that's the extent of my
comments I would madam chair
with your permission I would I
would
appreciate you the Chief Justice
speaking thank you.
Yes this go ahead.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee first of all if I
may a personal loan I sat here
right here in my office in Santa
Fe yesterday for about six hours
watching this committee work in
here this morning almost two
hours watching this committee
work and I cannot tell you how
proud I am this committee of the
members of the legislature
you've given it careful
considered patient thoughtful
consideration to all the matters
brought before you and it's been
out of how marvelously to
observe and zoom has its
benefits and that's one of my
guests and I just wanted you all
out how proud I am of the
legislature in this committee
particularly for thank you don
and by the way I have learned
quite a bit.
what you mentioned is proceeding
to the business at hand I'd like
to thank our sponsors are
Representative Lane
Representative Hochman Vigil
Representative have you had
Martinez Representative Derrick
plenty Representative Gail
Chasey co chair of this
committee I also like to thank
the government Michelle Lujan
Grisham will put this matter on
the call so that could be
considered
a gentleman on the.
Issue of.
Register judges and their
families is not new but it is
increasing with frequency.
Recently.
The worse by the day
the we don't have national
statistics from the from the
national center for state courts
however we do have a some
statistics in New Mexico the
twenty twenty the AOC received
reports of threats against
courthouses and several threats
against judges the twenty twenty
one the AOC received reports of
five threats against courthouses
and temperature can structures
AOC being administrative office
of the point.
Senator system in twenty twenty
the US marshal Services reported
a fourth out reported four
thousand two hundred sixty one
threats and then in an
appropriate communications
against federal judges and other
members of the federal judiciary
by contrast there were less than
one thousand press reported in
two thousand fifteen which is an
increase in of over three
hundred percent in less than six
years you know things have
changed and judges should not be
threatened with their bodily
harm to themselves or their
families should be pursuing
their jobs in the
What was at the house the the
house
of public affairs committee.
Consumer and public affairs
committee we had several judges
personally testify about their
experiences in our related other
experiences of judges
who wished to remain anonymous.
Times have changed and judges
should not be threatened with
their.
With bodily harm simply for
doing their jobs we've lost
judges who resigned over this
and you know who would have
imagined
you hear ago that we put a fence
around the capital of the state
of New Mexico and we also during
that same period of time it
closed down courthouses because
of threats made against other
courthouses and the people that
work in them ladies and
gentleman I I would respectfully
request that you give it to
passed to this
Bill as the house consumer and
public affairs committee did hi
all just about a week ago thank
you very much for your
consideration.
Thank you to justice
Representative Lane are we going
to go to any of the experts
before the public.
madam chair reading.
Thank you so members of the
public will start with a full
you'll be asked to indicate if
you're willing whether you stand
in support or opposition to HB
ninety nine so we will start
there.
As we have the poll we will
first go to public comment to
those interested in speaking
against HB sixty I'm sorry this
also Sixtyeight but we are here
and H. B. six eighteen ninety
nine so we'll go to the public
and if you'd like to speak in
opposition against HB ninety
nine please raise your hand at
this time.
Okay and so far we don't have
any participants in this poll
but we will take that as a sign
of anything to come.
Attendees again if there's
anyone that's interested in
speaking in opposition of HB
nineteen nineties is your hands
now.
Doesn't look like we have any
hands raise we will go to those
in support of HB ninety nine as
anyone in the audience would
like to speak in support please
vision hands.
Seeing no hands we will come
back to our committee.
Madam it's almost as if it's
lunch time.
I am quite angry Senate billing
you caught me I see
Representative about gun has a
Sander ace go ahead
Representative on thank you
madam chair I I do believe I do
think that this bill needs to be
a.
Forward however.
Excuse me I will serve that's in
Jack damages liabilities in a
file having served served as a
judge for our.
For a long long time.
In a small community everybody
knows where you live.
So I don't.
What would happen as far as the
misdemeanor our.
About the sharing of personal
information the judge.
The who is going to county and
about your disability to Milano
into bona County everybody knew
what does that close houses last
everybody knows where
Representative I'll close house
is so I am having a little bit
of heartburn with that I know
that in some other areas of the
state the a lot of judges are
I keep themselves hidden I mean
I know that would that would
department and there is one
judge that really lived out in
the mountains and you get all of
these gates locked up and he
lived in fear for ever I guess I
I couldn't understand that.
Because I've never
I I never feared that anybody
would bother me because of
everything that I have done is
to judge I never felt that that
would have been or what could
happen but I know that other
people there's other people in
this there's people in this
world that can do anything I'm
having a problem with that Mr.
On the second part because that
really honestly it's hard he.
The residents away from.
The known by everybody.
And.
In all honesty I mean I've
always get my my whole phone
listed.
And that is that people would
call me instead of coming to
knock on my door so this is a
small community I I know a lot
of you folks going to realize
that but I mean.
A lot of people I mean.
If you're a parent and your
child is in jail I'm here you're
not worried about waking up that
judge at four o'clock in the
morning you're worried because
your son is you're you're you're
you're you're in jail or your
child is in jail so I would like
I said I'd rather have been
called me think of knocking on
my door because I'm really not
very presentable that for block
in the morning so that's where
I'm having a little bit of hard
work on this but otherwise I I I
think we could go forward with
this bill thank you madam chair
madam chair can I offer some
Alka seltzer to.
About on in the form of a
response.
Representative go ahead thank
you madam chair so I I actually
appreciate that Representative
Malcolm because I I'm from a you
know my little beautiful small
town of six thousand people and
you know where to lives and you
don't get out of drug store for
an hour and so I can I can
appreciate that
but what I would share with you
is that when you look at the the
bill itself it's not the act of
sharing the personal
information.
That doesn't cause a misdemeanor
violation what it is is it's the
act of sharing the personal
information with the intent to
cause bodily harm to the judge
or interrupt the judicial
process so I think that that try
and is is important and I hope
that helps.
It and madam chair it does help
but we've it just the intent
that the harm that that that
could be a problem there and
that's where I'm coming from and
you're correct about that mean
you know we do my wife and I do
not go to while Michael after
nine o'clock at night and if we
do the early we make sure we
don't put the ice cream in the
cards to or what yeah we're
close to the cashier's office
the cashier Chris will be
sitting there forever and I
screwed will not before we
walked out the door so thank you
madam chair.
Representative also looks like
we have Chief Justice making to
make a comment let's go ahead
and hear that before we move on.
Thank you madam chair and I'll
be right Representative madam
chairman Representative Robert
gone part of the reason for this
is of social media these days we
had a very recent experience
aware of a judge was tasked with
hearing a very controversial
issue
and one of the participants in
the case had a radio station and
broadcast this judges personal
information that the very very
critical of the judge and it
ended up that someone drove by
the judge's house threw a rock
through their dining room window
have very causing very serious
of concerns on the part of the
judge and his family so that's
the reason part of the reason
for having this in there I
appreciate your observations but
and I hope that clears it up a
little bit.
Thank you and before we go to
Representative Cook I wanted to
tell one of my small town
stories of the town I'm Benham
as I'm not sure exactly where
the latest Census numbers were
around twenty five hundred
people and once before he passed
our judge Fred had seen me from
outside his house roll through a
stop sign in what one might call
a California stop and then he
saw me at the post office the
nature to tell me about it my
municipal judge so certainly it
meant a lot to our community and
it also meant a lot when we when
we lost him and in the last
couple of years but I appreciate
what the judiciary has meant in
our small towns and how often
they are trusted reliable
backbone and certainly don't
deserve threats Martin R. our
intentions of hard I thank you
for that privilege let me tell a
little story Representative Cook
thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Ryan for
taking over this bill.
I've seen these.
Types of threats occur in real
life so I know this is a big
deal and very important bill so
thank you my question today is
well first of all what would
this bill apply to threats
they're made on social media.
Madam chair Representative Cook
yes as long as all the the men's
raha elements for were met I
believe so yes.
Misery.
That's a criminal terms criminal
long term.
So madam chair Representative
Cook as long as the intent on
what's are are satisfied.
I think my concern is more of a
first amendment issue and so
what it what it would have
threat made on social media be a
true threat.
Madam chair representative cook
so it I'm thinking it would go
back to intent the prosecution
with if if somebody were
arrested in in charge of this
fence that have to charge the
intent element of not just the
expression of free speech but
and intent to cause great bodily
harm or ended up interrupt the
judicial process and and you
think that would withstand
scrutiny under first amendment
law.
And I'm no I'm no first
amendment you know subject
matter expert I just.
This came up the other day
actually we're talking about
another bill in the term true
threats came up and it just kind
of reminded me of stuff I've
heard around but don't really
practice in and just.
Makes me wonder if this if if
somebody being charged with with
this could appeal it.
As far up as they need to go and
and whether or not it would it
would withstand scrutiny.
Madam chair representative
cooking I think it's always a
balance on the knife's edge
about free speech verses these
type of of statutes so I think
whether the medium is is a phone
call whether it's in person
whether it's social media if the
intent of of the expression of
speech is the cause us great
bodily harm to judge for example
I think that would be I think
that would withstand
constitutional scrutiny.
Support your bill I'm just not.
Hundred percent convinced of
that and I'd love to hear from
anybody else in your experts the
justice for anybody else but I
mean like I said I am going to
support I just have that
concern.
Thank you madam chair.
Looks like to justice and like
to make a brief comment on that
point.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Cook
the I just come with what came
to my mind is the the case will
study law school but you can't
hire you can't scream fire in a
crowded theater so you're you're
you're you're you're speaking
but it's with the with malicious
intent in it that's established
a it it's for the purpose of
placing the judge where the
immediate family member in fear
of great bodily harm to the
judge or the immediate family
member then that that would be a
crime of with with its done with
that intent and that is proven
and
I agree there there is a.
There are you can come up with
with the hypotheticals of pro
and con but the bottom line is I
thank you for the jury satisfied
that this was done with that
specific intent on the part of
the speaker it would be
punishable under and withstand
scrutiny.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Mr Chief Justice I I guess
my aunt my immediate thought on
that is that.
You know that the hypothetical
screening fire is going to
create a.
You know I'll some sort of
reaction New Mexico route that's
going they could very easily and
and and
After injury or bodily harm or
whatever.
And.
Just bring smart you know all
I've got I haven't studied this
issue close enough but you know
I thought I thought it true
threat was something that was
not cause imminent lawless
action I think is the the catch
phrase of the term that the
courts use and I just have a
hard time getting there.
I'm there just having a hard
time getting there.
With regard to in particular
social media threats so if you
have any comment.
It looks like we have but
they're paid with the AOC thank
you to make a comment.
Go ahead with the.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee
Representative Cook good good to
see you
my name is Mattea page I am the
director of the Courts services
division at the administrative
office of the courts
Representative Cook just to
talk about for the the terms rat
we do have the term threat
Houston and similar statutes
your New Mexico the the use of
a telephone to threaten someone
and threats against a witness
our New Mexico your
jurisprudence defines threat as
threat of wrongful injury to
person or another so
so the but and and threats of
criminal or tortious misconduct
so we we do have limitations on
what what right is it it's not
just any any any.
Right as mentioned I think in in
the F. I. R. there are some
threats that would be covered
under under
of first amendment free speech
what we do have limitations on
what what is right is and that
has to be a threat to run for.
A wrongful misconduct thank you.
Thank you Mr page school to see
to I just I'm still kind of hung
up on if somebody put something
on Facebook and then twelve
hours later a day later judge
season.
Is that it is that a true threat
and I mean I know there are
other statutes that that address
this I don't know the date that
that ever been challenged I
don't know you know this would
require I don't know if
prosecutors with the even you
know prosecutor case on a on a.
Forty eight hour delayed threat
to a judge that was later you
know Representative raced or
whatever I just I'm just you
know just kind of point out my
initial concern so.
If you have any comments what
we're not I'll I'll stop
talking.
I appreciate that Representative
Cook it does look like one of
our analysts to criminal defense
attorney has their hundreds for
a quick
response from our committee
analysts.
Madam chair representative I
just want to say quickly that to
address that issue
it would be litigated and it
would have to be proven there
isn't it's not a per se so
somebody makes a threat and it's
not automatically considered a
threat you it would have to be
the the prosecutor and the the
charges would be made that
somebody per potentially
committed this crime and then
the prosecution would have to
prove that specific intent as
this bill as written.
So it's not a per se violation
just because the judge is
fearful.
Right it has lost control on
house yes we can hear you so I
understand it would have to be
litigated my understanding of
the way it would.
Be litigated is is that
somebody that's been prosecuted
under this would would say it
would have a defense of first
amendment defense.
And and that would be.
You know litigated potentially
up to I think there are lots of
Supreme Court cases on this and
it's you know it will go through
the same process and potentially
be
you know go up to the US Supreme
Court if it were to make it that
far so I understand it would be
litigated just my understanding
is that it would the whole
constitutional issue would be
part of the difference defense.
About the constitutionality of.
This bill.
In statute.
Thank you madam chair I can be
myself now thank you ultimatum
you use else if you want.
I just seeing no further hands
raised what is the pleasure of
the committee.
past Madam chair.
We have a two passed motion from
tier Chasey we have a second
I'll second that.
Thank you for Representative
Alcon corrected please call the
roll.
Representative well current yes.
Representative Armstrong.
Yes.
Representative Chandler yes.
Representative Cook yes.
Mr speaker.
Yes and I remain concerned about
Representative cooks loss of
control this mass.
Representative Eli.
Yes you got that yes
okay Representative Lewis yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative night Burt.
Representative rain yes ma'am.
Representative Townsend yes
ma'am.
Thank.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Yes.
Twelve to zero we have a due
pass on house bill ninety nine.
That is an advocate she does the
thank you for being with us
today.
We've made it through our agenda
any announcements madam chair.
We will be working on our agenda
for Monday and hope to get that
on to the website soon we we do
have a few bills that term might
be ready to consider from last
night so we're we're trying to
predict those things and we'll
do the best we can thanks thanks
to everybody for really long
night last night and your
attention today.
Thank you so much madam vice
chair for taking over.
Thank you so with that we're
turned.
