The six year staffing ratios in
committee the Sanchez had
completed their presentation we
had had public comment and so if
you'd like to take a few minutes
or a minute to complete
offer some concluding marks
before we go to the committee on
that madam chair ready for
questions okay very good thank
you
questions.
Representative al cone I know
you're way over there.
Good morning everybody Madam
chair of.
Representative Representative
available.
I am looking at this legislation
and believe it or not I know we
have to do something about the
notion problem with it or not I
know what we have to however.
Is thank you legislation.
Basically a.
Right the requiring the
department to have to promulgate
that enforcement of the nursing
staff and these pretty basically
what we're looking for is asking
the department of health to
figure out so that.
Hey who had needed the
department of health to do
something.
For the so we have done is I
have done nothing.
Yes.
And we jump into section for.
And we sat requiring the
hospitals to do.
Everything.
That the.
We're hoping that the but would
have to figure out some way.
So I mean what either we have
the first the three sections.
Or we only have the fiction for
which is going directly to the
doing the staff meeting of the
and the penalties and everything
completely.
Are we looking at it because of
and and this is what we're we're
we're thinking of I think we
need to do the first part first.
You take that step.
But we can go to section four on
this with the in the.
Steps in the first part.
And I'm having a problem.
Madam chair representative on
the defer to
my experts.
He is an expert.
Madam chair representative up on
at good question I I think what
the bill does create and
oversight by the department and
what it does is it empowers this
staffing advisory committee the
staffing advisory committee will
figure out based upon that the
reserves set out what are the
appropriate staffing ratios what
the bill does is it empowers
them to make that determination
it then empowers the department
to adopt those staffing
recommendations the staffing
ratios and enforce them a I
think it's a very sensible
approach is we don't know what
the proper reviewers ratios are
right now as we sit here and
it's a complicated question and
that's why the bill empowers a
committee to make those very
difficult decisions and then in
turn empowers the department
department to enforce those
ratios.
You madam chair it is and and
that we would do a hundred
percent.
Except for the legal legacy
through fiction for which new
material.
And it's it's a hospital shelf.
Hey and we go on to say what the
hospital is going to have to do
once this legislation the state.
Which the agreement with the we
haven't even the first step.
We're already in the hospital
you will do this.
Madam chair representative out
point hospital doesn't have to
do this effectively it's three
things meet the staffing ratios
adopt policies for training and
for provide for training for
their employees but they have to
first reach those conclusions
and hospitals don't have to do
anything until the point at
which the committee makes its
recommendations which are then
at adopted by the department and
also the legislature's notified
about those conclusions all of
those provisions have to happen
first before any hospital must
comply with the provisions.
Is that because of the still
revenue that the meeting of the
right and it's just not working.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Representative
Chasey.
Thank you madam chair.
And thank you representatives
for your are your bills the
question I had I was looking at
this.
Last night we were having that
presentation.
And what.
The question is how can there
be.
An FIR.
On something that.
Is not yet.
Detailed and it kind of builds a
little on Representative of all
phones question.
But it seems to me that the FIR
is precipitous.
Thank you if you could address
that
thank you madam chair
Representative I'm gonna get
defer to my experts.
Candor Representative Chasey I.
The agree with you I mean I
think that the FIR numbers are
in some respects speculative the
FIR numbers I think as I read
the fine fiscal impact report
relate to the cost of empowering
the committee doing the research
necessary to make sure that the
committee makes its
recommendations in a proper way
the but I think at this point
those are probably high
estimates it it it doesn't need
to cost that much it simply
empowering this committee to
reach these conclusions and
there would be some enforcement
provisions thank you madam chair
and and on the phone make this
brief but I'm gonna give you a
chance to of respond to that
criticism.
Which is actually the fact that
we have a shortage of health
care person and hello a lot of
the those in opposition to your
your measure say that this will
make it much worse than could be
a chance to counter that thank
you Madam chair representative
I'm going to do for to my other
expert witness.
Thank you madam chair
representative so
We have evidence to support
recent research that supports
the fact that nurses are leaving
their jobs primarily because of
working conditions and that is
driven by having to take on too
high patient loads on a regular
basis and so we feel that one of
the first steps in addressing
the nursing shortage and it's a
multi faceted problem obviously
needs of industry and education
and professional organizations
and nurses to help.
You know promote nursing
education but and that's the
other piece of it but I think we
for now we need to stop the
hemorrhaging of nurses as I said
yesterday they are leaving the
budget side in droves are not
necessarily leaving nursing as a
profession but they're leaving
the hospitals and the reason
they're leaving the hospitals is
their working conditions if you
are aware and I'm sure you are
of the nurses strike in New York
recently it was not over pay it
was over working conditions and
and that's what all the people
who testified here yesterday are
saying is that the working
conditions have become untenable
and they feel their licenses are
at risk they've they've had too
many moral injuries
that have occurred because of
the work they're asked to do so
I see this is a really positive
step to stop the exodus of
bedside nurses on to just one
more quick question I think you
can probably answer quickly in
states that do have these kinds
of standards are ratios has
their is there evidence that
that attracted for workers yes
there is
Madam chair representative I'm
so sorry yes there is and and
the more recent research very
much supports the idea that
improve staffing ratios increase
the retention and recruitment of
nurses thank you so much chair.
Thank you Representative anyone
else wishing to discuss
Representative Lente.
Thank you madam chair.
I'm curious on page five of the
bill.
So Senator and three.
Talk about what department has
the power to do can you explain
me the rationale behind
subparagraph two starting line
for on page five.
Madam chair representative I'm
going to be deferred to on the
streets chair Chandler
Representative McQueen are you
referring to the waiver of
staffing.
Ratios for rural general acute
madam chair yes all sorry
Representative the microphones
thirty off yep so Madam chair
representative Lente the
provision is to protect rural
hospitals and to ensure that
their unique situation remains
in New Mexico and that they have
the ability to continue
operating.
Madam chair I I I find that to
be a curious argument.
does not cut to the heart a
whole bill.
Madam chair representative lane.
The bill has to reflect.
The reality of the health care
industry in New Mexico I think
this is acknowledge that rural
hospitals are operating very
much close to to to margins that
would cause them to close we
don't want to put any rural
hospital in New Mexico over that
age as a result of this
legislation.
Madam chair but it at if I
understand it saying it seems
like you're recognizing that.
Madam chair representative line
we are sorry I wasn't I wasn't
on yes.
Madam chair it seems like you're
recognizing I guess the impact
that this bill is going to have
on hospitals.
Madam chair representative Lente
yes.
And so I chair and I just.
I guess I'm a little puzzled
Why if if the argument is if you
have a of a minimum standard.
And then ratio of nurses that
somehow going to drive up your
nursing pool because of the
working conditions are going to
prove then why would you wave it
for local hospitals in rural
areas.
Madam chair representative lane
for the reasons we've identified
we want to make sure that rural
hospitals in New Mexico stay
open and and serve the
communities the question of
scale hospitals like University
of New Mexico hospital they can
do this because they operate on
a much larger scale it's more
difficult for for local regional
hospitals to do so and this
provision reflects that reality
in New Mexico.
Madam chair I guess.
It's hard for me to believe the
the argument that if you say
that mandating a minimum
staffing ratio is going to drive
up your worker pool it seems
like what you're saying is quite
the opposite.
In rural areas so that's my only
question thank you madam chair
thank you representative of
anyone else with a question or
comment.
Happy to entertain a motion
madam chair.
We do pass madam chair.
I'd like to second.
We have a second.
They got we have a a do pass
made by Representative semansky
seconded by Representative
Romero to call the roll please
Representative Alcon.
Yeah.
Representative Casey yes.
Right
now for.
Mr speaker.
Please yes.
Representative
Representative read the.
Representative Rehm.
Representative as yes.
The vice chair yes.
Yes.
By a vote of six to to we have a
due pass on those bills to
state.
Thank you madam chair committing
thank you very much thank you
nurses Pritchett you.
Thank you.
You.
Next up is house bill one twenty
one.
this is Lee is already done.
So we're going to
Just get straight to the bill.
just
I'll just remind the committee
the past we've debated this bill
quite a long time yes the
Sanchez to
See if there was a compromise
possible
looking forward to seeing what.
Maybe change then out of James
thank you madam chair that had.
Thank you very much
Just to set the scene there were
a couple of suggested amendments
or fine tuning in terms of
language on the bill.
And we I hope address those so
we have a committee so that if I
may read the two to five number
madam chair.
We're.
Just a the company's.
You're looking at is an.
I guess I don't know where it is
either.
Yes.
Anyone know our I guess I'd have
to ask Lisa of
where they are.
It is the two two five two two
five five six nine point four
point six.
Share.
Yeah I'm seeing the.
Rollover package from the roll
over section but I can't the
actuals of.
Will.
I think will pause to try to
make sure everyone has a copy.
The committee either.
Remain calm.
Sorry.
Source of low income.
Madam chair while they're doing
that I don't know if you want
to.
Sure laws and go to another
build back I see I mean it would
be wise with sodium next number
house bill two thirty three as
amended Representative Matthews
is medicine Matthews here.
Representative great goes with
house bill.
Three forty nine.
The representative on no new.
She said.
We we could do that.
It'll take a minute.
The
Representative Ezzell your bill
you got lucky Representative.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you very much
for hearing that bill this
morning I'm here today.
Excuse me.
Presenting house bill three
ninety this has to do with.
race our testing and as we all
know we want everything to be
fair we don't want to be able to
we don't want anybody to be
deceiving the public as far as
administering illegal drugs
divorces we don't want the
jockeys lives being put in
harm's and we sure don't want
the sequel the decline F. eight
to be impaired in any way shape
and form.
Madam chair members of the
committee.
The changes in this particular
bills.
Start on.
Hey for here it is.
Start on page.
To the bill.
I'm gonna start off first online
I page two.
Which is the powers of the
commission.
They may suspend revoke or deny
renewal of a license or of the
person who violates the
provision of the reports racing
Act or rules adopted pursuant to
that act.
Change comes down at the bottom
and page two starting on line
number nineteen.
However for each positive test
result pursuant to section sixty
dash one eight dash fourteen
NMSA nineteen seventy eight the
fine shall not exceed one
hundred thousand dollars and
shall include one hundred
percent of a purse related to
the violation.
The financial be paid into the
race our testing and.
The next change is on page four.
I'm gonna stop right there the
definition of the race was
testing fan is on page three and
that is current language madam
chair.
The last change is on page four.
Line seventeen the race our
testing financial be thoroughly
examined and audited each fiscal
year by an independent auditor
approved by the state auditor.
Madam chair working on this bill
I worked with track management.
Legal counsel for the tracks.
The gaming control board and the
executive director of the New
Mexico racing Commission.
And madam chair I think that
this is one way but we can
assure the public that if
there's a violation.
The horse that does test
positive for illegal drugs.
That that person.
At the discretion of the
commission will not be licensed
by the state of New Mexico
again.
And we do have jurisdictions
with other states to follow suit
if they are banned from one
state it follows through to the
other states that do allow racy.
Madam chair the drug
qualifications are spelled out.
By the A. R. C. I. in that is
association of racing
commissioners international or.
A success organization.
Madam chair this is a positive
bill of industry helping
industry.
And with that I will stand for
questions.
Thank you Representative before
we go to questions we'll go to
the audience those wishing to
speak in opposition to the bill
please raise your hand.
Those online wishing to speak in
opposition please raise your
hand.
Those wishing to speak in
support of the bill please raise
your hand yes Sir.
Madam chair committee members my
name is Bronson corn I'm here
representing the New Mexico
cattle growers we are in strong
support of any legislation that
is going to make on the
racehorse industry a uh
a viable option or a viable
action for the the protection of
not only the jockeys but the
horses themselves they are and
at their the athletes and the
need to be treated as athletes
and we stand and support of this
bill thank you.
Those online should.
Madam chair in the past whenever
they have been drug violations
of the most recent one that made
a big difference in the status
of the horses that ran ran in
this final race couple of three
is three years ago of the horse
tested positive third place our.
and it was of.
It was a class a violation.
And that's the worst type of
violation you can have as far as
the drug schedules good okay
there's different classes of and
that's one of the most egregious
that there is.
This is tied up in litigation
for over two and a half years
madam chair of and finally the
court said well we're through.
The commission with this money
will be able to test more horses
to ensure that everybody is
racing the same not with
enhanced drugs and that's what
this particular drug was it made
a difference in the rest of the
horses that were in that final
race of.
Because.
The money was released to that
our noted that trainer that was
not playing fair with the rest
of the field.
And I think it's going to be
beneficial to put the commission
needs to do madam chair with
that I will stand for questions.
Representative Chasey.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Ezzell I I
really just wanted to comment on
behalf of are late mutual friend
might notices pharmacists can
cross that.
Was on the racing commission and
he always used to call me and
say how do I get in touch with
Representative Ezzell there's
something really bad going on
with the Tate with the testing
and he was an expert on the
drugs and was so concerned about
the industry so when I guess my
only question Representative
chair representative is
This isn't going to let anybody
pay less or get off.
Right madam chair like I said
earlier there are different
levels of the drug use that
drugs that might be used if
there is testing its anything
does not normally found in the
course of.
Of.
It is up to the discretion of
the commission is net that is
spelled out in section in Law
online I section see if this.
And the it does not relieve
their licensing from
prosecution.
I think that the public needs to
realize that we do take.
This industry very seriously
with amount of gross receipts
tax that the industry does pay
to the state every year is in
excess of five hundred million
dollars which is substantial I
think that
The commission now can propose
the civil rate federal civil
penalty fines and it just
follows what the A. R. C. I. has
pointed out as far as a
violation provide could be.
So madam chair I I just I that's
currently in which I just wanted
to be.
In
certain and it sounds like there
rules about certain number of
tests and and that that person
can't race anymore rights then
the so thank you madam chair and
I appreciate your work in this
area.
And I wish can still check in
the.
Madam chair and representative
to the right Mr gross's was the
through esses to the commission
we do missing.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative McQueen.
Thank you madam chair Madam
chair representative Ezzell the
I thank you appreciate would
what you're doing as a couple
language questions definitional
issues.
so it says.
The financial not exceed one
hundred thousand dollars in
challenge food one hundred
percent the purse related
violation yes Sir
How is that nafta.
So it if the fine we're if the
person for thirty thousand and
provide was a hundred thousand
it's a total fund hundred thirty
first a total fine seven.
I'm sorry repeat that one more
time if you're forfeiting the
purse does that count towards
the fine.
No it does not count towards the
fund madam chair representative
that I the person is then
distributed through the second
place our which would end up
being first place after that if
the horse in question was first
place winner the second place
our would move up to third place
were submitted but then that
person would be distributed
there in the in flight really
comes to mind madam chair and
Representative McQueen.
The I can't remember how long
ago it's been it's been about
ten years ago the horse that won
the all American derby in rid us
a.
At that persists could be
featured in derby excuse me
Is the world's richest quarter
horse race and I know that the
downside Albuquerque is doing
the same thing this year.
Senator those thank you answer
the question but I think those
those purses are great are huge
so the winner of of that
particular race does test
positive thanks for for that
pers second place our moves up.
Does with that works so madam
chair reserves as L. might my
concern is the language okay
because it says the fine shall
include the first.
And I think the person needs to
be in addition to the fine not
part of the fine and I I I know
that's your intent but I don't
think that's what says.
Also.
Also be the first.
Show also.
Require forfeiture the person
checking out something like that
I think that the wording does to
these problematic madam chair no
purses are released until those
horses do yes.
Okay good the at the so it's not
included in that and tell that
our the test results come back
the some insurers and as I'm not
concerned about how the
administered or the practice I'm
concerned about the words in the
bill.
In the words in the bill are I
mean I read I read this several
times and I wasn't sure how it
worked out okay.
So it's I think we need to work
on that.
In I would like to hear
suggestion for me miss madam
chair and representative.
You can make a suggestion I
don't know if it's gonna work
When you look at one twenty one
shall include for furniture one
hundred percent of the first
related to the violation.
So with.
The.
Shell also include
so after and shall include
forfeiture of.
Hundreds thank you also include.
Also includes forfeiture of Ford
Madam chair representative the
function I see hundred thousand
dollars period.
In addition any person before
for the something like that.
This.
With someone like to make a
motion could.
We adopt that okay let's review.
It's always better to be clear.
Madam chair representative
appreciate this help but I don't
think that we need to in that
sentence after the hundred
thousand dollars I think it
needs to continue on we're all
of that language is included so
nobody accidentally drops quit
drops the end of the Senate
somewhere.
This month a venture reserves of
a four we were Smith that let me
just might my second question
okay definitions
The.
One is nineteen twenty however
for each positive test pursuant
to section sixteen that's when
the that's fourteen the fund
shall not exceed one hundred
thousand dollars.
Measures of results you know
sixteen this twenty dash
fourteen works yes Sir it's
billed at over here's section
two on page three.
And that is currently we.
The.
The madam chair that is fourteen
point one.
With this references a sixteen
sixty dash twenty dash fourteen
fourteen which is not included
in the bill to the something
amendment.
If you're not familiar with that
that's okay thank okay so the
way the.
Sixty that twenty this fourteen
works is you take assessment and
you split in this different
samples and you yes one sample.
If that's possible positive then
you send the other sample or
samples to other labs.
In my concern is it says for
each positive test.
Resulting from you know that
process the my tested two or
three times and I don't think
it's two or three fights just
because you test the same sample
no.
Madam but that and I I I think
you're gonna tell me that's not
that's not how you intend to get
that but the again language has
for each positive test result.
And I think that's.
Not consistent with the way that
other statute works.
Madam chair representative with
queen on page for the bill
starting on line three sisters
Commission shell administer the
resources think than men in the
fund is preparation the
commission for the handling of
pre and post race out of
competition and the car C.
testing of blood serum plasma
urine or other appropriate test
samples there are still there
are two samples one that is sent
off by the track itself.
It from that of track that are
near in they are skipped in a
secure location locked in a
freezer locked behind the door
is that Miss does come back
positive the owner the trainer
that of course can have his
samples sent off to be tested at
a another approved twelve
testing left and then that's.
That's where it goes from there
that's this way they do it now
Madam is it Representative
Ezzell I I get that mmhm but
what I'm saying is language says
each positive test if both the
samples test positive I don't
think we're supposed to double
funds no meant no Sir it is not
double fund is just.
That for that particular our for
that particular day and it is
stated it has just a number on
it I did a fund that was not a
horse's name or anything else so
it is just one violation I agree
mmhm Madam chair Representative
Ezzell but I don't think that's
what this language.
Okay let's go back and look at
it.
So does it need to read madam
chair online nineteenths.
However for each positive test
for that particular point in
that particular race on that
particular day.
I think Madam chair
representative so I think needs
to be for each infraction or
something like that.
For each violation of the rules.
No matter how many times you
actually run the test.
Madam chair a kit really agree
with that language because
infractions now there is excess
use of the with they can get an
infraction for that so.
Drug.
Infrastructure might not be the
right term for that needs some
patches around the but my point
being for.
Free it's each violations in
each test isn't equivalent to
each violation.
Are you subject.
Sure
is the suggestion that for each
positive test per race.
Thank is that what we're trying
to confine it to each infraction
in a given.
At the chair representative I
think would be each violation
perforce.
Madam chair and Representative
McQueen at this will help any
what they do is the first place
winner of the traces tested
obviously if it's a big big
grace in excess of just like the
all American.
They will yes all those horses
prior to going into the race.
Some of these races.
Some of these races the purses
are that great so they will
randomly pick and that the
number of first place sources is
yes and then it's a random
random number that they dropped
their those horses go to the
test part.
Right now the commission can
only in New most normal racing
situations is two horses that
are tested out of the field of
nine or the field of ten that
run and that particular rigs.
so.
If that makes any difference to
where we're trying to go with
this.
At.
Miss madam chair Representative
Ezzell I think there's broad
support.
For your bill I think it needs
to be rid Smith before ms for.
Okay.
Suggests the bill in the will of
course try to get you back as
soon as we can and Mr there will
be some assistance coming from
from our staff and others one
comment to hopefully of course
if the for Representative
McQueen question the technical
issue raised was at the very
last by the AG it's in the F. I.
R. the question that he race
specifically about the fine
the question about how to assess
fines and so I think that might
help with finding the right
language answer madam chair and
in the FIR seventy seven
technical issues that it was
raised by the AG's office and so
that might help with just
finding the right language okay
all right I will get some
language and see if that fits
with what we're trying to get
done here to clarify that
language in that particular
part.
Thank you very much madam chair
thank you members.
I think we're ready to go back
to one twenty one.
Everyone has a CS now.
Not a siesta CS.
Okay.
Madam I do I do have a point of
order on this can I get some
clarification when the point six
version was emailed to the
committee because I can't find
it the
of sorry madam chair I
understand that the staff
received it yesterday
is that right.
We received at about two thirty
yesterday it was delivered to
staff soon thereafter including
minority staff I conferred with
Representative Nighbor to ensure
that there would be no issue in
terms of hearing at the twenty
four hour rule is not a rule
it's a guideline and we've been
adjusting it according to the
need to address issues promptly
in light of the situation so
your staff has had it since
about three o'clock yesterday.
Chair of I appreciate that
update I I think I would just
make requests just make sure
that they also emailed to the
members individually because I
this is what relief when I'm
laying eyes on it so that's a
very fair point Representative
thank you for that
So as I started to say madam
chair yes CS which I'll read the
number again we all make sure we
have the right one is two two
five five six nine point six.
And it is in response to some
suggestions that were made by
the committee.
And it also adjusts a little bit
the acreage school school fees
that could be permitted through
the expedited process that we
talked about.
Two days ago so just to begin in
terms of if I may explain what's
been changed madam chair.
The major changes is on page
six.
We added some language here.
I have my experts with me which
I really appreciate the language
was prepared by the office of
the state engineer.
In this language just adjusts
somewhat the language that
addresses a safety is and how
safety is making.
And madam chair
So that on page six through the
previous language could
if you if you look at page five
wine
Fifteen there's a phrase maybe
least and there used to be a
clause after that comma except
for an expedited temporary lease
comma and the sensitization
expressed a concern that that
created an ambiguity that would
that there was an opportunity to
do expended temporary leases for
for water rights office it is
our communities so there was a
change to add the additional
language at the top of page six
months one through four that
The chief that clarified what
was the intent was that there
are those types of water rates
would not be subject to the
expedited process.
Yes and then there are a few
others test which the last.
Money expert to help us with
thank you madam chair
the the committee several
members of the committee
looked at subsection C. of
section six of the bill if they
believe is on page twelve and
I'm sorry I actually was working
off of
The version too so so
in in subsection C.
there's a question about how you
cumulate.
Multiple applications for the
purpose of the caps and so the
the that section was re written
to hopefully make clear that how
how how that would be counted
third if there's multiple
applications transferring water
right into a single point of
diversion
can currently at the same time
that that would all be one
considered one application so
that's the the second change
then there was
a an additional change on
There is a request for.
May be some efficiencies between
the expedited temporary process
and and sort of a full blown
hearing under under under full
for leases and so I believe on
page ten we have.
Re written.
A portion of the bill to in that
subsection G.
One sixteen through twenty two
on page ten that that makes
clear that applicants can file
Applications for full leases at
the same time as they're filing
expedited these applications and
that you know those can those
can move forward and and
hopefully we have some
efficiencies there.
The
There's there's two more a small
small changes I think if you go
to page twelve.
I think section.
We talked about the my apologies
I think it's
Twelve line subsection D. lines
twenty three twenty three.
actually the the whole
subsection D. was.
There there there is some
Interested in clarifying what
happens after after a temporary
lease expires could somebody
immediately begin using under a
under a full time lease and
that's what that's what three
right of that subsection D. is
meant to meant to clarify that
in fact there there would be no
There could be no stopping using
the water under under if if
you've got the approval under
full time lease if you've if you
secure that at the conclusion of
a temporary lease.
On if we go back to page ten
At the top of.
Lines one through four
the sickest Association this
didn't come from the the
Committee but the secular
Association was concerned if we
do an expedited hearing process
the the protest ins would have
an adequate amount of time in
which to prepare prior to the
hearing so we can have a hearing
two days after the protest was
filed for example and so
previously the language said
that the hearing would happen
within eighty days of the
conclusion of the protest period
and this just expand expands the
language of it say within sixty
and eighty days so it's not a
substantive change from the
deadline but it guarantees that
the hearing will happen right
away before for all the parties
to hearing our
Are are ready the.
Last
Substantive change is I'm sorry
there's the last substantive
change I believe in David tell
me if I'm forgetting one
Is the the change to the limits
on on how much water can be
least an expedited temporary
lease.
And so what.
Did that make you so so the and
that is on page again my
apologies for sort of flipping
around through the sort of
larger bill
When we try to get it right.
That's okay th.
And I believe that that was.
I'm sorry on page.
Eleven
lines.
Twelve through fifteen so the
and for the cap for a
groundwater lease goes for it
goes from seventy five acre feet
per year to one hundred twenty
five acre feet per year.
Right so I'm sorry is jumping
around we're doing them
thematically but that's those
are those are the changes
between this committee
substitute and the previous one.
Ledger the yes and if I can
dress a couple things madam
chair we didn't mention that we
changed the ground water cap
that had been originally in the
bill from I think seventy five
acre feet two hundred and twenty
five acre feet and we can talk
about why we did that madam
chair and I understand that the
sub has some handwriting on it
that some of you got an extra
copy on that from what I can
tell is on page twelve and it's
simply just because I think
an analyst with this point out
that was language that was added
or changed and we mentioned that
change in the conversation madam
chair and representative so I
hope that clarifies what and I
think I recognize handwriting is
one of our analysts and writing
so.
So sorry about that confusion.
In terms of
the acreage change the was the
the groundwater acreage change
this was done after consulting
with the office of the state
engineer and having further
conversations from some with
some of the stakeholders there
was a concern raised by pattern
that they would have some
difficulty
being able to complete the
project that we all of course
went on to complete across the
state and the state engineer sat
down with them and looked at
their numbers and look at the
state engineers numbers and
actually advice that we could
probably
accommodate their issues with
the hundred acre feet but we
decided in that range we decided
that we would give a little bit
more leeway and at a hundred and
twenty five as the number so I
hope on correctly characterizing
our conversation and certainly
can correct me if I haven't and
madam chair if I may I I think I
mean that's that's generally
true there's in the field you've
heard from from renewable energy
folks that these these caps are
are giving concern I don't want
to give to you know
misimpression that the.
It's sort of everybody's hunky
dory with these caps it is it is
a compromise we also have heard
from agricultural interests that
these caps to don't work for
some of the larger farms in
southeastern New Mexico in
particular we've heard from the
oil and gas industry so we and
we we it's a standard office
take very seriously you know of
any concerns that the the
practices were trying to put
into statute are going to work
for for industry
this is this is a compromise
there's a there's a trade off
for these expedited temporary
leases
that you know the the state
dissociation is worried that
some of these are in Providence
and granted they don't want to
much damage to happen in that
interim and so we've
We recognize that these caps
still
particularly for some this
larger farms in for oil and gas
they're still major concerns for
San Juan water commission
there's major concerns I don't
want to I want to sort of gloss
over that and and and we're open
to continuing to work at least
at the state engineers office on
additional things that we can do
to help those those folks
take water to where they need
but for the purposes of this
bill as the speaker mentioned
last last hearing we're we're in
a pretty tough spot for all of
those industries if we don't
pass anything and this is this
is sort of a compromise language
that we think is going to give a
little bit more flexibility to
some these industries and and
and that's that's that's were
out on that madam chair.
For.
Thank you madam chair thank you
for the disclosure
I don't know if.
Folks have had the chance to
digest if there's any questions
of the committee.
Representative Lane thank you
madam chair.
so.
I'm still trying to work through
the committee so but I as I was
trying to know something the
changes so Page ten.
At the top now so we're talking
about.
Think this is in the context of
setting a hearing on expedited.
Which application is that right.
Yes Madam chair representative.
And madam chair the way
understood the previous version
as it said that the caring had
to be no later than eighty days
but now we're saying it has to
be between sixty and eighty days
is that right.
Madam chair representative yes
okay and so.
Madam chair I am concerned.
About this again is in the
context of an expedited hearing.
Why do we set
The floor of two months out of
the date that the application is
filed.
If the if the intent is for to
be expedited.
Madam chair representative Lente
Because there is a there's a
deadline for filing your
objection and the filing of the
objection is just a is a plain
statement of the objection but
that's not that's very different
from preparing for an
evidentiary hearing which in the
way the state engineer does it
is similar to the type of
evidentiary hearing that takes
place in in a District Court and
so that was just to make sure
that there wasn't the scheduling
of here you know if someone
filing their objection
Around the time of the objection
deadline and then having to be
ready for a full blown
evidentiary hearing the District
Court variety within say two
weeks it actually gives them a
minimum of sixty days to
prepare.
Madam chair I guess I don't so.
Why wouldn't we put it.
A high end cap that existed
previously to make sure that the
applicant has a hearing within a
timely manner but why can we not
leave it up to the hearing
officer to have discretion
that's what happens in civil
cases all the time why can't we
have they're in officer have
discretion if it's a
straightforward case both
parties think it's gonna be
straight for why can't a city
hearing within say thirty days
why do we have to have a minimum
of sixty again this is in the
context of an expedited hearing
that's that's what we're talking
about.
Madam chair representative land
my apologies that I think in our
in our description of a change
we filtered to talk about the
following online fits as unless
all parties come to it consent
to a different hearing date and
that is new language is that
correct that is new language as
well so the parties can consent
to an earlier hearing date or
earlier or later hearing page
from the sixty to eighty at the
time period.
Adam chairman what if somebody's
pro testing.
Why would they ever be motivated
to stipulate to something short
and sixty days appointed in
protest things they don't want
this thing to get approved.
So I don't understand why they
would be willing to stipulate to
that they're saying this thing
should be denied.
Madam chair representative maybe
I misunderstood you but I
thought that you interjected
that concept of the parties
agreeing to a different date
time not what you know.
No that's okay from through the
no I I I like that I just when
we do we put in of of Florida I
think that's what causes me
concern because again.
This is in the context of an
expedited
The hearing officer
because I I don't think that.
Sixty days as a as a straight
rural cross the border that to
me is doesn't make a lot of
sense.
maybe can I get some
understanding as to where the
the number sixty came from.
Madam chair of Representative
land again I believe that for
example for purposes of
retaining an expert witness and
and what limited discovery might
be allowed in that type of thing
sixty days is pretty brief it's
pretty expedited.
Madam chair so I guess.
We're just going to start a
personal experience and that's I
mean do and what this from any
other part of a law.
Miss madam chair representative
Fund my expert has worked in the
field of water disputes and
litigation you know educations
for quite some time I think he
understands the process.
Madam chair I'm not doubting his
expertise I'm just grappling
with with no injected a new
concept in this and I think that
actually makes the bill even
less palatable.
For folks that are trying to to
get these these expedited
hearings and that's my my point
is I think unfortunately I think
it actually makes the bill
Wirth.
so I have a question.
So I I would ask that you
consider that as this bill moves
forward I think that that's not
helpful provision I think party
stipulating make sense to me.
I'm assuming these hearing
officers have lots of experience
to and I know how long it's
going to take for a case to be
ready to be heard so I don't
know why we strip that away from
them and in the context of an
expedited hearing we make it be
a minimum of sixty days.
So madam chair.
Did I understand when it comes
to.
Of groundwater it's now been
moved from seventy five acre
feet two hundred twenty five
acre feet is that right madam
chair and representative of
that's correct.
And.
I am a little puzzled by what I
heard and I think I need some
clarification are you saying
that the renewable folks are now
on board with a hundred twenty
five.
Madam chair I did not see the
okay Madam can I get some
clarification of because I
thought there was a reference to
a meeting and it seems like that
was a and agreeable meeting.
Madam chair and Representative
what we did was I've worked with
this office of the state
engineer an asset they look very
carefully at the
The
construction proposal that would
be occurring with one of our
large renewable energies and we
looked at the basins that they
would be and I can't speak for
him because I'm not an expert on
water a lot but it or
engineering my understanding was
and and looking at the various
issues associated with the the I
think it's three basins that the
project would be crossing we
felt the felt that generally you
know it's not a perfect
situation but in general that
should accommodate that project
that we were we were discussing
earlier madam chair and
representative.
Madam chair to.
Did you get any numbers from the
renewable companies themselves
so as to what they wanted madam
chair and representative they
have consistently been asking
for four hundred acre feet up in
that range
and there's and that's the
number that I've been here.
Which is madam chair quite a lot
of water.
Madam chair so.
Eight I'm a little troubled by
the state engineer.
Being the one.
Setting the number that they
feel like a private company.
Needs in order to do a project.
When the private companies are
the ones that are saying no on
twenty five isn't gonna cut it
so can I get some information
about how the state engineer
arrived at a hundred twenty five
and that would satisfy these
renewable energy construction
projects when they're telling us
it's more like three fifty to
four hundred.
Madam chair representative I
would be happy to do that
offline I think you know they
were very open with us in terms
of their water needs it's some
of that is proprietary I don't
want to go into the details of
the exact amount of water at the
exact locations of these act
times that they need but they
were open on that and and you
know the their their concerns I
mean they can they can express
and I'm not going to
Negative words in their mouths
the they thought that the four
hundred number would give them
considerably more flexibility
given a number of factors
but given given what they showed
us and and what was available we
thought we had the permitting
tools to be able to to prevent
this project from being being
jeopardized to be clear for the
committee we didn't we didn't
select the three and a one
hundred twenty five number this
is the Sanchez Bill and we're
just asked provide sort of.
Expert input into into the you
know permitting issues
And and we we attempted to do
that on on their that industry
as well as as well as some
others
but that's that's that's what I
feel comfortable saying a public
hearing on on you know where we
got with that number.
Madam chair so I.
And I'm really not trying to to
be rude but that's not a good
way to craft public policy to
say I I need some some details
as to why we're sticking at one
twenty five one I've heard
consistently public comment
needs to be three fifty to four
hundred and the response I
received is I'm sorry it's
proprietary I can't tell you
why.
I do know this that the
renewable folks.
Are saying consistently won
twenty five doesn't fix anything
and then I hear the state
engineers office saying well
actually
it does essentially we know
better than they do about doing
these projects and it's plenty
of water
obviously I'm not a water law
expert but I tend to trust the
folks that actually invest
millions of dollars in a project
that they know how many Water
Rights eight acre feud Water
Rights gonna take
so no offense to the state
engineers office but I have a
hard time believing that one
twenty five is done anything to
solve any of the problems across
any of the industry.
we muzzle stick at the seventy
five number for going to do
that.
madam chair can I get some some
explanation about the changes
that were made at the request of
the state gives.
yes.
Course madam chair
Representative planes the on
Kate.
I have this right page five
subsection D. of the bill.
Basically.
The language that was added on
line twenty five or that was
added to the final provides of
the and further provided that
Lisa water it Sir by insecure
created this subject to the
prohibition unexpected pre water
leases set forth in subsection
B. so there is already in this
bill
a
provision that says that of
water right served by any sector
community judge are not subject
to expedited temporary leases
and there was some language in
subsection do that caused there
to be a possible conflict
interpretation so this just
clarifies the exemption that's
art in the bill.
Madam chair thank you was there
any other changes that that the
sick sick yes requests that were
incorporated.
I don't believe so other than
that the hearing you want to
talk about the the well anyways
other than the sixty days
Kate that we discussed already
Madam chair representative.
Madam chair so the that four of
sixty that came from the
Siculus.
Yes yes madam chair
representative.
Madam chair
I appreciate the request is for
folks are watching home.
Like they have nothing better to
do on a Saturday morning.
Not so maybe it is kind of like
Saturday morning cartoons with
the.
In a different way
We need to consider.
So madam chair
hi so I'm a little puzzled by
the.
By the requests of the acequia
is because my understanding is
in state law don't sick is
already have basically a veto
power over these types of of
transactions.
Madam chair representative
they have the ability to put
into their by laws a decision
making process where they can
approve or deny requested leases
or transfers yes so madam chair
I guess I'm confused why.
Wire the acequia is.
interested in interrupting this
this existing process if they
already have a veto right within
state statute.
Madam chair Representative.
That's the the the desire of the
SEC is was to once they
understood that that this
substitute would take place in
that there would be a
possibility of an expedited
temporary lease they were they
did not want to have extra
temporary leases they wanted to
have a normal lease process
Mr chair Madam chair
representative they wanted all
leases of a secular Water it's
to be under the normal these
process.
Madam chair but you you
currently have the ability to.
To veto any proposed transfer
correct.
That's correct.
Okay so madam chair I guess I'm
confused why.
Why it's being put forth the
Disick is are the ones that are
in favor of this bill.
The changes to the bill right I
mean at a foundational level
they don't really help you
because you already have that
veto power some a little
confused.
by that and then I I will say to
I've I find it troubling.
that.
On the changes we give ear to
the state cures which is fine
there stakeholders.
But very happy to power This
bill doesn't help them in the
least.
But when it comes to the
renewable folks.
We've not giving them a year
we're not putting in the numbers
that they say that they need so
I'm concerned about why it is
that we are incorporating the
sake is needs
but nor in all the other
industry folks can I get some
some feedback on that please
madam chair and representative
as we discussed at the previous
hearing this bill addresses at
least eighty percent of people
of entities that request some
four of a lease so that's eighty
percent in addition we look very
critically madam chair at the
issue associated with the
renewable energy project that
has been discussed today and it
and I guess we we disagree as in
terms of what that particular
company is contending they need
in terms of their water and.
So as I said if this bill does
not pass eighty percent of
people in of entities that need
access to water relatively
quickly will no longer have that
ability in addition the
transportation department which
relies on access to water as
well will not have that ability
to do so.
Madam chair I think I don't
think that it's corrected.
That people have access to water
it's the decision of the state
engineers offices maybe.
which I understood from last
year and is still even up in the
air there's no court of appeals
opinion there's no spring court
opinion there's no injunction
there's nothing to prevent the
state engineers office for right
now from continuing this
practice they've chosen to obey
and if and you know the term
general that's it and I would I
also was reminded committee
chairman to a month it's not
like we're talking about this
vast amount of leases and
somehow New Mexico's we sucked
dry of water two months that's
all that we're talking about and
so in light of that I don't
understand why again why we give
your this acres which is fine
given the place of the table
this bill doesn't help them
there to have a veto power in
statute which we discussed this
morning but when you look at
other stakeholders like
renewables there screaming from
the rooftop saying this is not
enough this is going to cut us
out of the lakes and if you do
this then you're cutting off the
bility of New Mexico to put
forth these large renewable
projects which has as a state
we've said this is how we're
going to do electric generation
moving forward and it feels like
for taking that away from them
so madam chair still.
Have concerns about the
committee so so thank you.
Representative okay
Representative Nibert.
I have.
Thanks.
Representative Alcon I hope we
can all have that sort of
conversation with each other
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair madam
chair
If I look at the time periods
for this expedited temporary
lease procedure.
It looks to me like.
They can file for the they can
file a protest if I read the
rules of this here correctly
protest may be filed within
seventy days of the electronic
publication.
And less there's some delay in
getting it published which may
even extend beyond seventy days
is that an accurate time frame.
Madam chair representative yes.
And so let's let's assume that
we have a the seventy day.
Period
the publication's matter that
extend beyond that seventy days
so it's seventy days from when
the state engineer puts it on
the electronic posting.
and then.
The hearing would be sixty to
eighty days thereafter you
you're looking at over a third
and maybe even approaching half
of the year before and expedited
temporary lease could be granted
it is that.
Those numbers accurate or seem
accurate yes Madam chair
representative if there's a
protest if this protest.
If there's not a protest.
Madam chair madam chair.
It would be seventy days would
be the main anymore time period
from the date of posting for
that
grant to occur Madam chair
representative that's correct.
And still that's a that's well
over two months and and for next
with highlighted
differently so that that seems
a.
Hello all of.
Madam chair.
And madam chair you mentioned.
That the increase.
Was to try to accommodate I
think you said pattern but.
I would I'm not sure whether
pattern doesn't need more than a
hundred twenty five acre feet
for its projects and variety of
areas.
And certainly
My concern is is how it's going
to affect us in and
Southeast New Mexico were.
Much greater quantities of water
are needed of them of the limits
that are set forth here so madam
chair and madam chair and maybe
direction for from the state
engineers office.
How do you envision.
Companies that are requiring
greater than a hundred twenty
five acre feet of water.
Preceding.
Should this bill go into effect
madam chair and representative
we have a leasing process that's
been in effect for some time
we've had testimony previously
madam chair and representative
that in the area that you are
discussing and Travis county Lee
County Eddy County no
preliminary approvals have been
provided since twenty twenty so
I think we can assume that they
have been relying on other
available process sees.
Perhaps emergency Water Act
perhaps of normal leasing but as
we know there is no preliminary
approvals being issued right now
so the normal process sees
apparently are being utilized
madam chair and representative.
you madam chair and.
Madam chair the the.
I'm not sure that the concerns
that have been expressed which
would necessarily agree that the
current
Change that has occurred is
necessarily meeting their needs
that
This issue.
This issue is one that that.
Has some potential I think the
testimony was has some
potential.
Adverse impacts particularly in
Southeast New Mexico in a
declared basin that I think
you're going to have.
Potential long reaching
Adverse impacts on.
Our communities.
On the industry that not only
supports are part of the state
but frankly the whole state.
And I think it's going to serve
as an impediment to advancing.
The very public policy that that
this body has been
very robust in in trying to
advance and that's the renewable
energy secretary of the even
the.
Ability get transmission lines
built in the state it's going to
be impacted by these limitations
and
I I just think that we need to
be.
Very
Careful when we start to putting
some what I would consider
artificially low
Limitations particularly in
Southeast New Mexico where we
know those of.
Those these limitations are much
less than what is actually being
required right now of of of
those industries so for that
reason
in off I'm not going to be able
to support this and I do hope
that as we work with the
affected industry in the state
engineers office of the.
You will.
Follow up with me on trying to
get some of legislation may be
an upcoming sessions to deal to
deal specifically with those
issues because.
I don't think thank you issue
is.
Is going to be involved in
southeast New Mexico I think
there's one of state here in
Lincoln County but there are
none to my knowledge and Chavis
said if we were.
and curry county so
that's where the major
activities are concerns are for
me and and I hope that we can
figure out how to how to wrestle
with the issue how to get water.
Two companies.
How to allow farmers to lease
their water tech companies
quickly so that
We don't.
Hand cuffs those industries and
prevent the economic development
that that we're relying on
And that that's a concern madam
chair madam chair so the
thank you.
And I I just have a couple
questions
I guess I'm just thinking about
that the process in the history
of this on expedited leases
madam chair.
Were these being filed wanted to
a month or prior to twenty
twenty five renewable energy
companies.
Madam chair and madam chair.
There were there were there had
been
Preliminary approval
applications prior to twenty
twenty from from energy I am
trying to remember off the top
of my head if there are
renewable energy projects in
that time frame I know that
since twenty twenty when we're
talking about the one two two
igate per year where we really
tried to to restrain them there
were
there was at least one
preliminary approval we did
grant for renewable energy
project in that time frame thank
you madam chair and with the
threshold that's being proposed
today at one twenty five I
understand that you know the the
amount of water was extended
if with this current CS is that.
Was that consistent with what
previous expedited leases looks
like with the requests that were
made.
Madam chair
It is but these are very
different projects I don't want
to over you know overstate the
the so there is a renewable
energy project in twenty twenty
one that got something within
these limits there's that that's
going to be good for all
projects it really will will
depend you know just to sort of
clarify we we're not the experts
on how you build these large
transmission lines or wind farms
or solar farms or any of these
projects battery farms you name
it we are expert in is how we
can permit and once you figure
out how many well as you certain
areas we can you know we can try
to work off of that so we
definitely respect that the
companies know better than us
how much water they need and we
try to do as we do with many
industry is is try to work with
them and make sure that they get
the water they need without
hurting other people thank you I
think I feel like this is such a
big undertaking when we're
talking about the compromise
that was made and the effort
with which to try to create an
expedited process that didn't
exist I'm really grateful to
understand that.
We would have won.
Rather than kind of go with what
we have right now which is not a
parameter not nothing's set and
the go with the flow isn't
working so I mean I feel like
this is in a good shape to
understand that we needed a
process this is being proposed
it's reasonable with what it is
that we have requested of the
sponsor and of all the parties
to at least come together to to
figure out what the best way of
going about this would be
And as the sponsor clearly said
there's other process these to
to go through to to seek this
out and also
just other opportunities to
perhaps improve in the future
but we need this I know that
I've missed the speaker did you
so did you want to say
something.
Yes chair thank you and
apologies for not present in
quicker thank you madam chair
and sponsor for working on the
bill if they were on a point six
version now.
it looks like you increased you
know I've I've got a.
Without.
The repeating everything I said
two days ago.
This is a place that is very
messy and complicated but I'm
glad we're in the space because
for the last fifteen years or
so.
We engaged in practices that.
We are now being told.
Maybe you are not legal and you
know I'm not sure why no one
challenged I agree with the
leader I I think it is it is an
opinion from the Attorney
General
and.
Not.
A Supreme Court decision for
example.
However.
I think that as the chief law
enforcement officers in New
Mexico coming down and saying
this is a legal practice and you
should not continue it I think
that's.
Pretty clear guidance to us
I know some have worked Madam
chair representative on this
issue for years.
And perhaps the legislature
never felt the urgency to
actually.
Do something.
I do appreciate your willingness
madam chair representative to
work with all the stakeholders.
It's a point six version because
as a testament to you wanting to
work with folks.
Up.
I do continue to be concerned.
About.
What we've heard and what we
continue to hear particularly
from renewable energy industry.
Yeah I mean that that is an
issue we we've made a
commitment.
The transition from fossil fuels
into clean energy and and.
You know I guess that was in the
details it depends on what kind
of clean energy depends on what
kind of company depends on whose
backyard it's going to go into
you know I'm not sure my
community would have supported a
budget limits in their backyard.
As much as we support renewable
energy so.
I do have a couple more
questions just to clarify some
things for me and and and you
know I'm trying to understand.
From a philosophical perspective
I think that water should be all
of our concerts.
Right.
Now when I think of.
Think of a sick yes I think
surface water right come down to
just a guess.
Chair representative why why is
groundwater such an important
aspect of this for the S. I
guess and maybe it's a question
for this I guess but why is it
such an important piece of this
for that specific community
chair representative happy madam
chair and speaker for to my
experts.
And.
madam chair and Mr speaker of
just to be clear I I think I
believe from what I've heard
from the state engineer in the
last couple of hearings that
groundwater is a concern to the
state engineer as well as to the
status for the same reasons for
similar reasons there are parts
of the state as of people
point out where sectors dominate
and parts of the state where
there's very few seconds but
regardless of that for as for
example there was a preliminary
approval given for five thousand
acre feet to intrepid potash
mine that would have had
tremendous the facts on
deliveries of water to the state
line in fact the Interstate
Stream Commission which most of
us believe Interstate Stream
Commission and the state
engineer believe in the same
policies in the same practices
Interstate Stream Commission
objected to the granting of a
preliminary approval of for the
injured intrepid potash mine
even though that would have been
if correct me if I'm wrong a
groundwater withdrawal they
would just note I'm sorry was
primarily service which I'm so
sorry I apologize I take that
all back I guess I would just
say hypothetically than a
groundwater withdrawal can have
a surface water the fact.
and so if depending on where
that groundwater withdrawal is
located or how close it is to
the stream
if you're a group of seconds in
a community and a water rate is
being transferred whether it's a
permanent transfer a regular
lease or a expedited lease from
below you to above you whether
it's a service withdrawal that
will have a very immediate
effects on you if it's if it's a
new service withdrawal above you
but if even if it's a new
groundwater withdrawal above you
there will be in effect the
effect may be slightly delayed
but there will be in effect and
so that is why there are there
is concern both in the state
engineer office in with us about
the practicing with a maximum
months would be allowed Madam
chair representative in New I I
understand that right and and I
mean even to your example that
let's let's assume it is
groundwater and surface water
five thousand acre feet.
That's we in the billion under
twenty five.
That's a big difference right so
whether we land at one twenty
five two hundred two fifty three
hundred four we go back down
seventy five it's a big
difference from the worst case
scenario that you've presented
and what's in this bill and
that's where I'm getting it
chair representative and
experts.
I understand that seventy five.
Were may I I if I remember
correctly I think C. engineer
can look that.
More or less look at
applications and landed at the
numbers that would happen Madam.
to be fair madam chairman and
speaker we just the state
engineer to advise us on what
the general you know what a
common amount of acreages of oil
for and what we're told is in
the hundred acre feet area get I
get that correct.
Eight.
Roughly the Madam speaker yeah
it it just because it's seventy
five was was the number the
sponsor and and you know the the
bill's backers felt comfortable
with we're again trying to find
the sort of the objective in
public well it wasn't we said
okay sorry I got re alligned
it's just about eighty percent
of of of transfers were you know
below that area it was it was
kind of a
number that they feel
comfortable so so I think that's
the crux of one of the issues I
have here is is that we reach
that number
you all legislative objective
information and data but but
it's it's still a subject of
number right and and now we've
seen that that some subjected
number can increase to one
twenty five and and look I I
will also say this I've had
meetings with many of you who
are last couple days and the
five hundred acre feet that we
heard earlier which is no longer
like.
V. number now it's like maybe
three fifty K..
This is a prime example of folks
like really needing to get
together in a room like I'm I.
This is the legislative process
for a reason and this is a
process that can only work if
there's compromise and and I'm
guessing that one over again I
mean we've seen it happen with
other pieces of legislation in
other committees and this one as
well.
There's a great deal of credit
here that needs to go to the.
And chair representative to the
sponsor of this bill for willing
to work right because she didn't
have to move from seventy five
to one hundred twenty five.
I mean that's her prerogative
Sanchez.
at the same time.
It's still early in the process
and I highly encourage you all
to really look for ways to make
this work I will remind industry
this has a two year
delayed implementation date so
if you have projects in the
pipeline right now.
That will require more than
whatever's in this bill.
I think we can safely assume
that there's a process sort of
stew illegal what my legal it's
it's it's been deemed.
A constitutional.
What what to give give give us
the phrase of what the agent
told us Madam percent chair
Mister speaker I believe the AG
said the
The prior process it would has
been
Without support in statute or
regulation.
And that that therefore the and
find that there's legal support
for the process so madam chair
representative Mr checkers you
can still continue to over the
next two years projects that are
in the pipeline theoretically.
You can still rely on the former
process.
Madam chair Mister speaker
that's that's how we've been
doing the one to two of those
since that the District Court
ruling basically the same way I
mean we we didn't see the
Attorney General opinion to be
that different than District
Court opinion it's their their
authoritative but not binding
and we really throttle back the
process
as a result of that and you know
and.
There are people who lost out on
the opportunity to to do
economically beneficial
activities because of that there
there were
projects you know oil and gas
Act that didn't happen because
of that but we've we've
continued to do them and and and
in settings where we felt she
was just sort of less legal risk
but it's it's been
it has been a process that we've
done in the in the past three
years sparingly but we have been
enjoying from doing sure no I
understand that
Mr speaker effective decision
the attorney general's opinion
went beyond just referencing
statute and regulation and also
called into question whether the
due process had been violent is
violated by the preliminary
review process that's in the.
I understand that the committee
representative
For folks that have projects in
the pipeline could still
theoretically.
Rely on the former process.
Understanding that it's on
shaky.
Legal ground because regional
authority for it
By the same token madam chair
representative.
That process is.
Has been shaking for fifteen
years or however long.
For those that are concerned
about their project coming
online in the next six months
you have a process that you can
use.
So long as I guess the agency
doesn't challenge you or
somebody sues you L..
Which is horrible because these
are big industries that have
been set dollars invested.
That's a problem right not of
our own making it will be real
clear that our own making I
don't know who came up with this
great idea but clearly at all a
good one.
So here we are.
This bill is I think.
In its infancy has a long way to
go S. if we pass this committee
thank you also for that has to
go through the Senate and there
two weeks ago and the last thing
I want is for us to not be able
to have a process in place.
Because it is not fair.
For.
People of the state it is not
fair for the Essick yes it's not
fair for those who rely on water
for their way of life beyond
being consumers like me and you
many of you.
And it's also not fair for
these.
Industries and companies that we
are working to attract.
And.
I'll say it again like we can't
be we've got to be really
careful.
Not to talk out of both sides of
our mouth here like if we want
these big giant.
Renewable energy projects I
believe this is the largest wind
generation project in the
western hemisphere is what I've
been told.
And it's in New Mexico and we
should be proud.
Yet here we are fighting over
whether it should be seventy
five one twenty five to fifty or
four hundred.
Seems like a really seems like a
really small potatoes here for
what's it for what's at stake.
So however this bill goes in
wherever it goes from here I
highly encourage highly
encourage people to sit down and
talk like really seriously like
we're all grown ups here like
let's figure this out can be
that difficult.
And let's get a process in place
that we can all be proud of.
Understanding that.
We've got to do so with all of
the honesty and transparency in
the world because that's been my
frustration about this process
to I've heard about three
hundred different stories about
how this may or may not affect
and what the numbers really
should be has really frustrated.
Because if folks wanted up with
our process have at it.
The multi billion dollar
investment you made is really
a shaky ground because there's
not much you can be able to do.
If this is enforced.
Thank you madam chair thank
representative.
Representative Alcon for his
own.
Thank you madam chair means easy
of the I would like to remove
that house Judiciary Committee
shift through throughout the
bill one twenty one two facets
Committee.
We have a motion I think we need
to do not pass the original
sorry I want to read.
Representative.
Make it difficult.
Madam chair I move a do not fast
on house bill one twenty one and
to do that house Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill one twenty one.
That you meet a.
We have a second by
Representative McQueen.
Please.
Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane no I.
Mr speaker yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert no
Representative three.
Representative.
Reem.
Representative should pan ski
yes.
Representative Romero my vice
chair yes.
And.
Yes.
house bill one twenty one to do
half of House Judiciary
Committee I.
six to three.
Thank you madam three of the
past thank you.
Thank you.
Representative Matthews I think
Europe next.
House bill two thirty three.
We are on house bill two thirty
three Representative Matthews.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
H. B. two thirty three and with
me today is way.
We can thank that.
Bailey
Bailey clay Bailey with clear
begin somebody totally
different.
with regulation licensing
department and this is
This bill as amended
really only adds to division's
to the authorized list of
divisions within our LD these
are existing and functioning
divisions they just were never
put into the statute.
And then in the effort to be
really organized the list of
divisions is now alphabetical.
And that is all this bill
that's.
With that we stand for
questions.
Very good thank you
Representative Matthews before
we go to the committee let's go
to the audience anyone wishing
to speak in opposition to the
bill please raise your hand.
Anyone online wishing to speak
in opposition to the bill please
raise your hand.
Anyone in the room wishing to
speak in support of the bill
please raise your hand.
Anyone online wishing to speak
in support please raise your
hand.
We'll go to the committee.
Committee question.
Comments.
Move the best.
Wow.
Okay we have a motion made by
Representative queen and
seconded by leisure lane for
details of house bill two thirty
three call the roll please
Representative Alcon.
Casey.
Representative Lane yes.
Mr speaker.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative Nibert.
Representative re yes.
Representative green.
Representative Penske yes.
Vice chair yes.
Yes
I have seven zero we have a two
thousand house bill two thirty
eight thank you.
Yes center committee all right
we're now thank you we're now on
House Bill three forty nine as
amended nursing practice act
changes.
Chair guy Ecosse good to see you
thank you I have been in here
yet so good to see you off.
Ready for me to begin with so
House Bill three forty nine as
you all know that have heard
that that we haven't nursing
crisis in New Mexico and the
whole entire United States the
latest New Mexico health care
workforce report indicates a
shortage of our ins between six
thousand and nine thousand we
are working to increase the
slots in our school of nursing
to provide more loan repayment
options for serving in the rural
areas in that building we want
to update the New Mexico nursing
practice act which is why we're
here today most of the changes
to the nurse practice act or in
the sections of laws that were
enacted in nineteen ninety one
which was thirty years ago this
bill addresses the needed
updates to the act I wanted to
also introduce you to my witness
Linda Siegel who will explain
the amendment who will explain
the bill.
Thank you welcome to Siegel.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee Linda Siegel are
Representative The New Mexico
nurses association as
practitioner Council nurse
midwives and we all got together
to look at changes that needed
to occur to the act which is
representative Gallegos said
hasn't.
changed in forty two years so
one of the main things we wanted
to do is advanced practice
nurses have that's become a
generic term which means nurse
practitioners nurse midwives
nurse clinical nurse specialist
and nurse anesthetist and so
there is a term that's commonly
used and even used in the rules
called advanced practice
registered nurses well it wasn't
in the statute so it seems very
important to put that in there
we have also defined anesthesia
which had not been defined in
that is of course what siRNAs
nurse anesthetists do.
There are are thank you twenty
one thousand
licensed nurses in New Mexico
not all of them practice in New
Mexico only a little over
sixteen thousand actually
practice in New Mexico but we
are the largest health care for
our work force in the state and
that is one of the reasons that
we thought we needed to increase
the number of members of the
board of nursing there is the
pharmacy board has nineteen
thousand on the nineteen hundred
licensees and and they have nine
members so we wanted to add some
additional members so we can get
our comprehensive
approach to the the board making
decisions because they would
have an advanced practice and
educator and an L. P. and and
and all the flavors of nursing
could be Representative so
decisions would be I understood
and and I would and perhaps
easier we have also created some
language which is very important
to the nursing shortage and that
is the clinical placement
process on page fourteen one of
the things that all the schools
of nursing say when they're when
they're students are ready to
start doing clinicals is that
it's really hard to find a
hospital and nursing home.
The clinic where they can do
their practice their their
clinical time and no one
quarters coordinates that so the
board of nursing our is willing
to to take this on and help
create a system that could be
used by all the schools
throughout the state to
coordinate these clinical
placement we've also taken some
language Eric which has not been
used for years in when this act
passed in nineteen ninety three
there was language play stand
that every advanced practice
nurse would have to submit to
the board of nursing for
approval their formula airy
meaning the drugs that they're
going to prescribe because often
APR and specialize.
But that the way pharmaceuticals
have changed there is no way to
do that anymore and actually for
at least ten years nobody has
been submitting a formal letter
to the board of nursing because
it it's just it's an impossible
thing to do so we're taking that
out we we have also put in the
act.
The ability of the board of
nursing to raise the fees so we
we we increase that cap for the
licensing fees because
unfortunately the number of
nurses in New Mexico actually
getting their license in New
Mexico has been declining so we
want the board to have the
flexibility to be able to if
they need to only if they need
to raise a licensing fee there's
no intent to do that at this
point.
We've clarified the language and
changed it from diversion
language when someone strays off
the course to alternatives to
discipline and we've created an
expungement section so if you
have done something wrong with
the board has had to sanction
you once you have completed
whatever it is they wanted you
to do.
and that activity goes into a
national database and we would
like to be able to expunge that
and keep and keep our nurses
working here as long as they've
done.
What they were supposed to do
and that pretty much summarizes.
Thank you madam chair that will
stand for questions you let's go
to the audience those wishing to
speak in opposition to house
bill three forty nine please
raise your hand.
Those online wishing to speak in
opposition to three forty nine
these iterations.
Those in the audience wishing to
speak in favor of rate of bill
three three forty nine please
raise your hand.
Okay yes over here.
Madam chair members of the
committee Deborah Walker the
executive director for the New
Mexico nurses association I just
wanted to reiterate what miss
Siegel said this is based on
multiple conversations of
meetings that NMFA convened over
the course of the interim with
the larger specialty
professional nursing
associations so once those
topics were created we
appreciate the sponsor and the
others on the bill for taking
those items under consideration
the nursing community greatly
appreciates the nonpartisan
by Carol support that we have
enjoyed since the nineteen
seventies forward so the bill
before you is supported by the
broader nursing community
throughout the state and we hope
that you'll be able to support
of this well thank you.
Good morning madam chair a theme
committee members I'm still
nurse since this morning I have
into given my career you gave me
a little hope so thank you
I also rise and support this
bill these are much needed
updates they are reflective of
what's going on other states and
updating our practice so I would
also like to chime in and say
support this wholeheartedly as
those are labor our labor groups
as well thank you thank you.
Anyone else in the audience
wishing to speak in support.
Those online wishing to speak in
support please raise your hand.
See anyone so we're back to the
sponsor any concluding remarks
before we go to the committee
chairwoman no I think we're
ready for for questions.
Do you have an amendment someone
mentioned
yes I'm sorry madam chair Stuart
there was an eighty left out
maybe we should talk about the
amendment then chairman of the
in in the prescription.
And I don't think we have a copy
of the amendment you.
But.
When we hear what can we.
Phone.
For.
Is.
Well this is I'm madam chair
this is what the drafters told
us we had to do and I thought in
rowing and racing could fix it
because it was like an a that
what's the to to get yes
two two five six five nine point
one okay great so what you're
thinking and then they can tell
you why you're also on a last
online twenty five before the
word licensed strike a.
So what would be one licensed
practical nurse.
Not one a licensed practical
nurse the point system to that's
not what it says was a.
That's not what the bill says.
Right I'm more looking at a bill
number that is two two three
five eight seven point one is
that your bill.
Two three five seven eight one
well there was a prior amendment
that took out.
Language.
So my bill says one preferably a
licensed practical nurse.
That doesn't reflect the
amendments person that doesn't
reflect the members from the
first Canadian madam chair.
The that's why ensure the the
amendment in health and Human
Services changed language right
before that.
That's why it's computer.
Okay.
So what I'm hearing
is that actually my to.
Experts to my left were wrong.
Such a rare experience.
So the for the record line twice
okay all right so anyone wishing
to make a move the amendment.
But for the but.
Sorry Representative McQueen so
madam chair I was on board with
your expert the other to the
other meant other amendment so I
get the point but.
You what this is a list of who's
on the board.
And it's you know I these into
the you know that's up to
nine.
That's at the line.
But I wonder about the word
preferably.
Madam chair that miss
Representative McQueen was taken
was also strong Ironman okay
sorry.
Thank you Mr thank you anyone
else wishing to speak about the
amendment like to move the
amendment.
For adoption.
When motion okay a motion to
adopt by Representative Romero
seconded by Representative nine
for to call the roll call I was
going to make a statement you
you weren't second.
Hello Representative Sapan ski
don't put your pen up when I'm
asking for seconds.
One second we have we're going
to adopt the are you still want
to come with you then okay I'm
sorry Representative go ahead.
it seems to me that it should
say on page eight line twenty
five before the second.
Word licensed.
Strike Hey.
That's what some some out
because there's too licensed in
that.
Before the second line.
You madam chair there is no age
before the first license.
There there is none but.
I.
I'm surprised they they drafted
that would to workers to
identical words in the state of
mind and say which were.
I don't we get it I don't care
whether we make it or not I just
pointed that out okay we have a
motion a motion to adopt the
amendment.
By Representative Romero
Representative the but
Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane.
Mr speaker.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert yes
Representative we.
Representative Rehm.
Representative the Penske yes.
Madam chair yes.
Madam chair.
Yes by a vote of seven to zero
the amendment is adopted.
Right we're now on the main
bills
question Representative Romero
thank you madam chair really
grateful state here that we're
updating all of this thank you
for bringing the bill I just had
a question on section two one
temporary licensure
And and just thinking through
reciprocity and how this sort of
works with other states as we're
trying to get as many nurses
into our state as we can can you
just described the intent for
the temporary licensure and how
that would perhaps move into
permanent and and what's the
proposal is in order to get them
out of here
Thank you madam vice chair madam
chair okay so this is a
separate temporary license or
licensure provision for
candidates who have not Polak
who who are in New Mexico and
have not practice for four years
or longer and are seeking
licensure the activation this
only applies to them in another
section we were part of house
bill one one ninety one last
year where we implemented the
which started July and January
one that if you come to the
state with a license on are in
license any kind of nursing
license from another state you
prove that you have that license
and it's a clean license you
automatically get a license
within thirty days and then you
have a year of a temporary
license to accomplish anything
that the our state might want
you to do.
So that provision is already in
here and we were really grateful
for that because that really
helps nurses with the backlog
they come with a license within
thirty days they have to get The
New Mexico a temporary New
Mexico license good for one year
so this little provision applies
to only that narrow group of
people okay madam chair
representative so we have a
temporary license and temporary
license I guess and gas trying
to understand the difference I
appreciate that and then I guess
just understanding the so anyone
that practices or has practice
for anything three years three
and a half years they can
automatically get that
temporary.
In a separate section of I just
I have to write that up okay yes
are in the I was in question
thank you madam chair anyone
else.
With questions.
Chair do pass on house bill
three forty nine as of the.
One
second second.
So we have a motion for do pass
on house bill three forty nine
twice amended made by
Representative and nine versus
seconded by Representative Sapan
scheme would you call the roll.
Senator Bob Corker.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane.
Yes.
Mr speaker.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative night for.
Representative Lee.
Representative.
Representative.
Yes.
For
are vice chair yes.
Madam chair yes.
By a vote of eight zero we have
the two passes a man on house
bill three forty one thank you
thank you for reading you're
welcome so I have been informed
we do have lunch in the across
the way the normal this LFC
rumor appropriation room know
how folks want to handle that we
could you know one by one go
gets the food or do you want to
break for ten minutes and just
pick some food up and come back
how would you like to do that.
Well yeah and then I'd like to
skip the whole floor session to
if we can do that.
So.
Okay all right you promise
you'll be back in ten minutes
promises promises okay cool
we're gonna break for about ten
minutes so we can pick up some
lunch and the.
Take a break thank you for so
at.
Wealth twenty we'll be back.
New Mexico.
Better.
Okay.
Senator.
I.
Representative.
There's a lot of yeah absolutely
are actually turns on the
tourney's.
Deprive.
I'm really not.
That's right.
Well first of all I mean they're
worried about the test for which
is.
Seven eight.
One two three three that was
part of the analysis that you
can kind of.
And.
And that's on.
Okay I don't know.
I just.
Concern.
Senate.
If you.
That's what the provision for
the alarms.
It says that like hi is the plan
to consign a hold harmless
overstate.
And and.
State Farm.
Have it doesn't say that that
they're on the hunt for that
whole time.
What is the.
If you look at what it says is
then the the service provider
can only go after the first
which is the point that I
thought I don't think that's
what are.
What it means here because I I.
I hear you because as a lawyer I
would say insurers say I need
you to release that we refer I
can write the check there's a
whole our listing here this is
if they give a hold harmless
agreement to the insurer the
service providers can only
pursue the person who receives
the money that's the part of
her.
It's cover and I told the.
Trying.
Okay great thank you.
I think the thing about six
fifteen yes okay first of all
are you looking at look at your
teeth I do have two two five
eight six nine point one.
It's clear it will give you
that.
It is it is really just saying
like and I'm gonna say this.
Nine three presentation.
If that.
It would really just making sure
that we have to be required New
Mexico that drivers have like
twenty five fifty ten insurance.
And all the thing is if you have
the insurance is there is
required by the state that
you're not gonna be suicide
insurance committee for not
having enough insurance but the
state department for how much
insurance you can have and if
you need that the clerks are not
going to get for not having
enough coverage and that's
really all that subsection eight
we'll see where it says.
Sens.
For.
It's.
There are pursue the excess.
The problem with that we can the
two ninety nine point nine
percent of the time State Farm
is particularly egregious about
the state.
A request for you recover from
the door
country thanks.
Contract
was.
I tell you okay as.
It was.
Under.
Health care.
My.
You have to go get the twenty
five percent will say this is
all they have.
Before the vote by understand.
It's it's from my side sometimes
you know.
We have.
She yes.
Wait for the next twenty four
she's going to take that
position.
Sanchez.
Hello.
I don't have see with.
That I usually have twenty five
first St Louis permission act
to.
Doing so yes I.
Representative because.
Back to Representative.
It.
But I can justify it we will be
sending that I dislike moving
stuff around.
Show quote that's right.
The.
Yes there.
This is something.
I tell you if your next one
they're different now.
I think that all the time I
just.
Depending on where I am.
Where we have
to be stupid kids on.
I have
four days of.
Those indications of customer
that there.
What
is the price.
Is this the.
Okay.
Well I
reached over to the COVID thank
you.
Thank you.
Four.
We have
have okay so.
Okay excellent all right.
Thank.
Thank you for the duration okay
requirements so we're hoping so
I have a bill three one seven
that's the radically up next and
we're hoping.
This is necessary here.
If you were hoping for that if
that's not the case with.
You can just.
Right right here.
Yes this is my bills this year.
Right following.
We've got.
Well.
The.
Representative.
Is a great.
Mexico yeah.
That yes.
Every time I call today but we.
We can.
The only thing that.
Actually conduct internet
service.
Today my some stuff.
I'll be here within three
minutes I will be that.
Six.
It is.
With.
Senator disposal.
For.
For cannabis.
Please things to do you have.
Madam center.
Coming from there's committees.
So.
This.
Thanks.
What the.
This
is.
It's kind.
Yeah.
This is.
Access.
So
far as the name of the.
I am is that.
So that's what.
This program.
I guess I.
So what I have.
Senator.
Apparently there's no quorum and
government.
I.
Russia's.
This.
What what has.
cast us.
I.
It
racks.
So much.
There.
Yeah.
Here.
Okay.
So.
Representative whatever it is.
Yeah.
So.
The.
Yes.
Ferrary is for.
So.
These.
So.
You.
Since.
Thanks
for.
The budget.
No.
Except.
The
whole.
With.
Is it fair.
Care.
Because.
The.
Yeah.
Right.
To.
I.
Areas.
We just.
Thank.
She.
So we have come back from lunch
in our short break I just want
to talk a little bit about our
agenda we're going to next year
motor vehicle code subrogation
rights but before we do that it
was pointed out to me that we
left off house bill two ninety
two which was on our agenda but
not didn't make it to the
revised agenda I don't that is
it's medical cannabis.
Thanks sensitive sensible safety
sensitive positions to would
people have any of that we if we
have time to take that bill up
Austin will go make sure we have
the copies that we need.
No it was but it didn't make
this agenda so I don't know if
you guys had a chance to prepare
if not we'll just have to roll
the bill.
It was on it was schedule for
today.
It's not on the list but it two
ninety two yes to ninety two.
I I think.
It's not the one we talked about
this morning ladies.
Medical Center diss cannabis
Medical Center the positions
yeah.
Okay all right so perhaps when
we get Austin is going to make
copies of what we need you know
that analyses and so on okay I'm
force if that's okay with
everyone but course this is all
based on whether we have time so
as we do have a relatively long
agenda so we're ready to hear
from you Representative.
House Bill three seventeen back
back back again.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
I do have a committee substitute
for House Bill three seventeen
that you all should receive.
I don't know what I'll do with
the was there Committee sub for
this bill No sorry.
Three seven three seventeen.
Yes.
And I will read the to to
number.
Make sure on the same page.
Three seventy three seventy
thank you.
That is two two five eight six
nine point one.
Do we need I don't know if we
need to move the substitute
before start explaining the
changes are just give us some
and little bit of activity
happening here right now thank
you madam chair okay.
All right with someone to insure
I move the committee so for
discussion very good thank our
members madam chair and members
of the committee so what the
substitute does is just makes a
couple improvements on the bill
from the last time I was here at
the suggestion of the analysis
we included the definitions of
persons to make it clear that
the act will apply to natural
persons as well as corporations
companies Xcerra I also had a
conversation a really productive
conversation with representative
Nibert.
And we've also included a
licensing language as it applies
to service providers as well.
And based on the questions that
were asked in the analysis in
the prior committee we've
expressly limited the lean and
the payments under this act to
services provided to an injured
patient in the normal course of
business so if your chiropractor
also happens to be here not she
can file a claim but if your
brother is helping get you to
appointments that would not be
considered a service and then
lastly we have tightened up the
language for section seven
subsection E. as requested and
it now says if a driver is
covered by a motor vehicle or
auto or automobile excuse me a
liability policy in the minimum
limits set forth in section
sixty six five of the NMSA
nineteen seventy eight at the
time of the alleged loss that
person shall be immune from any
third party subrogation action
seeking segregation of payment
of under insured benefits paid
in excess of those limits so
that language is necessary
because we want people to know
that if they follow the law and
by insurance they won't be sued
by another insurance company New
Mexico requires drivers to Kerry
twenty five fifty ten insurance
that's the minimum and if an
injured patients damages exceed
the required coverage and the
injured patient has under
insured coverage than the
underinsured coverage kicks in
above the minimum limits fill in
some states under insured
carriers have started suing
drivers who did have liability
insurance and the minimum limit
set by the state but at the same
time lobbying against raising
those limits so if the dryer
driver has the liability
insurance required by the law.
This is just ensuring that they
not be subjected to a lawsuit
for not having enough insurance
the lawsuit claims that the
driver should have done more
than required by law and so
we're just making sure that
we're not asking too much of
drivers so the basics of this
bill.
It does not increase the amounts
and attorney gets paid it just
harmonizes treatment of all
providers hospitals health
insurance therapists cetera it
actually speeds up payments to
injured people because of the
amounts to be paid are clear for
all service providers and it
also makes clear the uninsured
motorist subrogation suits are
treated like any other personal
injury lawsuit so madam chair
members of the committee.
And those subrogation lawsuits
that require that no mention of
insurance or payments be made
and and parties are included as
plaintiffs and the case has to
be proven by the same standard
as any other civil case like
which is the preponderance of
evidence standard also known is
more likely than not to a jury
just like any other personal
injury case still.
All that being said with that
madam chair members the
committee I would like to
introduce Mister ray of our
guests whose expertise in
insurance line litigation is
well known I'll ask him and
madam chair members the
committee if he has anything to
add and then we would stand for
questions the only thing I would
add is that what this does is it
normalizes the system for
collecting reimbursement for
medical.
Services provided right now we
basically have two parallel
systems that do not align with
one another the system available
to hospitals and a system
available to other health care
providers hospitals have
additional rights because they
get to place a lien on recovery
but by common law they also
reduce their rate of something
called the common fund drive
health care providers argue that
they're not subject to the
common fund drive in but their
ability to recover payment for
the services they provided is
much weaker than a hospital's
ability and what this bill does
is puts them on par giving all
parties the ability to assert a
lien against the recovery and
makes consistent the fact that
the common fund doctrine applies
to all so it's really a fairness
to all health care providers and
it is all also provides a
benefit to patients.
Question.
Representative.
Thank you madam chair
Representative.
My first question would be it
normalizes but what if the
recovery where the funds
available.
Does not match a hundred percent
of all the claims of the.
Service providers.
Thank you madam chair
representative that question
over for the inventor
Representative there is
something part a corollary to
the common fund drive in or part
of the common fund drive and is
in in also predation actions.
Your ability to separate gate is
dependent upon the injured
patient being fully compensated
there are several cases that
discuss that and if they're not
fully compensated there is just
like this bill discusses a
proportional assessment of
repayment for the health care
provider.
In thank you madam chair and
representative of that paragraph
be on page nine.
My question is.
If the insurance is not
sufficient to pay for all of the
damages suffered by the damage
party can the damage party still
bring an action in Italy
against the
Person that committed the tort
and recover.
Additional
Damages surgeons seek recovery
for the amount over and above
the insured and.
Thank you again Madam chair
representative.
I will again refer to my expert
witness and if it's alright with
me with you madam chair since
we're getting into the nitty
gritty of Insurance litigation I
could just refer to my expert
witness going forward for the
continuance of the threat thank
you madam chair representative
Nibert absolutely nothing in
subsection he provides that the
injured person cannot pursue
their claims against the third
party who caused the injury all
it does is limits the ability of
the third for the first party
uninsured motorist insurer to
bring actions against the third
party the cost of the injury
nothing.
Affects the injured parties
rights and and the vast majority
of these insurance policies
there's something called and
contractual offset so that if
the insured person who received
uninsured motorist benefits
pursues the third party who
injure them and does he
conceding the well.
The insurer has a contractual
ability to obtain some of that
recovery directly from their
policy holder.
Let me madam chair and.
Mr Vargas let me understand this
so.
The injured party.
Say the damages were million
dollars but the uninsured
It's under.
Worst something substantially
less than that.
The.
And your party could bring the
action.
If they had an agreement with
their insurance company their
own insurance company could the
insurance company their
insurance company bring that
action.
As well or is this language
prohibiting.
The injured party's insurance
company from bringing that
action Madam chair
representative that's correct
the injured parties insurer
assuming it paid them under
insured motorist benefits would
not be able to bring a lawsuit.
Okay so.
Let's say I'm the injured party.
Madam chair I'm injured I have a
million dollars worth of
damages.
The.
For freezers insurance company
paid me a hundred thousand or
whatever the the minimum is.
So I have like nine hundred
thousand dollars of additional
damage I can bring that action
the the.
Party I contracted with to
insure me does not have the
ability to bring that action my
understanding that correctly
Madam chair representative
that's correct.
And and so.
Is there anything that would
prohibit.
Me from bringing that action.
And then the insurance company.
Seeking some recovery from me
for the maybe the costs and
expenses of the state or
whatever that they pay up front.
I'm here Representative assuming
that there's something that we
refer to as a contractual offset
in the policy and use the
injured person recovers not only
the original toward freezers
insurance amount but also
amounts above that your insurer
might be entitled to recover
from you some of the amounts
that it originally paid you as
an under insured motorist.
Policyholder
madam chair and Mr Vargas.
If I have a contract with my
insurance company that says that
Bill the fan maybe they can
pursue claims.
You know basically step in my
shoes to do that can they bring.
Can they bring in action my name
to pursue my additional damages.
And bear the cost of that suit
recover and then we have
whatever contractual
relationship we want or does
this prohibit that type of
contractual relationship Madam
chair representative if you for
talking about them defending you
that's liability insurance
underinsured motorist insurance
so not not the same animal so to
answer the question no
also if if you're contemplating.
The stepping in your shoes for
purposes of the under insured
motorist coverage.
First of all I never happened
just as a matter of course and
second of all it's problematic
because.
I'm assuming using the
hypothetical that you gave me
earlier you didn't have a
million dollars and under
insured motorist coverage the
typical cases.
You recover twenty five from the
toward fees or the tort fuser
has twenty five and you have a
hundred or two fifty.
If an insurer does is you've
contemplated they will only ever
seek to recover whatever and
they only have the right to
recover the amounts they paid
and so if they filed suit on
your behalf and only recovered
two for two hundred and fifty
thousand but you have a million
dollars in damages.
They would be subjected to other
litigation by you against them
so it's just as a practical
matter doesn't occur.
Kind of.
And so madam chair and Mr Marcus
it seems to me that that
It would be whoever won the
number one it understand their
insurance policies but but not
number two this may.
Result in individuals having to
seek those additional damages
and not just simply rely on
their insurance company to
recover that additional.
Level the damages
Which may.
Cause them to
Incur their own attorney's fees
and what have you and seeking
that recovery and because I
understand and uninsured
motorist coverage.
My insurance companies going to
pay me the up to a certain
amount if I'm involved in an
accident and I paid for those
premiums to pay me that amount.
And if I read this correctly
unify have damages above that
I'm only going to get what they
what I bought him insurance and
then whatever recovery I get
from from the tort freezers
insurance company.
Is that an accurate from
observation on my part Madam
chair representative that's
absolutely correct as I said
earlier even if the insurer were
allowed to bring a direct action
to recover what it paid he would
be limited to what it paid and
if you wanted to recover more
than that you would have to be
part of that lawsuit you have to
have your own representation and
Kerr attorney's fees anyway
because might surprise you to
learn that insurance companies
don't typically pay lawyers to
represent you and uninsured
motorist situation only in a
liability situation where you
may be the cause of the of the
accident.
Madam chair of Representative
thank you for bringing this
thing.
I can close my remarks.
Representative reading.
Thank you madam chair in Mr
Vargas let me.
See if I understand how this is
now going to work.
madam chair and Mister Rogers
currently.
Let's say that a person is in a
car wreck.
they're taken by ambulance to
the hospital they're treated in
the hospital and they receive
treatment from that hospital
facility and then outside of
there they go to a car Procter.
And now we have.
That and we all know in New
Mexico that
No one it is one hundred percent
at fault would say that you are
representing that individual
with the insurance company and
you come to a fifty percent at
fault.
Let's assume that the maximum
policy is.
Fifty thousand and let's assume
that the bills are a hundred
thousand.
So currently.
You would negotiate with the
insurance company and what's.
Let's just say you get thirty
thousand from them.
You would then contact the.
Ambulance the hospital in the
car practitioner and you would
know does she ate a settlement
with the money's the funds that
that you received is that how it
currently works.
Basically yes.
Find it here Representative
basically yes.
So madam chair and Mr Vargas in
this legislation.
The insurance company would now
put.
The name of the insurance
company the name of the well
they would have to negotiate
with each one of those and then
put their name on the settlement
check so I mean it would be the.
Health it would be the imports
the hospital in a car practice
and then of course your client
is that how it would be now
Madam chair representative no in
fact if you look at this bill on
page five it is section three B.
it states if the patient or the
patient's heirs or legal
representatives seeking damages
under a contract of compromise
or settlement so that's the
thirty thousand dollars
settlement you reference
Representative.
Exercise a hold harmless
agreement with the person firm
or corporation making payment
that's the insurance company to
the patient or the patient's
heirs or legal representative
enforcement of a lean by student
law shall be brought for
maintained against the party or
parties receiving payment of
money.
So what part he can now do under
this statute to avoid having
everybody and their neighbor on
the on the settlement check is
execute a whole hold harmless
agreement when that happens if
the health care provider
attempts to assert this lean
they can't go after the
insurance company anymore they
can now only go after.
The plaintiff slash patient who
received the care and that's
when the negotiation work so
this actually streamlines that
process and and has a
plaintiff's lawyer I can tell
you there's nothing more
frustrating than when you can't
get a hold of the provider are
you can't get numbers from them
and so you can't have that
negotiation done before you
settle the case and then you end
up having the multiple name on
the check situation this
actually makes that simpler and
speeds up the payment.
So madam chair Mister of artists
what you're saying is the
insurance company would issue
individual tracks the each one
of those.
Representative no they would
issue the check to the plaintiff
and the plaintiff's attorney and
the health care providers
recovery would then be directly
against the plaintiff or
plaintiffs attorney as opposed
to the insurance company and the
insurance company will be
essentially off the hook though
we don't.
Very.
Jack because there for them
after that later.
Once.
Thank you madam chair.
Other questions.
to.
I don't see any other questions
from wanting to wish make a
motion madam chair.
I move it to move a do not pass
on house bill three seventeen a
do pass on how she Judiciary
Committee substitute for three
seventeen.
We have a motion made by vice
chair Romero of a do not pass of
house bill three seventeen and I
do pass of House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill three seventeen seconded by
Representative to Penske to call
the roll Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey
Representative Gleim.
Mr speaker.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert.
no ma'am.
Representative Lee.
Representative.
That is a Penske yes.
Madam chair yes.
The chair yes.
Well I do have a few thousand
house bill three seventeen
eighty and do passcode Committee
substitute for House three
seventeen thank you very much
thank you very much madam chair
members the committee.
On.
Seventy.
One.
Cohabitants economic remedies
act.
Good morning madam chair.
Good afternoon Representative.
I know you've been committee all
morning you probably haven't
seen the light of day but good
to see you Representative good
morning members of the committee
thank you for hearing this today
Hey what excuse me.
We are here today to present
madam chair and members of the
committee house bill two seventy
three.
The uniform go habitants
economic remedies act I'd like
to introduce before it began my
expert witness with Serra
Bennett who is an attorney and a
member of actually.
Have you introduce yourself
please madam chair thank you
madam chair and.
Members of the committee my name
is Sarah Bennett a commissioner
on the uniform laws commission
and an attorney who practiced
for many years in New Mexico and
specialized in family law.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you the use that I receive
notification that an amendment
have been said provided to you
all on our behalf.
And receive confirmation.
And in a hurry this morning
thank you very much could you
did receive that yes we did
thank you.
And which you.
So
let's talk a little bit about
first the bill and then we can
move the amendment for
discussion so.
Certainly if I may
this is to
An act the uniform co habitant
to repair canonic remedies act
it provides a right of action to
cohabitants for contractual and
equitable create claims arising
out of contributions to the
relationship of the cohabitants
establishes requirements of a
cohabitants agreement.
providing a right to third
parties to enforce judgments
against the co habitant and
providers provides remedies and
so if I may I would like to have
miss Bennet please provided the
background of this sure this
bill in the background of the
the bills this bill was
originally drafted by the
uniform laws commission
in a thoroughly vetted process
that usually takes about two
years it's recommended to
address an unfairness which
exists in under New Mexico law
it's if co habitants
Don't have written agreements
New Mexico have it for long
periods of time there can be
inequities that develop where.
One person in the relationship
is an equitably treated in may
be unable to enforce agreements
so in those circumstances this
provides a remedy which is not a
complete remedy but which is far
better than exist currently.
Okay thank you the card was a
little bit about your what with
someone move the amendment for
discussion please.
Okay and is the to to to to to I
number two two five five eight
two point one Representative one
moment please and I'm hopeful
that at thank you so much.
We could give you a hard copy
probably yes that would help
fund mentioned.
Thank you very much you're of
course little warm running
committees thank you know very
hectic day today for sure yes
all right so the two two number
is that two two five five eight
two point one eight okay so
we've moved it for discussion do
you want to take a look at it
page three.
What does this do.
Madam chair I would like to
defer to is been it.
Madam chair
the amendment does not.
Mexico will does make clear that
no equitable lien is created by
virtue of having a co habitants
claim to property this protects
of a buyer of property from
finding out that there's an un
recorded laying hunt and and
noticed leading that they had no
ability to know about but and
the bill does not create of a
lien of any sort even
inequitable in and of this
amendment clarifies that and
emphasizes.
Okay so online twenty.
We add
After the period we at the
uniformed cohabitants economic
remedies act does not create
alkaline okay correct.
Madam chair.
Representative McQueen.
Madam chair discussion on the
amendment.
Yes.
mentors and and and the spend it
so I I read the amendment and.
My question after reading the
management is the act doesn't
create a lean but this is a
cohabitants agreement feeling.
Madam chair representative in
queen
Doesn't that does the agreement
created Lino.
Remains do not automatically
create lanes usually under the
law when you have a situation
such as a married couple
sometimes equitable liens are
created but the world has notice
of that the people are married
and and for the they have the
ability to find that out so in
this situation nothing about
this act or the creation of an
agreement between individuals
creates an automatically
articling so madam chair
representative and misspent that
that's that's my issue is it
doesn't say.
Nothing about this act for co
habitants agreement the chicest
Act.
And I think if you really want
to clarify that you would with
also referenced the could happen
to print.
Madam chair and Representative
McQueen I wouldn't have an
objection to saying that but
agreements ordinarily don't
create equitable liens and so I
I think it's fair to assume that
this agreement does not create
an equitable lien and less it
was intentionally created.
Madam chair representative
thanks for the I I've others
concerns about the bill at UNM
that that's fine thank you.
Thank you anyone else.
Wishing to speak about the
amendment.
Moon wishing to make a motion on
the amendment.
Well move that we accept the
amendment to house bill two
seventy three the motion to
adopt the amendment to two
seventy three is our second.
Second.
The motion made by
Representative Roybal a neighbor
seconded by Representative fancy
would you call the roll
Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey yes.
Representative Gleim.
Mr speaker.
Representative McQueen no.
Representative Nibert yes.
Representative re yes.
Representative green.
Representative Sapan ski yes.
Madam vice chair.
Madam chair yes.
Thanks for it is about.
Bill.
That.
Those wishing to speak in
opposition to the bill please
raise your hand.
Those online wishing to speak in
opposition to the bill please
raise your hand.
Those wishing to speak in
support of the bill and the
audience please raise your hand.
Those online wishing to speak in
support of the bill please raise
your hand.
All right
so we're now back to the
committee we have an amended
bill those wishing to speak
about the bill any questions
Representative McQueen.
Thank you madam chair chair
Representative the just type of
office talking about this I
appreciate that at the time I
had not read the bill are have
now with the bill I do have
concerns about the bill
first of Madam chair
representative in the spend it
on page one line twenty five
I take it that has a couple is
not defined in the act.
Representative.
Madam chair and representative
that's correct.
And madam chair seven expert is
the couple have to have a
romantic involvement.
Madam chair representative no
does not need to be a romantic
involvement so madam chair
Representative.
the this this could arise but
just between roommates.
Madam chair representative I
guess I would need a definition
of roommate also because there
need to be commitments and a
decision to live or of
appearance that you're living
together as a couple and some
way that means that would mean
probably a judge would decide
this of course but it would
probably mean that you would
have to show some ticket
indication that you've made
agreements that.
You know for sharing the
workload for sharing expenses
those kinds of things.
So madam chair Senate and
misspent that that's why I asked
about the the romantic nature
I'm certainly the two people can
live together.
The split tors in maybe one
those dishes one takes out the
trash in.
I think they're playing
instances where they would not
expected to.
Create the binding contract by
that agreement but potentially
they do under the and then this
is that correct.
Well of Madam chairman and and
Representative McQueen at.
Probably not because they have
On the day to day basis complied
with whatever the agreements
were that they did they would
have a cause of action for
having lost it it the.
Direction of living together as
a couple the likelihood of
bringing an action like this for
the to enforce agreements.
Is small if it's of short term
or lack of commitment it's long
term commitments that are not
being honored in the end say
twenty years that are more the
likely scenario or subject
or bringing a lawsuit.
And.
Madam chair representative
misspent
So explain to me than what what
has a couple involved since is
not defined.
Will.
Of.
Here Representative McQueen.
Living together as a couple.
Would as as many things in
family law are would be
developed by the courts of
through decisions by the
District Court that are than
either affirmed or reversed by
an appellate court so I would
imagine that you know that that
my definition would be a
lawyer's.
Presentation of what I would
think a couple would be and it
would be making significant
commitments to each other that
required that the the other let
relies upon.
Madam chair representative
misspent I I don't know if and I
believe your coke Mr is
representative Nibert the
current one of my co
commissioners representative
Nibert to another is that
Representative or chair Chandler
if the will of madam chair
preps Representative Nibert it
has share with you my increasing
hostility to here from Los
It is one thing I don't like is
we get multiple paragraphs on
choice of law in a relatively
for Phil
Madam chair Representative miss
Bennet so the city's cohabitants
agreements can be oral.
And implied in fact so with a
course of conduct rise to the
level of a an agreement.
Madam chair and Representative
McQueen it could.
I I think it certainly could it
depends so much on the facts
there's so many different
scenarios under which of people
Mexico have it at that give rise
to commitments that are not then
honored at a later time but yes
of course of conduct over time
of of for example no I don't
want you to work we have so many
kids we take care of the kids
take care of my mom who has
dementia I'll do the work and
all of this will be both of ours
could be for example a
commitment that would be
confirmed by a course of
conduct.
That would be one example
there's so many and I guess
Madam percent and miss Bennet.
I think if you have that
conversation that's one thing
but what if you just that's just
or the.
The routine that you fall into
and it's never actually
discussed well then under that
scenario the most you madam
chair and Representative
McQueen.
most likely you would fall under
the claims for equitable relief.
Under that circumstance and you
know claims for equitable lead
relief if if
Hey it's hard to imagine a
situation where you would have
had some kind of conversation
every client who came and
Michael office had some kind of
conversation with their co
habitant about you know wired
we're doing it this way but you
know those things can fall under
the rubric of equities when you
have things that are implied not
specific and significant
reliance on it and the.
You know contributions that are
made that's what equity requires
madam chair sent misspent so in
that scenario you described a
two people living together once
taking care of an elder with
dementia
perhaps the elder passes away
and won the.
One member of the Google however
that's defined ask the other to
move out.
What is the relief with the
equitable relief there.
Madam chair and Representative
McQueen under this bill
The
The person who is being asked to
move out after the person with
dementia died that the.
The
The person being asked to leave
has provided long term care for
for example
If I were advising that person I
would suggest they asked the
court to reimburse
for the the care given the
market value of that care you
would have to hire somebody to
provide care to a person with
dementia and on hospice care
until they died so those kind of
equities can be taken into
account and you can consider the
market value of services if if
we don't have a real agreement.
In
Madam chair representative and
spend it in that case presumably
if the person's being just
without the other person perhaps
owns the residents do you to
balance the market value of the
care against the.
Rental value of having lived in
the house I agree I mean do net
that has that work well.
A court equity would balance out
what you had received coming
pardon me madam chair and
Representative McQueen a court
in equity does balance out those
kinds of things so if the the
defenses it was only a little
bit care I actually had other
people come in and do a lot of
the care I provided a lovely
place to live I find it paid for
X. Y. and Z. expenses those are
all the response and appropriate
response and equity climb.
Madam chair representative and
miss Bennet could the
Can member of the Google
assert
Claim on real property and
ownership interest on real
property that the when they
worked on that the.
Madam chair and Representative
McQueen of.
As a first matter there's no
lean on that real estate.
There are some circumstances
where people make real the
promises don't worry opportunity
don't worry this is all the same
as being married and my money is
just going for us and we're
paying for things those kinds of
things do happen and in those
kinds of circumstances a
litigant could claim these were
the promises that were made to
be state they're not a lien on
the property and what's much
more likely under this bill is a
claim for
the value of your loss in
reliance on those promises.
So.
It wouldn't be an actual claim
to the real estate but for some
compensation based on the idea
that you had been promised and
had relied on that and
contributed in order to
Stay in that relationship.
Madam chair representative to
spend it.
I guess my reading this is it
doesn't have to be based on
promises.
He can be implied.
Secretary madam chair and and
Representative McQueen yes it
can be applied but it can only
be applied if you have the right
fact scenario to support it and
the judge agrees with that.
And madam chair
percent misspent I mentioned
even if you don't have a lien
you could file a claim and you
could you could file this
pendants and you could you
could.
Put yourself in that position
could.
madam chair and Representative
McQueen I do not agree that you
could file a list pendants on
real estate when you don't have
of an equitable lien on the real
estate or other legal claim to
the actual realistic.
Yes so I I mean I I think you
could mentor from the Senate
think you could fashion a claim
to the real estate.
Madam chair
Representative miss Bennet why
is this bill amending the
federal electronic signatures in
global national commerce.
At four point what is that on
page seven sectional.
It amending of course not the
right word superseding
apparently.
With.
Madam chair Representative
McQueen a.
Do not have an answer to that
question I think it's a uniform
Act and therefore
Some chair Representative
misspent I I'm I'm an attorney I
draft documents after that forms
I start with an intimate could
form is kind of like a uniform
law you you have everything in
the form that you need and then
you go through and you take out
what you to because then you
don't you don't forget to put in
things you have to look for
another documents things like
that well my objections to the
uniform laws that we've seen for
this committee is I think
they're still too much in the
form and some things that
probably should've been taken
out you know because the they're
trying to be comprehensive when
they draft these here from laws
hi there.
The state sort of carry on.
madam chair percent and
misspent my concern with this is
it's really vague is.
It opens the door to a lot of
potential occasion
you talked about health like
courts could define what has a
couple means I mean that's
That's effect based
circumstances looking the court
cases to to figure that out is
is troubling me and understand
the you're trying to address and
then fairness
one of the things that.
What on the levels of unfairness
that that I think is very real
in our court system is the
ability to hire lawyers
so in my contracts I used to
always put attorney's fees
provision to right so if there's
a dispute the winner gets their
terms.
Most of my clients for nonprofit
and did not have deep pockets in
entry fees provision works
against you.
If you can't afford to pay the
other side's fees and I think in
this case it works against you
not that there would be awarded
fees which is the expense that
someone that has deep pockets
could bully the other person in
the Google.
with this act.
Just by the being able to for
the fees and I think really the
opposite is your intention and I
get that
but because of the vagueness
it's just it is I would.
It is in my opinion a giant can
of worms.
The to the office and that's
just just someplace I don't want
to go.
Madam chairman if I may respond
to that previous
In family law more than I think
probably any where else maybe
there are some other areas that
are comparable but in family law
Morse's there is a huge
inability for people to afford
the process they have to go
through we have created prosafe
form so you can file your own
divorce and obtain a divorce and
hopefully present forms would
be.
Appeared for this as well but
the problem that we're trying to
address is that the person with
more money is able to simply say
no and the person who is being
completely shut out of the gate
accumulations over perhaps a
twenty year or thirty year
relationship.
the person is facing
homelessness are going to live
with relatives and
not even having social security
benefits because it didn't work
for example
as they're completely
disadvantaged and are unable to
bring any action to enforce
claims over a long period of
time and sometimes they have
been betrayed sometimes the co
habitation is because one of the
parties is already married and
fail to get a divorce for for
taking on this new relationship
there are many of those kinds of
issues that come up in domestic
relations and this would address
one in a way that allows of a
body of case law to be developed
and to rule out the.
For the forms of abuse that
you're concerned with because
they are not in this the body of
this bill.
I would note that there's
nothing in the bill that
requires them to have lived
together for a long period of
time.
Madam chairman and
Representative McQueen you're
you're absolutely right
my experience and observation is
that people who have lived
together for a year and split up
don't have the ability or the
time or.
Whatever it takes to make such a
claim and I don't have that the
losses of a form that would
cause them to go to the trouble
to do it.
thank you madam chair thank you
Mr Senator Representative
Nibert.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative
madam chair with with your
permission the Representative
permission all.
Ask questions directly to the
witness effect okay yes
madam chair and in miss Bennett
It appears to me that as society
is moving forward we have.
It's more common for people to.
Maybe live together as a couple
than it is to get married with
with would that be an accurate
statement madam chair and
representative Nibert I would
agree.
And so today if a.
Hello this column a couple.
I'm merry couple.
You if.
They break up go their separate
ways.
What protects one or the other
party
And how is that different from.
A married couple breaking up.
We're getting divorced.
Representative.
Madam chair representative
Nibert what a merry couple gets
divorced they have just rights
that are established by the law.
and so when you break up.
Even if you don't have no money
at all you can do pro state
forms they they tell you
basically had to divide up your
community property how to
allocate your separate property
and you do that and you can get
a final decree of divorce and
move forward if you are living
together.
as a couple and you split up
some people do that very well
just like married couples they
make agreements they do what's
fair and they move on.
If if they of are not able to do
that or if one side says no.
Of I don't think so I'm you know
this is all mine and it's my
name on it I engineered it
and the other person has and it
has no clips essentially
there is I know in some of the
committee of people some of the
comments and said that
This these rights exist under
the law already
I have talked to all the family
lawyers I know and several
judges who do family law and
they've confirmed to me that
there are no remedies for those
kinds of representation for
those kinds of trade offs that
people do in a marriage the
person whose name is on title
the person who sent it who
actually paid the money for the
item is going to have that
property and there is no remedy
for that of and there is no
compensation for having provided
a great deal of labor and
contributed in other non
financial ways to the
relationship and you will not
receive compensation for that
there is no place to file the
action.
And so madam chair miss madam.
It seems to me that what this.
Bill was trying to do is to
provide some protection for
those couples who are not
married.
And who later
or and who's for a period of
time.
Contribute jointly to the
acquisition of assets in rural
and other things.
And then for whatever reason
they they.
Get divorced it so to speak that
they split up and and this is
the effort is to try to
recognize that there's
contributions of both parties
and that one party by and large
has not been able to secure.
Has not been able to receive a
remedy.
For their contribution to that.
To that couples of
Build a of announcements because
of whatever nature maybe maybe
all the property was put in one
party's name maybe maybe
the other one contributed but
did not get recognized as a
purchase property and so when
they break up of the one.
The one party has a huge
advantage over the other and
this is the bill that's trying
to remedy that situation as of
Madam chair representative
Nibert yes I would agree
completely with that and madam
chairman spent a I would agree
with my colleague from Santa Fe
and Santa Fe County that.
This will result in litigation
but it's necessarily going to
result in litigation because
right now.
There's no recognize remedy to
be result one party.
Can't sue the other for for
Their share whatever you want to
call it because the the courts
won't recognize that that remedy
exist in this would be the bill
statutes so to speak that would
allow them to seek a remedy upon
that break up with would it not.
Madam chair representative
Norbert I agree with that I
would also point out that it
doesn't necessary it's not
necessarily going to
dramatically increase the number
of filings because many of these
parties are already in court
over their split up.
For child support and child
custody for example of and and
those kinds of issues or arguing
in other ways because they can't
get their remedy
in the appropriate way so the
targets better the remedies and
I think it will make things more
efficient in a certain way for
parties who are breaking up
they're also parties who've been
who co habit for some period of
time it's often thought of as a
practice marriage then they get
married and then get divorced a
year later after the marriage so
both claims would be part of the
same thing as they are now even
if you're divorcing and you're a
married couple and divorcing
when you when you've had a short
marriage in a long period of
living together there's a lot of
that activity that tries to
creep in to your community
property litigation this is a
more structured way of allowing
it and I think it would be more
intelligent for the court to be
able to address if it's set in
this kind of destruction.
madam chair and miss Bennet.
This New Mexico.
Authorize common law marriages.
Madam chairman and.
Representative Nibert no it does
not.
Ms Oakes habitation was illegal
until two thousand and one M.
and madam chair to keep our
answers a little briefer we got
a pretty tight yes and madam
chair representative R. miss
Bennet.
Some states have addresses
issues through
And acting common law marriages
are recognizing common law
marriages were the.
Spells so to speak would have
whatever marital rights I have
after they have complied with
the requisite period of being a
couple of and have.
And our dean by by law to be be
married let's go back and look
at what co habitant means
there were some questions
regarding living as a couple it
doesn't require a romantic
relationship.
But likewise.
It has to be more than just
roommates does it not.
Madam chairman and
Representative Nibert it depends
on the definition of roommate I
hate sorry the to lawyers answer
but roommates can be any sort of
state including strangers who
live in a house and have no
connection with each other other
than the money they pay the
landlord so it does not include
that kind of a roommate.
Right and madam chair agency
budget it requires some
conscious or we've as I read the
bills require some conscious
decision on the part of the two
people to hold themselves out
the representative to the world
so to speak that they are a
couple.
If if it doesn't it doesn't the.
You know just because.
We live in the same apartment
that doesn't.
Make us subject to this act but
if we live in the same apartment
and we are holding ourselves out
to the world as a couple and.
Regardless of the romantic side
of it.
That is the I thank the kingdom
that that you have to establish
to take to to have this bill
then become effective in my
reading that correctly Madam
chairman and Representative
Nibert yes I agree completely.
And so madam chair and
representative I I would just
conclude with this New Mexico.
Has.
I would say a problem it that it
has an issue.
That remains.
And result.
And this bill is an effort to
resolve or at least allow all
parties who find themselves in
that type of relationship.
To have the potential to secure
a remedy up on a break up.
And to attempt to secure what I
would say is there
Ability to obtain a portion of
the value of that Google as a
a required items of property
much like a married couple would
upon their their break up later
on and that's that's a whole in
our law now.
And unless we pass legislation
like this that will continue to
be a problem for for people who
are couples but not married
thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative thank you Mr.
Thank you for all
Representative.
Thank you madam chair
representative expert I'm just
trying to just clarify something
that was and the house committee
analysis report under section
five dealing with the issue of.
Well they they put it and seven
C..
It is about the statue
limitations that section this is
an equitable claim based on
contributions to the
relationship the cruise
termination of could have a
Tatian as subjects equitable
defenses and they start talking
about which statute of
limitations applies.
That the when I go back to page
three of the four I get paid for
like one it sounds like it could
be a contractual claim or to
equitable claim so what what
would it be just depending on
what your filing under how would
you correlated those two
sections madam chair and
Representative group I hi for
every
a claim under written contract
which is very unlikely plan but
a claim under written contract
under written contract that
would be the statute of
limitations for a written
contract everything else would
be the general statue
limitations if you could go
under either one of these only
on a written contract right and
that six and equitable is for
right but it really a whole
statue limitations is just when
your claim is cut off so if you
have a written contract given
two years longer that you can
make that claim okay so
basically in this analysis madam
chair expert it's just going to
depend on which way you filing.
And what you have to claim to
madam chair okay and you don't
believe it generally it's going
to be contractual madam chair
experts can be more of an
equitable.
Madam chair and Representative
right I agree completely it will
mostly be equitable claims or
have a written contract okay so
you don't feel any really need
to specify based because it is
laid out like that madam chair
and representative that's
correct thank you madam chair
thank you.
What else.
Happy to accept the motion.
I
have a motion for of a do pass
on house bill only two seventy
three to seventy three made by
leader Chasey seconded by
Representative Nyberg as
amended.
By seconded by now
Representative night but.
But please Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey yes.
Representative Lane.
Mr speaker.
Representative McQueen no.
Representative Nibert yes.
Representative Reese yes.
Representative right yes ma'am.
Representative C. Penske.
Yes.
Madam vice chair.
No and I'd like to explain my
vote.
Madam chair.
Yes.
I vote of seven to to we have a
two passed as amended explain
your vote Representative Lujan I
have an opportunity to talk with
my colleague and I totally get
the intent of the bill I'm just
concerned with the vagueness and
some of the nuance of what we
have discussed with cohabitating
folks having deep pockets and
the nuance of take caring for
perhaps someone and being able
to make that claim on those in
the conflicts and may have with
intent in a will and a trust in
those other things that now open
up for litigation on having that
ability to basically drawn any
claim or property generally in
the state can be for quite quite
litigious already with multiple
large municipalities and and how
that gets complicated so I would
love to continue to work on this
bill thank you madam.
Thank you thank you thank you
for today thank you very much.
Item.
Three of house bill three
thirteen cannabis regulation
changes.
Okay.
Michael it is not I think it's
important here everyone.
Floor is yours by chair thank
you madam chair get the Kandace
relation Act is just seeking a
bit of update we've learned a
lot in the first several months
of legalization and are looking
to basically what this bill a
few things out to do a few
things the first is to ensure
that our micro businesses can be
economically viable we've
learned that the plant count
that we allowed for them
unfortunately was insufficient
to allow them to be
to have a bottom line where they
could continue so we'd like to
expand their ability to to grow
more
we've revise this bill already
in previous committee to to
basically adjust to the
interests of the of the industry
and of course with the the CCD
the cannabis control division
but really the the big picture
here is is about how to help
micro businesses do their
business how to help the
cannabis control division
regulate the industry more
properly financial to revoke
licenses look at how it is that
they can enforce the laws that
is on the books and really just
just continue to learn from this
while adapting is what this bill
does madam chair with me is the
general counsel for the cannabis
control division or the
regulation licensing department
and of course the interim canvas
control division director also
director of alcohol and
tobacco so with that madam chair
will stand for questions.
Okay
We there is an amendment that's
been passed out.
Okay.
Okay.
So we want to move it for
discussion.
Okay good it's been everywhere
else so madam chair this
ammendment
basically allows for additional
laboratory research for cannabis
right now the law doesn't allow
for sort of expansive laboratory
research and this allows for for
that this is brought to us by
you know advocates looking for
that research ability.
Why don't.
Any questions about the
amendment.
We have a motion on the
amendment but we have a
question.
Representative.
thank you madam chair of of.
The cannabis research
laboratories of.
That's talked about.
Page six one seven.
Taking the limitation of the
plants.
Of four a yes can a laboratory
also be a retailer.
Madam chair representative if
you look at page six at least on
my.
Amendments and contacts the
amount of cannabis research
laboratory means of facility
that produces or processes
cannabis products in all parts
of the plant genus of cannabis
for the purpose of studying
cannabis cultivation
characteristics are uses that
definitely not a retailer.
So so the.
I think cannabis research
laboratory could not also have
an aspect of cannabis retailer
the the totally independent.
Madam chair representative
I just wanna give a certain
amount of contact with the
research laboratory.
So in so since since the
beginning of time Candace is
been a schedule one drug so
there hasn't been a lot of
medical research into cannabis
because hospitals and research
laboratories shy away from
because they all get a lot of
federal.
In nineteen sixty eight the
opened up I believe in
Birmingham Alabama a research
lab to do cannabis but it's not
good cannabis D. A. they do a
lot of people have come forward
and said we need to do more
research for economic what
cannabis on the human body as
states are legalizing it is so
the DEA has a program to
actually license up research
facilities that are designed to
grow cannabis for research
facility New Mexico's in the
lead to to land one of those
reserves facilities out in
requests your requests so what
this does is it it it go limits
the plant count for those
research laboratories we think
that that's a really good public
policy because they're not
selling it for consumption
they're going to be selling it
under the watchful eye the VA to
medical research laboratories
that might need more distillate
one more flour to do their
research.
Madam chairman Mr expert.
They would be totally
independent there would not be
on the same side or.
Madam chair representative
that's correct just before under
the watchful and DEA just to
supply medical cannabis for the
medical industry.
Any other questions on the
amendment.
The.
Okay we have a motion to adopt
in a second
To call the roll.
Representative local.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane.
Mr speaker.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative night very yes
Representative we.
Representative green yes.
Representative semansky yes.
Madam chair yes.
Madam chair yes.
By a vote of nine two zero we
have an amendment adopted then.
The audience those wishing to
speak in opposition to the bill
please raise your hand.
Those online wishing to speak in
opposition to the bill please
raise your hand if you.
Of
those in the audience wishing to
speak in favor of the bill
please raise your hand yes Sir.
Madam chair members my name is
been wonder on the executive
director server us yet we
Representative Mike for you.
Madam chair committee members my
name is Ben Lewin Jr I'm the
executive director of the New
Mexico campus chamber of
commerce for the statewide
cannabis industry association
representing cultivators
manufacturers testing facilities
retailers and number of
ancillary businesses supporting
the cannabis industry we stand
in strong support of this bill I
A. fondly remember when and
Representative Martinez now
speaker gently reminded the
legislature several times that
the cannabis regulation Act
wasn't going to be one and done
that this is going to be of a
piece of legislation that needed
to be revisited tweaks of all of
and that's exactly what this
bill does it's benefited from
the input of the canvas control
division from the industry and I
I urge you to to pass this bill
thank you thank you anyone else
in the audience wishing to speak
in favor of the bill.
I don't see anyone anyone online
wishing to speak in favor of the
bill please raise your hand
Corey gold Gould.
Corey.
Madam chair and representative
my name is Corey ruled and they
had a cultivation for mom and
the girls on an indigenous woman
owned cannabis farm your stance
in New Mexico I generally
recommend this bill going to do
process specially with micro
businesses being considered ten
percent of the maximum plan
account the concern our
important has six hundred point
account which currently makes
this a macro producer and
considering a modest increase
for this next season part of
this consideration is to be able
to fund small expansions around
the state particularly in rural
and underserved areas we
suddenly find ourselves
considered a marker producer
this we can't testing for my
business in the sense of
removing a major conference for
small farms like mine in the the
plan counties but I'll also send
you a form new inferences and
how I can expand around the
state that is to say maker
producers are limited to a
single location what I suggest
is removing the restrictions on
micro businesses having a single
location for example and how
it's defined in section two
subsection J. could be reported
to state cannabis producer micro
business means a cannabis
producer at licensed premises
use that possessed in total at
all locations no more than one
tenth of the mature cannabis
plant plant count by the
division of large cannabis
producers.
Context there producers who have
done business for years in the
medical market with multiple
locations implant counts lower
than one tenth the current
maximum thank you.
Removing restrictions for micro
businesses will be a major boon
for small farms like mine in
competing against large well
funded businesses with deep
pockets thank you for your time
thank you.
Anyone else online wishing to
speak in support.
And see anyone
Representative in the concluding
comments before we go to the
committee.
No thank you madam chair okay
Keeping a list anybody comments
on the bill questions.
Representative Chasey.
Thank you okay we have a motion
for do pass by Representative
leader Chasey in second by
Representative of cone
Representative reading.
Madam chair and Representative
when we were in government
affairs let me take you to page
thirty.
We spoke about your power to go
ahead and investigate.
And so
Let's see.
Line ten you can you can issue a
subpoena yep it can't be less
than five days I'm a cannabis
producer and I refuse to go
ahead and produce of the
requested items then when we go
over to page.
Thirty seven point eight.
We see you can suspend that for
a full investigation.
Well if I'm not gonna find the
records you can't do a full
investigation and.
Madam chair and representative I
said what you need to put in
this section is a failure to
comply he gives you the
authority to go ahead and
suspend.
Go ahead.
Madam chair representative yes I
remember this is question very
very clearly and we we did take
a look at that so the summary
suspension portion on thirty
seven is really in the case of
of of health safety welfare so
if something happens in like say
like we found tainted cannabis
with with mold that could be
that could pose a threat to the
the health of the general public
then we can do a summary
suspension we didn't want to do
a summary suspension for any
time they've violated the act we
feel like that we can find in
due process for this so the
subpoena aspect of this is that
you point out on page thirty
of on page thirty is very
similar to alcohol and so it a
lot of times the of SO you will
go do an investigation the want
to pull the the footage from the
cameras and maybe some of the
receipts to do an investigation
if they fail to comply with that
subpoena if you notice down on
the and do on thirty page thirty
of line nine nineteen if they
refuse the subpoena then we list
the what they call the eight of
the District Court to we just go
to District Court and asked them
to enforce a subpoena for us and
then that gives that gives the
authority for them to turn over
to get that that information
under the subpoena we did we did
discuss whether or not to have
summary suspensions for any time
like say some somebody was not
compliant that we do a summary
suspension we really felt like
that was unfair to the industry
if we really only want to use
our summary suspension powers if
we really see something that is
a threat to health safety or
welfare.
Madam chair in Mr expert.
What shape your
Which is sure scenario that
you've gone ahead and said about
the mold on the marijuana so.
I don't comply with the subpoena
now you're going to petition the
District Court to order me to go
ahead and to comply and all that
time I can go ahead and sell it
I think what you need is a
provision over here that allows
you at your discretion to to
suspend that.
madam chair representative yes I
I think that we're on the same
page because that that that new
language in thirties on page
thirty seven summary suspension
is the case of the mold right so
if we find after doing a full
investigation that that the the
division has objective
reasonable grounds to believe
and I on a full investigation
that is the licensee is
conducting itself in a way to
pose an imminent threat to
public health safety or welfare
we can summarily suspend the
license.
That would and I would just say
that would still include some
due process right even if we
summarily suspended thank you go
to District Court and ask a
judge to say it was arbitrary
capricious or or they didn't
have the facts to back it up so
they can still go to court to do
that but but that mold that we
really think it's tied to the
threat of health safety welfare
of consumers.
Chair and RLD I yes you know I I
get it but the the problem is
here your full investigation on
page thirty seven I'm not going
to cooperate with you so you
can't perform a full
investigation.
Madam chair representative it's
about reasonable ascertainment
of underlying facts so you know
when we define it there it's
about understanding what the
parameters of that summary
suspension would require and and
again reasonable grounds it's
it's there have to be facts that
present themselves that were of
what allow for that suspension
of the cost of the
From the license well thank you
madam chair I still have a
problem with.
The
questions or comments from.
Members.
Hello Representative certificate
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative
The I'm just curious about the
concern that was raised in
public comment and really
appreciate what you're trying to
do to support micro businesses
but
for the flip side of macro
businesses that would now
potentially be characterized as
micro businesses have
You just address that are or.
Share how that might play out
are there many businesses that
fit in that category.
Madam chair representative so
we're just essentially proposing
to change the plant counts so a
license that a pick up person
has whether it's a producer
vertically integrated wouldn't
convert automatically to a micro
business they would still be
able to operate as a producer
and have the same number of
locations but for those who do
have a micro producer license
our will apply in the future
they will have an expanded I
can.
Thank you madam chair and
representative that that that Mr
Fabius.
Do you have something that is
very I know that I move on of
the Madam chair representative
in future iterations of the
campus regulation act I think
one of the areas we're gonna be
looking at is how how we can
how businesses can kind of
merged into bigger businesses or
or go down in business for
whatever the business need is
and to make that more uneasily
an easier process to do but I
think in future iterations of
the cannabis regulation Act
you're gonna see that ability to
move up and down up to different
licenses that fit the license we
want to be flexible so thank
you.
Thank you that resolves that
concern thanks.
Welcome.
One question we're not monkeying
around with any of the
provisions that require that
users that growers producers
must have water rights before
they can.
Good to knows water is not being
suggested whatsoever this bill
thank you madam chair okay
I will just say I can't because
I know there's been some
controversy around that.
I have gotten really good
feedback from my little mutual
domestic water just a compass
associations because.
Users were using that water for
their operations and they're
really what often wasn't fair
compensation and they were
tapping into the system and
there was a lot of concern about
it so I think that's helped a
lot that we enforce that by no
license being issued up until
the producer can actually show
where they're getting that water
that's been super helpful to the
small mutual domestic so just
share that with you thank you I
think we have a motion on the
table I thought it was made by
Representative Chasey and in
seconded by Representative Alcon
good I'm so glad I think like
Lucien dollars something just
yet
Maybe after this evening
so I don't see any other members
who have any questions or
concerns so let's uh call the
roll on the motion of a do pass
Representative of course.
Representative Chasey yes.
Representative Lane.
Mr speaker.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert.
Representative reeve.
Representative green no ma'am.
Representative some pants he
yes.
Madam vice chair yes.
Madam chair yes.
By a vote of six to to the other
two passes amended on House Bill
three eight okay so I would like
to try to get one bill and
before we go to the for no
there was a bill that was left
off Representative it's house
bill two ninety two it was left
off in a verdant leave on our
agenda although R.
sponsor was notified it was on
the agenda so representative
Thompson could to.
Okay so we're not gonna here
with probably not going to get
to that today.
Representative.
to ninety two we handed out a
separate packet because it
wasn't in the book.
So.
The floor is your tier your is.
Thank you madam chair and before
Mrs anything I tell my Canadian
mount so I'm sorry I'm not sick
I just.
Somebody said more like a Disney
princess I like that better.
So this is my expert witness
Miguel determine who's the who's
the you head of the firefighters
you for Albuquerque and
Bernalillo county.
So essentially what what we're
this bill comes from is.
I got a phone call from a
firefighter who's who's asked me
to do a bill regarding the use
of cannabis for firefighters and
I just I talked to me said well.
Kind of the culture in the fire
business is deal with your PTSD
with alcohol and that didn't
sound exactly and really good to
me so I got involved with Miguel
and we we've come up with this
bill essentially what it is with
the attempt is to allow people
who are wonder called safety
sensitive positions to use
medical medical cannabis to deal
with the PTSD that they will if
they this I was told if they
don't have it the first year
they will the second I think it
might be the first date and so I
will let Miguel take it from
there.
Okay and I hear there's a
substitute is passed out is.
Yep.
Happy to have you I don't
substitutes much different but I
just want there is one that's
been passed out okay thank you
and.
I'm gonna let Miguel talk about
this we did with the substitute
thank you.
Chair with the substitute for
discussion thank you.
You madam chair representative
so the substitute was based on
the recommendation from the FIR
and working with a
representative to pass his
office
so really it it it it does the
same thing but it also kind of
fines a little bit about.
Impairment is so it it it also
defines the with the original
intent and also addresses what
the FIR recommendation was we
help.
Okay
Do we have a well so we have a
the substitutes for discussion
what we go to the audience those
wishing to speak in opposition
to the bill please raise your
hand.
Those wishing to speak in
support of the bill please raise
your hand.
Okay here we go.
In the blue.
Madam chair representative so
thank you my name is Greg
Montoya on the vice president of
local two forty four in
Albuquerque and a captain with
the Albuquerque fire rescue
You know I just wanna ask for
your support with this with this
bill
every day firefighters respond
to emergencies they witnessed
and experienced trauma on a
daily basis whether it's mental
or physical we have members that
suffer from PTSD depression
sleep disorders anxiety
and the only means of coping
with this right now is either
prescription medication or
alcohol so I believe this is a
great opportunity to for some of
our firefighters and first
responders to you know get
involved with the medical
cannabis program and we have
departments nationwide that do
sound policy have have created a
a path where were they could
help treat some of these
elements New York Detroit
Arizona California so
I just ask for your support in
the past thank you.
Madam chair representative so my
name is Chris Johnson president
of the Los crucis professional
firefighters association I just
like to thank the sponsors for
bringing this bill forward and
echo some of the sentiments of
already been spoke about that we
have a lot of members that are
doing with a myriad of medical
issues largely are centered
around the mental aspect of the
job that is kind of just
inherent in what we do and right
now our best alternative is
those prescription medications
which ultimately have far worse
side effects than anything that
cannabis or its derivatives ever
kind of produces so we have
members who have barbiturates
and benzodiazepines and opiates
all of these drugs are commonly
prescribed but the the answer
just isn't it's not meeting the
need and right now based on the
way the legislation reads our
members are excluded from being
able to use cannabis or its
derivatives due to the fact of
most of the men us
municipalities have kind of a
one and done Chattfield so even
if you were to use CBD that your
tier C. level got slightly too
high and not pop positive on a
drug test regardless of
impairment we would lose our
jobs so it just keep we don't
have the option to look for this
and our our alternatives to
start meeting the needs so I
would like to stand in support
of this and strongly recommend a
do pass thank you thank you and
I would New Mexico did you go
online so those wishing to speak
online in opposition to the bill
please raise your hand.
Those wishing to speak in
support of the bill to mera.
Good afternoon can you hear me
yes.
Hi my name's terra marking
telling the deputy director for
the children youth and families
department and I oversee are
secure facilities
we stand in opposition of this
bill the majority of our
juvenile justice position in the
secure facilities are considered
safety sensitive and our staff
don't carry firearms nor do they
drive commercial vehicles.
These positions are tasked to
provide for the care and
rehabilitation of educated youth
and these use may have substance
abuse substance abuse issues
mental health.
Environment tendencies they
respond our staff responded
emergencies they transport use
and they must take decisive
action to protect the safety and
security of our use staff in the
facility and that's why we stand
in opposition to this thank you
thank you anyone in support just
wanna be clear I don't see
anyone online and support
Representative chairwoman
anything.
Committee we will stand for
questions.
Representative pants cannons
Representative free.
I thank you madam chair and
thank you Representative
I just want to thank the team
for working with me on the
substitute we had heard the bill
in house health and Human
Services with madam chair and
there were some concerns
presented including the concerns
from CYFD so we were able to
work together with one of our
senior analyst as well to I do a
lot of research on how this is
addressed in other states that
do allow for the use of medical
cannabis and I think one of the
issues and the the original bill
that is now addressed in the
substitute is that we are not
changing the definition of
safety sensitive position
I one of the concerns that have
been brought forward is that we
were.
It's an advisor Lee narrowing
the definition of safety
sensitive to just a couple of
categories and there were a
number of categories of
professionals that didn't fit
but we could also would not be
advisable to be that removed
from the definition of safety
sensitive so I think we at this
language mirrors the way that it
a number of other states address
and we also
sought some guidance from
national association of fire
fighters documents in in
crafting this so that we could
be
as correct as we possibly could
in trying to craft this so at
you know I think
I'm not sure I have a question
to ask you Representative but I
just wanted to give everybody
the background on on that the
way that the substitute came out
thank you.
Representative Rehm.
Thank you madam chair let's uh.
Let's go to page two and go to
line fourteen.
And the employee is required to
carry a firearm as part of the
employees employment.
So if we go to federal law and
this is the important to either
purchase or possess a firearm
which go to twenty question
number twenty G..
Are you an unlawful user of or
addicted to marijuana or any
depressant stimulus narcotic
drug or any other controlled
says substance.
Warning the use or possession of
marijuana remains unlawful under
the pharaoh federal law
regardless of whether it is been
legalized or decriminalized for
medical or recreational purpose
in the state where you reside.
So how are you going to respond
to that.
Madam chair and representative
ream.
The so what you just read means
that the anybody who carries a
farm would be exempt and they
would not be able to use
medicinal marijuana that's how
it's written in the bill.
This is there going to be exempt
okay exempt thank because of the
federal statute that you just.
Thank you.
Thank you anyone else
Representative al cone because
he's so far away and other than
that great facility myself that
way because I know you only look
on that side.
But Representative right
Representative related left and
he didn't pick up my order.
Of those one question madam
chair in a I just want to know
what measurement do you you.
In order to to to measure the
amount of impairment what loan
I need to tell you know.
I just can't figure it out Madam
chair representative of Terrel
content that's a great question
and and and debate and discuss
quite a bit there's a there's
there's multiple answers there's
different ways that people do it
so depending on where you got
California just doesn't measure
for to see if you go to
Vancouver they have a impairment
model I think the one that would
most likely be adopted for us
which is Albuquerque's where I
work is City of Albuquerque's
not safety sensitive employees
have an impairments model so if
you if your employee and your
supervisors thanks at your
impaired by cannabis or any
other alcohol or substance then
they have a check sheet of of of
and when the document is slurred
speech
gate if your if your eyes are
red this kind of stuff and then
maybe there's a whole bunch of
them and then that's what they
use for impairment there's also
a blood test so if you were to
the state you had a medical
cannabis card and you were to
get tested there's blood tests
that we don't use we use
urinalysis currently there's
blood tests and a able to
measure some of the nanograms if
you will of to see in your blood
without have to be changed to
policy so what like my brother
said before before this is going
to change policies exchanged
statute and allow us to be able
to go to the cities
municipalities to request
responsible policy based on some
of the newer technologies with
cannabis investor question sure
did love probably not madam
chair because of having a lot of
problem with this with this
thing because you know I mean
I'm gonna use comparison to do
W. I. are all called me they
said be filled out in the I had
a drink a certain amount of
alcohol on Philly federally
reach to figure it out that at
this level you couldn't drag
with that but it took testing on
people in order to get to a
number that they felt would be
that they could reach.
Simone another I think we need
to have a distant lab somewhere
it has some volunteers that of.
Use cannabis until we figure out
where the amount of impairment
reaches that level that that
that we can make sure it's it at
this level you could no longer
continue working or even driving
for that state and madam chair
on that point
Cannabis is different in that it
it can maintain in your system
for up to thirty days so it's
unlike alcohol where your blood
level is indicative of your
impairment so there there will
be M. S. as that drunk driving
stops there are screenings for
lack of a better we are balance
your speech your ability to you
know count backwards all those
kind of things so it will be it
will be figured out within the
departments there but within the
the if departments themselves
what and there it is I believe
there's some maybe not so I'll
just leave it there.
Let's give the sure that is
that's a big question did only
make it worse.
Madam chair I don't even if.
Representative Nibert.
So that.
Thank thank you madam chair for
page two of.
I'd like to ask a couple
questions regarding
What the employer is supposed to
do.
To determine whether there's
the level of concentration that
would cause impairment and with
the employer have the ability to
draw blood or something
from the employee is is that
what's been suggested here Madam
chair representative Nibert is
not suggested that is one of the
ways you can but you can measure
THC in the blood and and faster
than you can in your house SO
once again going back to the the
policy makers and and drafting
responsible policy that would
that would be our recommendation
for reasons suspicion and post
accident
Testing.
So madam chair.
Representative I I assume that
maybe employment manuals would
have to be redrafted to permit.
That type of action
because I suspect employment
manuals don't.
Cover that at this point so that
may that are maybe you said your
analysis would be another way to
test.
But after that after allow in
their employment manual to allow
that.
Testing to occur whether my
bladder or urine to.
Really get to that point with
that not.
Madam chair representative
memory yes currently the
analysis is the kind of standard
testing method for cannabis
but.
Really what this bill does is it
allows protections to those who
carry a card and use medicinal
cannabis and that's and that's
it is we're not talking a
recreational using on the job
just for those that have been
issued a card and they can use
medicinal cannabis for Wetherby
PTSD anxiety payment management
whatever the case may be so
there's a lot that would go into
the policy and polished and SHGs
for a department or agency
failure County quite a bit if
we're gonna change that but yeah
that's what we would be asking
similar to alcohol you can't
drink alcohol for eight hours
prior to your shift so with the
way firefighters work for us to
do on and for his off so during
the forties forties off we have
multiple of all of our members
who have lots of different
ailments including cancer and
they were prescribed this
medication by doctor that they
can't use because even if there
are.
On one day the using medicinals
very low amounts of medicinal
more of camps by the way is
usually the way is prescribed
they can't use it because if
they get of random or post
accident found tests they'll be
determine if based on the zero
tolerance policy in most
municipalities currently.
The.
Representative B. two correctly
of if if you are an employee
that operates the commercial
vehicle or you are required to
carry a firearm.
The employer can prohibit the
use of of of medical marijuana
for those types of positions.
madam chair and representative
number that that is correct and
based on what we found for
national statues those are the
two we found that would exempt
you from being able to use
medicinal cannabis which goes
back to the kind of loose
definition The New Mexico
defined whether B. back in
twenty seven earned in nineteen
with this current legislation it
was great enough to where
everybody could be considered
safety sensitive if you hurt
somebody in the duty of your job
which you could be driving you
could be doing anything you can
you can consider safety
sensitive so that excluded a
whole portion of the workforce
from using a prescribed
medicinal marijuana and we don't
think that's fair.
Madam chair and representative
of the only thing that I think
you are one of the things it
does not cover however is
Use of heavy equipment handling
explosives and and other types
of things that maybe an employer
might also have similar concerns
that with respect to employees
that have these two
physicians and and so I.
I don't know if it needs to be
expanded to include some
additional things but I could
think of you know mining trucks
and construction equipment
things like that where you don't
have to have the license
Christian Health not highway but
you are operating big heavy
vehicles at
might be similar to a commercial
driver's license vehicle also
handling very
The explosive devices would be
to other areas that I would
think implore you might want to
Be concerned about their own
liability and having employees
that may be
Using
this for medical reasons and
still be on the
important so I just that out
the.
I'm concerned with some of those
aliens thank you madam chair
thank you Representative thank
you Representative anyone else.
Happy to entertain a motion.
Madam chair would move a do not
pass on health has.
Two ninety two and a do pass it
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill to
ninety two.
We have a motion of a do not
pass on house bill two ninety
two but I do pass and house
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill to ninety two
made by Representative Penske
and seconded by Representative
Chasey to call the roll
Representative of course.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane.
Mr speaker Representative
McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert.
Yes I'd like to explain.
Representative read.
Representative green.
Representative Sapolsky yes.
Madam vice chair yes madam chair
yes.
A vote of seven to to we have a
do not pass on house bill two
ninety two but it to pass on
house Judiciary Committee
substitute for House.
Representative Nibert thank you
madam chair I voted to passes.
Well to continue on but I would
like you to look at whether or
not the exemptions are to be
expanded because I could think
of some other things that would.
An employer
probably ought to have the
assurance that people handling.
Types of materials for operating
types of equipment should
not have their insurance revoked
or incur liability because
someone is is under is taking
the medical marijuana and
working so thank you madam chair
thank you madam chair members
services so I know we're we're
bumping up against the floor
session but there were it was a
bill four seven four zero seven
four zero seven that I have been
contacted by some local
governments and so on so no
we're gonna have to go to Forces
four zero seven and I'd like to
try to convince will conclude
with that because we are bumping
into the floor session.
we have an expert that could
help Madam chair I do thank you
very much.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee we will try to
make this quick I will go ahead
but my experts introduce
themselves.
Thank you madam chair members my
name is Lisa city or white and I
am a deputy county manager for
Bernalillo county great okay
good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee I'm Dr
heather General I'm the chief
medical examiner at the office
of the medical investigators.
And house bill four zero seven
all we're really doing is we are
modernizing some language that
have been.
Long ignored in statutes have
been looked at some of it had
been looked at since nineteen
eighty four in other parts it
had not been looked at since the
nineteen forties and we're just
updating language and we're also
increasing the amount that the
county is allowed to pay for an
indigent burial
all of the language of this bill
deals with indigent burial the
only substantive change apart
from modernizing language is
increasing the amount of the
county is allowed to pay it was
I believe it six hundred dollars
you can't very anybody for six
hundred dollars so we're
increasing that amount and with
that madam chair members the
committee we stand for
questions.
Before we come there's no
substitute there no amendments
have we've had a lot of those at
this time okay very good one we
go to the audience anyone
wishing to speak in opposition
to the bill please raise your
hand.
I don't see any hands raised
those online wishing to speak in
opposition to the bill please
raise your hand.
Those in the audience wishing to
speak in support of the bill
please raise your hand.
Catherine.
We have a might for you
Catherine.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is
Catherine crier Shada nine the
registered lobbyists for the New
Mexico counties we stand in
support of this legislation and
we think the sponsor for
bringing it forward thank you.
Anyone else wishing to speak in
support.
Those online wishing to speak in
support please raise your hand.
Six okay and the concluding
comments before we go to the
committee Representative I'm
just to say that I'm glad we're
able to update this and if we
could look at it more than once
every eighty years that you
create but yeah I think it's
just brings about some lesson
necessary modernization I
appreciate the time of the
committee thank you.
Representative Chasey.
Thank you Representative and and
we have this in government the
only thing I'm I'm I'm still
hopeful that you might find a
way to make a simple amendment
to it so that we don't just put
a a figure in statute without it
index.
tickets so that we don't have to
come back in.
Twenty years eight years I just
heard from the our former
speaker is the county attorney
and Bernalillo county this
morning and he said Bernalillo
county has a really beautiful
indigent burial service and
sometimes that families come and
they're shy because they don't
have the money but they have
ministers and Paul bears and our
long service and then during the
COVID that hundreds and hundreds
of deceased in this really
helped so thanks thank you
Representative anyone else
wishing to speak to this bill
Representative Frank.
Your.
Second.
Given the motion fourteen pass
on house bill four oh seven made
by Representative read second by
Representative Romero to call
the roll please Representative
vocal.
Representative Chasey yes.
Representative.
Speaker Representative McQueen
this.
Representative Nibert yes
Representative re yes.
Representative green yes.
Representative Sapan ski yes.
Vice chair yes madam chair yes I
voted nine to zero we have a few
pass on house bill four oh seven
great thank you very much chair
so just like to talk a little
bit about Arjun I apologize to
the department heads who came
I'm probably imagine for two
thirty two we are we are
scheduled to go to the floor
will roll it to Monday I'll put
it on Monday first thing the
reason I'm not taking it now I
imagine there's gonna be some
amount of discussion with it
with the bill and I think we
really do need to to make sure
we get it right so that's where
we are we'll do two thirty two
first thing I'm gonna have to be
looking at my Monday John that
because we're getting into
crunch time and we're gonna have
to be making some tough calls so
thank you very much everyone
for your invoke the table now
