Senator lane.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen.
Representative Nibert your.
Representative read.
Representative Rehm your.
Representative semansky.
Madam vice chair madam chair
here madam chair we have a
quorum thank you.
So we are we have one item on
consent Senate bill two nineteen
as.
Madam chair I'd like to move it
to pass on Senate bill two
nineteen as amended we have a
motion on the for the past
seconded by Representative
marine.
Would you call the roll please.
To nineteen yes.
Representative Alcon.
If this.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen.
Representative Nibert yes.
Representative read yes.
Representative green yes ma'am.
Representative Penske.
Madam vice chair.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Yes.
Madam chair was seven yes is in
one no you have a do pass on
Senate bill two nineteen.
Thank you very much let's go to
our next regular business item
we are back on Senate bill Ford
for twenty eight firearms and
unfair pre trade practices act
and we have Senator some long
days here.
Warning you madam chair chair we
took good and I think Census
advice from this committee to
prepare an amendment you should
have it with the put our number
three one three point one.
I understood was sent to
committee yesterday you'll have
Senator we have it and it has
been distributed so if you'd
like to explain the amendment if
you move for discussion
purposes.
I'm here like to the amendment
okay thank you senator our our
thank you madam chair chair the
concern of the committee
understood was the breadth of
the word aware of to be a car up
basically for cause of action
and is explain the committee we
use that word in that phrase
very deliberately because of our
goal to try and stay within the
federal lane of travel that were
required to do the committee had
a good suggestion that if there
was concern with the breath of
that aware of to all causes of
action that we limit it to just
guns and so the memory you have
in front of you goes back to the
original language with regard to
of the injunctive relief under
the existing language the unfair
trade practices act does not
change that anyway so we take
that back to the original
language and eliminating the
what aware of language then in
it's supposed to pair up the we
modify the existing act only
with regard to the damages that
are statutory as we talked about
we've taken those the ten
thousand dollars.
Then what we did is we created a
new subparagraph C. which has
the aware of standard but make
clear that is limited only to
application for the act to
guidance and firearms so you'll
see that in paragraph six of the
men that they have in front of
you that's the aware of standard
against women only two guns and
and then madam chair you have a
new paragraph the which again
relates to specifically the case
law and in the rulings with
regard to go to the limits of
the application of the act in
certain circumstances only two
guns the and that's to do trying
comport with the the federal
exclusion under the PLC a
representative will stand for
questions on the members.
Much Senator questions on the
amendment these guys need a
little bit of time to digest it
I'll give you a few minutes to
do that.
What everybody.
Everybody.
We are ready to to go.
Representative Romero thank you
madam chair I just want to
clarify on page sixteen line
twenty two Sir extending the
The real award.
For tribal times at for an
additional ten thousand so we're
saying.
Either or at the judges
discretion and care whichever is
greater so.
So the whichever is greater it
Representative refers to the
actual damages versus statutory
damages rights of the act this
is all existing that that is
part of the existing act the
only change release to the
number but the existing act
provides for an award of actual
damages or the or the statutory
damages and then and then when
it comes down to will full of
violation of the act that's
where you see the the multiplier
the three the three times actual
damages or an additional in this
case would be additional we
really track in the original for
trip exact he probably be
trickling that ten thousand
dollars that's what the original
act does but we thought that
would be probably to excessive
again I'll be very candid with
the committee when you're
putting these civil damages into
the statute it's a very
subjective analysis week we
could put anything in there make
an argument for it as I told the
committee yesterday I put a ten
thousand dollar number there
because that's the statutory
limit of a small claims in small
claims court that seem to be a
good standard.
On that point.
I guess I'm a little confused by
that because what you say is to
recover actual damages for the
some of.
Additional ten thousand
whichever is greater so it's
always going to be ten thousand
on top of the actual damages.
Then chairman have been granted
respond to that point catch up
with.
Madam chair this would be an so
it would be ten thousand dollars
for three times actual damages
typically speaking the ten
thousand would be greater but
not in every case in some cases
you'll have for instance someone
buys a car in the governor has
been tampered with that could be
a claim that was worth more than
ten thousand I don't need an
example I just want to talk
about the language the language
says to recover actual damages
for the some of and then I said
if I'm reading your thing
correctly it says insert
additional ten thousand dollars.
So whichever is greater.
Madam chairman sure that's
correct to the actual damages
for ten thousand whichever is
greater well then we need to
strike the additional because
that's not what it says.
The or an additional warrant
additional I believe I might be
talking about the first time in
that paragraph where it says it
so what it should should say
madam chair is actual damages
for the sport the sum of ten
thousand whichever is greater
but if oil full then an
additional ten thousand.
Or three times actual damages as
an as though that's the penalty
for the finding of willfulness.
Okay.
So we're on page sixteen line
twenty two and add an additional
before the ten thousand dollars
so let's see how that works.
So madam chair okay or in
additional.
Only when it's on only when it's
a willful
Unconscionable.
Will for practice so the there
two separate madam chair Senator
if I'm understanding this
properly there's the
Original damages and then it
where there's a will full
engagement with unfair trade
practice than your house than
your.
Looking at the the additional
damages that's correct and and
no Madam chair of a chair again
that's the same scheme that's in
place right now one of those
right now the existing act has
certain damage level and it has
an intense damage level for
willful conduct so we're doing
the same thing actually would be
a little more conservative than
the original Act because
the ritual Act with with in in
theory it would be three times
that so you'd go any of those we
look at the original act it's a
hundred dollars for an
unconscious of isolation and
then three hundred dollars for
willful so they multiply it by
three for that additional
component under the existing we
didn't go that far.
My am I wrong your right to have
the additional yep.
I just want to make sure I'm
not.
The additional we shouldn't a
down to earth yeah.
Okay I thought I was that line
there.
If.
So madam chair my recommendation
would be to not adopt number
item for on the amendment.
Other comments on anything else
vice chair that's it
Representative Nibert all the
question.
Thank you madam chair.
In paragraphs the.
Manufacture distribute
distribution and sale of.
Of.
The pharmacist says through the
violates New Mexico federal law
again.
If it's legal in the United
States were.
Only apply in our law then
there.
They are manufacturing and item
that is illegal in New Mexico
but they're still manufactured
and and and you're bringing them
of potential lawsuits against
that company.
For many if simply manufacturing
something that's legal in the
United States and am This Is
going way over brought the new
your ability to bring them into
New Mexico point is fairly
extensive that's a problem and
then.
Paragraph do.
It talks about.
You don't have to prove.
Lost profits
I guess we assume lost profits
said the on the specific
requirements proof of monetary
damages lost profits or intent
to deceive or taken for vantage
of any person is not required so
I guess a person just gets to a
ledge with the lost profits are
in the year to recover madam
chair and senator mmhm this is
Representative so when you're
doing consumer protection laws
it's often times very difficult
to prove damages that's why the
the unfair trade practice in
laws like this have statutory
civil very much in the first
place is to recognize that
sometimes it's difficult to
prove actual damages that's what
you have the alternative of to
with the civil damages so here
the loss the loss of profit
should be required because that
doesn't really matter of the
what a loss of profits is to an
injured party necessarily you
may be injured and have no loss
of profits at all that's what
this language assessors there's
that's not a requirement of
damages.
But madam chair and senator that
they get to recover those down
to the
madam chair that so we know it's
only because the alternative for
actual damages so you have the
alternative for actual damages
and if you go the actual damages
route that we looked at and
that's earlier subsection
then arguably you could argue
loss of profits so you have the
alternatives it's a and that is
the best way I can think about
that this is when you're in when
you're doing the consumer
protection laws you could have
the minimum stand which is what
but you know what in what we
call the minutes of the federal
arguably one dollar damage of
the court may still say we want
to grant relief to you and
that's what the civil penalties
are in the in the unfair trade
practice we're gonna we're gonna
recognize statutory minimum even
though you're damn actually I'm
just may be very minimal.
So you're not what if I
understand your testimony you
can't recover.
The amounts up above and in the
form of paragraph.
Two hundred fifty thousand
whatever was.
The ten thousand.
And.
Recover your or.
Lost profits.
And other actual damages that
you could prove up its current.
So it's one or the other when it
comes to guns in your example of
it comes to guns in talking
about the two hundred fifty
thousand dollar violation at St.
I guess I wish it was a lawyer
for a little clearer than that
because.
I don't I don't see where courts
are instructed to do one or the
other.
And again the.
I just don't know why we're
using the word.
Paragraphs the New Mexico or
federal law it seems to me that.
The only way you ought to be
subject to suit
for the manufacture.
Portion of it is it's biolase
New Mexico and federal law
because that way if it's legally
in.
The United States but not legal
in New Mexico.
You should be able use of unfair
practices act to go after that
manufacture for simply
manufacturing a product that is
legal elsewhere.
And and that's what I think this
language does.
Madam chair representative
you're right that's what the
language does and you just may
have to have a policy
disagreement should should New
Mexico be able to enforce gun
laws in your your argument is
that you should be able to
enforce any gun law unless it's
in violation of federal law as
well and the New Mexico may have
been laws that would stand the
second amendment constitutional
analysis and still are not
prohibited by federal law simple
maybe of for example.
Some of the gun laws that have
been suggested the session some
of them are still moving some of
them are not but New Mexico's
looking at its own gun laws that
are apart from federal law two
years teacher example none of
none of those could be an actual
claim within for trade pacts Act
I think for is the appropriate
standard but that's a policy
question for this committee and
were you and I may disagree.
Well madam chair and senator.
There may be a policy question
but basically what we're saying
is if you manufacture firearms.
You better not sell them in New
Mexico make them available for
sale in New Mexico because if
you do you're subject to the M.
unfair practices act.
For several manufacturing
something that's legal elsewhere
and and you have your long arm
jurisdiction provisions that are
going to be able reach out and
grab these manufactured bring
him to New Mexico and imports
unfair practices at.
And frankly if you're
manufacture thank you look at
that you say.
We're not going to send any
guns.
For gun devices.
To the state of New Mexico for
cell and so you've basically
prohibited.
The sale of firearms in the
state of New Mexico by the
statute.
Representative maybe your intent
but the and I think that's what
this really the the message that
gets a so madam chair and
senator
you know again a legal a legally
produced of firearms that's
available for sale in Texas.
By that language we are
prohibiting that and we are
bringing in.
It.
We're not prohibiting that if it
is illegal in New Mexico for
that device or whatever we are.
Because the that manufactured to
be subject to our unfair
practices act we can bring him
into New Mexico courts and
forces statute for the simple
manufacture of an item that is
legal elsewhere we don't see
that anywhere else in our
statutes and.
That's what I think this bill
does and and I have a real
concern with that thank you
madam chair thank you so.
Thank you Representative others
on the amendment wishing on
Representative Eli.
If it's okay thank you madam
chair the.
You madam chair good morning
chairs of on this of I had a
question on paragraphs the so
going back to the standard so we
have a of really about expanding
a person aware of so see that
we're making explicit that they
may be granted an injunction.
and I think that would be within
the context of someone who
likely L. L. not necessarily a
but how I envision a someone who
is not the the recipient of the
actual harm or potential harm
it's somebody who's more of a a
watchdog so to speak so this
would enable that person again
and junction is that correct he
would do if they meet the
standards for injection as you
know Representative that's a
pretty high burden typically
right you have to show
likelihood prevailing on the
merits in the absence of other
remedy so you start to meet all
the standards for getting an
injection but we give you an
intra court that's right.
Ed Sheeran yeah I understand
the.
Sir callers for omens to a to
get a a PI in New Mexico
But then I think the other part
those so the injunction piece
make sense to me because if
there's a bad actor
and they haven't harmed anyone
yet or they're they're on the
precipice of harming someone we
want to be able to to stop the
bad actor that makes sense to
me.
But then the language we put in
at the end of paragraph C..
It says and shall be awarded two
hundred fifty thousand.
For violation.
so if if in junction is an
available remedy and you can
stop the bad behavior.
why do we have the word shall
Andrew this is someone who
hasn't actually suffered any
actual harm and were saying
they're entitled to two hundred
fifty thousand dollars.
You madam chair again the it's
it's it's a strong penalty and
and I'll be the first to see
that the the goal here again is
to back to the representative
Nibert it's point is is not just
enough that you have a legal
firearm elsewhere in some of the
state bringing into New Mexico
you have to be in violation of
the New Mexico gun law and I'm
gonna trust the state
legislature that we're it's
pretty obvious to me we're gonna
be pretty cautious about
enacting gun law restrictions
and I think we've been so so for
the session that's a concern
of Representative neighbors you
know that
we're we're gonna pass some gun
laws in the so sweet people into
that but I don't see that
happening this legislature and
again that means that if we have
a New Mexico law we're going to
enforce that that New Mexico gun
law so it is a strong it is a
strong remedy representative I
want to agree with you and so
that there could be injection or
alternatively again the
objectives as may of course you
see that make room instructions.
And then you have the
so we were to the tune fifty
thousand are provided it's it's
a service violation for a
serious offense.
Madam chair and so again in the
context of of the standing issue
being a person aware of not
someone who's been actually
harmed.
Of the of the injunction piece
makes perfect sense to me I
think that's an appropriate
process
and again we still have the
Attorney General can can bring
these actions as well
but when we.
We allow two and fifty thousand
on a shell basically not even
may show basically for someone
who it isn't the actual
perception of harm I think of
some concerns of that so thank
you madam chair.
Thank you others wishing to
discuss the amendment.
yes Representative Penske thank
you madam chair Senator
I just want to make sure mentors
expanding this because I think.
The way I read this ammendment.
Number six madam chair and
senator.
I think what was in the original
bill.
Was.
Simply.
Injunctive relief we have not
reading both of these sections.
Together but now.
The awareness.
Creates a two hundred and fifty
thousand dollars.
Award for violation is that was
that an intentional changes that
not a change from.
The original.
Because I think in the original.
We have the knowingly.
Peace on page seventeen.
That then led to the two hundred
fifty thousand dollar.
Fine and then we also had.
I think we had evidence of.
Harms also.
Just I I guess I'm just trying
to check track madam chair and
senator that.
The the new amendment do would
you mind addressing.
Will and let me turn to Brandon
on that who's right there on the
amendment but to but you're
right we can we want to
understand the amendment we're
looking at the bottom of page
sixteen Original Bill sixteen
seventeen which is that same two
hundred fifty thousand dollar
worth so let me turn the Mr
Cummings please.
Madam chair that's our.
Madam chair just.
Representative
the restrictions on what actions
are able to bring with regard to
firearms I mean that there will
never be in action that's the
P. L. C. A. A. portion means
that there can never be an
action that involves firearms or
firearms parts that is not a
knowing violation of state or
federal law so every violation
that is actionable against
firearms under this act undersea
we'll have to have that knowing
component so the the the
original acts not involving
firearms that language would
mean the same which allows you
to seek an injunction or damage
isn't like paragraph a.
There is and then there is a
step up in paragraph the for.
Who did it will fully that the
violation was willful there's no
step in the new paragraph C.
because every by election that
isn't will full can't be sued
over so every violation that you
would be able to a prosecutor
under this action would be a
knowing and intentional
violation of federal law.
I don't know if that answers
your question representative
madam.
Madam chair to I think I think
we.
Last the step up.
At madam chair and senator I.
Keith maybe I'm.
Missing something but if if we
wanted I I've sort of thought we
were going for a parallel of
paragraph eight in parallel of
paragraph be.
Specifically for firearms but
now we've got.
See that is.
Incentive relief for awareness.
And a two hundred fifty thousand
dollar violation and.
The second paragraph is.
As as doesn't parallel.
These that manager I'd.
Maybe I'm not reading it.
New Mexico he said that have
left confused maybe if I could
help and if I get this wrong
center I'm sure you'll correct
me I don't think the intent is
to make them parallel I think
the intent is to have one
standard for
the nor the normal unfair trade
practices and a different
standard for those relating to
guns at least that's the intent
of the senator I believe is that
correct.
Then it's just madam chair
different penalties yes okay and
yes I think that's the intention
of treatment.
Okay thank thank you.
Anyone else the manager yes
Representative every.
Chair and Senator.
When I look at the word on page
seventeen one one marketed.
And then I'd go over to page
twenty one.
And I go to line eighteen and I
going advertising.
I think you're including.
Anything that's advertised in
New Mexico that may be legal.
Elsewhere.
Such as a farm in the am I
reading that right or not.
Madam chair members coming to
answer questions.
Of Madam chair representative
under the exemptions section of
this act what you're describing
is specifically not permitted so
no loss you may be maintained
against any firearms
manufacturer distributor
advertiser seller.
If that act it over an act over
any act that didn't occur either
within New Mexico or delivered
into New Mexico.
madam chair and Mister Cummings.
Using the word in other places
in this bill about may because.
And.
I kind of see that as as not
something that you would have
to.
Prove actually damaged may
because of the.
Madam chair they were talking
about two different things right
now that you're talking about
the marketing language that was
of concern here Mister Mister
Cummings turn to what's on in
the page thirteen of the bill.
Really so paragraph to between
lines in fifteen eighteen which.
Required and specific with the
proof for the exclusion section
in that that's the part there
that refers to the action or
transaction having occurred
in whole or in part in New
Mexico and then you know you so
that was the exclusion I think
address your other concern about
advertising and then I think you
turn to a new subject and I'm I
may have lost you along the way
would you would you know we go
where you're at now.
Madam chair and senator I I mean
in the in the discussion that's
been going on we're using of
language that it may cause harm.
You know and I'd I'd have to go
back through here and find it.
But I I find that I think this
is so broad.
Are you.
Madam chair of the in to give me
an example.
The recently the there's news is
come out and said that if you
have a gas stove that there's
in the burning eighty minutes
these kick chemicals and and all
and a high.
So I go ahead and say well it
may cause harm to me.
But anyway exact I think this is
just waiver on it right now if I
may Representative that was part
of the reason we remove the
aware of language so you know I
understand your concern we are
talking you're talking now about
the main bill but we remove the
aware language so that quote in
the normal fun fair it's not
just being aware of or seen an
ad you actually have to have
there's some language in there
about.
Injured by it or something like
that so just be aware that has
been addressed not probably to
your satisfaction but it has
been addressed to some degree
thank you Mr you're welcome.
Anyone else wishing to discuss
the amendment.
I'm happy to entertain a motion
on the amendment chair on I move
that we adopt the amendment
without item number four.
Thank you motion to adopt the
amendment to the Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate bill for twenty eight
removing paragraph for from that
amendment.
And it's been made by
Representative Romero and
second by Representative Chasey.
Any further discussion on the
amendment.
What would you call the roll
thank you madam chair
Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey yes.
Representative Lane.
Speaker Martinez Representative
McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert.
Representative read yes.
Representative green.
No ma'am.
Representative Sapan ski yes.
Madam vice chair yes.
Madam chair yes madam chair with
the seven yes is into knows you
have an adopted amendment with
the item number four all right
well yesterday we had concluded
our discussion of the bill.
so I would like to know request
a motion on whether or not to.
Madam chair I move that we
Senate Judiciary Committee says
two percent of four twenty as
amended.
Motion made by Representative
Romero seconded by
Representative Chasey to pass on
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill for
twenty eight as amended would
you call the roll please thank
you madam chair representative
on.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert.
Representative read.
Representative Rehm government.
Representative the Penske yes.
Madam vice chair yes.
Madam chair yes.
Madam chair with a vote of six
yeses in three knows you have a
do pass on Senate Judiciary
Committee said percent bill for
twenty eight as amended.
Thank you very much Senator
Madam may have just moment I
know you're very busy schedule I
just want to congratulate you on
your chair and all of you on
this committee I serve on this
committee very long time ago and
I'm smiling at Representative
Chasey who Sir with me here she
was here when I came here and
I've shared it on time and
Representative ring was on this
committee long time and a lot of
water under the bridge but the I
think I would come over whether
Representative Alcon was on the
committee when I was here not
too but I think he was from time
to time so it's nice to be back
with you well thank you senator
I want you to know I finally got
rid of that horrible coach that
was in our office I didn't do it
I wasn't doing any the phone.
I was.
Yeah I understand that Senator
serve on state said that coach
so I think it was to replace it.
You.
Yeah so I'm not very long ago
there's.
Probably lies in that in that.
That the house states you all
keep longer hours.
I know we have a need for us
here.
What.
Senator who is your answer thank
you
So also Vontaze are you gonna be
presenting the attorney
general's.
Yes Sir sorry about that.
You thought you were with us.
Your.
Your.
One thirty.
Later with you young people over
here in the house.
Yes well good to see you again
Senator for now on Senate bill
for twenty six.
Thank you madam chairman Chuck
was with me today is the newly
elected Attorney General of
privilege to have here today of
the proposal here today is to
create a new division of the
attorney general's office
specific to civil rights and all
of the Attorney General give you
a very brief explanation for why
would like you to support this
initiative madam chair members
of the committee
I and and proud to be here today
presenting Senate bill for
twenty six and I want to thank
chairman serve on this for
sponsoring this bill
the attorney general's office
has.
Very broad authority in one of
the more interesting aspects of
the statutory language that
creates that office is that
empowers the Attorney General to
create the department of justice
would actually never had and
never designated the attorney
general's office.
As a department of justice and I
think before we can actually
take that step I think it's
important that we catch up
frankly with something that has
existed at the federal level and
in most states in this country
for the better part of six years
and that is a dedicated unit
that focuses on protecting and
vindicating the civil rights of
every day so this in short that
is what this bill does it gives
us new investigative authority
and clarifies our ability to
protect Mexican citizens.
And the rights.
Thank you madam chair was simple
question thank you let's let's
go to the audience.
Thing to speak in opposition to
this bill please raise your
hand.
Those online wishing to speak in
opposition please raise your
hand.
Those in the audience wishing to
speak in support of the bill
please raise your hand.
And those online wishing to
speak in support of the bill
please raise your hand and I see
a Maryland back.
Maryland.
Thank you committee chair and
members my name is Maryland back
I'm the founder and executive
director New Mexico child first
network an organization
dedicated to improving the lives
of children in foster care I'm
as we have seen many of these
bills come forward to protect
children this session we want to
thank the Attorney General and
chairman sirventes for bringing
this forward I want to say are
just echo in house Senate health
excuse me Republican senator
Senator David guy egos stood in
support of this bill and said
based on being fiftieth out of
fifty at for the worst child
abuse crimes for the worst
repeat that the worst revolving
door of these crimes he stood in
support and Senator Gallegos
said if we're going to change
the narrative if we're going to
do things we've never done in
stopping fifty just for these
**** rific cases of child abuse
and it's time for all of us to
do something different and I was
proud to see Republican senator
David K. go stand in support we
stand and support and we think
the AG for being willing to do
something different and put
these most horrific cases of
child abuse front and center and
protect the civil rights of our
children and our vulnerable
populations in New Mexico thank
you thank you Jim.
Jim.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Jim Jackson here
for disability rights New Mexico
this bill would bring an
additional focus on civil rights
within the attorney general's
office and we appreciate his
initiative in this area
enforcement of civil rights is a
particularly important issue to
press persons with disabilities
and particularly children
because I know that the Attorney
General has a special interest
in that so madam chair members
of the committee we encourage
your support of this bill thank
you.
Thank you anyone else online
wishing to speak in support of
the bill please raise your hand.
Okay I'll go back to the
sponsor.
The new manager ready for
questions of the committee very
good Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you senator Graham of.
To.
Very quick questions one
I have talked to the Attorney
General about and that's the
word of for example in.
Paragraphs the in section one
second line it talks about the.
Escalated demand to a person or
public body and that phrase
appears numerous times in the
bill and I just would like the
Attorney General to explain a
little bit about
the the.
A fact of this bill with respect
to a person and who this is
really directed to.
Madam chair representative
Nibert thank you for the
question we we we have had a
conversation about that
particular language and I think
it's important for the committee
to understand the the history of
civil rights enforcement in this
country in that history is is
really captured in section J.
which appears on page five
of the bill but in short when we
are referring to a person we are
referring to an individual
acting in their official
capacity in often times when we
are in a situation where we may
need to name a public agency we
also name the individual who is
acting in their individual
capacity so in this instance and
in this framework person refers
to somebody acting in that
capacity doesn't refer to them
acting in an individual capacity
in the intent of the bill is to
focus on the deprivation of
civil rights that or
Under the control or direction
of a government agency or a
public body and we feel it's
sometimes necessary to name them
as an individual but it is not
intended to go after private
actors that's what this bill is
intended to do it specifically
focused on accountability for
CYFD school districts others
political subdivisions in any
leaders of those institutions
that may be subject to a civil
investigative demand in that
context thank you madam chair
thank you Mr Attorney General up
the other word that.
Out of me is section one
paragraph the.
We see after person or public
body that is issued a civil
investigative demand I'm
wondering if the word issued
should be changed to presented
served or something other than
issues guy it just seemed kind
of odd to me that maybe you
could explain it
Madam chair representative night
but what we've done here is we
actually have more explain which
that that we have authority to
exercise or to issue civil
investigative demands in other
contexts for example in consumer
protection matters are anti
trust matters in it it really is
just a term of art for this
context because we're not it's
not a subpoenas were
specifically trying to
distinguish it from this idea
that has to be served and then
it would implicate all the
potential problems of formal
service and things of that
nature I was thinking maybe the
work presented.
Issue issue just saying the long
string for that's.
If you're fine with that I am
and again I.
I do think
Particularly my community we've
had several very tragic events
and.
I'm appreciating every effort to
try to address and get to the
the problems and hopefully this
is one measure that will allow
you to have the tools to make
the system better so I I think I
support your bills are thank you
madam.
Thank you Representative
Representative McQueen.
Thank you madam chair
Madam chair Mister chair general
Uh.
So.
But.
The same systems great to me
service thing to discussion and
some of the testimony in.
When I think of civil rights.
I think if things like
discrimination press secretary
said that and I heard public
testimony about what sounds to
me like criminal matters child
abuse could you just could you
clarify that for me is this
these civil.
Infractions or we talk about for
more Madam chair representative
McQueen that's an excellent
question in the I think it's
it's important for me to sort of
walk through the evolution a
little bit of the the focal
point of this particular
division but also technology the
history you're absolutely right
that we in the civil rights
division was created at the
department of justice in
nineteen fifty seven in the wake
of board verses brown there are
or brown versus board of
education the regional focus was
on the desegregation of schools
and then it it transitioned into
the desegregation and anti
discrimination work in the
sixties for public
accommodations housing and like
it has then evolved into other
areas of
of rights protections for
American citizens based on
jurisprudence both at the
federal level and at the state
level the reason that we have I
think such vocal support from
advocates who are concerned
about children is that
especially in in this state
because of the problems that we
are currently facing we have a
problem protecting the civil
rights of children and this is
not a criminal solution to that
problem it is ace it gives us
civil investigative and
enforcement tools to hopefully
bring about and accelerate
institutional level change right
now we have civil rights
attorneys who represent
individual litigants children
with disabilities children in
the foster care system and what
ends up happening is that if
there's a deprivation of those
rights often times there's an
offer of settlement for monetary
damages in as a condition of
accepting those that monetary
settlement those litigants sign
usually a confidentiality
provision and also agree not to
get into the detail.
Those are the underlying
problems of what occurred in the
system itself this is
particularly problematic for
disadvantaged people or people
with limited resources so if you
have a dis child with
disabilities in the school
district that doesn't have
access to adequate resources and
you need to and you need that
money to take care of that child
what you do is say okay I'm
gonna leave the system alone I'm
gonna take this money and use it
to support my child but what
happens is you leave that system
in place and on changed so this
is intended to give our office
civil litigation and
investigation authority to
engage in stomach level reform
so that we stop having issues
where these children in
particularly vulnerable children
are not in a position where they
may have a settlement and
monetary award but the next
child is still suffering in that
system and if you talk to civil
rights litigators in this state
they tell you time and again
that they can often times obtain
justice for individual clients
who have been impacted by
various agencies but they're not
able to move the ball forward in
terms of institutional level
reform and that's what we're
trying to do.
It madam chair Center
researchers General is it just
for protecting civil rights of
children or is it brought from
that that would protect the mail
system Madam chair
representative in the queen it
is broadly constructed and and
and the the chairman of this and
I had a conversation at the
beginning of the session about
whether or not to keep it
narrowly focused on just
children what a brought it out
and I think we recognize that
there are a number of other
challenges that we need to get
into so the answer your question
is it is not just children it
gives us the authority to
protect and vindicate the civil
rights of of lots of different
individuals we may have a county
jail for example that has a
history of being able to being
unable to prevent sexual assault
that deprives those people in
that custodial space of a
guaranteed right of of being
protected against that kind of
assault this would give us the
opportunity to look at that he
would give us the opportunity to
look at other issues but what I
have stated very clearly is that
the first and and from my
perspective the most important
work that we need to engage in
is the protection of these
children.
Madam chair Senators and Mr
chair in general so I.
I I know some civil rights
attorneys they can make more
money in the case and I will
make in a lifetime that's not an
exaggeration
Will you be seeking.
civil penalties and if so to the
civil penalties.
go to the state go to the
victims.
Madam chair representative
McQueen if you look at the bill
there are no there's that we are
not including enough not ask for
the inclusion of any civil
penalties this is this is not
about money and I want to make
that abundantly clear to
everyone on the committee this
is not about returning money to
the state or state coffers and
it is not about stepping into
the shoes of individual
litigants who will still have an
opportunity to have their rights
protected and to be compensated
for any specific harm to them
this is about institutional
reform and it was very it was
intentionally constructed in
that way so that we allow for
private litigants to to run the
course of their of of individual
education and allow us to engage
in institutional reform wherever
we can and however we can.
And madam chair center Mr chair
general are with those efforts
be.
parallel or the combined or the
sequential and how does that
how's that play out.
Madam Madam chair representative
McQueen nothing that we do in
this bill displaces impairs or
impedes any individual from
obtaining for initiating their
own litigation and and allowing
them to recover and be
compensated for any harm that
was done to them as a result of
depriving them of their civil
rights it does give us the
authority to intervene as an
interested party in pending
litigation but it doesn't give
us the right to recover for
example monetary funds but there
are as this committee is well
aware there is ongoing
litigation and that has already
addressed some of these issues
and we would have the right to
intervene in some of those if
the state has an interest in
bringing about institutional
level reform.
Madam chair of the center Mr
chair general so I I think I
heard you say I wrote down on
the FICON that.
That's not intended to go after
private persons this is that
correct Mr and madam chair
Representative McQueen yes.
Not private persons it we list
persons acting in their official
capacity that's what persons
refers to.
So madam chair center and the
secretary general on page four
line twenty four line twenty
three civil rights violation
means and act practice or
parents conduct by any person or
public body isn't that I I mean
I don't.
That that seems to be any person
to me that that doesn't seem the
the person acting in their
public city Madam chair
representative McQueen they
they.
You if you'll permit me when we
talk about the enforcement of
civil rights in this context it
specifically limited to
individuals acting in their
official capacity does not if
you look at civil rights
jurisprudence we we we're not in
the in the business nor can we
establish civil rights
violations against private
individuals not acting under the
color of law we can you know you
know that's something that in
the broader context of how this
bill was constructed I think
relatively straightforward it
limits us to focusing on
governmental actors.
So
Again madam chair center Mr
chair general see on page three
point eight I believe that lines
been amended but I believe it's
still says.
The person or public body at I
mean.
I don't see definition a person
here that that's limited to
public rules it just says
person.
Madam chair representative clean
up if you if you read that in
its entirety in contacts which
is part of part of what we do
and were hoping to do in terms
of evaluating the construction
it's a person or public body
that is issued a civil
investigative demand pursuant to
subsection C. of this section
shall comply with that demand
regardless of any
confidentiality provision
established by state or local
law so in that context what
we're talking about specifically
is somebody who is operating in
their official capacity who
choose confidentiality and the
official work that they do is
covered under
a specific statute for example
the children's code which I know
has been a subject of debate
before the committee and before
the body and it's a specific and
we included that language so
that we wouldn't have an issue
with a confidentiality provision
that attach is to a to a
government agent acting in that
capacity.
So madam chair center Mr chair
general I I'm just one more time
page two the resolution may
issue a civil investigative
demand to a person for public
policy at in person just seems
really brought to me I I I don't
see anything limiting that to a
person acting.
In their official capacity.
Madam chair representative
McQueen what I what I would say
again is that yes if you read it
in context what we are talking
about is issuing a civil
investigative demand to
government actors we we had not
intended and or not will not use
this to submit some
investigative demands to private
individuals because if you think
about the deprivation of civil
rights.
That is not that is typically
something for example in the
state of deprivation of your
first amendment right the
jurisprudence on first amenities
amendment is relatively clear
that.
When you're thinking about
protecting that right it's
protecting that right against
governmental censorship and
governmental action.
Private action and if you follow
that.
Jurisprudence it it is self
limiting in the sense that in
this context it doesn't give us
this brought a forty because
you're not acting in an official
capacity.
David Jervis Attorney General I
agree on the first amendment you
know and and I said I hear
people all times that follows my
first mentor rights and
psychologist government election
so
but.
Sexual harassment is a civil
rights violation the not and
that certainly doesn't require
government action.
madam madam chair Representative
McQueen if you if you look at
the construction of what we're
looking at
we are late we're looking
primarily at a pattern and
practice not a singular Act and
so it is hard to conceptualize a
notion for example of sexual
harassment being can initiated
or conducted by somebody in an
official capacity that is
engaged as a pattern and
practice.
Okay so
Madam chair center Mr chair I
would propose I will support
this bill
I have no problem with what what
what you're after I think you
need the definition of first.
Because it's right now it just
says person and you keep telling
me in the context of this it
doesn't mean person but I don't
see that contact thank you madam
chair.
Thank you.
I thank you madam chair Senator
on to sin is a mystery thank you
but you do a Taurus but Mr Agee
first I would didn't know really
what I thought about this bill
and I've read it
And listen to this debate and.
I myself agree that there's such
a big problem with CYFD that I I
kinda like the fact that this
will give you authority to
really help that situation and
get involved in it so that's
something I'm excited about it
and supportive of
and I think
That maybe the elephant in the
room is is you know is this
gonna apply down the road to a
police officer or something like
that and you know being pro law
enforcement like I am and I am
sure I can see situations where
you know you might have to get
involved that there was a civil
rights violation with law
enforcement because they are
under a government agency is
that with that encompasses met
madam chair representative read
want to be abundantly clear in
and I don't want anyone to miss
the fact that we are going to
very much focus on the rights of
children at the outset because I
think that is the biggest on
addressed an unmet need but it
will absolutely give us the
authority to investigate
patterns and practice of civil
rights violations in law
enforcement there's there's no
doubt about it and that and that
is intentional and as somebody
who served as and continues to
serve as a crepuscular I think
it's important for us in law
enforcement to have the ability
to demonstrate to the public
that we are willing and able to
engage in institutional level
reform not because we are in
opposition to law enforcement
but because we're trying to
improve how law enforcement
functions and the rules that
govern law enforcement and also
to is there by improve the
public's faith and confidence in
the work that they do and so
it's it will absolutely apply to
that and and I want to be clear
about that and madam chair and
Senator Sanchez and mystery G.
because I'm sure I'm sure bill
remember when he comes back and
was it gonna ask you that so I
thought I just you know throw
that out there I will say just
as a statement I've worked with
you for a lot of years as a
prosecutor we work to review it
officer involved shootings and
things of that nature together
and I've never found you to be
The state overzealous on what
you do and pry and how you
prosecute and what you choose to
prosecute so I don't and I don't
have that concern with you I
mean who knows who follows you
know you but overall and I think
I can support this bill I I
again I'm very excited about the
CYFD part I myself believe
there's a huge problem there and
if you're willing to get in and
try to do something with that
and created a division in your
department for that I think that
actually is a very positive
thing so centers of Hernandez
and mystery G. I will be
supporting your bills.
Thank you Representative every
Representative Alcon.
Thank you madam chair.
I'll go down to.
person what is your vacancy rate
right now strategy.
Madam chair representative all
clone I I don't know the exact
right what I can tell you is
that there was somewhere on the
order of a of of about a four
million dollar funded vacancy
rate when I inherited the agency
and walked into the agency so we
have funded vacancies that were
in the existing budget and then
we've added additional person a
lot of that person will be
dedicated to this new
affirmative litigation but not
just civil rights and I'll give
you an example since you asked
the question we recently that
the United States department of
justice initiated the largest
anti trust case in the state in
the country in the last thirty
years it's been joined by eight
different states I got up early
I read that article I sent it to
the chief of staff in the AG's
office and I said I want to meet
with the anti trust division to
find out why we haven't joined
in that litigation and when I
got to the office he informed me
that there is no anti trust
division inside the attorney
general's office and that is
just one example of many of the
types of capacity that we need
in the affirmative litigation
right now we have slated between
five and ten FTE ease to work
and this initial unit once it's
created and it's my
understanding that we have about
a thirteen percent somewhere
between thirteen and fourteen
percent budget increase that
will fund the lawyers
investigators and support staff
that work in this division.
Mmhm thank you thank you madam
chair you danced around my
question is if if possible the
question is if you were lucky
enough to hire people how many
people would you be looking to
hire to my.
Madam Madam chair representative
will call on the field the
people that are not there right
now you mean with respect to
this bill or the entire agency
entire agents representable
let's let's let the AG going is
answers and then you can
complete your question.
Madam chair representative of
all point I just I want to be
clear with respect to this
division it would be about ten
people I understand that based
on the the budget increase that
we have that we're looking at an
additional twenty three FTEs
on top of the vacancies that we
currently have in the office so
something on the order I would
think of probably thirty five or
forty additional funded
positions that need to be filled
but not all of them will go into
this division.
Thank you madam chair non I
understand is moving in the if
they are I can see that there is
this is take thirty to turnings
into court staff as a to talk
about a year.
That's what my problem is that
the.
Madam chair was what we pay.
Our attorneys in the state of
New Mexico that work for us.
to get a civil attorney to go
work for the A. G..
The civil attorney can go out.
And the public in just one not
willing deal could make the
money that he would make us and
working for you.
I think it's gonna be hard to
fill those vacancies and so
therefore my question is did you
make room for contract attorneys
in this case.
Madam chair representative all
cone your point is very well
taken as somebody who has spent
the vast majority of my life as
a public interest lawyer public
sector lawyer I know better than
most that you that you're not
gonna be able to compete on pay
a long we will have the ability
I've already had conversations
with civil rights attorneys it
usually starts with me banking
some of them to consider
abandoning at least some of
their lucrative practices and
considering coming to work for
office for a time but we do have
the option of potentially
partnering with some outside
civil rights attorneys if we're
not able to staff up quickly
and to and to help at least
offset some of the costs we were
again this is not there no
monetary damages for this so
that would be pro bono work but
what I can tell you as somebody
who has done this for a very
long time you don't come to the
attorney general's office to
work in the civil rights
division because you think
you're going to get paid your
you come there to do this work
because you think it's
meaningful and important work
that's going to help the public
and and I know that may sound
tripe or corny but fundamentally
when you're making the pitch
that's what you're pitching to
these young lawyers and you're
trying to inspire them that
you're gonna be doing meaningful
important work on behalf of the
most vulnerable people and
that's what we're trying to do.
Thank you thank you madam chair
I just want to bring that up
because I know that the
somewhere along the line we're
going to catch up financially to
support us so we can hire people
that are coming to work for.
Kind of decisions I mean I can't
I can't get my vice chair but
we're pretty AG relates to
discuss or not because he's
going to say no way in heck so
you think about that madam
chair.
We're just a comment.
Thank you madam chair.
Before we go to Representative
Chasey I just need to let people
line to step away for a little
bit but money vice chair will
take over the helm and
appreciate about but I'll be
back thank you.
Representative Rita.
On Representative Jesse okay.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Senator and and Mr Attorney
General
I.
I wonder who's been involved in
the discussions of setting up
the office of civil rights for
example tribes what other
interest groups for can I am
really I should call the manager
what other stakeholders
Madam chair representative
Chasey I have been in touch and
it had.
In depth in in person
conversations with tribal
leaders for example chairman
Lente was invited to the
attorney general's office we had
a long conversation about the
impact on
tribal communities native
interest particularly as it
pertains to children I've
personally met with advocates
for children with disabilities
and and persons adult persons
with disabilities I've discussed
this with we on Howard at the
ACLU and of course I've had
extensive conversations with
other representatives of both
the house and Senate.
Madam chair.
In talking kind of following up
a little bit on my colleague
judge of Cologne.
Do you contemplate having to
hire outside counsel to
prosecute some of these cases
are to pursue some of these
cases madam madam chair
Representative Chasey what the
conversations that I've had with
outside counsel about helping
assist in this work is our
ability to perhaps help with
covering the costs of litigation
no fees no payment of any kind
in part because there's there's
no recovery mechanism that's
built into this process but I
have had a of a conversation
with civil rights attorneys
particularly civil rights
attorneys who are focused on on
protecting children my cart Sir
crack up Kelly sentenced out and
others again I usually start by
asking them and pleading with
them if they'll come and take a
job usually they laugh and then
I have a conversation with them
of if we can come up with some
way to offset costs and we're
not able to fill the vacancies
would you come and help us but
at this point there is no plan
in place to start paying people
to do work that frankly I think
we should be doing
on our own behalf and inside the
agency.
So madam chair and and Senator.
I I.
Fully endorse your office being
able to have a civil rights
division.
it concerns me a little that the
whole thing was.
Couched in the children's
rights.
You know what I have a very good
friend and colleague who was the
head of the office of consumer
protection in a previous
attorney general's office.
And
And she litigated against the
predatory lenders.
The state got a lot of money in
those cases.
I've been involved
her first really I got an
interview that was one of the
people identified for the
cavernous settlement.
By the
The folks who are trying to
figure out how to change the the
practices
And.
Although this the state of New
Mexico didn't dispute didn't
fight the suit they said let's
settle.
They're still fighting over it
those kids haven't gotten
anything we have no damages.
I don't think that's right I
think you should be looking at
damages.
And I think the same would be
true for other civil rights that
you have I mean I remember when
we pass the legislation.
To create the Civil Rights Act
our former speaker
Brian Egolf described it
including conscionable situation
where a foster child was being
sexually abused by.
His
foster parents and because of
qualified immunity there's never
been a decision with those exact
facts before.
There was no suit against the
state of New Mexico I mean I
think there should be damages I
I I really think that's how
you're going to
get somewhere changing the
patterns and practices I think I
can't remember Kevin this was
Filed right before.
Probably about October of twenty
eighteen.
It's still not settled and I I
honestly think and I don't know
Senator you've done a lot of
trial work I I always wanted to
work in civil rights and I ended
up in doing what I think is
another area of civil rights
that we're going to suddenly
realize some day that this is
doing the child protective
services is we're looking at so
rights of children and families
there.
But I think there should be
recovery.
I don't think it's just a matter
of changing patterns and
practices and I I'm not critical
of the idea of having the civil
rights division I don't think
this is far enough and.
So and I also think that if you
can't get damages then you're
going to get of what I don't
want to have happen is that the
damages are collected and they
just pay the attorneys and.
The victims don't get any
satisfaction four four measure
of
Measure of us.
Some way to compensate them for
what what they have lost so I
and I don't know maybe I've
talked to the term Senate
Judiciary later about how we
could look at that I mean I I I
I just hate to see you look at
it that way.
I also want to say and I know
this isn't your fault but some
of the public testimony claim to
that there were Republican
proponents of this legislation
and we live colleague here has
the run off there were not who
voted for the bill maybe they
stood up and waited for the bill
but they did not vote for the
bill so I I don't appreciate
that part of the public
testimony just wanna let you
know when it it's not your
fault.
I
I'm inclined to support the bill
because I think we should.
Start at it but I worry about
this person I worry about the
fact that you're just going
after patterns and practices and
not damages.
So if you want to respond about
the damages fine but I'm just
kind of having of a thoughtful
conversation with myself here.
Well maybe not awful and madam
chair.
Less you feel it's valuable okay
moving over respond to prepare
Chasey and I know you're showing
times there's been no hint of
partisanship to my knowledge in
in the past of this bill.
Thank you for that I know we
have a.
Here you
okay we'll go back to
Representative Nibert I believe
the as an amendment.
The.
Madam chair and senator in a lot
of the conversation we've had
with a I do think sense Hey
Representative from from Santa
Fe and Santa and I both the
we're concerned about the work
public health person I think
that if we go to page five in
between lines nine and ten we
insert a definition for person
and then re number
the next paragraph as program
three I think we accomplished
purpose and if I heard the
testimony right.
Person could be defined as a
governmental a governmental
official or employee acting in
their official capacity for a
public body and I'm wondering if
that would be a friendly
amendment to your bill.
Well except that is a member of
the the madam chair I would I
would move an amendment to
Senate bill four twenty six
being from page five between
lines nine and ten insert a new
paragraph two that reads quote
person close quote means that
governmental official or
employee.
Acting.
What you said in a.
Acting in.
And they in official capacities.
For a public body.
and then we would have a.
As.
Semi colon.
And then the word and.
And then re number paragraph to.
And I guess up above on line
nine we would need to strike the
word and at the end of that one
nine.
Attended the launch of.
I can read that again if you
wish I will be needed is there
any discussion on the amendment.
I don't know that.
And my.
This bill as we are not
creating.
The New Mexico Civil Rights Act.
Right.
The ten.
And while the Civil Rights Act
limits.
And it's.
Not for civil rights.
Against individuals in federal
court I believe that's.
Maybe the the.
Representative is that.
I don't.
I think that this is related to
the.
Stores.
Sometimes we turn reactions to
return my call us right.
Did anybody hear me.
Share.
But I guess my question I see I
thought civil rights violation
in this bill is being defined as
the subject matter for which is
civil investigative demand could
be brought not as a way of
accessing the court and so I
worry that if we eliminate
person then.
It I don't I'm worried about the
ramifications of that
Representative chair on the
point so
The resistance he if you look at
page page three one eight.
I mean that's years talking
about who receives the civil
investigative demand and so I
don't think we're talking about
access to court I just think
we're talking about to the
attorney general's office
interacts with and that we're
we're living in limiting that to
public.
The Fishel's public employees so
for example.
If you had a state manufacturing
company were you had ongoing
civil rights violations that
would not be subject to this it
would only be these the state
agencies that we've been talking
about the publication sees.
And that was are very concerned
whether person would be deemed
to be overly broad and will
bring in a private individual
private sector this this my let
as I understand legislation and
talking to the Attorney General
it's meant to be applicables to
governmental bodies and
agencies.
Madam chair representative then
should we make.
The amendment match.
Either the Civil Rights Act of
the Human Rights Act or does
that language you just read do
that.
Madam chair representative I was
just trying to
The definition for what the
Attorney General said he was
concerned with that person was
official government official
acting in their official
capacity and so this only
applies to the section it
doesn't go outside of the
sections just for purposes of
this one section
of law that we're if it's an
act.
So it will be very limited in
scope to to the use of that word
on these five pages.
Madam chair representative so.
I would just offer that the
Civil Rights Act.
Makes multiple references to a
person.
Acting on behalf of under color
of or within the course and
scope of the authority of the
public body.
And I don't know if that
Matches what you read that we
may want to match it.
So madam chair I mean I as the
chair.
What I'm hearing.
Is the we she's suggesting that
we match the definition of
person in the Civil Rights Act.
Purses the proposed amendment
which was a person means
governmental official employee
acting in official capacity of a
public body in adopting the
regional language from the Civil
Rights Act.
Madam chair I mean I think
I appreciate the representative
suggestion I think I think
that's good language I think you
know under color of authority is
important concept and
I like it when the language is
consistent so I am I for one
would you if we get to serve
dropped that language into this
definition I think that works
you want to withdraw and
perhaps.
Yes you just.
Person means.
Do you want to keep that
representative of us.
Representative.
Percent.
A person acting.
Is the.
And that's so friendly the.
The.
Okay
madam chair Representative I've
we would still consider that a
friendly amendment and I think
it makes sense to to its
synchronized language.
Madam chair you you might have
that written out or whatever you
have to staffs have hit it right
but I'm I'm comfortable with
that as well so I would either
amend my amendment or withdrawal
my amendment to make that
amendment however you wish
Taylor said is there any
discussion on the amendment is
there any objection to adopting
that amendment.
Right you have an amended bill
Back to the bill there anyone
else that wants to talk about.
I will entertain a motion.
If you pass motion on Senate
bill for twenty six as amended
moved by a speaker Martinez
seconded by Representative
Nibert.
All we take the role thank you
madam chair Representative
Alcon.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane.
Speaker Martinez.
Yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert.
Representative read yes.
Representative Rehm yes.
Representative Penske yes.
Madam vice chair yes.
Madam chair.
The.
Representative Eli sorry.
Here at your vote yes.
Madam chair with ten test is you
have a do pass on Senate bill
four to six as amended.
You thank you madam chair thing
members the committee.
Okay so
Honoring the chairs intent we're
going to do Senate bill two
forty six we're going to try to
get through this agenda before
getting back to the floor so
that's the intent and I
understand even amendment for
for twenty six as well okay.
Can we get that you madam chair
members of the committee for
small thank you for meeting of
this morning
my how sponsor is chairing a
committee right now.
so this is these are some
revisions to the rise uniformed
law under Carol acts
as your analysis indicates most
of the provisions are
are just simply aligning things
that we got this the staff
through
what a couple of things that are
important however to note in
this the first is that we do
make a definition of judicial
officer and with regard to
judicial officer we then exclude
from the act those those acts
that are inherently judicial.
Which would be something that is
done it within the scope of
their duties and the record is
filed in the court of the
judicial officer we also
we also do required for the
automatic the general of service
that they do take a a class that
will be the subject of one of
the members and and really
everything else is just simply
aligning everything now we have
the active place with that we
have to stand for questions.
we'll go to the audience
is there anyone in opposition to
this bill.
Anyone online in opposition
seeing none anyone in favor of
this bill of we want to line up
to have a Mike cool.
ninety seconds and swore less or
less.
Thanks Lena knows that.
Madam chair members of the
committee I'm Selena Jones on
the general counsel with the
administrative office of the
courts stand in support of this
bill and very much appreciate
the sponsors were clarifying
that.
The official actions of judges
and court clerks are not subject
to the administrative
requirements of the uniformed
Tara L. act thank the sponsor
very much for your clarifying
the law.
Thank you for.
The morning madam chair members
of the committee Christina
Chavis director of business
services for the New Mexico
secretary of state's office our
office is in support of the bill
after changes made graciously by
the sponsor thank you very much.
Anyone else this point online
one person on the head Rebecca.
No back up.
We can't hear you you're still
needed.
Sorry.
Benham commission
madam chair and representatives
for backup branch of the New
Mexico state ethics commission
we are charged with enforcing
the revised uniform lan in a
trail acts and we appreciate
that the sponsor bringing this
bill to clarify some of the
issues that we've seen a rise in
our year of enforcement on these
types of complaints so we stand
in support of the bill thank
you.
Thank you all right that
concludes audience support
Representative Robert.
Thank you madam chair and
senator I appreciate the time
that you took with me to go
through this I was concerned
about your your bill initially
but we've we've come to a a
meeting of the minds if you will
madam chair I do have an
amendment that I believe is been
passed out
and I guess at this time I would
would move it for discussion it
is point two two six one eight
four point one.
And that amendment makes some
some fairly small changes
strikes a little bit a language
but and adds maximum.
That the secretary state can
require the notaries to go to
the training so to speak as it
sits at ninety minutes so the
training period will be no
longer than nine settling.
And I would I would be happy to
address any questions anybody
have thank you is there any
discussion on the.
Representative Alcon.
Madam I'm just curious.
Of the fifty one minutes.
Why our cities the time for a
money.
The the bill as originally
written just said that there
will be the training and and I
think the comments were what is
it going to be a five hour
courses in this seven hour
courses right now of course and
and then talking to the senator
we we just agree that our to
have to learn how to be a notary
out of the a long enough for to
learn your of the do's and
don'ts and what you have to fill
out and and all the perfunctory
matters of
Notarize in someone's signature
having someone in knowledge or
signature it doesn't seem to
require extensive training that
one might see in some other
areas.
Well
Madam chair and and
representative
We told the secretary of state
to put a seal on the
notary.
Still.
And if you look at any notary
That affects the stamp of any
notary today you will not see a
seal on their.
That we we have that in the
long.
And by the way it's in this law
again Senator you might want to
comment on that but it's again
in this law that makes it very
clear that you have to have a
sale.
so we we can say these things
with the same to do what they
want I just want to make sure
that they were going to go
overboard.
The.
We have a.
I'm happy.
Any other comment on the I I
also found that to be awed it's
a strange time frame.
Ninety minutes I it doesn't
bother me if the if the
secretary of state's and in
agreement with that I you know
so be it any opposition to the
amendment.
Are you having amended bill.
Back to the bills are COVID on
the bill Representative Nibert
madam chair and and senator of.
As I understand most of most of
the bills basically to give the
the courts relief and and to
talk about the the.
What I call automatic notarial
officers and that that's really
what this was intended to do was
clarify some of that and
particularly with respect to the
courts to make sure that they
didn't have to go through all
the procedures but.
You might the center you might
mention
that were eight to alert the
existing notaries that they will
have to go through some process
to get new stamps when they re
up there
notary certificate so would you
talk about that a little bit
Madam chair representative
Nibert actually so the with the
the structure of the bill of the
law already is that what a
notary public get to the
commission that the interstate
but it.
So so so well at the the seal as
they as they get their new
commission in the natural course
of business so they'll be no
additional cost to the no no
republics for doing that for the
material officers the need to
get it done within a year after
the struggles and I.
And madam chair and and senator
you know that seal may not seem
like it's an important that when
people from other states one
another in New Mexico notarize
is or reflects the notarization
and stamps the instrument
There are other people looking
at that in other states and and
if the CEO is a requirement if
jeopardizes the recording of
that document in other states
and so you know of for for
notaries I I really would
encourage them to get a new
staff with a seal so that it
does not jeopardize a recording
of those documents and in other
states the and I think all the
county clerk here would would
accept there have been accepting
my current staff but they they
could be kicked back in other
states so that.
Even though most people don't
think that's an important
feature that can be an important
feature as people look at these
documents with that I support
your your bill and appreciate
your listening to me and making
a few amendments thank you madam
chair thank you center any other
discussion on the bill.
I'll entertain a motion.
Madam chair all move a.
Do pass as amended on Senate
bill two forty six we have a due
pass motions and one second
that.
And technically it's on Senator
out the public affairs committee
substance I'm sorry Senate bill
two forty six as amended thank
you Senator we've second by
Representative reeve we please
call the roll.
Can.
Thank you madam chair
representative Oaklawn.
The.
Thank you.
Representative Chasey.
yes.
Representative Lane yes.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen.
Representative Nibert yes.
Representative read yes.
Representative Rehm yes ma'am.
Representative Penske.
Madam vice chair yes.
Madam chair.
Madam chair with eight yes is
you have a do pass on committees
of Senate bill two forty six as
amended.
Chair members of the committee.
the doctor.
Thank you senator.
so we're going to move on to
Senate bill fifty I'm presenting
this bill so Representative
McQueen is going to be Terry
meeting
we're trying to make it work.
With.
Since.
If you.
Representative Romero whenever
you're ready thank you Mr chair
members of the committee this is
the right to repair act what
this bill does it creates a
process for new home purchase or
to have their builder inspector
pair replace or otherwise
resolve any observed
construction deep facts before
involving legal
Litigation
with that I understand we've
been able to clear up some
issues between opposing parties
on this bill and with the
amendment that I have before you
Mr chair
this message should hopefully
resolve I know there's other
questions and with that my
experts here if you he could
introduce himself.
Of.
Chairman and Representative hi
my name is Pierre am story I'm a
contractor in Albuquerque New
Mexico and this is a very
important bill for the home
industry and construction
industry and in the whole state
of New Mexico
we are being inundated with
lawsuits that are the we cannot
defend our shares prices have
gone through the roof which
affects affordability of homes
and this is a good a good bill
that all the parties came
together to negotiate it and
with the it would help us
tremendously if we can get this
past thank you Mr
chair also online the of net
shepherd as an expert in the
case that we need them.
and with that will stand for
questions.
Okay
is there were more would you
like to present the amendment
first
I don't know if we've heard the
bill before me media contacts
it's up to you okay.
If you have an amendment
don't let me forget that so
we'll go to the public
is there anyone here who would
like to speak in opposition.
The.
There anyone online who they
speak in opposition to this bill
please raise your hand.
Casing the joint speaking
support.
Okay
but ninety seconds.
You Mr chair members of the
committee Randy training with
the New Mexico home builders
association
this is a very important bill
well we have a situation where
our subcontractors specifically
are being placed in very
difficult positions the bill
that you have before you there
are three principal of parts of
this bill to these exist today
and one of them is the contract
between the buyer the seller the
the builder the home in the
purchaser of the home and of
what has been going on is that
these contracts are just being
skipped over and so we've got
the contracts which exist today
we have the court system which
exist today what we're doing
here is putting a process in
front of that a small little
time out if you will to allow
the opportunity for the two
principal parties to talk it
over and possibly get this thing
resolved before these lawsuits
get launched people's premiums
go up and eventually our
subcontractors are being
stressed to the point of going
into business and if we have no
subcontractors we have no home
building industry thank you very
much.
Hello.
When we get to set here.
So Mr chairman and members of
the committee my name is Laura
Vassar I am the president of the
New Mexico home builders
association we have brought the
right to repair bill or form of
it in front of the legislation
for the last five years this is
like like Mr trainer said a real
issue.
And we're not trying to stop
homeowners from from resolving
claims or anything like that all
we're trying to do is allow a
process for the good builders
and the subcontractors to
resolve the real issues in
homeowners houses so all this
bill is asking is basically tell
us where it hurts tell us the
room Telesis bot let us go take
care of it and if we don't go to
court follow the contract terms
that were written between the
two parties to begin with go to
arbitration this bill does not
in any way take any of those
rights away but what it does is
it helps us.
To decrease the escalating
insurance costs as the
settlements happen and and that
process goes off we're just
trying to create a system tell
us where it hurts let us
addresses the bad builders will
still need to go to court and
should thank you very much thank
you sponsor Romero for caring
this bill for us here today
really appreciate the
committee's time.
Good morning Jack Clark with New
Mexico home builders association
this is Randy mentioned Randy
trainer this bill has been
particularly difficult on
ourselves and we're down to the
point where we have a many fewer
subs available to build our
homes in particular in the
Albuquerque area than we've had
for a long time this is a
serious problem the Serbs or
where the labor is just for all
of our workers are lose a sub
you lose the workers the other
thing I would mention is that.
One thing hasn't been mentioned
if you go to sell a home today
there's a place on your
disclosure for your realtor to
fill out the form to fill out
that and we has your home been
part of one of these lawsuits
and you have to disclose that
and and
It wasn't mentioned earlier but
we've talked to the subs in
folks have said we've had
hundreds of these lawsuits are
we've been named and we have not
repaired a single home win going
and fix the drywall we just pay
out money and and but all those
people who've been a part of
that lawsuit have to disclose is
from a seller home in some is
gonna say what was it fixed and
they're going to have to say no
all and that's a real problem in
our industry so we ask you to
support this bill thank you.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Julie onako with the
New Mexico trial lawyers
Association we neither oppose
nor support this bill but
there's no category for and then
we.
We do appreciate the amendment
that's being brought today but
by Representative Romero and
have been asking for fixes all
along and this ammendment today
gets to part of it so we
appreciate that I will say that
once again today we're hearing
that we're looking for a
solution because insurance
industry is raising rates I keep
hearing that in different policy
areas and the fixes that we're
doing and each policy area don't
actually hold the insurance
industry accountable so I hope
we'll get to that solution
somewhere along the line in this
policy body thank you.
Thank you good morning Mr
chairman good morning members my
name is L. part Representative
cast in law firm I just want to
echo the comments from this
group and from some of the folks
that you for there's clearly are
issues and I strongly believe in
the right to repair I think that
the amendment goes and we stand
strong support of the amendment
those of goes a long way towards
making the bill better thank you
Mr chairman.
Mr chair members of any good
afternoon John Thompson
registered this for centuries
New Mexico home builders
association but different to
hear from time I was seventeen
time I was twenty two I work for
one of the subcontractors and
they let me do a lot of things
that quite frankly I never even
it learned in business school
and it taught me the value of
these businesses within our
communities and and this is a
bill that that protects and
preserves those businesses
within these communities and ask
you to support it thank you very
much.
We're gonna we're gonna go
online Steve Hale the.
Receive you.
We just lost develop Kim
Shanahan.
Thank you Mr chair and I also
want to well manage commission
hand on the former executive
officer of the center area home
builders association we have
long stood in support of this
kind of legislation and did we
put this in front of this body
many many times over the years I
also want to thank
Representative Romero was family
has long been part of our local
ministry in Santa Fe one of the
reasons that that we are seeing
this a rise in New Mexico it
because so many of our
surrounding states Arizona
California Nevada and
experiences sort of abuse is
sort of litigation in the past
and are passed right to work
laws that has driven some of
these insurance companies into
the low hanging fruit which has
been New Mexico so I do want to
recognize the fact that this is
evolving phenomena in our nation
that states have come to know
how to deal with these sorts of
things a Randy trainer Jack
Larkin providing this battle for
probably two decades and now it
is time to actually get this
pastor rob just want to say this
is a timely and the stand in
support of this law thank you.
Next we have a build New Mexico.
Mr chair members of the
committee and I'm sorry this is
miles Conway in the executive
officer of the Santa Fe area
home builders association this
was at the top of the list of
our builder members
of those attempting to deploy
housing in New Mexico and other
you know far above taxation or
material costs or labor costs or
any of those things our
association was asked to support
into work on fixing the
construction litigation issues
thank you for your support this
bill thank you Representative
Romero for carrying it and all
members of the committee for
hearing us out.
Next up we have carried plant.
Chair and members of the
committee and I'm very plans and
with and without last year at
last about
the industry for about thirty
years I'm also the president of
the homeowners association of
central Mexico I think everybody
is on the floor speaking as part
activist job and sending all at
so from the perspective of being
out there ultimately what we do
is to get people in the home New
Mexico state housing crisis you
no longer serve our global
market and our state has the
power to make decisions on on
bills like as that will help
balance the school costs and
assistance in providing those on
Senate us support and.
Thank you thanks of Steve Hale
is back.
Steve you are muted on the here
and there you go.
Yes Mr chairman and committee
members of this is Steve Hale I
am a builder in New Mexico since
nineteen eighty seven and this
bill is going to be huge for
both homeowners and for the
range that we as builders Hey
insurance companies hired your
support thank you.
Thank you
So that ends the public
testimony
back to the sponsor thank you Mr
chair happy to talk about the
amendment now
Some of the.
The.
The member for the session so
move
Senator I'm gonna let the chair
take over.
So
While settling in this amendment
is essentially a compromise and
understanding the need to
address immediate threats to
health and safety when it comes
to the right to repair
clarifying that if there was
notice that this no longer
applies to to that situation I
don't want to read it explicitly
I think you can do that and then
clarifying on the second part of
the amendment how to notify
folks about the right to repair.
Again this is a compromise from
all parties here.
Madam it's a for I I understand
it's friendly.
So
I understand we're on
Representative McQueen.
Not yet Ventura from the minute
the the question about the
amendment okay so you have
questions on the amendment Madam
chair representative Romero so.
I I'm not.
We've been told this ammendment
satisfies
Certain concerns
I see the language immediate
threat to life for safety the
person legislation I find the
dwellings.
my concern is what what if the
dwellings not little.
Like the the heat's not working
so I I'm not sure that maybe if
it's cold enough out that's
immediate threat but it it could
just be an unlivable.
Area he's not working in the the
water's not running the roof is
leaking something like that.
You will
Those are those are pool parties
could be emergency situations
which they would not have to
follow this if it's an emergency
they can call their insurance
agent or builder or another
subcontracted to fix something
that's an emergency this.
Okay this is this bill mostly
for defects that are the.
Large or small but but I think
is emergency they can bypass
this and can get to an emergency
situation rectified and madam
chair we have Ned Shepard online
who's our expert.
Mr shepherd would you like to
supplement that answer.
Yes thank you madam chair Ned
Shepard
In response to that question
Representative
the the part that says safety in
my assessment would and included
the things that concern you at
home or would be able to bypass
this process and go for that as
Mr abstracts at.
The Madam chair representative
expert first off.
If there's a if there's a way to
by pass this in an emergency I'd
like to see where the language
is because I don't see.
That can years.
I can Matt madam chair
representative I I look at the
words safety and in my
assessment that would be where
you would be able to if you
don't if for instance you don't
have heat and it's a serious
problem we don't have water and
it's a safety problem thank you
would be able to buy past that
issue.
So Madam chair representative
You know immediate threat to the
life for safety of persons
occupying.
Now that that to me doesn't
sound like you're cold or that
you know the shares are working
here is for the some flush at I
think those are different levels
of concern.
so I don't think this language
covers situations where the
property is essentially a
little.
I mean.
This one is not a threat to the
person's safety life or safety
and that seems more severe to
me.
Is there question there.
I think it's so I'm looking for
a response to make me feel
better about this language madam
chair I think when we just
combine immediate threat of
safety what to life or safety
incomers the the idea of an
emergency proposed that you that
you're discussing
I mean if it's could I don't
know if you want to add and I
have to talk to the advocates
about adding any sort of
amendment that said life safety
or emergency.
if that helps.
The madam chairs of you could
say not have the.
Mr shepherd did you want to
weigh in on this COVID.
Implied question from
Representative McQueen.
Yes madam chair representative
queen in terms of any any
language changes that's not
within the scope of my authority
to make those I think that.
either Mr Abbas toward Mr
training would need to address
that
that I I would agree that would
all there I perhaps and and that
would meet your needs I think
that what I'm saying is if if
the waters off Byrd a day or two
it's
this act would not.
Aim to that now if the water was
completely off or it's ten
degrees and there's actually no
heat in there for days to me the
the life and safety would be
invoked however I.
Uninhabitable.
Would be a term that would
encompass your concerns.
So madam chair
There's a Romero you know I I
would suggest him trying to do
this on the fly except with
respect to claims for alleged
construction defects rendering
the dwelling not habitable or
inhabitable.
And and striking the the
language about immediate threat
to life for safety of persons
occupying the to all.
That's friendly Mr ge miss madam
chair.
To help me I'm still getting my
parents I'm looking at the
proposed amendment where would
that go so except with claims
for which construction defects.
The strike beginning with
involving her.
Sector commander of that line.
Hold through the next one
through the word dwelling.
Okay and insert the loser of.
Rendering.
He dwelling.
I'm inclined to say not
habitable but I I don't know if
inevitable this is
uninhabitable have a.
So and certainly there of
rendering and willing to have a
little.
That's fine madam chair.
Is that a motion Representative
the so I I I would move that we.
We're not commend the amendment
we revise the amendment to
reflect that language.
Okay is there a second.
Second.
Okay there's a question on the
proposed amendment find
Representative McQueen with by
Representative Sapan ski Madam
chair representative.
Would you be open to adding
rendering the dwelling
uninhabitable.
Or that that language in
addition to ensure safety.
Madam chair representative yes
although I think it the dwelling
that is immediate threat to life
for safety is uninhabitable.
I just wonder if you have a
specific issue specific area of
the home.
And the rest of the homes
habitable but the staircase was
falling down or the I don't know
the railing was improperly
installed or.
Madam chair representative I
just okay I I kind of like to
lie for safety because if there
was some specific issue it could
be immediately addressed.
Madam chair in that case we
would not straight through the
language after the were dwelling
we with intercom
then we would insert my my
language.
Thank you madam chair that does
help clarify given the fact that
there might be portions of the
home that would be inhabitable.
But if the entire place is
uninhabitable.
Or third delay for safety like
the roofs caving in or something
like that then we could do both
ends with with that amendment.
It could also potentially apply
to condition outside the the
structure.
Okay so just to be clear we are
striking language that Williams
and Ashley discussed in we're
going to keep it keep involving
an immediate threat to the life
and safety of persons occupying
a dwelling
comma.
And then or rendering.
The think that course this is
the third I think there's three
analyst yeah so and then the
language rendering the dwelling
or other duality willing a
dwelling and then have the bull
okay.
And then comma after
uninhabitable the with the come
of their but Legislative Council
with the okay.
And so rendering on Hannibal
four in which the seller after
notice it's our it's our only
the okay I think we understand
that.
Okay okay.
you have my version.
This.
Thank you is just so friendly.
Madam chair representative yes
okay thank you thank you
speaker.
Second we have a motion to adopt
the amended act amendment as
described seconded by
Representative made by speaker
Martinez seconded by
Representative read.
Would you call the roll.
Thank you madam chair
representative all con.
Percent local.
We're adopting an amendment yes.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane.
Speaker Martinez yes
Representative McQueen yes
Representative Nibert.
Representative right yes
Representative green yes
Representative Penske yes madam
vice chair.
Madam chair yes madam chair with
nine test is you have an adopted
amendment please
You have an amended bill
Representative have we gone to
the audience and COVID okay I
just want to make sure yes
speaker when appropriate on over
to pass as amended.
I think it's appropriate for.
And motion made by speaker
Martinez to
for do pass on Senate bill for
twenty six as amended and I
believe is that a second
a discussion until I finally can
have a pending motion.
Okay that's fine anyone wish to
second that motion seconded by
Representative read all right so
the four still yours
Representative.
Okay
madam chair Rosa Romero
does this just apply to new
construction.
madam chair all deferred and
Accenture Representative yes.
So
Madam chair
Representative an expert on page
two where it says original
purchaser or subsequent owner.
It what in what circumstances
can the subsequent owner
maintain a construction defect
suit.
Madam chair representative of in
the state we have a ten you're a
rate of repose so subsequent
owner potentially have a defect
they can bring forward so madam
chair is a rare it's just so so
buy new construction you mean
basically the willing in the
first ten years of its
existence.
Madam chair representative yes
to me this is in within the
working period of the home page
is between one and two years but
we do have to stand on the home
for at least ten years.
Representative repose the
construction Madam chair
representative of the there's a
warranty for new home
construction generally extend to
the subsequent owner to a second
owner.
Madam chair representative yes
this within the contract limits
at the home builder has given to
the original homebuyer.
And madam chair Representative
I've just gotten word that there
was meant to be a friendly
amendment on page one to clarify
exactly your question
another amendment line twenty
four dwelling means a and with
the addition of newly
constructed single family
housing unit
to clarify your point
Representative
We love to make that amendment
so madam chair I I would move
that amendment.
Really means a second and
certainly constructed after the
workday what's the two oh two
number or two we're just doing
this on the fly madam O. okay.
So on page page one one twenty
four.
Representative read is this on
the amendment yes ma'am okay
madam chair and
I think I need to go to the
expert I thought this would
cover the new construction and
remodel or we get in there with
totally new.
Madam chair representative yes
that's.
But that's correct.
Madam chair and and the.
Representative I think we ought
to keep that new and remodeled.
So that.
I have sorry and is so that we
keep it so we.
Get both sides to that.
Anyway that's my comment did you
have well my Representative my
understanding it was a friendly
amendment.
Is it not it is friendly madam
chair and three model has not
been captured I believe in this
bill and with the negotiations
from the parties here today it's
just a new construction Madam
chair representative I'm sorry I
thought that this covered
remodel also prior to this
ammendment.
Thank you.
Thank you Representative such a
friendly amendment it is would
you repeat it Representative and
chair on page one line twenty
four after the word a and before
the word single insert newly
constructed.
We have a second.
I think Representative Romero
seconded.
So we have a motion and a second
to call the roll please.
Thank you madam chair
representative of upon.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen.
Representative Nibert.
Representative read.
Representative green no ma'am
what swing that.
Representative Penske yes.
Madam vice chair.
Madam chair yes you may explain
your vote Representative madam
chair.
Representative I really think we
need to get both sides of this
you know of you could have a
remodel and something to be a
little defective and I think the
amendment fixes rather than go
to court and I think that the
it's saying is let's try to fix
this before we go to court
anyway that's what thank you Mr.
You representative madam chair
you have seven uses in one and
one no for adopted amendment
thank you.
Representative claim Madam chair
Representative Romero thanks for
on page two
One eighteen seller means the
very responsible for
construction of drawing if it
developer
Subdivide the lot in hires
builder to build ten houses is
the party responsible for
construction the developer the
builder.
Madam chair representative he's
the builder.
It with the developer have any
liability in in that
circumstance Madam chair
representative potentially.
of the bill but could have some
liability.
Of the work done on the lot.
This course compaction and
certification of compaction.
Madam chair representative
expert I'm a lawyer I do real
estate don't duplication so just
like I'm familiar that there's
this thing construction defect
litigation but.
Thought years so I'm a little
fuzzy on some of the details
Madam chair resentment expert
on page three.
Of the purchaser shall ensure
the dwellings made available for
inspection not later than ten
days after and then online
twenty for the seller the
soldiers construction
professional shall provide
reasonable notice to the
purchaser before conducting the
inspection yes I am I am this is
sort of technical objection by
and come for without language I
don't think.
Builder should be able to
dictate the time of the
inspection I think it needs to
be mutually agreed to so if the
builder says okay I'm coming by
to say three o'clock and like to
see a three o'clock I'm at work.
the owners at work.
I mean the way this is written
it could suggest that the
the.
The builder and their
construction professional can
set the time of the inspection.
And I will just note that the
I'm uncomfortable with that I
think you should be good mutual
agreement
Chair reserve further on that.
The owner should have the right
to be president including with
their own construction
professional.
it shouldn't be like your the
keys that house knock yourself
out you know it should be.
You know and I and this is
something.
I do I deal with property
inspections my documents say the
owners is welcome and encouraged
to attend.
Yeah that that kind of thing
kids at it because I think
having that that open this
during the inspection is
important
So I'm concerned about that
I I don't have a specific
amendment on that and then
The the page four line for
includes testing in invasive
tests are always a concern
whether you're poking holes in
walls or floors or whatever
The server red flag for me and
then
on online AT this is shall
restore the dwelling and this is
from the testing within sixty
days.
It seems like a really long time
if you're just doing testing.
What was that time period so
long.
madam chair Representative think
it just as actually confining
the amount of time to prepare
right so.
It ensures that that gets done
within sixty days Madam chair of
says this isn't the repair of
the construction defect this is
the repair the damage done by
the testing so if you book a
whole all to look at something
inside you know again I'm not a
builder either
I thank you you go in and maybe
pull off and dry wall and then
you leave that open for sixty
days it seems like a long time
to me.
To that time period be shortened
Madam chair representative of.
It is but I think in the routing
is within sixty days is not
saying we have to go to sixty
days but they'll have to have
that time for whatever reason
may they may need that time
maybe there's something in the
wall and needs to be fixed
before the draw can be replaced
into your your first comment
about the home will be to be
there I think that's what we put
in ten days to make arrangements
with the homeowner within those
ten days so that they can be
there and we're about full
transparency we don't want
anything to go awry because of
Homer's not there so the the ten
days gives the builder and
homeowner time to arrange the
inspection or the testing so the
homeowner can be there.
So madam chair of Senator just
to be clear I I support the
concept and I I recognize I've
worked with enough builders that
that want to make things right
My concern is mostly the
drafting of the bill and the
language in the bill which I
think is not
I deal.
so I mean I I could see where if
you're opening up dry wall maybe
you need to leave that open
in order to fix what you see
behind so concerned about that
Madam chair representative
expert we we talked about we we
are the amendment that if
the home if there's a safety
issue or if it's not habitable
his is a homeowner entitled to
compensation if the if the like
go live in a hotel for.
Three months or so it is that
part of that part of this
process then any point Mr Madam
chair representative so Page
four lines nineteen and twenty
he offered to provide monetary
compensation to the purchaser
think is on the table as far as
just being able to remedy a
situation so I think that
encumber so you're asking.
So madam chair of that it's not
required it's it's optional
that's correct chair the so
madam chair if someone was
building building a house and
and they went through this
process and for six months they
could not live in the house
in the house gets fixed through
this process which would be a
good thing.
Who covers the expense of living
somewhere else for six months
Madam chair representative I
don't think this prohibits
somebody for going after damages
this just creates a process for
the right to repair they can
still litigate any recovery of
damages that's currently on the
books.
Okay.
Madam chair representative on
page four we start with the
region offered to repair and
replace and.
To me an offer something you can
reject you can accept or reject.
I don't see any ability for the
for the property owner to reject
this offer or arguably even
negotiated.
Madam chair representative means
as you stated the offer is is a
an attempt to create the
opportunity but it can be
rejected I don't where where do
you and guess I'm confused as to
why wouldn't be clear that they
could projected.
page five lines seven and
In the line seventeen the
purchaser shall allow this
seller or the seller's
construction professional
opportunities to make the
repairs or replacements.
Madam chair all of nets online
to respond to that part page
five one seven three nine.
Madam chair representative
McQueen the intent of the bill
was to try and reduce and keep
lawyers of the process so if we
had a situation where languages
in there that.
There be some sort of dispute
possibly about to propose
prepare all we do is invite a
lawsuit about that so the object
was the builder goes ahead our
cellar as it's called and offers
and says we can do this repair
and let me do it if it turns out
the homeowner is dissatisfied
with the repair in the bill they
then go on to the process which
would have been there all along
which is either a lawsuit or
arbitration whatever's and the
contract and how things work so
again it's it's trying to be a
very simple bill that allows the
parties to try to work things
out before a lawsuit.
And if not then you have to go
there in the problem with the
lawsuits and pin number one is
been say that the homeowners
never get enough to repair their
house fully and some dollars and
then they have a construction
defect notification other
seller's disclosure which is is
not good and the expense for
everybody so with that really
it's trying to be a simple bill
to avoid that okay so madam
chair Esther
So I I have a very specific
questions I understand the
problem with the the the
litigation so as if you could if
you keep your answers to my
questions I'd appreciate that my
concern is the seller present an
offer solar.
That's a weird word but the that
the builder presents an offer
In then they get to act on that
and if you have the state you
construction and ensure percent
of your your plasters cracking
because the building's not
structurally sound.
And offers coming in patch the
plaster.
When you say will but that
doesn't fix the problem the
building's not structurally
sound all know they'll be fine
it's just settling for you got
moisture coming through the
foundation Paul to seal it well
the moisture's bubbles up in it
causes problems my my point is
if the offer to fix and this is
you know this is based on
experience right that the the
fix is usually.
The least expensive to the party
fixing but it's not sufficient
why does the home or have to go
through that process and allow
that to take place before they
can take the next step.
Just before you answer of
answers can be briefer and
questions can be preferred as
well so we we're going to be
finished we're gonna finish this
bill before we go to the floor I
have permission from the speaker
to do that so just be aware
answers and questions brief as
possible Madam chair
representative so currently
there is not an ability to
respond that's what this bill is
about so the the ability for
them to have the first shot at
it they still have to be
satisfied with the repair at the
end of the day so if they're not
actually addressing the
underlying cause that needed to
be repaired and it was their
responsibility to do so the
whole idea of this is to get it
to that for staff.
Okay so construction defect
Madam chair of the.
Propose repaired that will not
solve the construction defect.
That that builder kids come in
and do that whether or not the
the the property owner thinks
it's a fix.
My question is why do we where
we requiring that middle step.
And in this goes back to to me
to the issue of the quote
unquote offer that there's no
acceptance of.
The builder in this case gets to
determine what the repair is.
Madam chair representative the
the homeowner has the the final
say on the repair whether he
satisfied or dissatisfied with
repair or not if you're not
really a satisfied with the
prepare to go to the next step
and the seller can actually
offer money for the repair if
they're not happy with it thirty
we're not we're not to the money
part yet okay my question is
about the next step.
The proposed offer is clearly
inadequate but you still have to
let them could come in.
Patch the the stucco yeah
whatever it is before you get to
the next step and that's my
question.
Madam chair representative this
bill is to to allow this the
builder and the sub to to to do
the repair and if the repair is
not satisfactory to the
homeowner the homeowner can go
to arbitration which in the
contract which in the contract
and ultimately to sue the
builder if the repairs are done
to their satisfaction.
chair of the Romero the the
flames of the bill doesn't allow
the the homeowner to negotiate
the scope or nature of repair
that's a problem for me.
I'll move on
page five there there's.
There's a lot of problems with
the structure of the bill the
orders paragraph three three
redundancy in paragraphs.
we have time periods terms of
thirty days sixty days this is
gonna end up to be a long time.
there's language in here about
the purchaser and seller
Minegishi to release or waiver
upon the satisfaction of the
purchaser I think purchasers and
sellers terms
in exchange for monetary
compensation or other.
Consideration in lieu of repair
this is this is after we this is
after they're not happy with it.
I.
Madam chair on on page eight.
After all this happens.
The owner of line for can file a
complaint in court if there's no
dispute resolution mechanism in
the country.
I'm more concerned that we've
gone through a whole new process
and now we have to go to
mediation in the contracts are
written
so so that the mediation is the
the home building industry or
captive mediating companies
I am concerned that that I'm
also concerned that.
Not all dispute resolution
mechanisms are enforceable but
this appears and I don't think
this was intended to me the
language here.
By law makes the dispute
resolution.
Provision for school doesn't get
the home or the opportunity to
challenge the dispute resolution
provision.
In that these me to my final
question and that is if we have
dispute resolutions in the in
the contract.
Why don't we just have this
right to curing the contract why
can't this be done contractual.
Madam chair representative it
could be the reality here what
we're trying to do this is to
have an enforceability of the
that right and so it can be in a
contract I'm sure they're
already many that have this but
this creates that mechanism
universally.
Madam chair Representative
Thanks for where in the I
appreciate what you're trying to
do I.
I wish I had seen the sooner
because I think.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative do we
have a quorum to help okay very
good.
I don't want to lose a quorum
and then take a vote that
doesn't have any effect so is
there any other questions on the
bill as amended.
Have have there is a pending
motion Representative to speaker
Martinez and seconded by
Representative revoked believed
to do pass as amended
one brief question federal aid
some brief questions from
Representative read our
comments.
And
Senator I think you need to get
together with a couple of us
before we hear this on the floor
I really like to see the remodel
and I agree with some of the
points of the the queen is drugs
thank you madam.
Thank you Representative we have
a motion four do pass as amended
made by speaker Martinez earlier
and seconded by Representative
read to call about a role please
thank you madam chair
representative Oaklawn.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane.
Speaker Martinez Representative
McQueen.
Representative Nibert yes.
Representative read yes.
Representative Rehm yes ma'am.
Representative the Penske yes.
Madam vice chair yes madam chair
yes madam chair with seven yes
is been one note you have a do
pass on Senate Judiciary
Committee so for SB fifty as
amended.
Thank you everyone for your
diligence and hard work this
morning.
You know and I may be working at
Walmart I'm gonna look at kind
of what's come in in the last
day or so and we may be having
one more meeting and maybe this
afternoon or it may be first
thing morning so.
How do you know that.
All day.
