Displaying
Mr speaker.
Representative McQueen.
There.
Representative Nibert there
Representative read.
Representative green your
Representative Penske here.
Madam vice chair.
Madam chair here.
We have a quorum our first item
on the agenda as house bill
seventy two and just remind
everyone where we are with the
bill we heard the bill we had a
full hearing on the bill there
were some suggestions from the
committee members about the need
for some amendments and the
sponsor agreed and sponsor is
bringing back I believe it's a
committee set up that
incorporates those and we are
going to Lynn limit our
discussion only to the changes
that are being proposed so
Representative could you
highlight the changes for us
please yes madam chair thank you
madam chair members of the
committee so per the discussions
and per the input and thank you
to everybody for your input
we are introducing a committee
substitute and
Number one.
The committee substitute removes
the exception for law
enforcement and military that we
previously contained in
paragraphs one and two of
subsection a number to move the
definition of semi automatic
firearm converter above the
definition for firearms As
suggested.
Three redefines semi automatic
firearm converter to mirror the
federal definition contained in
a rule promulgated by the ATF.
And then a it also well it
indicates that although ATF uses
the term machine gun we replaced
it with a lot of automatic fire
arms then number four and final
removes the appropriation as per
head of the section suggestion
of the department of public
safety so we remove the entire
section section two that was in
the previous bill so all of the
changes that we made for
actually directly taken from the
comments and suggestions made by
committee members at the last
hearing.
Madam chair and that completes
the change if.
Thank you for that presentation
other questions from members of
Representative McQueen.
Thank you madam chair for a
minute chair person wrote
robocop come hero.
Did you see that the definition
of semi automatic firearm
converter came from the ATF
regulations.
Yes it redefines Madam chair
representative it does redefine
semi automatic firearm converter
to more the federal definition.
As promulgated by the a TF.
In the Madam chair
representative Republic
Caballero I guess I'm still
concerned with that definition
Senator automatic firearm
converter means the farm fire
arm accessory or any other
device comma part.
Or combination of parts.
That is designed.
Constructed are used to convert
a firearm into the farm which
shoots.
Point designed to shoot or can
be readily restored to shoot
automatically etcetera
with.
What's what's the meaning of the
word restored.
Is designed to shoot or can
build for the rest of the
restored issue.
Madam chair and representative.
And looking for that right now
what I understood these two line
twelve the committee substitute.
Thank well yes but I was trying
to get to is one of the
explanation that was given to me
Madam chair representative give
me just a moment
When I understand line twelve
please page two one twelve.
If you.
I don't have that.
Madam chair and representative
let's make sure we have the
right substitute I'm gonna read
out the number it's a number two
two four nine six one point two
is that the correct copy then
chair of Madam chair.
Yes I'm looking at the point one
perhaps you go to the committee
and come back to me.
I certainly I will any one else
wishing to ask questions into
that Representative McQueen have
the wrong version so.
Anyone else wishing to ask
questions of the.
Madam chair representative so
I've I've looked at what you've
of proposed and I still have a
little bit of a problem here.
Let's let's take
Was take a person who has a.
A semiautomatic firearm they
have not modified it.
They have used a lot.
And now all of a sudden the
parts are worn and it fires
fully automatic you've made that
a criminal offense.
And.
We had that actually happened at
the range with one of our
schools with our law enforcement
pistols and we returned it to
the.
Factory to have a repair.
But as soon as it fired
automatic.
This would be a felony for that
person.
Madam chair.
Our expert witness Madam chair
representative I can attempt to
answer that so I think what
you're saying was has been so
worn down that one from a semi
automatic to fully automatic.
Correct Madam chair in expert
correct yes so I that in that
situation and the person would
have to go through the steps
they have to do to own a machine
gun under ATF standards because
that would be a fully automatic
machine gun.
Madam chair representative.
Madam chair and expert the
problem is the gun is defective.
And it was returned to the
factory to be repaired.
You know use it he couldn't of
oil or the department couldn't
have made it a machine gun so
but in that scenario.
It's in this law that's a
felony.
Madam chairman Representative I
think if he immediately or
mediate we mailed it back they
would no longer be in possession
of a state meet we mailed it
back to the gun manufacturer
Madam chair representative okay
madam chair experts so when he's
standing on a range in that fire
full automatic.
He was in possession of a at
that time and Senator possession
of it until he can get it to a
Farm Steeler to mail it back.
And madam chair and Committee
I fail to recognize Mr bin that
who is here to assist us and I'd
like for him to answer.
Is that okay madam chair yes it
is okay madam chair members the
committee Representative Rehm I
I think the simple answer to the
question that's being raised by
Representative is yes under the
technical reading of this bill
as as written the possession of
a weapon that functions as a
fully automatic weapon would be
criminal under the definition
here however we'll tell you my
experience in as a law
enforcement officer in
experience in handling firearms
for last twenty six years the
occurrence of the thing that is
being
Raised is infrequent and is as I
agree with Representative print
def indicative of defective
manufacture.
so so I think the the short
answer is yes the economic that
functions as fully automatic is
the intent of the legislation is
written to be prohibited.
What I think is being described
as an unintended consequence of
what is being representatives
would wear and tear on part of
the economic that is generally
known as the Sears.
Which controls the rate at which
ammunition is fed into a semi
automatic pistol but in this
case what is being described as
defective workmanship for
functionality.
Madam chair and
Experts can you show me where in
the bill it ignore alleges that
warning and.
is not a violation and this.
Madam chair and and
Representative so madam chair
are we are we discussing the
here we go.
Yeah.
Okay madam chair the
representative is just admitted
that that when we're done we'll
fire fully and that that
officers now in possession of a
felony.
So we're in the bill the city
exclude them.
And with that situation.
Representative created by the
amendments that we've just on
the status of madam chair and
representative.
I think it would have been
indicative of the first bill and
it's in this bill as well or the
amended still.
Thank you madam chair and
representative to point me to
that place.
Madam chair and Representative
let's go to a page one line
twenty one so it is a
semi automatic firearm convert.
And then you go over your
definition and it fires fully
automatic.
So
if I understand correctly your
question relates to the bill
that we saw previously am I not
correct and that's not what is
the subject of this conversation
madam chair it relates to the
bill before and it relates to
this bill here current what did
you hear the explanation madam
chair of which portions of the
bill for amended in.
Madam chair yes I did when you
read this from the first word
for the last word there is a
problem that is it.
It does it it does not allow an
exception for this.
In the previous bill did not
allow for an exception for this.
Is that right Representative
Rehm.
But then I think you're correct
okay so that that we're not
discussing an amendment so your
question Mr questioning is not
in line with what we determined
we were going to be discussing
today.
Well madam chair I think the
problem is is that we need to
discuss this in the totality not
in
we're going to try to eliminate
any questions that may arise now
that we look at this legislation
That Representative.
The process that we've been
using for all bills is when we
asked the committee the sponsor
to go back with an amendment we
limit the conversation to those
items that are being amended and
that's been on your bills on my
bills and everyone else is built
so that we had a very full
conversation about the totality
of the bill
a week or so ago and so I'm
asking you to honor the request
to the chair and the and the
roof family policy we've been
following from day one of this
committee and limit your
questions to either clarifying
or trying to better understand
what amendments are being
proposed.
Madam chair I think the I think
it's clear that that's a
violation under this legislation
and it hadn't been fixed so
let's move on to something else
and madam chair let's go ahead
and go to.
Page three line seven stimulate
a rate of fire otherwise
achievable only with an
automatic farm so what is the
standard rate of fire.
Madam chair representative you
said Page three line seven.
I'm not reading that are you on
the right version can we go
through the version again so
let's read the two oh two
version numbered so everybody's
on the same page it's two two
four nine six one point two.
Have the right so.
So why don't we make sure you
get the right version
Representative and we go to back
to Representative McQueen and
then they'll be Representative
Nighbor.
And we can proceed past for.
I thank you madam chair.
Mentor I believe I have the
correct version so two two four
nine six one point two of the
language I I had questions about
appears in this version as well
Madam chair representative
Roybal Caballero on P. two line
twenty three the word restored.
Could you repeat the
Representative page two line
what twenty three twenty three
okay thank you.
Can be readily restored to shoot
automatically and I wonder what.
What that means.
Madam chair Mister Beck.
Madam chair members the
committee Representative McQueen
having read this having
understand having understood the
way in which farms are
manufactured the way in which
firms are
are maintained there are and
I've had occasion to shoot and
to be issued weapons as such
there are Vietnam more weapons
for example and we give you a
specific example where an M.
sixteen rifle that is capable of
what is known as select fire
that being semi automatic or
automatic fire in its
manufacture can be dis abled to
fire only semi automatic fire so
we're talking about a weapon
from let's say the sixties for
example can be manufactured in
augmented to reduce the
capability for it to fire in and
fully automatic way thus making
it a semi automatic weapon I
think the intent of language as
I read it today as we raise it
is a question is to prevent
someone from being able to
restore economic otherwise
capable of producing automatic
fire to that capacity under this
bill.
Madam chair representative
expert that's that's helpful
but that the
I guess the a lot depends on
what readily means and that is.
This will be on my knowledge of
firearms
Madam chair representative an
expert on online twenty four.
to shoot automatically more than
one shot without manual
reloading.
Doesn't a a semi automatic
firearm shoot without reloading.
Madam chair members the
committee representative queen
yes.
Yes.
But this is a so I understand
that if you're the semi
automatic pistol you pull the
trigger and fires a shot you
pull the trigger fires a shot
you don't have to manually
reload between those shots.
Madam chair representative
correct.
What is the phrase without
manual reloading add to this.
Madam chair members the
committee representative of the
queen but I I will I will give
myself and what I'm reading here
in front of me hi the by single
function of the trigger I think
the the phraseology that comes
after it I agree reloading
generally brings to to mind the
notion of having to perform some
sort of function that creates
you know loading into Google it
I think what again with my
knowledge of of things like
external conversion kits that
require.
Less than the one the trigger
pull prove firing if each weapon
which is kind of what you're
describing I think the goal is
not reloading with the singular
stroke of the trigger being the
for one firing going around is
the intent is every.
The cement chair representative
an expert I maybe I don't
understand what re loading.
Costs too so I mean to me
reloading means putting bullets
in the gun.
Not the mechanism of the gun
firing in in.
Bringing another round to the
chamber is that does that cuts
to reloading.
Or is it just putting more
bullets in the gun that is
really.
Madam chair members the
committee representative of the
queen I think that both could
exist and we're talking about
classification of economic as
you specified semi automatic
generally has either a magazine
or a mechanism that holds the
ammunition that is not capable
of being fired so think of a a
pistol for example the magazine
holds ammunition the only
ammunition capable being fired
at that moment is the ammunition
underneath the firing mechanism
or the firing pin so to the
extent that that bullet under
that firing pin needs to be
expelled there is a re loading
process from the magazine into
the breech of the gun if that's
the expression of the drafter in
the legislative.
Right.
It.
Madam chair representative
expert at.
I'm looking for here on the
meaning of these words in this
context.
I am not a gun expert but.
To me manual means using your
hands.
And I would think a semi
automatic pistol.
Could shoot more than one shot
without manual route we losing.
Some concern about that let me
let me go on also online twenty
four by a single function of the
trigger so.
Madam chair representative
expert and in the last committee
meeting we talked about all
those years
In previously who and I looked
at this issue mainly folk focus
on fox talks and I I believe
those are different mechanisms
the other this year of which
would sort of
I believe that this year would
cause again to fire multiple
shots with one pull the trigger
my understanding of the Comstock
is that rocks the gun back and
forth against the trigger.
So it's not a single pull the
trigger it's multiple proposals
it's just think in rapid
succession.
Madam chair representative
expert is that correct or am I
mistaken.
I'm sorry.
Madam chair members the
committee representative the
queen I think in the the first
part of the question I I
absolutely see that the exact
same way you do that there this
year issue is mechanical
internal to the gun bump stock
uses a nurture against a solid
object which in this case is the
human operator of the of the
firearms finger.
To create a motion back and
forth and so I think what it
comes down to is a discussion of
whether or not the fire via the
bump stock is moving or whether
or not the fingers.
I think the notion though we.
They could both be this is
entirely possible but one is an
external motivation force that
causes this motion and others an
internal function that enables
the ability of the got the
continue to move as I
understand.
Okay met mentors of expert I
appreciate that but if whether
it's the human that's moving or
the the firearm.
I believe the triggers me.
Back and forth in rapid
succession and if that's the
case.
Then this this definition would
apply to all those years but not
apply to bump stocks.
Madam chair representative with
I think we used the term of
throughout.
Converter.
Is no that Miranda the fully is
also here assistance because at
the last discussion we had a
similar discussion concerning
converters and all the fears and
their function and how and why
it is that anything that I'm
chair representative that.
Is an accessory such as the bump
stock of the Autissier.
On any other accessories that
are being used.
To multiply.
The capacity of the firearm to
continue shooting whether it is
by finger or automatically due
to this accessory converter.
Is what we're talking at the
end of fiscal a to further
clarify madam chair members of
the committee representing the
queen so I think I guess the
confusion is that there and I'm
not a gun expert my front to the
left is the don't expert
the public the bump stocks are
specifically for semi automatic
rifles right and is your
shoulder that is causing the
that required to happen and then
the auto Sears which is chip
whatever you want to call them
those of those little things you
fit into the back of a semi
automatic Glock of the physical
office we do usually used for so
there's two different they're
two completely different shapes
and do completely different
things I'm not a gun expert but
I would ask can you put a bump
stock madam chair representative
on the clock I don't think you
can just physically for some
automatic rifles meditative
correct madam chair members the
committee that next project
Representative McQueen yes that
that is my assessment is that
the the shoulder fired nature of
this now getting down to the
actual absolute semantics can
you apply a shoulder fired
mechanism to a Glock handgun the
answer to that question is yes
which further complicates the
issue but generally speaking I I
agree with the assessment that
the bump stock is used for
shoulder fired weapons it.
Madam chair.
Representative is an expert I I
I agree with all that yeah I
agree I understand your intent
is to get that these accessories
but when the accessory is the
fine.
Including the raised by a single
function of the trigger.
We need to we need to know
whether or not.
He pumps out has a single
function of the trigger and I
believe it does not.
I believe a bump stock uses the
the force of the firing in the
in the Salt object that the
person the finger to rapidly
pull the trigger.
Not to just pull it won't.
And if that's the case in your
definition applies to all those
years but does not apply to bump
stocks.
And that I you know I don't know
enough about this to know
whether you know for sure
whether or not that's the case
that's my belief I mean you can
I know you can bump fire a
pistol I know you can attach an
accessory to bump fire a pistol.
That that's different than
others here.
You can you still do it but my
belief is that it pulls the
trigger in rapid succession.
And if that's the case in your
your definition only applies to
all those.
Madam chair representative.
The entire section fine the
entire section five I believe
was written.
To.
Include.
If the firearm accessory or any
other device.
Part or combination of parts
that is designed constructs for
use to convert a firearm into
any firearm that shoots is
designed to issue and then can
be readily restored I think.
That was meant and and that this
is what I want it to include.
The totality of all of these.
Mechanisms
This is the second justice said
stated part of combination of
parts on the so.
All of these in when we made the
original presentation we went
through the description in
detail of all of the parts and
we talked about I think Miss
fiscally mentioned all of those
alright so.
It is my belief and I believe it
is the belief of the Sanchez
that that is what we meant to me
that is why we wrote it that way
not meant we actually wrote it
that way madam chair to be
inclusive of and then most
recently of.
In Albuquerque we had several
incidences then it would really
be good if we could just okay
okay that was here about that
was my point I just wanted to
further explained to the
definitions these are very
relevant questions so with that
chair what when we're coming
so I I've been handed the the.
The Federal Register definition
As soon as published in the
Federal Register before being
confident CFR and it does have
this language Madam chair
representative my recommendation
would be online twenty four and
I know we don't amend committee
service online twenty four after
the rich if you added a period.
And then struck without manual
reloading by a single function
of the trigger it's read read
all the law is designed to shoot
or can be readily restored to
shoot automatically more than
one shot.
Which would seem to be what
we're after without these other.
Criteria that.
Muddy the water for me madam
chair not sure what the
procedure is and I don't know
what to to how to answer them of
that we're I consulted and it
accomplishes what.
Yes Representative what we don't
amend committee celebs which
then would require another so to
be brought back so just keep
that in mind you might want to
keep a list but we're not going
to be we're not gonna be
amending committee subs if
that's our rule so.
So madam chair thank you that's
that's all my questions thank
you all right so this is my list
so far I have Nighbor
Representative Nighbor Riemann
and lane is there anyone else on
the list okay so representative
of either.
Thank you madam chair
representative of.
I really don't have any
additional questions I just want
the public to to be aware that
the two major issues I raised
the in the last committee
meeting really have not been
addressed and in the amendment
and the first one is.
The issue of ownership and the
ability to own an automatic
weapon if one goes through those
procedures and this bill.
Madam chair and representative
of a large you correctly
as I read this bill this revise
bill it's still prohibits.
A person licensed or permitted
to own or not economic from.
The basically having that weapon
because
Most of them would contain.
Such a function that would allow
that economic to be both a semi
automatic and automatic firearm
in my reading that incorrectly
madam chair Representative th.
Madam chair and representative
what.
I'm not quite sure is there a
particular section that you're
referring to.
Well in the in the substitute
Madam chair representative did
you make any effort to address
that
That line of questioning that I
have the other day with respect
to.
Enter to for tennis fiscal Madam
chair representative Nighbor a
yeah I think that you were
referring to I recall as a type
of firearm that you have a
switch that could go from a semi
automatic to an automatic with
this Lujan if this were passed
would it make that person a
felon as long as that person had
gone through the hoops to own a
machine gun the no they wouldn't
be because that is something
that they already they're not
they're not adding an auto sear
on to this is simply a switch
that has to be with the certain
type of gun so it's my
understanding that that person
as long as they went through
those hoops with ATF from with
rules background checks to own
that specific very specific type
of weapon than that I don't
think that would fall into this
category.
Madam chair representative the
the definition of semi
automatic.
Firearm converter.
Which is new part of the bill
it's a new section of the bill
is very expensive.
And it says it's an accessory or
any other device so let's focus
on other device.
Designed constructed are used to
convert a firearm into firearm
that shoots automatically.
Those weapons that are legally
obtained by such a person.
Has.
A device.
In that economic.
That allows it.
To shoot automatically and I
don't see how the revise
language here.
Specifically addresses that and
allows that person to a state
potential prosecution under this
bill.
Again are you with me if you
read it differently but the
that's the definition it's here
and I don't see an exception for
people who have a permit or
license to.
No in process I'm not a
automatic weapon which by their
very nature most of them if not
all of them now have a device
that allows it to shoot either
semi automatic or automatic.
And that was the case that was
the case representative in your
in the original bill so let's
move on to come talk about
whether or not the specific
amendments to this I just want
to make it clear madam chair
that there's nothing in this
bill that changed my concern
that.
And I think you just agreed with
the I thank the sponsor agree
with.
Think of.
The second point madam chair and
representative was the issue of
transport.
And that is.
These.
Semi automatic weapons automatic
weapons maybe even the assessors
be manufactured in Arizona.
Heading to Texas where they
could be legally sold.
That transport driver.
Knowing that the what is
occurring he would be subject to
this act with witty not.
And there's nothing in the
amendment that deals with that
specific issue I raised the
other day it is a.
Let me ask you this question did
you amend the bill to address
the question he specifically
asked and the answer is yes or
yes.
Madam chair believe the section
Was the same section that we had
in the last of your concern.
Yes ma'am sure we get okay with
that that's why I said in my
introduction that we thank
everybody for their comments in
their quest we don't need to
know what we can do this so yes
so what section was amended in
this in this bill that addresses
Representative night first
question.
The look at the broken for the
original bill.
Okay.
Madam chair representative I
believe.
When we answer that question in
the original bill we referred to
page three
number six which was the
transfer of is that an amendment
and that that we don't because
that was not okay that was not.
So I hear you says an amendment
that address that it was not a
proposes amendment he madam
chair fee we call Representative
night Byrd made comments on but
didn't break any request to
amend thank you.
Okay okay thank you madam.
All right Representative Rehm.
Thank you madam chair
Madam chair and experts so of my
line of questioning on a.
Pointed out that there's reasons
that individuals have different
pull weights on traders
competition hunt dean of law
enforcement they all have
different pull weights and
competition they want a very
light trigger meaning very low
to pull weight to go ahead and
increase fire.
And did you address that
question because the way I read
it now that still a violation.
Are there any amendments that
addresses the question that
Representative Rehm just race
and it can be answered I'm sure
in a yes or no answer madam
chair and was trying to pay
attention and I didn't quite get
your question can you just one
more I believe it it snowed but
on one and make sure answer
correctly.
Madam chair and Representative
in my line of questioning I
noted that there were different
pull weights on traders and they
are designed that way for they
are purchased that way for
different reasons the fire arm
would be used in competition in
hunting for law enforcement we
have a I have your pull weight.
I understand
Madam chair representative did
you want to answer that for I
guess my quick money.
answer is no because it was not
proposes an amendment it was a
comment that was made the same
as Representative and those are
my no answers the question thank
you.
Madam chair and representative.
So in the audience last time we
had a disabled sheeter.
He had arthritis and he used a
device to sistem and firing a
firearm.
We know under the Americans with
disability act that we need to
make reasonable accommodations
Representative please stick to
the amendments okay well did you
address that issue.
Madam chair and representative
the answer is the same no it was
not proposes an amendment thank
you madam chair you're welcome
Representative lane.
Thank you madam chair Madam
chair I noticed that changes
made to there was a couple of
exceptions under the original
bill and look at the committee
substitute.
It's it's now unlawful for a
person a unit they work for
state or political subdivision
to possess one of these
converters Representative.
You're looking at Representative
my notes what is your question
madam chair where those there
was two exceptions and in the
underlying bill from the
committee subsidized believe
those been limited.
Madam chair and Representative
when I introduce the substitute
did mention that we remove the
exceptions and madam chair
so I guess I would I would like
some understanding as to why did
we remove the exception for law
enforcement.
Madam chair representative this.
Madam chair representative we
remove that based on the advice
we got from Representative
actually thought it was correct
that law enforcement needs to be
precise and how they how they
shoot a firearm and these when
these auto Sears of blocks to
put in there to spring bullets
which would cause a lot rate of
danger situation with law
enforcement madam chair so let
me present a little different
perspective actually appreciate
the comments from Representative
queen I I think.
The idea of having law
enforcement firing automatic
weapons I don't think anybody is
it would push that.
the madam chair.
Here's the different perspective
that I would submit as what's an
issue with this committee so it
is.
criminals are going to continue
to have these devices.
And so if we're making these
devices illegal that's fine we
can talk about that but it's
hard for me to expect law
enforcement to be able to
recognize these things in the
field.
If we don't get an opportunity
to train and handle these things
study these things.
And what this committee sub does
madam chair is it actually think
law enforcement who their their
purpose would be to study these
things so that they can identify
them in the field that that that
in of itself would be a
violation of the statute so
madam chair and I don't know if
if the Sanchez would contemplate
that but I think making sure law
enforcement for training
purposes and I think you can
limited training purposes I
think that would be helpful.
Madam chair representative of.
I don't see I'm I'm not seeing
the relevancy to on what is
being said I think we did what
we were asked to do and I don't
have any other answers.
Thank you Representative any
other questions Representative
Eli and madam chair can explain
why the exceptions taken out for
armed forces.
And madam chair Mrs neglect and
chair representative was for the
same reason and in terms that
you don't want to just be spring
these these bullets the want to
serve more of a precise shot.
Madam chair do we have
jurisdiction over armed forces
and what they can possess.
Madam chair representative I
have no way of answering I don't
know the statutes and I I
believe we probably don't but I
you know I just don't have the
answer.
I'm not at mentioned earlier and
not the four that were not legal
experts and we're sorry we don't
know what the statutes and
limitations are Madam the the
problem is that we are creating
a crime.
And.
To not know what the statutes
are can understand but certainly
experts can help with that so
chair I I I see there's some
some issues with this committee
substitute
I'm concerned about both the
exception being eliminated for
law enforcement to build a train
and recognize these devices if
we actually want them to be
competent when they enter the
field and then I have concerns
about a state trying to create a
crime involving members of our
armed forces thank you madam
chair.
I am concerned about.
The ambiguities that have been
raised Representative.
And I feel that the bill really
needs to be very tight and very
clear because we are creating a
crime that could impose
liability on people.
And from my perspective this is
not ready.
To carry that weight of
responsibility.
So I've already heard some very
good questions from
Representative McQueen.
I could not vote for this if
there were a motion to defer do
pass and I don't know what the
book the will of the committee
is but you have an option one is
we can roll it again but I have
to say this will be the last
time because I you know we have
worked our docket is growing
exponentially and we have other
gun you know gun safety bills as
well including a and well and
the number of constitutional
amendment so we have a little
heavy docket with very important
bills we need to consider so at
this point I guess I'm looking
for guidance of other members
how their what their senses.
Can I ask you a question would
you but when you talk about them
because it is and the
communities are they related to
all the line of questions that
remain or in particular to a
particular line of questioning
on particularly to what
Representative McQueen was
racing
certainly I am concerned I will
say about the fact that there is
no language in this bill that
provides for the fact that that
people can own machine guns and
that they can be permitted and
there's no reference in here to
something that would be fit the
definition of machine gun and
acknowledging that if you have a
permanent thing you are legally
allowed to have such a machine
so
that's one concern that I have
as well
as I said I think it's not tight
enough and it's not clear enough
and for me I'm just that's just
me speaking as an individual
member of the committee but
it's up to you I think you've
heard some concerns from.
really of a variety of people on
the committee not just one one
ideology if you want to put it
that way and I I'm concerned it
you know we could we could put a
motion out there we can see how
it plays out but I don't think
this is a tight enough bill
minister but I would I with them
thank you I was kind of my
there are some different a line
of questions that we obviously
are are opposed two but we're
also open to
Representative McQueen to and
you're just your comments right
now and
I'd like to just take a second I
will play the role of listening
so I conferred with both Sanchez
and we're okay to give it one
more shot and to include but I
want to be specific to include
Representative and hopefully
somebody's taking notes but
queens
Concern.
And I believe it was pointed out
to be on page two the sections
basically number five and the
last twenty three twenty four
online.
And then
the.
Concerned about language of
ownership.
Reference to machine guns and
permits and the allowance of to
define more clearly ownership.
That's number two.
And do you have in the what was
the other I want to make sure
we're on the record for that.
Madam chair members of the
committee also Representative
eight point about on forces
armed forces correct thank you
now for the record I want to
make sure that we're clear on
madam chair just so that we
don't exercise another amount of
your time and we can go ahead
and make these I'm going to make
these changes specific specific
to what has been proposed
because of these are proposed
changes so if that's okay and we
are on the record and we're okay
then I'm willing to make the
correction and come back
facility right Madam chair yes
Sir the just just to be clear
Madam I think Representative
Lane had two point one was armed
forces and I don't know the
answer that the other was the
the state law enforcement and
for training purposes and I did
I did suggest language which you
know more in the process factory
that would allow these devices
if owned by the state and used
for training so they would be
privately owned by individual
officers to be owned by the
state law enforcement agency and
they would strictly be used for
training at and I think areas
that use that language.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you only have than the poor for
that we've recorded four major.
Points that were raised today
thank you
so we'll do our best but I will
tell you our our schedules
getting tighter and tighter and
their people madam chair the
only thing I would request of
everybody is is that when we
come back that we deal with this
what you've articulated to be
the committee substitute as it
relates to
thank thank you very much
Representative thank you.
Three times.
This is.
Thank you sorry.
Thank you I'm I'm having those.
And a heavy load thank you.
Okay next up we're going to hear
house bill one thirteen.
Share introduce thank you madam
chair and we are brought back
some amendments to house bill
one thirteen and they're very
simple and they were based on
input that I we receive from us
a number of you regarding the
qualifications of the
magistrates so if you look at
page two of the bill you'll
recall there was some
conversation about well why are
you listing these various
disciplines or whatever subject
areas of expertise and we
debated whether that was
appropriate given the fact that
some of you could come up with
other expertise is that seem
very simple as well so what we
essentially did was eliminate
any reference to the you know
teaching social services so what
we did was we
eliminated referenced to that so
if you go to page two line
seventeen you strike the four
year answer instead two years
and after that you or higher so
it's two years or higher from an
accredited institution of higher
education in them after that we
a limited off eliminated all the
references to the different
kinds of text you know expertise
or background work work
experience and so on and so on
that's the sum total of our
amendment madam chair.
We're just gonna be on the
amendment is there any
discussion on the amendment.
We is there any opposition is
anyone want off the amendment.
Got it documented option with
Representative Chasey second
from representatives of Penske.
Is there any opposition to
amending the bill.
No opposition is amended.
back to the bill what is the
will of the committee thirty
discussion would pass as
amended.
We have a motion to do passes
amended for a second we have a
second from Representative lane
is there any opposition to
passing the self.
You have in the past madam chair
thank you.
Joe's gonna requests to be
rolled over again.
What.
Just give.
All right Representative Ortez
is chair we are on house bill
one eighty five as amendment I
understand you have an expert
who will be joining us virtually
yes madam chair to experts who
okay so this is our first one of
these and I've got my fingers
crossed in terms of working on
it so
with the two individuals who are
your experts please raise your
hand without work Lisa for us
check and Austin okay Madam have
their names if that means as
well would be great distinct
Brinker and Brian Fahey.
I see one hand raised
huh okay and I see a.
Yes
so the individuals.
Uman forms are covered up by
something but they are there.
In the big stream back there I
don't know what's what's going
on there but they we I can see
only so my screen which I guess.
will be able to hear you on the
last so the floor is yours
Representative thank you madam
chair members of the committee
I'm really excited to present
this bill H. B. one eighty five
because it saves New
The bills does this in two ways
and it's in two different parts
the first part deals with the
appliance efficiency standards.
Are states adopt appliance
efficiency standards all the
time they've been doing it since
the seventies.
Since twenty thirteen to three
twenty eighteen thirteen other
states have adopted the
standards that we have here in
this bill.
What it says is that in order
for the products that are listed
in the bill to be sold they have
to meet energy star or
WaterSense efficiency levels are
another efficiency level
developed by a trusted source of
these these are these products
have been chosen because states
are allowed to set standards for
them because there's no federal
preemption law there's lots of
different kinds of products on
the the centers that are already
for sale off the shelf and that
consumers will save money when
they buy these will save money
from the Sanders we think that
by twenty thirty New Mexico
residents and businesses will
save fifty eight million on
utility bills two point five
million gallons of water eighty
gigawatt hours of electricity.
That's the standards part the
second part of the bill is about
clean lighting this is about
transitioning the state off of
fluorescent light bulbs in favor
of LEDs which will not only save
us money but will be safer for
for New Mexicans I want to talk
about the money part first LEDs
are have advanced over the last
ten years that was widely
available they're cost effective
to replace fluorescence because
they come in all kinds of
different shapes and sizes their
LEDs are two times more
efficient than fluorescents
which will result in up to
twenty million dollars in annual
savings.
Now under the safety issues
fluorescent light bulbs contain
mercury someone who handles
fluorescent light bulbs you know
our custodian or maintenance
workers focused folks who work
in the waste stream like garbage
collectors or landfill workers
are at risk fluorescent light
bulbs are often poorly
poorly disposed of and are at
risk if they break mercury
vapors are are dangerous so this
part of the bill will remove the
threat to workers keep the
mercury from
reaching in our on our lander in
our waterways this bill is about
save money avoiding hazardous
pollution no one has to change
out their existing products at
home this bill just means that
if folks are going to buy a new
appliances they're buying the
most efficient ones that are
available
And we have an amendment madam
chair.
I don't know I was process is
that earlier.
Incentives to the.
Yes.
Chair I can read the two oh two
number if that's helpful.
Two two five zero zero six.
Yes.
Would you like me to explain the
moment the amendment so it
cleans up the language that we
use for manufactured homes we
recently had mobile homes that
need to be corrected throughout
the document that that changes
made in the definitions and
where they're referenced in the
bill secondly the amendment
clarifies that this bill sets
standards only for new products
we added exemption for used
drugs and had a the word new at
the beginning of section four to
make that clear.
Finally on page twenty we
removed everything in that
section beginning with the
second sentence this was a
result of negotiations with with
the stakeholder with
stakeholders who were concerned
about the openness of that
language that would have allowed
the state to create future
standards for products that are
not listed in this bill.
That is.
Stephen.
The state is there a motion to
adopt the minutes.
So.
Representative.
Is there any opposition to
adopt.
Thank you madam chair I have
three experts here today can you
people for with sweet Christine
Brinker with sweep she's on the
zoom and right feeding with the
appliance standards awareness
project.
And with that we stand for
questions.
Well let's first go to the
audience.
Anyone here wishing to speak in
opposition to the bill.
yes.
We go.
Yes Republicans all us without
pasal electric.
our our.
It's funny there's a few out
there today that I'm not
necessarily opposed to what just
piece.
section nine of the bill of
which puts a time line on.
the use of being able to count
these products in our energy
efficiency filing.
We've just had energy efficiency
filing that went through in
December and our plan is that
for three years so we'd like to
see our ability to to see these
products through that entire
otherwise we have to go back and
it just creates an issue from
that perspective.
secondly
these definitions in statute for
us is a problem usually these
are put into rules a few of the
definitions although they don't
affect our energy efficiency but
as an example under the
computers portion of it
reference California code in and
it would be inside of our
statutes we would like to see
those definitions be able to be
put into a rural or a standard
and then thirdly.
part of my title is economic
development at a passel electric
and I just wanted to remind the
committee that we in el Paso
electric territory live in an
early competitive area you know
we have we have one shop it's
literally ten miles from its
competitor in el Paso Texas and
and.
for retail purposes I just
wanted to bring that up that we
that that products sold in New
Mexico not so The New Mexico
could easily be purchased
in taxes so but but the main
concern that I have is that
section nine.
We could be allowed to.
Energy efficient filing that is
approved by the by the
commission to to be
grandfathered in
that would be terrific on that
end and then and then the time's
up we come thank you all up sure
anyone else in the audience
wishing to speak in opposition.
Anyone online wishing to speak
on opposition if you have your
hands up already and do not wish
to speak in opposition please
take them down.
Okay
Jacob.
You need on mute yourself Jake
of.
Yes good morning can you hear me
yes you're speaking in
opposition is that correct that
is correct I have a lot of
issues with this bill namely the
give us your full name first
please our Jacob Weber out of
Albuquerque okay.
And I have a lot of issues with
this bill and namely the the
flow rates on on faucets and
toilets and stuff like that I
think it it's way too low that
we end up flushing more more
more to try to compensate for
that with low flow
I thought and it frankly I'll go
to taxed by might my staff and I
have to and and for my personal
use
this this is ridiculous and
I think it's going too far thank
you so much thank you.
Carla.
Thank you madam chair I'm Carla
Sonntag's.
Excuse me with the New Mexico
business coalition we are the
affiliate for the national
association of manufacturing and
in that role we know that it is
not so easy to necessarily get
all of the appliances and
everything that's listed which
is very open ended without what
they're giving EMNRD the
responsibility for it is not
that easy to always find all of
these parts pieces and
appliances that are going to
meet the standards that you are
trying to set and with all due
respect to the bill's sponsor I
really don't see this going to
save people money I think it's
going to cost them a lot of
money.
Years down the road when it
becomes more standard.
Then at that time we can save
money on our utilities and
provide these appliances and
products easier than we can win
a small state like New Mexico
sets these type of standards I
know the standards are being
emulated from California but
it's still not widespread enough
to make it economical in our
state for those reasons we
oppose this bill and we urge you
to oppose it as well thank you
thank you
Jacob Cassidy.
Thank you madam chair Jacob
Cassie with the home appliance
manufacturers
I wanted to COVID simply on the
inclusion of air cleaners in
this bill is completely
unnecessary since last month the
US office of management budget
Received a rule to from Do�a to
add this product to the
appliance standards program
we expect within the next sixty
or so days that that final rule
to be released Clio IRA and and
be and once that's approved
there will be federal standards
for these products there's
simply no need for that for a
state to act we believe this
should be done at the federal
level and we're very happy that
it is being done so additionally
since I had the opportunity to
speak and make the same request
before the Energy Environment
and natural resources committee
senator Jeanne Shaheen from New
Hampshire introduced legislation
to do this pen if the IRA at OMB
and DO we the alphabet soup does
not go ahead and approve get
this done so this is happening
be it from federal regulatory
action federal congressional
action and in our letter to
thank Senator Jean our friends
in the energy efficiency
community joined in on thanking
again this is the second year
we've had this introduced so
look forward to hearing from
them and we really appreciate
their support on this
legislation thank you for
listening all we're asking is
that this gets removed.
Thank you.
I don't see anyone else online
and there's no one else in the
audience wishing to speak in
opposition so.
okay so individuals in the
audience wishing to speak in
support pres please raise your
hand.
Okay Amy.
That you madam chair members of
the committee Amy there be
registered lobbyists for New
Mexico gas company sincerely
appreciate the sponsor for
working with us between this
hearing as the previous hearing
and house energy to address our
concerns the thoughtfulness for
all of us as New Mexicans as we
look to transition
really appreciate all the work
that's gone into this and our
company Santa support.
Thank you.
Yes good afternoon mentor
members of the committee we've
got a with the circled around
the chapter representing our
thirty five thousand members
throughout New Mexico we are in
strong support of H. B. one
eighty five we believe that by
setting applies a fixture
standards and thirteen other
states have staff we will save
New Mexicans money's
additionally this bill also
having efficiency standards
help with the majority of you of
the prices as well so we used
data strong support in S. C.
will vote yes thank you thank
you.
Charles chair members the
committee Charles Walker for
natural resources defense
council action fund and we stand
strong support of the bill
vision the.
Other arguments made previous
the thirteen states that have
adopted the standards in the
site's California also include
large hi populated states are
actually terms of market
probably about half the country.
Thirteen out of fifteen consider
bigger populated states so the
instructor should have no issues
with this thank you very much
thank you anyone else wishing to
speak in the audience in
support.
Okay let's go to online.
I see
A person named kavu.
Cover.
Or is it conservation voters me.
Find can you hear me yes what's
your name my name is my name is
lily anexio who is at the need.
the last thank you madam chair
and members the committee for
lines today I stand in support
of the bill that we're talking
about right now I apologize late
on Friday and numbers are being
I for all the reasons previously
stated bang for the thanks
Sanchez so much work on this
thank you.
Jeanne Logsdon Logsdon Jean.
Here.
Hello my name is Jean Loxton I
represent the league of women
voters of New Mexico we just are
very supportive of this bill
because it encourages energy
efficiency and makes it easier
for consumers to buy energy
efficient products it's very
consistent with many Lee
positions about climate change
and so we endorsed this bill
thank you thank you
Laura Ferrari.
Laura.
Yes I'm Laura Ferrari and I'm
representing the New Mexico
water conservation alliance and
we're in very strong support of
this bill we have found that on
the water side and we don't
represent the energy side these
products are readily available
and there have been great
improvements in low flow and
water efficient devices over the
last thirty years to the point
that now the lower flows
function much better than the
old high flow devices and
there's been very good success
with them thank you thank you.
Sammy.
Thank you madam chair Chandler
and members of the committee my
name is Danny Caroline the
climate energy advocate with
conservation voters Mexico and
we also support the bill for all
the affirmation reasons thank
you thank you and lastly
Samantha Salazar.
Samantha.
Good afternoon thank you madam
chair members of the committee
my name is command them with the
center for civic policy as their
clean energy fellow and I
support H. B. one eighty five
for all the reasons stated
before.
Thank you and I guess it wasn't
Leslie June PED.
June.
Yes good afternoon my name is
June Parsons honorable chairs
and Representative I'm speaking
today to request your support
for H. B. one eighty five the
environmental standards and
appliances fixtures my home
house low flow fixtures for the
for the last five years and
they're so well designed they
plus completely with one lunch
my water bill averages fifty
dollars a month in a home that
is over two thousand square feet
my electrical devices and LED
bulbs means my average
electrical bill is less than
fifty dollars a month H. B. one
eighty five with only apply to
new products at the point of
sale recognizing it's not
helpful to for lower income
households with purchasing new
appliances if they can't afford
it H. B. one eighty five also
benefits all households looking
to purchase new appliances that
have been screened for energy
efficiency and cost
effectiveness and product
availability H. B. one eighty
five is a win win for every New
Mexicans by lowering energy
usage and water consumption in
households across New Mexico
both precious commodities that
we need your good management in
passing is beneficial
legislation rather than the
unpredictability of our federal
government to adequately at.
I urge you to support and one
eighty eighty one eighty five
the environmental standards for
appliances and fixtures thank
you.
Thank you.
That concludes our public
comment period is there anything
sponsored by state before we go
to the committee yes manager
then I respond to some of the
comments that were made in
opposition quickly.
I don't have to sure if you if
if there were some specific
things regarding items in the
bill that would probably be
helpful for us to understand
that to me do that thank you
madam chair at first we we need
the definite with regard to
definitions we need those
definitions to match all the
states in order to help the
manufacturers develop those
products and bring those
products to market.
Second we are open to the to to
change the timing of up to three
years I don't know what that
looks like in your committee and
how we can address that too just
because concern about
The process that's already in
place.
Three in natural looks happy.
That's really all I would like
madam chair today.
We we talk many people talk
about the toilets the new
toilets are are efficient and
they bring of water down to do
the business that they need to
do hi and fourth I really do
want to respond to this the air
purifier issue that is in
process at the federal level but
we don't know what's going to
happen there so it's important
we keep this in our bill because
air purifiers are really a huge
energy user and that is the
single largest energy saving
product in the bill and the
largest utility bill saver of
the Energy products outside of
the water fixtures so it's
really important that station.
Okay thank you I think that was
helpful Representative.
Representative.
Thank you madam chair the
manager does this bill regulate
the toilets that install my
house.
Madam chair of.
And Lane
are only the new toilets that
you purchase.
Madam chair I don't that was not
a very precise questions are so
does this does this bill
regulate New Mexico seven stole
my house.
Yes it does madam chair and
chair and madam chair and new
faucets.
Chair representative lane at yes
and madam chair I heard a
reference in the Sanchez opening
comments LED lights that is
this.
That said that's beside owner
sensors this saying after a
certain point you can only
install the lights are only
have.
Well I don't know that you can
have pictures that just one only
because they screen looking at
libel so please educate me.
Madam chair representative lane
I'm going to ask our expert
brain fady to to answer that
question but before he begins
this is that you know we're
phasing out fluorescent light
bulbs which are dangerous and
costly and I'll let.
Ryan fady answer the rest of
your question.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee Brian
fading with clients standards
awareness project.
We're nonprofit project that
works to advance the policies at
the state and federal level
before that and in other states
as well took to the question of
the policy would phase out the
sales of fluorescence after the
date it in January one twenty
twenty four for the screw in
CFL's compact fluorescents and
generate one twenty twenty five
for the linear fluorescents the
sort of long tubular ones but
any fluorescence that folks
already have in their homes or
that are in sort of maintenance
closet so they've already
purchased those can continue to
be use it's just when you go to
buy a new ball after those
states it'll be the LEDs that
are available.
The madam chair so I I think I'm
still confused because when I
look at the language in the bill
and this under section five it
gives reference to the laughs.
And I have.
This is saying that we you
can't.
So I guess a lamp that only fits
of.
The old light bulbs I guess
because it seems like most lamps
you screw levels and now and you
can either plug into LED boulder
you plug in a old school Bolden
I personally love the daylight
LEDs fabulous lighting super
energy efficient but I'm just
wondering.
Am I missing something here
Madam chair representative Lente
you can still use that you just
you can use the same picture you
just screw in the New.
LED.
Okay I guess I don't really know
what we're we're prohibiting I
guess it just lamps the only fit
the old school incandescent
bulbs Madam chair representative
Lincoln lamp means like cold.
So the light just went on for me
Madam so I appreciate that so.
What's the main lesson for us.
So madam chair assume that's in
the definition section I just
glossed over that is that fair.
Madam chair representative Lente
I'm checking.
The technical term.
Have just learned I've learned a
lot about science with this bill
madam chair.
Resembling.
Thanks for.
Madam chair representative lane
it's on page six W. impact
resistant.
Madam chair representative when
we're we're just using the word
lamp instead of label because
that is how.
That's how.
States other states define it
that's a technical term.
It.
It does seem a little bit
confusing I have to admit but
that is where we are okay thank
you madam chair and at the EDD's
I understand through and if you
keep
but if you end up making other
technical changes on time frame
I just noticed that this it's
just use the word lamp and use
the phrase impact resistant
fluorescent lamp I think legally
those are not the same thing so
you might want to look at
whether the clean up or not.
you madam chair so is it just
fair said generally that this
would apply to all new
appliances that would go into a
residence.
Madam chair representative lane
no and I'm going to ask me to.
Elaborate a little bit I thank
you madam chair representative
so again on the fact sheet that
we say it's not to everyone
there's only thirteen appliances
that are included in this and
includes air purifiers
commercial dishwashers
commercial fryers commercial hot
food holding cabinet commercial
ovens commercial steam cookers
computers and computer monitors
electric vehicle supply
equipment and gas fireplaces
some light bulbs and
then letting fans and water
coolers those are the complete
list.
Thank you madam chair I do have
some questions along sort of the
approach that we're choosing in
this bill to reference the
ministry of regulations of
another state.
Madam chair can you help me
understand why it why are we
selecting that practice.
Madam chair representative lane
enough the thirteen states that
are already doing it it gives us
I will give manufacturers one
another state to get these
products to market and it needs
those in meets their standards
and helped us get that more
products and more efficiently
and more cheaply secondly if
we've got that like you were
working together on this the
what's that would have to be
face that can maybe the strength
in numbers.
Madam chair and I understand
that I that big corporations
would appreciate uniformity
makes them easier for them to do
business but managers here's a
thought that I have.
As the why estimate this is a
bad way for us to legislate what
happens whenever an
administrative agency issues
codes is it gives the public an
opportunity to participate in
that process it gives New
Mexican citizens option provide
feedback they can there's a
committee that happens during
the ministry of process.
If we buy statutes say we're
gonna drive in other states
administrative codes we've cut
out New Mexicans from that whole
democratic process.
And so while chair I do
recognize and appreciate that
there's some efficiency with
taking a state like California
that's probably an expert in
this area and they have a lot of
resources that are devoted to
this I do think there's
something to the democratic
system to make and make sure we
don't cut New Mexican citizens
out of that process so.
Madam chair something also
recommend that the sponsor look
at if it may created a huge
headache I understand that but I
think it's a bad practice to
site to other states
administrative codes.
Madam chair so I'm intrigued by
the.
The comments that this is going
to.
Make.
Of these products cheaper for
New Mexicans can you explain
that rationale.
Madam chair representative lane
It's really the life of of the
product and folks will have.
Cheaper energy bills over the
course of their units in the use
of that product so it thank you
for putting may not be cheaper
but the the pay back is is
pretty timely pretty quick so I
I'd like for Brian to.
Give a little more detail on
that.
madam chair members of the
committee yet just as the
representative was saying you
know it's about saving energy as
you use the product and
recouping money on your utility
bills from lower utility bills
and we have from the savings
analysis on the drugs in the
bill.
Many of them have what we call a
zero pay back period where the
more efficient product is the
same artist prices the less
efficient product some of them
are couple months there's a
couple in a couple years but
they're pretty quick pay back
periods and then folks save
money on your utility bills
throughout the life of the
product what's nice about that
is you know as a consumer you're
going to purchase a product and
you don't have to do a research
project to figure out what's the
more efficient version you know
the the products that are
available are the more efficient
versions and you will save money
just use them.
Madam chair and I understand the
perspective that that everyday
New Mexicans will save on
utility bills I know like I said
I installed daylight LEDs in my
home in my law office and they
do save on energy which of
course means lower utility bills
but Madam here's my concern with
that perspective is it's it's
really easy for me.
To make the decision that I want
to pay more up front.
Knowing that I can get that back
over time
for someone who has a has access
to adequate financial resources.
The concern that I have with
this approach where we in Santa
Fe are saying look these are the
the regulations are applied all
New Mexicans.
Is with we now given those folks
who are trying to make ends meet
every month two choices if you
want a new appliance is going to
be higher the cost is gonna be
higher because these regulations
so you have to to put on credit.
Which is not a good practice or
madam chair.
You have to get in the cycle
we're perpetually buying used
appliances.
And again those don't last very
long in the long term they're
more expensive in terms of non
resources that you you
contribute to those but if
you're just trying to make ends
meet that's your only option
your only viable option and so I
understand the intent that we
want to you know protect the
climate we want to encourage
people to be efficient their use
resources but I worry about when
we as a legislature gather in
Santa Fe and we say this is
what's best for you New Mexican
what you're going to put in your
home I know what's best for you
and your family and I think that
every day New Mexicans just want
to be able to pay the bills and
move on and I think that these
kind of bills actually make it
harder for working New Mexicans
so thank you madam chair.
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative you mentioned
that you've learned a lot and I
was wondering if you're going to
get Larry Scott's vote on page
five one seven whether whether
the chairs of.
Good understanding of of you
don't have to answer that I'm
just.
I really like to.
Madam chair representative
Nibert dove do is deep
ultraviolet it's a wavelength.
Is the wavelength rage in the
far ultraviolet that's what do
this thank you got it
Madam chair representative we
have a long discussion and and
energy on on this bill and I
want to prolong that discussion
but.
There was some discussion about
the referenced other states
standards but in fact this
legislation also references
other countries standards does
it not in several instances.
Madam chair representative
Nibert I would like Christine to
answer that.
I thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Christine Brinker much
southwest energy efficiency
project there is one instance of
the bill where references a
national standard from Canada
and that is because Canada is
very good at making sure their
furnaces are efficient because
it is so darn cold there but
it's so that is why there are a
couple steps ahead of the US in
terms of their furnace
efficiency that's why we think
that there's no comparable at
one in the US yet but but since
we're close neighbors we just
borrow there's.
Well madam chair and
representative actually in two
cases in the second case it says
American standards and
commitment standards and that's
on page sixteen line eighteen
So you know we are referencing
other standards and I would have
the the same concern that has
been expressed with respect
other states I would have even
more concerned with referencing
standards and in other countries
and applying them here but the.
madam chair and and
Representative.
I believe the gentleman from el
Paso electric raised a concern
that that frankly is my biggest
concern with this legislation.
And that is.
On the side of the state the
south side of the state in
particular.
Where we have.
Appliance dealers.
Trying to sell their products.
And they are somewhat in
competition with.
The el Paso market over on the
side Lubbock and Amarillo and
and there's one.
And some smaller towns as well
and so one of my concerns is
that if.
If we have those appliance
dealers in New Mexico are they
going to be disadvantaged by
having to only have inventory of
products that meet these
standards when.
In close proximity.
There are appliance dealers who
are going to be able to find a
wider array of of products
because they're not those
standards and taxes.
Madam chair representative
Nibert that's that's an
excellent question I cannot
answer that question so I'm
gonna ask my experts if they can
answer that question.
Tell me first madam chair
representative I'm yeah I think
for these types of appliances we
do not see very many folks that
are willing to drive a hundred
miles to buy a cheaper version
of a level so I don't really see
that that is a huge problem
there might be some but the goal
here is to make sure that New
Mexicans have access to these
really good appliances and make
sure that that manufacturers
aren't dumping the things that
they can't sell elsewhere in New
Mexico and so we're getting the
good things out to folks they
will have those choices there's
multiples of each of these are
available for manufacturers and
if someone does choose to drive
a very long way for libel and I
guess that's that's their
choice.
Madam chair representative it's
not gonna be the light bulbs.
Very much purchase a light bulbs
whether there but I'm more
concerned about the appliances
because.
Frankly and in my own experience
building a house of.
We've really looked at a variety
of places in in purchasing those
are those appliances in state as
well as out of state Albuquerque
to The Dallas frankly and and I
think at least on the east side
of the state I suspect the same
is true in the Los crucis market
you have a lot more
yes you have people who don't
view the state line is as really
existing that they're looking at
a market area and they're
willing to travel within that
market area to to acquire things
and then when I see legislation
like this I see this as an
impediment to our vendors.
Because as I said in the prior
committee.
The market.
Pretty efficient the market's
going to dictate and the market
is telling all of us.
That we're headed in this
direction a more efficiency.
We're headed I mean these light
bulbs that we we're seeing today
they're going to be replaced
probably within the next few
years.
But the fact of the matter is.
By passing this legislation
we're not allowing the market to
work for forcing the market and
at least on the south side of
the state and the east side of
the state we're created
artificial impediment to our
own.
The indoors.
At the expense of maybe of
vendors and tax or to the
benefit of the vendors in taxes
and and I'd I I hate to see our
small businesses lose out in
that regard that that's my major
objection to this type of
legislation I'm not gonna be
able support from for that
reason I think the market is
going to take care of this I
don't subscribe to the fact that
appliance dealers are just going
to be able self junkie
appliances here they're going to
dump on here I think I think
they're going to have the those
same array here as they have
elsewhere but if we passes we
limit the array of appliances
that would be available.
And people will make their own
choices and some of those people
make choices to go elsewhere to
another state to acquire those
things so for that reason I'm.
I'm continuing to have to
support the legislation but
I appreciate your studying
intently on on her
the technical things and and
appreciate to your your
willingness to.
Less in this direction but I
think the market's doing so
anyway thank you madam chair
thank you Representative thank
you representative
Representative every yes madam
chair and Representative Ortez
I've I think that
there are federal standards for
almost everything that you have
in here there either I rural or
or how are they.
Madam chair representative green
the products that are listed do
not have federal standards
that's why there we're doing in
the state in our.
In this bill.
Madam chair and representative
Ortez so I've got a good friend
that is a plumbing contractor
and what I remember is he has
told me that a shower head of
can not have a flow rate of more
than two gallons per minute that
a toilet if I remember right
there one point six or one point
eight gallons per flush.
Are those not the standards that
are out there currently Madam
chair representative green out
as Christine to.
Answer question here.
I'm gonna pass it over to
legislative action.
The branch manager.
I thank you madam chair and
representative of water fixtures
are the one set of products
where there are federal minimum
efficiency levels but states can
go further than the water
fixture proficiency levels and
so that's why you see the
faucets showerheads urinals and
toilets here and the proposed
standard it's at from the US EPA
WaterSense program it's just
like the energy star program but
on the water fixtures side
that's where the efficiency
standard comes from.
Thank you madam chair and
representative so I think we
already have a standard and if
we're going to make it is
pointed out tighter skin
increase the our products cost
of madam chair and
representative
or yes list would what was
talked about a used appliance
store when this goes into effect
does that put him out of
business or can they sell the
old use.
Appliances printer
Representative bring with the
amendment that you just passed
that is not the case we can
still continue to sell those
used appliances they will not go
out of business unless they've
got other reasons to.
And madam chair and
Representative Ortez let's just
look at the page one hundred
point twenty the year purifier I
don't see battery powered or
solar power and are you meaning
not to limit those or.
Madam chair representative
Raymond Bryant can answer that
question for you.
Yes thank you very much Madam
chair representative the
appliance X. is in the air
purifiers the standard covers an
air purifier that can operate
Wall Fund into another
electricity source so if the air
purifier can operate all plugged
into the wall of whether that be
with a USB plug or your standard
wall outlet then it would be
covered if the air purifiers
able to operate without
connecting to another
electricity source and it would
not become.
Thanks madam chair
I just think we already have a
standard in the US and that's
been spoken about thank you
madam chair.
Thank you.
Representative also on.
Thank you thank you madam chair.
I have been looking at this
legislation to be looking at and
looking at it and.
I just have a I'm having a lot
of hard work.
I just can't see telling me.
Thank you by that.
Can I get in the way it's set up
is I cannot buy that because not
going to be available.
Okay good example okay my wife
and I were looking for like
Google.
And there were seven it said
smart I looked at her and I said
no way in hell that we know what
to do with the smart my involved
to work on a batch of.
But
it's just to give you an example
of a of life in today's world
okay there's so much out there
that we had no idea that the
how.
Actually is we get as people
like myself get around that we
have no idea how to operate so I
just.
It just seems to be like if
we're going to go by in the
plants.
We're going to go buy an
appliance and we're going to get
the best value for money.
And what we're looking at is
what can we afford to put in our
house.
Not what can we afford to keep
running for the next twenty
years we are looking at and we
buy this product and we take it
home and we can we put it to use
tomorrow for today.
So that and.
And I just have a real problem
with with this does you're only
going to be able to buy this
this and this because that's all
it's going to be available and
you know what even in twenty
years I still don't think I want
to buy a smart light bulb.
Just.
Just a thought better care.
Speaker Martinez thank you madam
chair thank you secretaries from
Greenville forward
this is a this is one of those
bills that I think we could talk
about all the and it's it's it's
such a simple thing but such a
wide reaching impactful thing as
well I do just want to remind
the committee because what what
one of the.
Alright we'll give me heartburn
A few days ago
about this bill was costs right
low income middle income people
lower income people.
But there is there is federal
funding.
Within the environment
department I think it's a point
of eighty million dollars.
To help with rebates and I
believe the rebates for up to
twelve thousand dollars
for for.
Taxpayer if you will and their
point of sale rebates right so I
go by.
One of these appliances I don't
have to wait for my taxes the
next year to get my money back
it takes the price off the you
know off the top
I just want to make sure I I a
state that for the record
because
you know.
Assuming what will whether or
not this bill moves forward I
hope it's not because of cost to
the consumer because the federal
government has come in to ensure
that lower and middle income
people can afford these more
energy efficient appliances so
thank you enter.
Thank you speaker I just and I
know I a sense we're gonna be
rolling this because there is an
amendment that we talked about
in terms of some three year
window if it's already in the.
The company's plan I'm not sure
the details of that but I I
think you understand what the
issue is
if but having said that I but I
I do I am equally uneasy about.
Some of this I it does make me
feel more comfortable that there
may be funds available
At all these are very good ideas
of course but I don't want us to
be.
Placing too large a burden on
lower and middle income people
and without have knowing more
information about that rebate
that program I'm gonna be
uncomfortable so maybe after
it's all educate myself a little
bit more about that Leslie I
just I just giving feedback to
you all I agree that it is not
good practice to be referencing
other states rules and rags and
so on because they can change
and we don't know how they're
gonna change and we don't have
any input and how they change
and then the here we are so I
think that's a problem and I
think you from my perspective to
get my support on this bill that
will need to be addressed at
some point just giving you my
feedback so when you come back
you'll have some better
understand about where some of
us are coming from all right
anything else from the members
okay thank you
will look forward to hearing
back from you that manager thank
you for.
I.
House bill one fifty five.
Yeah.
Armors.
For.
Your is yours Representative
thank you madam chair thank you
with I would like to begin by
introducing the expert witness
is Barbara Roman she's district
attorney from the thirteenth and
I'm happy to have her here help
me so house bill one fifty five
it's basically increasing the
penalty for aggravated battery
on a peace officer I want to
talk a little bit about of it
about it because I know a lot of
people go around increased
penalty crime but I had a case a
long time ago that I had an
officer who was shot in the hand
his name is Chris Corona and his
with Clovis police department
and they were basically back in.
Some type of an alley and he
shot at the officer and hit him
in the hand so when we were
prosecuting that case or I was
prosecuting that case I started
looking for statutes that would
fit and I was shocked to find
that the only statute that I can
really charge under that case
was under thirty twenty to
twenty five which is aggravated
batter in a peace officer when
you basically hit an officer
with a deadly weapon so I
started looking back and I was
just looking at all the
different statues and and making
comparisons and I want to try
this case I I knew afterwards
that I was definitely going to
at some point want to try to
work on raising this penalty
because when you go to the
statutes and you actually go to
what aggravated battery on a
regular person is so if you
commit temporary disfigurement
on a regular person if if I were
to punch this district attorney
in the face and and cost her to
get a black and blue I would be
a misdemeanor when you go to the
statute for aggravated battery
on a peace officer when you do
that to a peace officer gets
four degree felony it's actually
raising at a level because of
their status as a peace officer
so if I were to shoot
Representative Rehm just a
regular person it's a third
degree felony punishable by
three years and five thousand
dollar fine but if I were to
shoot the chief over there it's
still a third degree from felony
punishable by three years in
prison and a five thousand
dollar fine and it just didn't
seem right to be that we can
only charge that I looked at a
San under intent to commit a
violent felony which requires an
intent to kill and often there
is an intent to kill and that's
just an assault and assault is
is it just a threat of an
immediate battery or batteries
actually something that's
hitting the officers actually
touching and I look to add to
the fiscal report and looked at
the committee analysis and.
And I looked at what the the
office of the public defender
said will we'll be handling a
larger number of cases age I
just don't believe that be the
case raising it to a secondary
phone is going to change how we
prosecute the case it's like
raising at first offense
trafficking and they do it again
has a second offense trafficking
is not first degree felony the
penalties are higher but the
facts don't change
what we're trying to do here is
make the actual penalty fit the
crime these are police officers
who were out there working to
protect us we're in a position
where we have so many officer
shot at and to say that you can
shoot out an officer and the
penalty is going to be the same
as if I shoot at a regular
person structurally it does not
fit with the way the statutes
laid out so I warm trying to
encourage you not to think of is
an increased penalty to so try
to make that argument it's going
to be a deterrent it just
doesn't fit into the penalty
just doesn't fit the crime and
there is also an agent Alice's
said it went into that and said
if a person shoots and hits a
police officer with the fire
without killing them they face a
less penalty than if you
actually shoot at a police
officer miss them and so that's
a problem in the statute I've
always believe it's a problem
the statute and so I'm trying to
switch that penalty to where we
can actually give them a penalty
that a person deserves an issue
that our law enforcement officer
so it's not the same as a
shooting at a regular person I
will also defer to my experts I
know she has some examples to
that have affected them and
their office and district thank
you Representative Rehm.
good afternoon madam chair madam
chair and members of the
committee I get my name is
Barbara low I've been I'm now
the current the elected district
attorney for the thirteenth
which is Santa Valencia and
Sevilla counties but I've been a
prosecutor for about twenty
seven years
one of the one of the cases I
was blessed to prosecute was the
murder of Rio Rancho police
officer Greg Nigel Bennett K.
excuse me Greg Nigel banner.
And one of the things I found
out when I prosecuted that case
is that when a police officer is
assaulted murdered or
shut it's really like assaulting
the entire community because it
makes us all a little bit safer.
And I will I will point out I
will I would just ask the
committee to look at this as a
public safety issue all of our
constituents one of their number
one concern right now is in the
increase in violent crime.
And.
Police
The through the through ladies
and gentleman such as yourself
that's the reason why they're
separate statutes for battery on
a peace officer assault on a
peace officer verses I'm not
police officers and.
This again is recognized
throughout not only the statutes
but as you all are aware of when
we when we
eliminated the death penalty
there are certain crimes that
would have been death penalty
cases they're no longer
definitely cases but they are
they do carry the life without
the possibility of parole and
one of those is murder of a
police officer so I think our
society has already recognizes
the need to give police officers
more protection because they're
the ones that that run out run
towards danger to protect all of
us you know I I know I've heard
I've heard criticisms of this
bill were you know they try to
minimize well you know maybe
being shot in the hand or or
maybe you know throwing spitting
on an officer they're going to
charge higher which is nonsense
that's not the case we're
talking about life threatening
injuries there's an officer who
is.
Shot and almost killed in
Albuquerque in two thousand
twenty one and he still not on
on full return to duty but
because he wasn't killed he did
not get I mean that was that was
charged only as a third degree
felony and the wife of the wife
of that police officer in the
police officer I think maybe on
the line to speak to you but
that's just some simple we're
not talking about officers who
were spent on board kicked in
the growing although those are
not nice things we're talking
about life threatening injuries
two police officers and again I
I think it's just implementing
what I believe the intent of the
previous legislative legislature
recognized by giving police
officers special status special
penalties for harm called to put
harmed costs to police officers
and with that I will stand for
questions of manager despite and
had a few more things just so
the chair in the committee knows
what great bodily harm is
actually defined as which is
what we're talking about is an
injury that creates a high
probability of death result in
serious disfigurement a result
in the loss of any member or
impairment of the body so we're
talking about speeding or
kicking or hitting an officer
you're going to be on a fourth
degree felony battery on a peace
officer I would also point out
that this is not a mandatory
nine years the court still has
discretion to sentence up to
nine or if it's if you hit
somebody with a deadly weapon
let's say a piece of wood an
officer with the if I had
somebody can with the fire with
locked in because great bodily
injury then the judge would be
able to consider that a deadly
weapon I would also point out
that they're least penalties for
when you better school employee
madam chair and members of the
committee when you better health
care professionals so this is a
new concept but it's just not
this this is just not fitting
the crime.
And and we've got to protect our
law enforcement officers to make
the penalty what it needs to be
and structured properly with
what the statutes are so with
that then I'm sure we stand for
questions thank you for.
First let's uh go to the
audience anyone wishing in the
audience to speak in opposition
please raise your hand yes.
Madam chair.
Representative my name is Junie
ball time the district defender
of the first two nation district
for the law offices of the
public defender did we has to
house bill one fifty five.
Activated battery on a police
officer this is many different
circumstances in contact first
actually committing grave bodily
harm against a police officer
second.
Causing no harm minimal harm
well with a deadly weapon a
deadly weapon in New Mexico has
been defined as everything.
Four one two yes even issues.
And we're not talking about how
heels or dance go we're talking
maybe it's because.
Also.
That is conducted in that manner
that.
Cause great bodily harm or death
I don't so actually no I.
So
What this bill does is it
provides the same kind of.
For someone our is great.
As.
Now the base crying here is
already in the hands of all in
New Mexico with the firearm
enhancements with that visual
enhancement or by finding of
aggravation by the court which
would increase the penalty I
start.
This.
Point I'd like to make is that
increasing the face punishment
well not the type of crime
because parents are we act in
the nation ninety nine point
nine percent of her when the
commission of another crime or
with interactions with law
enforcement themselves not
because someone is thinking
about.
This is a second degree felony
into this.
Thank you.
All right anyone else in the
audience wishing to speak in
opposition.
Let's go online is there anyone
online wishing to speak in ops
opposition I see a hand up Taina
tryna.
His are you speaking in opposite
she's in favor of yes I'm sorry
I'm new to all this stuff so I
would be speaking in favor okay
will give us a minute we'll get
to in a minute okay maybe two
minutes of.
So let's go to the audience now
and speak see who wishes to
speak in favor pacer hands okay
so we're gonna go across from
over here chief and then we'll
go back this way.
Thank you for the opportunity
Representative three for the
bills couple things I want to
come out to to do things on the
practical personal practical of
this structurally make sense
proper alignment as you
mentioned
we had a decrease of whether she
believes it can be avoided or
not increasing officer assaults
and batteries
I have the opportunity last week
for us once committee regarding
use of force to give an example
of that of our officers have
been you know someone act I
suspect economic coming up in
order the attacking of that is
increased it's been through the
roof of two thousand seventeen
we only had ten of those in two
thousand twenty two we have
fifty eight of those second part
personally of the reshot me I
think all the all of me respect
for the second.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you let's go to the back.
It's going back here guys with
let's not fight over who's going
to talk.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee chairman on behalf
The New Mexico district
attorneys association
We're seeing both in Albuquerque
and in all the rural areas the
assaults and the batteries are
put on police officers this is
just trying to go through the
roof
we need to align the and we
appreciate Representative read
for bringing this bill.
it because we did it online the
there on the line and for
everything we do we don't see it
it's going to increase anything
if anything hopefully it does
have a deterrent effect.
And that's the direction that we
need to be going thank you thank
you.
Yes Sir madam chair members of
the committee millions more with
certain I have the ministry
about attorneys for all the
reasons that
Representative repeating
Romo detail drawing that she
provided we are in favor of this
bill in chief I do.
Okay anyone else wishing to
speak in favor of the bill in
the audience all right let's go
online
trying to.
Sorry I missed.
Trina no you're fine okay sure
that I hello my name is Trevor
back and I'm the wife of officer
Mario for he's an eighteen year
veteran of the Albuquerque
police department Mario also
serves fifteen years as a
trained emergency response
response team member.
On August nineteenth nineteen
twenty twenty one Mario and
three other officers had seventy
bullets fired at them from a gun
held in the hands of James
Romero's James R. Myers was a
twenty seven year old fell in
from California to strikes
against them he was in
Albuquerque in Albuquerque for
just stays before he started
terrorizing our citizens and
shut out for officers Mario was
first shot in the neck just
above his full approved
fast and it's never too late was
arteries the second bullet went
through his left arm and
shattered humerus bone both
shots rendering both his arms
useless to radio his location
for out Mari was bleeding out
and dying Johnny Garcia was a
home that day Mario would have
died before rescue could have
found him by the grace of god
Mario was still here Mario was
and still in therapy and will
never be as whole as he was
before he was shot he's Americal
to a watch tomorrow go through
and overcome everything he has I
cannot express how physically
sickening this loss to our
officers and their families
Mario was a husband a father a
brother a son and a friend and a
grandpa's first many people
Levin depend on him when he's
not in uniform just like all the
other officers and their
families understanding that
somewhere in our system is
applauded G. values their lives
the stressful attacking those on
guard should receive punishment
at the highest level.
Why is our system a gravely
demoralized our loved ones
because they wear uniforms they
ran towards the trouble to
protect us all all of this I am
asking all parties to please
consider how important allies of
those officers are and who
depends on them home when
they're not in uniform we have
to know that we're not sending
our love ones into the
battlefield pregnancy thank you
for your time and consideration
thank you I don't see anyone
else with their hands up online
and support so we'll go back to
the sponsors or anything you
want to say before we go back to
go come to back to the committee
no madam chair will stand for
questions okay thank you I have
on my list Representative Chasey
and then Representative McQueen.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you very much
Representative reason D. A. Romo
I appreciate it I generally am
not in favor of increasing
penalties because I think we all
agree that the real deterrence
is swift and sure punishment and
so I don't view them as
deterrents however I appreciate
the fact that you've left this
with discretionary sentencing
for the court.
The the thing that I want to
mention is that the sentencing
commission is undertaking a
rather huge project the
legislature is funded to redraft
our criminal code in part of
their task is to bring things in
line.
I.
I can appreciate your argument
that this is out of line
I I would suggest that should
this bill not make it all the
way through that you make sure
the sentencing commission is
looking at this in the redraft
of the criminal code they've
been reporting to us that our
courts corrections and justice
interim committee and I don't
see a reason not to bring the
status of
a law enforcement of the
individual in in tow line here
as for all of these fourth
degree felonies we created for
the special groups I kind of
regret having voted for some of
those because they haven't been
made as dust maybe you encounter
this to
They
I I don't know how helpful they
are quite frankly and then we
come up with another group
saying what this group deserve
special protection whether it's
that a coach or a health care
worker or you know we've we've
got a whole bunch of in statute
now over the years and and
I could have.
It seems to me and I just wonder
how helpful they are protecting
those individuals so without
madam chair I just wanted to.
I advise you with regard to the
sentencing commission in that
work and and try to get this on
the on their radar thank you
madam chair and then chair and
if I may just respond to
Representative Chasey I
appreciate that and we will
definitely do that I I hate to
wait when this is such a clear
structure problem in the statute
because it could be you know in
four months another officer get
shot by the time that gets dealt
with so that's why we do feel
support to well we can see it
address it now but yes for sure
this does not pass I will will
bring that to their attention
thank you for the the statement
Representative McQueen.
Thank you madam chair Madam
chair representative review
sol
Disclose my ignorance of
criminal.
Mentors every if someone shot
the police officer.
Don't think it an attempted
murder charge they get it
usually madam chair Mister
representative they generally
get an assault with intent to
combat commit a violent felony
because they didn't hit them
which is a second degree felony
which is same as attempted
murder with assault with intent
to commit a violent felony you
have to prove an intent to kill
that's a very hard element to
prove so guess dust often will
have to the okay my gonna do
attempted murder for my going to
assault with intent to inviolate
family because there's a element
to attempted murder also which
is hard to prove so again you
can charge that but it's very
difficult if that answers your
question that's why assault with
intent to commit a violent
felony never works when officers
actually shut in these cases
because proving the intent to
kill is very hard I've seen
cases where someone's been
stabbed and and then others are
going to be attempted murder but
it actually is a very hard
statute approved because of the
intent and often it's the same
degree felony as the the one
that's right next with assault
with intent to commit a violent
felony let's say on a police
officer so we look at the
statues Madam chair
representative and we try to
find the one that's fits the
best and and it's easiest to
prove the intent and I found it
out and also defer to do Romo
that attempted murder is
actually very hard crime to
prove with intent and if you
have anything to add.
Thank you
Madam chair representative
McQueen I I agree with with the
with Representative read
and when you're talking about.
One thing that I appreciate your
comment about the criminal
to support I don't know anything
about come along when I went to
law school tell you that I had
to learn on the job but.
We are we are legally bound to
charge the most the more
specific crime so in other words
we can't just choose to to to to
we can't use another statute if
it's not the specific statute
that fits the facts we're
legally bound to charge based on
the most specific statute given
the facts if that makes sense
so for example
We couldn't charge and just
activated assault
if it's a police officer we have
to charge aggravated assault on
a peace officer so you have to
charge on the most specific
statute under the facts that
make sense but yes intent is
always even a first degree
murder case intent is very hard
to prove you're looking you're
trying to what's inside a
person's mind and I think you
are heard from a representative
from the public defender's
office that well a lot of times
these just happen now there miss
interact with the police and
they issued them well.
You know that in that situation
if that's true then we would
have to prove that that wasn't
the situation and that there was
a pre conceived or a you know a
deliberate intent if you will
to to come to harm that the
officer based.
Beyond just shooting their
weapons so to speak.
Madam chair representative right
Again to me pointing a gun at
someone employing the triggers
sounds like content.
Why is it difficult for.
Well
Madam chair and representative
it is intent for aggravated
battery so at their aggravated
battery to a peace officer is
more specific than attempted
murder I don't even think
there's an attempted murder on a
peace officer crime and so we
don't have a crime for that so
you have to go charge the peace
officers prime which is a third
degree felony and so you cant
eight in it again it's a great
bodily injury there was some
argument that it that it creates
a high probable it bility of
death or result in serious
disfigurement and it that the
manner I believe it was they
were saying any it's a manner
that can cause the great bodily
injury I think is what the
public defender's talking about
so for example if somebody comes
up to.
This officer in chokes them to
wear that as a manner in which
they could die or manner in
which great bodily harm could be
cost those are the types of
situations that might fall under
the statute but it's agree just
conduct that could kill you and
just doesn't kill you if that
makes sense but there is it to
my knowledge and attempted
murder on a peace officer
charged.
Madam chair representative read
at.
To segue you previously
mentioned being kicked in the
growing and now being choked
could could that be charged
under this even if the officer
didn't suffer great bodily harm
and madam chair no no
Representative that would be
battery on a peace officer and
that is just and at the two in
intentional touching that can
cause physical injury challenge
the authority of the officer and
there's one other problem but it
doesn't fall under that and it's
those are your questions of
officers or spitting on officers
you're kicking them now if you
kick them in the growing and and
it was cost permanent or
temporary disfigurement then it
might jump to that level but
again it all comes down to that
bodily injury of the officer and
whether they used a weapon or
not but Madam chair
representative for you that's my
question what is a deadly weapon
at deadly weapon is defined as
it's any type of weapon that can
cause death or great bodily
injury and they list a lot of an
agency firearms knives whatever
you know the normal things you
think of but it can also be any
type of like object that could
cause death or great bodily
injury he could be hit with a
stick over the head an officer
could be attacked with you know
just any item that's near them a
wrench just any and it's defined
in the jury instruction madam
chair representative you have to
find a jury has to find that
that is a deadly weapon meaning
that as an object that could
cause death or great bodily
injury and so it's a jury
finding and so when you talk
about a deadly weapon and what
is a deadly weapon a lot of
things to be deadly weapons
besides a firearm but again it's
still defined as a deadly weapon
and a jury has to make a finding
Madam chair representative re
because someone's hands or their
knee or hello the concerted
deadly weapon madam chair and no
answer Representative I've never
seen something like that that is
that is more again Madam chair
representative here for degree
battery on a peace officer where
you're heading or sloppy number
elbowing him or something.
Like that that happens all the
time that's a fourth degree
felony so madam chair to read I
I did see a reference and one
analyses that of someone's mouth
was considered a deadly weapon
they they had to be here or some
other communicable disease.
Madam chair representative I've
charged battery on a peace
officer for urinating and
spitting on corrections officers
because they could have a
disease but I've never charged
as an aggravated battery when I
guess if you that madam chair
representative you took your
teeth and that somebody's ear
off and it was a permanent loss
of their here to fire at the
teeth could probably be argued
as a deadly weapon again these
are you're talking about the
type of injury right so Madam
chair representative Ramon that
case you would have to charge
the deadly weapon all because
you would have the grip of the
heart Madam chair representative
exactly it's either or in that
so that you can have great well
you can you can do it in a
manner that is likely to cause
death or great bodily injury
Madam chair representative or
you can use a deadly weapon the
madam chair representative ream
of suppose there's a protest a
protesters holding a sign is
told to leave the area doesn't
gets arrested there's a tussle
that sign is a deadly weapon
this is not Madam chair
representative only if they use
it as a deadly weapon and the
jury finds that it's used to
death as a deadly weapon so
Representative they take the
stick of that final it's a good
it's a metal bar and they hit an
officer upside the head and you
know they're unconscious or have
brain damage sure that could be
a deadly weapon absolutely so
but but madam chair.
Representative remaking your
combining the elements I'm
talking about a situation where
there is no actual harm to the
officer.
What what constitutes a deadly
weapon and it sounds like maybe
it's not a part part.
But pretty much anything else
could be a deadly weapon and
could be charged under this even
without harm to the officer
chair and representative that
would be here for degree battery
on a peace officer charge where
you're just causing injury
challenging their authority your
question it has nothing to do
with the aggravated battery
aggravated battery to a peace
officer has to do with weapons
and causing great bodily harm at
all the.
The more check because you said
Madam chair representative read
almost any object could be a
deadly weapon.
In chair and representative of
you yes you asked me what
objects for deadly weapons and
you said almost any object if
it's using a matter that could
create death or great bodily
injury now for example I don't
know if I could take a hand
sanitizer third at your head I
don't think a jury find that to
be a great at that serious or
dangerous weapon they are
defined specifically the statute
as certain weapons but then
they're also defined as any
object could that could create
death or great bodily injury
could be used as a deadly what
like a vehicle you could try to
run over an officer with the
vehicle and that is actually and
assault with intent you know
assault on a peace officer with
a deadly weapon if they hit the
officer with their car that
would be charged there this
section if they had with a
deadly weapon and the jury found
that a vehicle was a deadly
weapon so they're two separate
when you hit an officer that is
four degree and we're talking
third down wanting to make a
second bid madam chair
Representative read to you have
to come into contact with
officer suppose you have the
the.
Led by he took a swing and miss
madam chair representative
that's an assault so when you
deal with an assault that is a
threat of an immediate battery
which means someone may swing
and economic that you those are
there are statutes for that
battery is an intentional
touching so batteries a touching
assault is a threat of an
immediate battery.
Some insurers a revised agree
that.
During the hand sanitizer
probably won't be enough but.
Throwing a rock probably would
be Madam chair representative it
could be if it was a big rock
and it could kill you and it
does kill people all the time.
Madam chair representative right
I like.
I certainly.
Don't have a problem with
Increasing the ability for
people to use knives and guns.
No problem with that I I'm
concerned about the situation
where.
Someone has an object in their
hand there is a the fiscal rest
there's a tussle.
People come into contact with
each other and it's alleged that
the rock in the hand the stick
in the hand whatever it might be
is a deadly weapon and I think
it qualifies under this and.
Madam chair sorry I'm just I'm
concerned by the so I and madam
chair representative I
understand it but it's very
settled in the long very settled
in the jury instructions that's
a jury question if it is a
deadly weapon that is what the
jury decides it's actually in
the instruction you have to put
the object in there Madam chair
representative and then they
decided to secure if it's a
deadly weapon which is our
democratic system and that's how
it is an all the statutes
whether I do it to you are we do
it to a peace officer or a child
or anything like that.
Madam chair or sorry one more
question I think you said that
the fire would example the no I
think we cover that
it is there a separate
enhancement for using of our.
Madam chair there Representative
there is a fireman hand Smit
that can be filed that requires
a jury finding that the person
used a firearm in the commission
of a felony if the jury finds by
special verdict form that they
used a firearm in the commission
of a felony they can enhance
that by I think that one of to
three years now if I'm not
mistaken that's up to the
prosecutor to decide to file
that that is mandatory time if
the jury finds and if the
prosecutor files in Madam chair
representative ream so that
would take the existing law the
third degree felony and you have
the fireman hand Smit and might
not get you all that we all the
way to second degree felony but
if we get you maybe halfway
madam chair it would baby get
two to six years if the court
decides to impose civil
penalties you have six years
eighty five percent of that
crime you would serve you know
three four years possibly and
madam chair taking into account
that some of these situations we
say shooting somebody in the
hander shooting some of them
that they might not ever bill to
go back to work again I mean my
officer was lucky he was shot in
the hand was able to go back to
work again but if there hand
gets blown off that's just great
bodily injury and their life's
definitely changed madam chair
the plan Representative I
appreciate your questions at the
the point being is this is very
dressed in the law what deadly
weapons are and we're trying to
do is make it clear that
officers are out there
protecting us for our own safety
and it should not be the same
penalty to shoot an officer or
to hurt an officer cause great
bodily harm is it would be for
me to do it to you.
Madam chair representative right
a third degree felony is did you
say three years and second is
nine seconds nine yes Sir in the
enhancement is three it filed if
piled yes Sir the file so
The fireman hand Smit in the
second degree felony you're
going to to ten if I at twelve
to fund sorry.
Madam chair representative yes
if the if the judge sentences to
nine R. member judge always has
the discretion to apply the
fireman Hanson that's mandatory
but she's the judge could also
if it let's say it was a fire
lock and that judge felt that
that wasn't something that
warranted nine years it gives a
judge discretion to sentence to
one year two years or and it
also gives prosecutors the
ability to work out please
depending on the facts and
decide whether to fight fires
file that fireman hand side but
it also deals with the situation
when an officer get shot like in
her situation that's changes
life forever and it's no
different than me shooting you.
If thank you Madam.
The manager moved to pass a
health or one to five okay we
have a motion for do passes are
okay and function for two passed
by Representative Lane second by
Representative Rehm we still
have some questions so I
understand that's okay we'll
hold the both in advance well
Representative Alcon thank you.
Thank you madam chair I listened
and listened and listened and I
remember listening to that same
debate that on many years ago
when we first passed this
legislation making it a third
degree felony.
its statement subject soon thing
we're doing Madam chair
representative the only thing
we're doing and this legislation
is changing that from a third to
a second degree felony right
Madam chair representative Alcon
yes okay so anything else that
is in this legislation has
nothing to do but time.
And with the time factor Madam
chair representative absolutely
everything else as far as what
it takes to prove it is the same
okay thank you I just wanted to
make sure everybody understood
that because I hear I mean we've
we've debated this bill I don't
know how many years ago for
hours and hours and hours and
now I hear the same debate again
but I would do this changing
from wanting me to the other
exactly Representative over that
value in happy to take the
gentleman's motion over there
madam chair.
Anyone else having questions or
wishing to speak on this item
okay would you call the roll
please listen.
Oakland yes Representative
Chasey yes Representative lane
yes.
Mr speaker yes.
Yes Representative Nibert yes
Representative re yes
Representative green yes ma'am
Representative semansky yes.
Madam vice chair yes.
Madam chair yes.
Thank you.
Thank you.
If you want to come of it I have
a lot of experts on this I
guess.
One of the kids.
Appreciate all the experts but
if we could try to keep that for
certain areas and and about ten
issue absolutely it's just it's
actually a very simple building
okay thank you.
All right thank you.
madam chair members of the
committee house bill one fifty
nine what it does is allow video
testimony for misdemeanor Trent
misdemeanor traffic offenses and
misdemeanor offenses
it's but specifically for India
W. why analysts who are
analyzing whether there's a
substance on a misdemeanor case
or misdemeanor charge in their
system what this bill does is it
gives the opportunity to get the
lab analysts to testify via
video subject to cross
examination and this is the same
thing that we have been doing
through COVID
the the big thing about this
bill is we have wanted to I
think lab analysts who could
testify and need to be wise and
and misdemeanor offenses in the
state and they have five
subpoenas today and what we need
to do is keep these analysts in
the lab analyzing and doing
their job so that cases are
getting backed up and so this is
a bill that works of this type
of that testimony via video
worked wonderfully during the
COVID every challenge to it has
stood up illegally in the court
system and so that is the intent
of this bill so I I'd like to
introduce some people that I
have with me I have miss Babcock
she's from the lab if you have
any questions for her Alyssa
Johnson is an expert on the
legal analysis of it and Mr long
and I missed a lot of are both
from the first you just school
district attorney's office to
answer any questions you might
have as far as how this might
move caseloads along faster so I
would first like to departments
Babcock and see if she could
kind of explain the situation
with the labs at this point.
Madam chair members of the
committee.
Thank you for listening to me
today I'm Katerina Babcock the
forensic laboratory director for
the state of New Mexico forensic
laboratories.
Under the department of public
safety and this includes the
Santa Fe forensic lab the Los
crucis forensic lab and the
Hobbs forensic lab.
In Santa Fe we conduct DNA
testing firearms testing we can
print testing and controlled
substances testing.
In Hobbs New Los crucis those
are just drug labs what I have
found over the twenty four years
that I've been at the department
of public safety always at the
forensic laboratory is that
people in the lab or always
spending a lot of time traveling
for court I myself when I used
to work basis my background is
in forensic firearms
identification I did that for
about nineteen years I spent a
lot of time on the road
traveling all over the state
sometimes needing to be in Hobbs
on a Monday and then Farmington
on Wednesday so I'm out of the
lab traveling I'm starting my
travels maybe Sunday.
In Hobbs Monday traveling to
Farmington Tuesday getting to
Farmington spending the night.
Waiting in court Wednesday I may
or may not be back in the lab on
Thursday so what I'd like to
convey today is that all the
scientists which I oversee
probably about around forty
employees scattered throughout
the state they're all in the
same boat and we learned during
comment that it works very well
to be in the lab be in constant
contact with either side whether
it's the prosecution or the
defense and be ready to testify
at any moment.
Thank you.
And madam chair will
differentiate she does this is
not for felonies at this point
this is just for misdemeanors
and D. W. I. analyst because we
believe that testimony is pretty
generic when they testify and
and so that's we're focusing on
it but that is just to give you
an idea of what the lab analysts
face every single day but I
would defer to either Mr long
agency Gardner from the first
initial district attorney's
office Madam chair
representative my name is Julie
there though I'm a deputy
district attorney the first
additional district attorney's
office and I've been prosecuted
of the I. basis for thirteen
years I started in Albuquerque
and now I see practice here in
Santa Fe and I've handled this
immunity to me by phone eighty
W. eyes make your homicide cases
in great bodily injury cases as
I handled it at every damn it
this is a huge bill that would
make everyone's lives so much
easier and potentially in excess
city in terms of bringing that
testimony to the court at every
step.
We've seen analysts be able to
testify at this point in
preliminary hearings and as miss
Babcock said that's a huge help
for it to be by video because
then we can let the witness know
when they are needed to testify
and it's ten minutes notice as
opposed to letting them sit
there the entire day let's get
through the rest of the
testimony and then finally be
able to call them scientific
laboratory division as the
laboratory that handles these
particular tests with respect to
the implied consent act and
today like miss Babcock have
several analysts that are spread
throughout all the point systems
throughout New Mexico and so
they are muted magistrate courts
down south in district courts
here in the north and they
literally have to pick and
choose which the payment they
will comply with because they're
needed everywhere all the same
time and so the ability to have
them testify by video means that
they are able to testify in more
than one point in more than one
morning and that's huge with
respect to what it does in terms
of if there's a breakdown or
it's less effective when you see
them on video they're just as
effective you are able to look
at their demeanor you're able to
hear their inflection there tone
and so it doesn't make any
difference in terms of the
testimony and the relevance and
importance of it to see them on
video as opposed to having them
in front of you in the program
thank you Mr.
and then it and also I would
also add chair that is a huge
cost saver with rural New Mexico
being how far string out it is
and and how far they have to
drive I would also add defer to
Mr Johnson because I know the
big question and I'm just going
to try to nip this right now is
confrontation that's always the
question is is that a
confrontation issue and we've
done a lot of research on that
and and like I said it's gone up
through the courts during COVID
and there hasn't been any issues
from the Supreme Court on this
but I would defer to her with
the case law that we expect to
get asked about.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Elisabeth Johnson
general counsel for the house
Republicans and I'm actually
going to wait until you ask me
questions about the
confrontation clause.
With that would stand for
questions.
Thank you Representative what we
need to get to the audience and
process.
The so those wishing in the
audience to speak in opposition
to this bill please raise your
hand okay
Hello.
Madam chair.
All and the district defender of
the first judicial district for
the law offices of the public
defender and we would stand
opposed to house bill one fifty
nine.
Because the bill provides no
particular reasons for avoiding
in person testament it is
insufficient to overcome the
constitutional mandates by the
New Mexico in the U. S.
constitutions for confrontation.
I can yes it's not have valid
exception to the confrontation
clause according to the New
Mexico case law and so what
would be a past thank you thank
you anyone else in the audience
wishing to speak in opposition I
don't see anyone on going to
online is there anyone online
wishing to speak in opposition
please raise your hand.
I don't see anyone with their
hand race now let's go back to
the audience those wishing to
speak in favor of this bill
please raise your hand.
K. Y. C. one per two people
chief and then.
Okay.
Flamingo I see that.
Where
we have a sector for the yes
part of my responsibility forces
that have allowed to charge we
have three different last across
state of New Mexico.
That that we serve three hundred
agencies across the New Mexico
just last year alone we have
almost twenty thousand pieces
that we process for the state of
New Mexico forces.
This is the best phone support
about this legislation the
support that we provide is it is
a tremendous more workload
addition to all of the actual.
Itself just like everybody else
and actually we have staff tried
to revive investors the state of
Mexico in the space of we will
make sure that we do have to
address head on the W. W. I.
problem in the state at the same
relevant testimony still I
they're still opportune
confrontation through that
process it doesn't necessarily
Does that for still has the
opportunity to make sure that
the challenge testimony from our
experts and for those reasons
Madam asters support.
Thank you chief your next.
Thank you very very very brief
up hello everyone the secretary
said what I had his job for him
up for a little while in
transition that we have and I'm
sure the so he has his
recruiting scientists of the
state of New Mexico to no fault
of of director Matt Clarke
there's pay issues a lot of
other things I think it's a
problem across the country
Representative Chasey mentioned
something earlier about the only
deterrent to crime being swift
of being caught quickly I can't
I'm not as open as you may have
a caught quickly I think this is
one of those things that would
help us and that we don't have
the folks are actually analyzing
DNA analyzing firearms to find
out who fired those who the
suspect is driving around the
state for misdemeanor cases when
they could be doing this via
video so I would also stand for
this bill thank you ma'am thank
you if anyone else in the
audience it's wishing to speak
in favor of the bill.
Okay M. let's go to online is
there anyone online wishing to
speak in favor of the bill
please raise your hand.
Right I don't see anyone raising
their hand the go back to the
sponsor hype it the would you
like to add anything before you
go through more okay.
All right who wishes to speak
up.
Representative Alcon thank you.
There I.
This is about one thing if
somebody gets who gets arrested
for driving while intoxicated do
you live.
And they sign paperwork which is
called the implied consent that
who.
No this is me in the way I'm
reading this assist me when that
person signs that implied
consent act somewhere on there
it says that the analyst can now
appear on video.
I'll defer to so so basically be
implied consent act stands for
the proposition that when you
drive here on the state roads
you deem to give your consent to
law enforcement when they
suspect that you're driving
drunk on and so by your driving
you've already committed to
allowing that consent and of
course there penalties if you
take that back which are the
aggravated charges that come
from D. W. I. so basically if
that part remains in this bill
by you by driving you've given
consent as well to allow that
analysts to testify in on video
but the thing is madam chair I'm
just.
I'm feeling is OK because that I
remember one day in a long long
time ago there I go
we had a case and the
prosecuting attorney out of the
the I decided he wanted to.
People from the lab to come in
and testify.
We could not proceed with the
case because.
Basically.
I believe that's what it was so
we sent limits seven o'clock
when voters and last in the need
to arrive and then she came in
and to the user testimony
I'm not going to the details but
it didn't work anyway testimony
from the end of this did not
work convicted of that guy the
person.
At that so that's the thing the
thing is though that just
because to sign that it is
giving you this it will give
that person does not give up the
right to be for to see or to be
seen.
To see the person that is
basically testified against
them.
And that's where my problem is
because I don't see where the
we're.
I just I just have a problem
state okay so now maybe we can
take it even as fast or maybe
the even the officer doesn't
have to testify because he said
the like the person at.
And we how far can we go on this
can we I I I just I'm having a
problem.
And believe me I understand the
problem having at the lab.
I just tried to find a way to
where if you do this you're
going to have to change the
rating on the paperwork that is
signed by the defendant.
That is charged with a DWI.
And I don't know how to do that
madam chair that's way above me
thank you
madam chair and representative
of all for two and miss Johnson.
Madam chair representative all
close by.
That someone would ask questions
so I studied very hard last
night is that I could answer for
you first of all I want to be
clear that when the signing I
the actor not waiting the price
level which.
So the witnesses there whether
or not that soon or in person so
I want to clarify that before I
proceed to answer question and
then regarding both the
confrontation clauses in the
United States constitution and
also the cost of the New Mexico
constitution courts of relevant
courts the US Supreme Court and
from New Mexico courts have
upheld that there's not a
factors and this keystone reason
why you look
Why there could be a challenge
based on confirmation is
reliability is yes so they went
to a set of factors the lesser
of which is whether you can see
the person they look to things
like
If the defendant retained a full
opportunity to cross examine
whether the judge and jury were
able to view the witness's
demeanor and body by video
monitor we recently had a a case
and the New Mexico court of
appeals where awareness is
wearing a mask and a challenge
was brought because they said I
can't see I can't hear the
witness
and I was actually of health
because they were able the
person was under of which god
gave them the underlying
foundation of reliability in
their testimony I think they
were also able to cross examine
see this pod that this person's
body language
and the four of health that so
hopefully that a little bit of
an answer to that.
Thank you for all this we would
have to the other.
I'm just asking a question.
So I rule him out of working.
All right are at.
Representative Rehm.
Madam chair and Representative
want to go back to one of the
comments that I heard from the
public in I think you touched
partially on it but the
constitutional mandate for
confronting witnesses does this
violate that in any way or can
you comment on that.
Representative Madam chair
representative green that goes
to the comments I just may have
to change Representative call
comes white
No based on a variety of case
law I do not feel that it does
because courts look to a
totality of the circumstances
and whether or not a person is
face to face in the same room
like I'm right here next to
these people this is has been
found by the United States
Supreme Court to not impinge on
the the sixth amendment they
also look to other things like
whether the witnesses under oath
and other touchstones of
reliability so now I do not.
Madam chair and Representative
read.
The analyst or they involved in
any of the observation of the
errant driving.
The traffic stop the field
sobriety test the actual rest
the actual taking of the breast
sample they involved in any of
that Madam I guess Madam via
vice chair and representative
Reno the you always will have to
have your officer present this
is specifically for analysts and
the officers one who observes in
would testify to all that my
understanding and I'll defer to
my experts who prosecutes
internet to be wise you would
basically have an analyst it's a
very simple yes and they also
replace repeatedly with legal
designees at it's just showing a
little kind of I'll write and
I'll defer to the experts for
that right so the state would
still I'm sorry madam vice chair
prepped vice chair
representative so it the state
would still be required to call
the law enforcement officer who
as of this writing officer or
officers who they're the driving
behaviour and saw the signs of
impairment who performed and
deserves to standardized field
sobriety test and and you know
did the rest and then where the
analyst comes in is if the
person is submitting to a blood
test than the scientific
laboratory division analysts
would come in and talk about the
testing about actual blood
sample and what what assessors
found and what those quantities
mean and so you would still be
able to effectively cross
examine them they would still be
present just be a video and you
would ask many questions that
would challenge the results of
those blood tests and madam
chair an expert this is done us
some time passed the arrests the
arrangement all that it's it's
some past.
Is that correct.
That will Representative are
chair representative and I think
I'm the question asking is have
we been doing this for awhile
and during COVID we've been
doing preliminary hearings
they're subject to all the rules
of evidence and cross
examinations via video hit
telephone we've been doing on so
many hearings via video and ones
that have cross examination
probation violation hearings
again these are on felonies to
and we're just talking about
misdemeanor D. W. Y. analysts at
this point.
Madam chair I think that clear
to clear it up I'm going to ask
if we were doing acting COVID
now want to make that point
clear that the analyst is not
involved in any of the arrest
portion they just simply have a
sample and testing that and
madam chair and Representative
read they actually also work for
SLT they don't even work for the
state so they're neutral witness
they don't work and I'm sure she
admits Babcock confirmed they
detest is not work for the state
more SLT.
Thank you for the DA's offices I
guess I should say madam chair
members of the committee.
The forensic laboratory is under
the umbrella of the state of New
Mexico department of public
safety however we are not law
enforcement and we provide
independent independent forensic
unbiased analysis.
of all cases.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative there's
one Representative at your she's
got my list yes Representative
Casey of.
Electors Mr.
Okay thank you madam chair
Representative review have a you
should have a copy of our
committee analysis and of.
The new a little concerned about
making sure that the this
complies with the Supreme Court
case of Craig but just some
technical issues the AOC
suggests and I think it's a good
suggestion that you described
the analyst and you have been
part of it but not the whole
part as a laboratory analysts
because there are other types of
analysts that
Might somehow be captured here
that aren't cool you really
trying to deal with and
then there's if.
Sure that I agree with this but
it says that
Garcia.
Page two twenty four twenty five
the page three lines one through
three.
Duplicate the language on page
one lines eighteen through
twenty five and and that is a
new material so it's possible
that it does but I wonder if you
know like to clean it up if this
is
If this is in fact the.
Would you mind taking a look at
that federal money and I and
madam chair Representative
Chasey we've looked at this and
I think the difference is and
and I know that this is.
These two areas.
Madam chair representative.
Read those lines and.
And okay Madam chair of the and
representative.
It says that on.
On page two paragraphs State
lines twenty four twenty five
and then that all of the lines
at the top of page three
duplicate the language on page
one lines eighteen through
twenty five.
It is all new material for for
sure.
Amending a different section
there.
Representative Casey I think it
almost exactly duplicates
language but doesn't quite and
the purpose of the new
subsection C. in section two is
to explain that a defendant
doesn't get to objectify just
because a witness is our.
To object sorry.
Or objectified but this
Just because of a witness.
During remote.
Madam chair at representatives
like and basically it takes away
that ability for them to claim
that they I want them their
person they can object.
And and I'll defer to my experts
on that too Madam chair
representative Jesse so the
first part of that is talking
about her a is talking about
that that person consents to the
chemical test percent implied
consent act when they drive on
the road to New Mexico
subsection C. is talking about
the analysts has defined by
video and that consent given by
doing the driving so they're
they're talking about consent
for different things.
insurance though just off the
top of my head read it that way
because it says the new material
is the video parents
not about.
Implied consent.
What about describing the list
as a laboratory analyst you done
that chair representative and
and subsection C..
Page one twenty four on page two
and then.
Don't use laboratory in front of
to describe our lowest lines
twenty five or.
Line two on page three.
Madam chair representative so on
my twenty five if a laboratory
analyst is subpoenaed to testify
in a court proceeding about
Kimmel contesting that analyst I
would say for a fact to be in a
laboratory analyst because it's
in the same it's in the same
paragraph
I I don't believe and I and our
I see okay sees suggestion and
refer to it as a laboratory
analyst but it also picks up.
Me and we could.
This we could read that in very
simply if that's I'm not sure if
it's necessary to.
But if the madam chair if you
would like this experience
explained the Craig situation
we're prepared to do that okay
Montoya thanks I'd appreciate
it.
I'll defer to Mr Johnson.
I'm here Representative Chasey I
like I said it's been a lot of
time last night looking into
this because I too was concerned
that this I wanted to be certain
that this complied with the
credit decision and.
In my analysis there were a
couple of key points the first
is that the correct decision
explicitly state that whether or
not you are face to face in the
same room with the person that's
not the touched on that's not
the tax so that's important to
understand for explaining yes
but the current tests that the
state must show that it has a
sufficiently important interests
to justify the use of an
alternate procedure
it was mentioned briefly in
public comment that convenience
is not just us sufficiently
important first actually agree
with that
which is why I believe the
interests are a a position C.
and B. R. public health interest
so pertaining to efficiency the
reason I think that this is our
biggest interest is because of
patients the is actually
mentioned in the sixth amendment
as well as being public trials
mentioned right before your
right to confront witnesses so
in my mind there are legal foot
second I I also believe that we
do have a public health interest
if you go to the courts website
you will see currently verbatim
it right for community safety
for six please do not come to
court before attending a court
proceedings please contact the
party was asked to testify and
find out whether the hearing is
happening by video slash phone
or in person and whether you're
tenants a still fire so I think
there are a couple reasons in my
mind PNC is is stronger than the
public health.
concern but I do believe it
comprises.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative Romero.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative I'm.
Just batting this around in my
brain from like confrontation to
and being able to confront the
process of testing and the need
to do that I think New Mexico
set the precedent for being able
to ensure that the lab techs
were in person nationally and so
for me I'm concerned that that
not having that in person
version and I and this is more
so on the witness side I suppose
are we allowing for witness
testimony in lieu of having in
person witnesses.
And and any of these court
proceedings to your knowledge
madam chair representative madam
chair representative of this is
just specifically to this area
I've had a lot of conversations
with our Supreme Court justices
on this talk to them about is
with this hold up and and and
I've got the impression from and
that this is something we need
to give a try to and that they
were fully in support of it is a
huge cost saving cases have gone
up there I've I I've had serious
conversations with them about
whether this is something that
they see getting reversed and
you know maybe maybe it does
down the road but I I think this
is the first step in seeing you
know how this is going to be
handled on a witness it is not
extremely essential as far as
you know cross examining them in
person we're not talking about a
child or a expert on a felony
rape case or the DNA analysis
we're talking about A. D. W. I.
analyst with SLT and the fact is
I mean it will it will increase
the efficiency of these district
attorneys offices to get these
cases heard defendants are just
sitting around getting their
cases you know Pat that
postponed prosecutors I haven't
even decided they can use
analyst because she's got five
subpoenas in a cycle sometimes
you just got to go and then you
just have to get the analysts
and that's not fair to the
public when you can't per you
know find all the facts of your
case so I feel that it's not
being done we were doing it
through COVID on pre lives and
things like that but I don't see
this is going to be happening on
a felony jury trial unless both
party stipulate you know that
the witness can appear
telephonically this is just for
misdemeanors and D. W. I.
analysis so that said madam
chair thank you for for the the
the interest in that but I am
concerned that the efficiency
side is only on the part of the
government's case verses the
person being tried right because
they're saying if we want to
have that witness available and
made available the efficiency
part is on the government side
right so not necessarily the
speedy trial being of interest
if you just want to get that
witness and.
Person to be able to describe
the test how went into that
because this deals with their
rights right and that's why we
have that standard in place and
so I'm concerned that
the that it's one sided it from
the efficiency argument
madam chairman chair and then
vice chair it it's sufficient
for the prosecutor but it's
sufficient for the defendant to
sit around and wait for their
case for eight or nine months
I I don't believe that any of
them want that and if they do
want it it's totally strategic
because I want this what this
not to be able to appear and the
case to go bad everybody knows a
longer case weights around the
witnesses are Los analyst move
you know you can't get the
annals there for trial and it
and it's it's not good for the
public it's not good for the
defendants it's not good for
victims and certainly not good
for the DA's office I understand
why the public tenders one
oppose it because every I mean
with all due respect the longer
case lingers out there the worst
the case becomes so I just Madam
chair madam by chair I just
don't believe that that this
infringes on any confrontation
Rights the case law supports us
I'm getting good feedback from
the judges we've been doing it
we're gonna save a ton of money
we're gonna let our analysts be
in the lab instead of driving
all the way to Clovis and then
driving all the way to
Farmington the next day and and
cases are going to move along
and that's what we want so I
hope that answers your question
and and I definitely understand
your concern I don't disagree
with the promise of of the
efficiency and the need I don't
disagree with that at all I
think there's a to align to tow
the my issue with it I think and
heartburn is being able to
inform the accused as to whether
or not they have the option to
happen to actually confront
right because we're saying it's
efficient on one side but if
they perhaps had a important to
say I I just want to take this
box to do it telephonically
verses have in person I think
there might be like.
a discretionary version of that
for the person to be able to
access that right verses opting
apla you there's no opt out
right there's no opt out in this
situation there is done and and
because they will opt out and we
will be in the same position
that everybody's in right now
unfortunately in and madam chair
madam vice chair it's working
now we're doing it now and it's
working and the judges are
allowing it and its building up
held in the court so I think
this is an opportunity for us to
actually help the lab help all
parties and save a lot of money
and travel with that a bill like
this and it's a great time to
present it and and and get this
through and and see what happens
I am very confident madam
chairman vice chair that this is
something that I believe will be
held up based on the research
we've done and the conversations
I've had with different judges
Madam chair representative I
think that just addresses my
concern because if they want to
opt out opt out then it is not
in their best interest to try to
do this on the efficiency side
is not equal because if there is
that.
You know inability to at least
have I I think the option is
good I think if there was a
compromise on being able to
enact this to say here your
rights and you can also opt into
having this analyst you know
here all the reasons
I don't I disagree with your
read of the case law I think it
if it favors the in person and I
think president favors in person
and so I'm just I'm concerned
that I think this is a great
opportunity to try something but
not without the discretion of
the accused to be able to do
something else if they choose
madam chairman by percentages
would change nothing at this
point and this is this would
change nothing it will be the
same as it always has been and
so I mean if we don't want to
change how it is or or try to
move forward from where we've
come from COVID and all the
technology that is available
that the court to spend money on
for situations just like this I
mean yeah if if this isn't pass
we will just be where we were
and I understand your concerns I
appreciate the question and and
madam chair if there was a an
opportunity to amend the implied
consent verses giving consent I
think I'd be open to something
like that but at this point I
can't support thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Representative I too
am concerned about the implied
consent piece
and I'm also concerned that
judges are giving your opinions
about how they're gonna rule and
I hope maybe a mis understanding
what you're saying because that
makes me very uneasy to be
thinking that we're fund manager
at it's just basically bouncing
ideas off of you know different
legal people that I run into and
at there's a confrontation issue
were this is something that
might possibly work.
But I'm also chair looking at
what is working in the K. in the
spring courts and they have not
rejected any of these cases at
this point since COVID.
Yes and I there may be a
difference it I'm just about to
call there may be a difference
in terms of in an emergency
state versus a non emergency
state which I believe will will
likely be out of New April and
I'm thinking I I was intrigued
by the idea that we're hanging
our hat on
ideas notices that the courts
are giving about being careful
coming in if you're sick and and
so on and so forth which is one
of the rationales that I heard
as as some as a justification so
that's going to go away and and
I think it's going to go away
pretty soon.
Yeah and then we can be very
cynical about that it in
appropriately so maybe so
it's going to happen that order
is going to expire and so I
think we
That that rationale is not
nearly as significant as it
might be it
When the times are changing so
if the somebody wish any other
comments okay happy to entertain
a motion.
Do I have I don't think the do
pass on house bill one fifty
nine.
And also.
a motion for two passed by
Representative every night Burt
and seconded by Representative
Rehm.
Would you call the roll please
listen Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane yes.
Mr speaker is.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert yes.
Representative read yes
Representative green yes
Representative.
Representative said Penske.
Madam vice chair no.
Madam chair no.
By a vote of six to three we
have a to pass on house bill one
million.
Thank you.
Friday afternoon.
Yeah.
Help you out there cones.
It wasn't six to four I.
For ages.
By the three.
I have for those so it it's it's
six four six.
That.
Okay good.
Okay.
All right.
Representative L. come on yes we
are on your house bill one oh
six increase public employee
pension maximum thank you madam
chair house bill one oh six is
the relating to public pensions
and it increases the maximum
maximum amount of pension a
pension that a members promoted
permitted to earn pursuant to
the public employee retirement
that I'm going to do madam chair
it because the gentleman here on
my right.
Most everything.
I'm gonna have him explain it to
you and I'll have the money to
do some self to the.
Okay.
Thank you madam chair members
agree to do with the P. R. A.
just because there are board it
did not take a position on this
bill but I will explain it to
answer any technical questions.
Currently the forty two year one
of general state employee under
para they can work and earn up
to ninety percent of their their
their final average salary of
today that takes about thirty
years what Representative
o'quinn's builders is it would
incentivize people to stay on
longer gaining an additional
three percent per year if if
somebody chose to stay on thirty
three years and four months they
would be eligible to earn up to
a hundred percent of their
pension and and for pensions in
general madam chairman long
careers are positive the longer
remember putting into the
pension fund that money the
longer to vested and the shorter
duration they are taking out
from the pension fund and and we
we have a number of plans but
happy to answer any specifics of
committee may have madam chair.
Just to add madam chair last
year was a rough year in the
house labor we went through I
don't know how many pension
bills and this was the only bill
that we were able to put
together to have both the
agencies and the unions were in
agreement it's kinda like
finally we found something that
we couldn't get it done because
we ran out of time.
So with that madam chair we
would stand for questions thank
you Representative quickly I'll
go to the audience anyone in the
audience opposing this bill.
Anyone online opposing this bill
please raise your hand from.
On those in the audience in
favor of the bill please raise
your hand yes secretary.
Committee.
More public.
And I want to talk.
Seven five of the recruit.
State
of the.
Have.
Reporter.
The law enforcement dispatchers
people grants management make
sure funding goes up for we have
a list to be able to do their
work and ensure
I was crying with respect to
the instructor for the national
offer from cash.
Only a directors you name it and
so.
Legislation in that with Senator
by Jane.
This bill one of six people
cases.
The government.
Bills the Senate bill one twenty
four and one component that she.
As part of the yes.
Thank you anyone else in the
audience wishing to speak in
favor of the bill.
Going on line
I see hands Josh Anderson.
Josh.
I'm here thank you madam chair
members of the committee Josh
Anderson with us Council
eighteen
we fully support this type of
proposal to invest in our
current workers and incentivize
them to stay longer I think the
worst thing we can do is is find
ways to to incentivize people
not to stay when we have caps
lower than the hundred percent
that this bill proposes a so we
fully support this we think this
is a great way to recruit not
it's not district but retain our
current workers across all
sectors of government including
city and county and I also want
to I can't member everyone to
sign on to this bill as it moved
out house labor I know
Representative reading had a
similar bill we just want to
thank him as well and of course
the chairman and all the other
Sanchez for for joining this
this is a good bipartisan bills
and we urge the committee
support thank you madam chair
thank you John Lipschutz.
Thank you madam chair members of
Canadian journalists use with
The New Mexico federation of
labor I as for all the reasons
stated by my colleague Josh
Anderson we stand in strong
support of this bill we
definitely applaud the Sanchez
for bringing this and as again
just to reiterate this is a very
good measure to help with
recruiting and retention I know
there's been a lot of talk about
that this session and and a lot
of different ideas but this is
one that I'm glad that everybody
could come together on an agreed
that we believe that this will
sincerely help those efforts so
thank you very much and we urge
you to support.
Thank you John and I think
that's everyone online so go
back to the sponsor the of any
final comments before we.
Before we madam chair which was
good Representative Rehm I think
you want to speak yes madam
chair I move to pass okay is
there anyone wanting to speak
not wishing to stifle debate.
Representative McQueen and than
I ever.
The left side would like to
speak okay.
Madam chair of.
Madam chair person come a third
So thank you if you read through
the bill just changes ninety two
hundred but can you explain to
me how the math works how do you
get two hundred and how does it
you were were not just changing
then point.
You still have to work for to
get there is that correct and
just explain me how that works
being that not a state employee.
Yes it's just the use state
police for him that's probably
the easiest one Mr chairman and
Representative so for each year
re instate workers just like a
state police member each year
they work they get three percent
of what's are called their final
average salary the most plans
that's a thirty six consecutive
months of salary so right now
the law allows you to work
thirty years to earn ninety
percent of whatever that final
average salary is this would
allow you to go beyond that to
the hundred percent and in most
plans that would be thirty three
years and four months that they
would have to work to get that
hundred percent.
In the chair representative
expert I just.
So you're you're building up
service credits.
To get fully vested and the like
each each year is a year or two
it's a percentage Mr chairman
and Representative McQueen S.
each each year you work you earn
three percent.
So so you know if you get to
thirty years you've earned
ninety percent of that salary so
if you wanted to go to the
hundred percent for each year
you work beyond the thirty years
you get three percent on top of
that until you hit the hundred
percent than that then it's
capped it so so madam chair
Representative expert its the
three percent by the times the
number of years so.
Currently you Max out the three
percent of thirty that's ninety
and it's B. three times thirty
three in the third to get to a
hundred okay.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative Nibert thank you
madam chair just one question
does this
Have any impact on the.
The financial status of the
retirement funds is it going to
make it to where we are.
Further behind.
Or does it help bring us closer
to where we need where we're
trying to get madam chair and
representative Nibert so there
is an immediate financial into
the fund right now when we do
our valuations which we do
annually we don't project
anybody working anybody getting
a pension more than ninety
percent so now that we are going
to dissipate potentially in the
future paying up to a hundred
People to stay on longer.
As those contributions coming
over time that he goes away but
we will have a one time hit in
our next valuation.
So Madam chair representative Mr
trio the.
The here is a mathematical hip
not an actual actual hit and.
As people work longer to get the
hundred percent that additional
money coming and will account
for the additional retirement
that they may receive lighter.
Down the road after their
retirement madam chairman
representative Nibert to exactly
as as that money comes in to the
fund for a longer period of time
exactly what you said it works
away that first time it.
And so madam chair
representative mystery a would
would you consider this to be
somewhat neutral then and in the
actual
What you would anticipate to be
the actual occurrence
Madam chair representative
Nibert I'm I'm hopeful it's
actually can be slightly
positive once it's fully
implemented thank you very much
that's all I have chair one
question.
I
have a photo there is an option
but I just want to ask a
question so is this gonna says
file those folks who won't
return to work since we're okay
so we're keeping people longer
but then if we have a return to
work policy they'll want to
leave so they can get double
salary okay I know that's a
little off topic but I just want
to point out there we might have
competing goals happening here I
think this one's great I think
it's good we want to keep people
working but and there's another
goal that we might be hearing
about eventually I don't know
what the status of some of those
bills but let's see how that all
plays out we have a motion on
the table a do pass motion on
the paper table the soul you
called.
Representative Alcon yes.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane yes.
Mr speaker.
Representative McQueen yes
Representative nightmare yes.
Representative read yes
Representative green yes ma'am.
Representative Bensky.
Madam vice chair just.
Madam chair.
Yes.
Thank.
the last one.
I don't see anyone.
We're done in the we are not
meeting this meeting this
weekend and we will be meeting
on Monday are after the floor
session and it could be we have
a fairly hefty agenda to speak
