Representative Cook.
Mr speaker.
Yes I'm here and I see
representative Armstrong church
well yes yes I'm here.
Representative.
Here
Representative McQueen.
Here.
Representative Nibert.
Here.
Representative.
Representative Rehm.
Click
here.
Present as well members you
received another
Revised agenda the sponsors of
house bill two eleven asked us
to roll it again.
That's the only reason we have
been rolling eight eight.
And so it is not our first item
any longer our second I don't.
Are now first item is house bill
two twenty three representative
Thompson and I see that she is
with us and I do have a experts
you need representative Thompson
no madam chair okay we'll go
ahead and okay.
you did cut out for a minute so
I just want to clarify you said
it was to eleven that was being
rolled at the request of sponsor
Representative Dow correct.
Right but there are multiple
Sanchez but it's Representative
job who's been making the
request okay you just jumbled up
for a little bit with their
cameras I want to make sure we
said that clearly that to eleven
was not being heard today thank
you madam chair turned my camera
off and to be sure that I can
properly preside here thank you
go ahead representative Thompson
thank you madam chair and
members of the committee good
Monday morning so house bill two
twenty three is a bill I've been
caring for several years and now
I don't know why I can't get
past but I'm hoping this is the
year so what it does madam chair
is create a registry in that do
you have the system so that when
an officer runs a license plate
that they're going to pull the
car over it will pop up that the
driver or a regular passenger
may have a disability that may
make communication difficult
this could include things like
autism spectrum disorders
deafness
a seizure disorder that's
exacerbated by flashing lights a
brain injury and and I have
spoken with quite a few law
enforcement officers on this and
essentially they're they're
taking as the more information
we have the better and and as
you all know I have a son with
autism who does not follow
commands but there were the
that's the story that really
made me decide this needed to be
done well there's a couple I
have a lot of deference and I
asked them when when when you
get stopped by the police what's
the first thing you do and I say
well I reach into my pocket to
get out the car that says that
I'm deaf and I just had visions
of hands up hands up hands up
and you're reaching in your
pocket because you don't hear
and then the other story is I
have a friend who has a son who
has autism who's older than my
son and his brother was his
caretaker the brother had picked
him up after work and they were
rushing home because the brother
with autism had to go to the.
Bathrobe and so they were
speeding and they got stopped
and when the police stopped them
the brother with autism stop
building with the bathroom he
jumped out of the car and ran
and the police drew their
weapons and luckily the younger
brother who was the caretaker
with screaming he's got autism
he's just going to the bathroom
and nothing bad happened but it
could have I'm and so I just
want to keep as many people as
possible thank during the
traffic stop so that's
essentially all this bill does
them with that I stand for
questions.
Let's do a quick call let's to.
Fifteen seconds all of the
audience and see if we have
people here in favor or in
opposition to house bill two
twenty three.
And if you will start that now I
had folks.
Okay thank you very much we have
five people in favor none in
opposition and let me see if
there's anyone who would like to
speak.
In favor of the bill.
I don't see any hands out yes we
do Ellen pines.
Go ahead.
Thank you madam chair took me a
moment to get on muted Ellen
pine speaking on behalf of the
disability coalition and we
stand in strong support of this
bill a lack of understanding and
knowledge about who the police
are dealing with can lead to
very traumatic situations and
sometimes even fatal ones this
will be protective of persons
with disabilities who whether
it's because of deafness or
other disabilities can't hear or
can't understand or can't comply
with police commands this will
be very protective of them but
it's also protective of the
police because no police officer
wants to find out that year she
shot somebody and possibly even
killed somebody simply because
they could not hear or
understand the command so we are
just part of the bill thank you.
Thank you I'm Jim Jackson.
I thank you madam chair Jim
Jackson for disability rights
New Mexico we also support this
bill for the reasons that the
agency finds any of sponsors of
the bill have outlined it's a
voluntary registry but it could
make a really important
difference for a of people with
communication issues or other
kind of behavioral issues and we
encourage the committee support
thank you.
Okay that is our public comment
on we'll go back now to the
committee and first I have
Representative McQueen.
Representative thank you madam
chair.
Madam chair of Representative
Thomson
Does that work so for example an
officer pulls someone over at I
would imagine the type of the
license plate and you get a
profile and it would just
automatically appear on that
profile.
Madam chair and Representative
McQueen yes that's it so what
when you register your car there
will be a place where you can
check a box and it will state
either the driver or passenger
may have and then there's a list
of conditions that you can check
and you have to provide medical
documentation to the department
and so that when the officer
runs the license plate it you
know the things will come up
what the cars registered to
those you know what what.
I'm not exactly sure what kind
of information comes up but
something will pop up that says
that a passenger may have autism
or the drivers staff or
something along those lines so
that they will just have that
piece of information along with
all the other information they
get.
So I'm just I guess reiterate
Madam chair representative
Thompson it would be a second
step it would just be part of
what they're already doing and
they just get a little of the
additional line item of
information is relevant.
Madam chair and Representative
McQueen exactly okay thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative.
Representative Alcon.
Thank you madam chair is.
Representative Townsend yes I'm
just wondering.
Why it would be done on a
person's ID or driver's license
instead of the vehicle.
Madam dot com the officer if the
officers yet let's say they
think this car stolen and
they're screaming hands up hands
up get out of the car and your
staff.
There's no chance to look at the
driver's license this is this is
to give them information before
they ever leave their car.
Okay thank you madam chair.
Representative Madam baster.
And madam chair for ready I'd
like to move and you pass on H.
B. two twenty three.
Second.
We have a motion for to pass in
the second I had just had one
question
Representative Thomson is
involuntary are the
applications.
You madam chair it is one
hundred percent voluntary.
Here again and representative
Armstrong question thank you
madam chair and representative I
just have one question also can
you register a usual passengers
in the vehicle or is it just the
owner or
Have to be a usual driver like
the example of your friend it
was a passenger in the car that
got up and ran can you register
usual passengers yes yes madam
chair you can and I think it
will be my son is now in a group
home I think it would be very
helpful for them to be able to
get the people that they drive
in their in their house they and
and so yes the the path it's a
regular password I mean I saw on
one of the analysis you know how
could you possibly know who's
gonna be in the car well you
don't but my son rights and well
we used to when he lived with us
he wrote in our cars all the
time so you can you can add a
passenger.
Thank you thank you madam chair.
Thank you I don't see how.
Then vice chair did you did you
have any questions right you're
just making a motion all right
let's call the roll face we have
a proper motion.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Cook yes.
Mr speaker yes.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Lewis.
Yes.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative Nibert.
Yes.
Representative Rehm yes.
Representative Townsend yes.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Yes.
Twelve zero two passed house
bill two to three.
Thank you very much thank you
representative Thompson thank
you madam chair members of the
committee.
Next we have Representative
Harper and Eli.
House bill two seventy six.
Thank you madam chair are you
ready.
We are.
Right well up first thank you
it's a.
Privilege to be in front of your
committee I don't often comes
here
but when I do we always make me
feel welcome so thank you for
that.
So.
This this house bill
I'd like to first say that it is
not a partisan issue in my mind.
I like to share a couple stories
that perhaps highlight this this
fact.
The first.
Shortly after the election some
supporters of president trump.
made a scene in New York by
protesting outside the homes of
governor Andrew Cuomo.
And former secretary of state
Hillary Clinton.
I don't remember to click Nibert
said I'm sad for the Clintons I
feel like they can't win I feel
like you're being targeted.
Of course the secret service
will keep them safe I just think
it's beyond the pale it's like
where are we going with this it
just keeps getting ratchet up
more and more.
And the the former first
daughter Chelsea Clinton tweeted
at five oh three that night that
trump supporters outside returns
home shouting lock her up.
So that's that's an example of
our.
Protest yet Democrats homes.
Here's another example the
opposite sex scenario.
Republican senator Josh Hawley
Missouri.
I was not at home it is two boys
were gone but his wife Erin
Holly and our infant daughter
Abigail we're home.
When a group came to protest
them.
For his plans to challenge the
electoral college results.
You're chanting shame on you and
other things and one point Erin
Hawley opens the front door
asked protesters to leave she
says we've got neighbors and a
baby thank you.
Just as fear for close the door
locked.
Well after that point of course
the protesters that we've just
started shouting come out come
out.
And she was very frightened.
That's.
One one other simple maybe not
participating artists and I'm
not sure.
This.
Just have a couple months ago in
Salt Lake City Dr Angela Dawn
who is our the state attorney
all just and it's been the face
of the Corona virus epidemic in
Utah.
guiding the public policymakers
and and such well her home
address was shared online.
More by group called Utahns for
medical freedom.
And yes people shot outside her
solar city home with signs in a
protester in the morning and at
night on this particular day.
They showed up your matched by
solar city police officer who
informed the signs violated city
ordinance.
They could protest as long as
they're not targeting any
specific helps you Sir.
Right there are so there are
signs of leaving and then later
that evening when the second
round came they decided to a
protest outside the neighborhood
stemmed from her home.
So I read this I thought to
myself what so.
Maybe there is a solution to
this problem.
And
Sure one otherwise from the
story I think is important so
mark Cronin who is a neighbor
came across the protesters
walking his dog in front of
them.
wasn't surprised this is
happening based on political
division but we believe people
showing up at Dunn's home was
crossing the line.
This is supposed to be someone
sanctuary I mean protest for the
capital government buildings
where the public places but not
for a person's house.
That's just wrong.
But the real reason I'm I'm
bringing this bill forward madam
chair committee members this
happened in Rio Rancho here
recently.
neighborhood not too far from
mine there is just a sweet old
retired couple.
and they were.
The flying the flag in the yard.
And that resulted in an
organized protest every week for
about four weeks from our home
and my organized I mean like
they brought food
you know.
And and then when this got out
protesters of the protesters
showed up.
And the protesters the
protesters were hard.
And so you can see how this
could all the sun escalate to
something very dangerous.
And so are.
Madam chair members to me this
this bill addresses that by
defining targeted residential
picketing.
And making it a misdemeanor.
with that Center like to head
over to my co sponsor
Representative Eli
madam chair members of the
committee I was asked the
questions all respond to it no I
do not hate the first amendment.
I I do have to tell you that
I am a lucky that my father is
still alive and that when
Representative Harper proche me
about this idea the first person
I called was my father because
he was the first executive
director in Arizona of the ACLU
it was their attorney.
And so I asked him a question
you know what I mean what do you
think this this seems reasonably
tailored and
my father is you know not wise
and all things but certainly in
this area wise and all things
and
this is a bill that has one is
carefully tailored to the danger
that's present without
restricting the public's access
to our complaint in the public
square about public officials
people are trapped in their
homes and this becomes a
different situation this becomes
dangerous.
And states are starting to
respond to this so I do
recognize the concerns and I
will say that Representative
Harper and I have really
benefited from the committee
analysis are both in the prior
committee and this committee and
those changes just keep getting
better so for example this
committee analysis talked about
the definition of pick a thing
we need to tighten that up so
you should have in front of you
I hope you do yeah I realize
this is last minute and I want
to explain this to you the point
two version of the house
Judiciary Committee subsidy what
would have been in your packet
this morning is the point one
version so this just came so the
difference is is the definition
of picketing which I would like
to read you know because there
is so much you know our
confusion and what's going on so
this is pretty short I want the
public to know so section she is
now amended to read as using the
staff from ticketing means a
person's presence intended to
apprised the targeted individual
target households locally or by
expanding a margin with the sign
banner sound application device
or other means of an opinion or
message and so madam chair
members the committee of we are
willing as Sanchez to take any
suggestion and so and we have
demonstrated that we will be
incorporating those we're not
recognizing this is a balance
between a what what is a
legitimate public policy and
that is protecting a particular
elected officials frankly but
others who are involved in the
public square from harassment
communication which the first
amendment does not support.
While at the same time allowing
people to be in the public
square and complaining about
the policies and actions and
everything else and so we hope
we struck that balance but as
always we benefit from our
members particularly this
committee of judiciary and these
types of issues and with that I
will turn it back over madam
chair representative Harper.
May I just ask a question
Representative.
Yes hi.
We have a committee zoom which
was what was said to us but what
we're are you making the change
or where will the change being
in another yes madam chair so
when you ate you do of the
committees and then
Representative Harper and I saw
the committee analysis and I
talked to Representative harbor
this morning and suggested that
because I know madam chair that
you do not want to have quite
correctly amendments to
committee stops so rather than
try to one man that and put in a
an amendment which would change
paragraph see the definition of
picketing are we adopted what
the committee analyst are
proposed in terms of the
definition of picketing that's
the change is we redefined the
definition of picketing in the
point two version.
I hope that madam chair answers
your question.
So do we have.
The point to that we have is
correct or do we not have a
point.
No yes you should now have to.
You said correct and I gave you
two choices so I'm
so so madam chair if I could
just very clearly the point one
the definition of protest and.
Included a price the public.
And the committee analysts
recommended we think it's a
great change to strike across
the public.
And to replace it was.
Apprise the individual or the
household are let's see what was
the exact language.
Hi to target individual targeted
household yes so that that is
the change that the point two
has over the point.
We actually have a point to it's
just that the analysis is not on
the point to is that what you're
telling me.
Okay yes the I get that yeah.
So that's the only difference to
the point one.
So are you ready for me to go to
the audience and you did explain
this so that it might affect
public comment right.
Let's see what the first we'll
do a quick pull
I think probably ten seconds
we'll do an ominous.
Try to reduce everything given
are on appreciated timelines
here so let's go with.
Still to seven.
ever say yes those opposed say
now let's see how that works.
Okay we have
Two in support and to care for
in opposition.
And so let me go ahead and take
public comment.
Would you raise your hand please
if you'd like to make public
comment there's two enough
people I'm not going to divide
you up Rikki Lee Chavez.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Rikki Lee Chavez
on behalf of the New Mexico
called defense lawyers
association we do stand in
opposition to the bill we
appreciate the Sanchez work on
this and this opposition is in
no way are meant to disregard or
disrespect those who serve in
public office and we appreciate
that however we do oppose the
creation of new crimes we
believe that our criminal
justice system has another
opportunity in the code as it
stands for such things to be
addressed and for those reasons
we respectfully oppose thank you
madam chair members.
Do you have any other public
comment.
I don't see any other hands
raised but I do have a lot of
has raised on the committee so
let me go back to the committee.
And let me make sure I've got
people in order.
First I have Representative
Armstrong.
Thank thank you madam chair and
thank you Representative for for
bringing this as as someone
who's been sort of the victim
and or a potential victim of
this I appreciate it I'll tell
you what that sort of machines
two years ago and twenty
nineteen
no one stayed around and
picketed but they did put signs
in my yard so
Specifically targeting me and
and opposition I was taking on.
On legislation and that was very
very negative and it was enough
to scare my family.
And and myself is such that I
had previously felt the
constituent constituents should
know where I live in the
district and I just have since
then removed all my personal
contact information got a PO
box.
On this time around with with
three doing the same legislation
had police around when those
bills were being heard us so
that they could watch for
picketing or negative activity
got a camera installed more
locks on my fences it's other
it's very real and very scary
and
So I I assume had someone been
caught on camera putting that
sign believing that sign in my
yard they could have been
charge of trespassing as opposed
to picketing but still
this is it happens it's real
it's scary and I just want to
thank you Representative for
bringing it forward thank you
thank you madam chair.
Next hi Representative Alcon.
I would choose me for last I'd
like to see the with the legal.
People say okay great.
Next I have Representative
McQueen.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair representative the.
So my first question you
actually already fixed and that
was the the property line versus
the structure and this comes up
In our prohibition on Campina at
the building sites.
because I mean you could be the
you know if you're voting in the
like high school gymnasium
you'll be a long way from the
actual property line so
if you want to set up in the
parking lot or something.
That becomes an issue
yes this is this is a tricky
issue because of the first
amendment issues.
And then I think about.
You know where are.
And I think about the fact that
you know I have been targeted
But I know you know someone was
driving around my neighborhood
looking for my house.
That makes me nervous and I know
that prior to the start of the
session
of the council service took down
all of our home addresses.
Because of security concerns.
And I know if you really you can
find those things that makes me
nervous but
On the other hand you know I
think my question on the on your
draft is the hundred feet of a
property on.
And for most of us I suppose not
all of us me she lived in some
tricky to community which I
don't but for most of us a
hundred feet of a property line
is probably a putting a public
street.
And so so we are limiting
speech.
On public property all.
And I wonder if you had the
thoughts about that.
Madam chair and representative I
was I I was waiting to see if
our Representative Harper at a
response to that and if not I'm
happy to respond.
Please Representative okay in a
Representative I'm in the
capitol so I I missed the first
part of your I don't know why
suddenly my internet is not
working as well in my office but
I think I caught your question
it that we might be limiting
ticketing on public property so
this is actually the hundred
feet actually came out of last
committee analysis you know
you're you madam chair and
representative your hundred
percent right I mean I up in
wrestling with this issue we're
trying to strike a balance and
so we have to be very hi thanks
specific as to what we're doing
and so the hundred feet is there
I am
I I guess we could try to
fashion an exception R. that
would say unless it's somehow
you know in the public right
away but I had the problem that
I have with that is that could
include a sidewalk directly in
front of the person's house
which would defeat the whole
purpose of this so I don't
really know how we would do an
amendment that would satisfy
kind of if you're on a major
street which I do get.
And I want to the committee to
no I really wrestle with this
this is not for me and easy
dividing line but I do think we
have to make it crystal clear as
to what we're doing I mean when
they say the Supreme Court talks
about narrowly tailored
exceptions two of the bill of
rights this is that our the it
this is the application of that
principle and so I got to be
careful but I'm happy to work
with you as it if it were to get
out of this committee and head
to the floor on the floor
amendment to could make that
clear about I'm not just sitting
here today I don't have a great
suggestion for you to address
what I think is a very
legitimate concern.
And if I could.
Madam chair and that's all right
Representative.
thank you so.
in the committee analysis State
they do reference a challenge to
a similar ordinance that made it
to the supreme court and the
Supreme Court.
I'm actually upheld the
ordinance.
And
and we tailored this Committee
sub it and why does that that
ruling and and as far that
ruling.
We are the opinion stated that
this was not.
Preventing
marching or protesting or
sharing of opinion on that
street you know if there are
marching down that street that's
fine but what state I'm held was
not targeting an individual in
their whole.
For that message.
So I think.
Representative Ely said it's
it's a challenge we're we're
probably not going to get this
perfect.
But this.
This is based off of something
that has been deemed
constitutional.
And also mention that the city
of Albuquerque
and the caliber we'll have a
similar ordinance and the C. R.
Tisha also has a similar
ordinance and that that are too
Jordan's was also tested and
I've held in New Mexico court.
Sure Representative is
Representative Harper
anticipated my next question.
you know I I think you know the
vast majority of properties will
be within a hundred feet of a
public road I mean the server
you know I I I think it's over
ninety percent but
summer that ballpark.
In my next question so to carbon
X. to deal with that you would
creating some sort of exception
that swells all I mean it just
you would get the bill if you
said you can still do this on
the on the public side rocker
public for so I I get that I
just want to see what you just
said about that and then
terrorism Parker.
In the case you cited which I
which I haven't read but that's
sort of brings up my next
question is could you parade
down the streets.
Having the street because the
public official lives on the
street so long as you do when
you're on drugs and you're
saying yes you can.
But it doesn't really say that
in in the in the bill I mean
you're you're basing that on the
interpretation of a different
statute in the trade print
spring court decision.
Yeah.
Madam chair representative I
think I can answer that so the
answer is yes if in in the bill
it consists of picketing answers
specifically directed or focused
towards resident person takes
place within a hundred feet of
the property line so could that
be prohibited under the statute
yes if their marching up the
street and not directly in front
of his house and I did get a
question from one of the members
of the committee could that be
allowed yes under this bill it
certainly could be and the
reason for that is if you look
at the committee analysis of
frisbee versus shelves which is
a nineteen eighty eight Supreme
Court decision on it's very
specific the ban on picketing
would be directed or focused
towards the residents of a
person and would only encompass
an area within a hundred feet
and what it talks about is is
that the band is and this is the
critical issue the ban would be
narrowly tailored to protect the
interests of the targeted
household not the general public
so the minute we start to get
away from that and say well they
can't get in front of this
person's house but they can pick
it up the street general from a
practical point of view we go
double does make sense but the
reality is is that if we get
away from that we're running
into the constitutional
challenges crispy iterations and
I see you shaking your head yeah
Madam chair representative I if
I have an answer your question
I'm sorry I mean it is it is a
function a little bit of my
internet I apologize.
Yeah my question isn't can you
put it near the residence and by
the terms of your bill you can
do it within you do it under one
feet from the property line
correct my question is I'm
elected official I live in a
small town I live in Maine a
little on main street in that
small town could there be a
protest parade marched down main
street past my house.
So long as it that did not
linger in front of my house.
So madam chair and
representative it depends on
what your definition of focus
this so you look at the bill
it's is directed or focused
towards residents so I gas if
you're marching on main street
passed the house the argument
would be made I think probably
successfully you could do that
because as you know particularly
in first amendment law void for
vagueness is an argument that is
made repeatedly with respect to
statutes that impinge on the
first amendment and since that
is a little void me a little
vague
it probably would not apply and
so it's a good question I don't
have an answer other than that.
Madam chair representative
heartburn and anything that at.
I'm not sure Representative
thank you for the opportunity I
have.
I was thinking similar thoughts
that.
but let's just say that we're
talking about doctor dons
residents and that those folks
in Utah wanted to pass back.
You know pick up past her house
with the message that we we
should have to wear masks.
As long as it was not focused.
At her residence but they were
just conveying this message
going down the street.
I'm.
My understanding is as this is
drafted that would be okay.
But if they had signs that said
Dr don.
We're mad at you and they
stopped and then started
shouting at her house.
Then that would be a problem.
Madam chair representative thank
you.
Representative Nibert no
actually I think
mail actually.
Representative Nibert.
All go whenever you want me to
madam chair
Couple questions are along that
line.
A hundred feet from the property
line of the person's residence
Is is so.
Would have a lot of different
applications.
Just based on
Where people live and I was
thinking about the person lives
and about.
Large apartment complex.
A hundred feet of the property
line.
Of that person's residence would
that be the property line of the
apartment complex or would that
be the actual.
Boundaries of the person's
apartment with in the property
within the apartment complex.
And the.
Madam chair representative
maybe if I could ask clarifying
questions that was the other
point that was raised by the
committee analysis.
And we will do our reserve you
on at I actually discussed this
a little bit.
The original Supreme Court case
the first unit referenced their
organs referenced a dwelling.
and we order water when drafting
this that that was perhaps a
little too right.
And that residents would be
better.
so it's like a residents now we
didn't specify whether this was
multi family or single family.
And I think the question I ask
Madam chair representative is if
this was a an apartment complex.
A large apartment complex
that's.
I generally private property
correct that's not considered
public.
so.
They would most likely be trust
passing at that corner.
I apologize to be asked to
answer a question with a
question.
Madam chair and representative
they could be trespassing yes
there are.
presents for them.
Good night by the property
manager because generally
apartment complexes are open to
the public.
The most apartment complexes
allow people to come and go
visit the that the tenants and
what have you so it's not the
you know it's not that a person
could go on and and gauge and
and that activity but the
engagement of that activity
would have to see so servers the
property manager advise them
that they needed to leave the
premises that would would be my
doctor says
and so you know it if it's if
it's a hundred feet from the
apartment.
Someone could be out of the
gate.
Where people drive in and out.
And you could pick it on the
public sidewalk outside that
gate.
If you're talking about a
hundred feet from my property
line I live in a single
single family dwelling on a lot.
A hundred feet puts them in
front of my neighbor's house.
Down the street.
so little bit different scenario
would and so I was just wanting
to borrow with respect to to
Large apartment complexes are
which we don't have many of in
my district but the you
certainly do it in the
Albuquerque metropolitan area
Is it is the property line of
the first and residents The the
actual apartment or is a the.
Property.
On page the person's residence
your is located.
Two answers Madam chair
representative number one I
don't know the answer that I
have to go back and look at the
definition of residence which
I'm sure is to provide statutes
and I can look before we hit the
floor second is is to go back to
Representative and hybrids
question Ellen actually one of
our analysts actually has the
answer that question yes you
could March down main street
reports as well so we might want
to call on Ellen madam chair if
we get the time to go back to
her aunt's Representative divers
question I mean I have the
queen's questions but to answer
Representative nine point
question I don't know but I'm
certain residences defined in
the statute we could look it up
if that becomes a problem we can
fix.
And that might want more follow
up would be our in house someone
light care Representative Ezzell
that lives on.
I don't know how many sections I
think twenty seven sections of
land.
It out of.
Hundred three probe from from
her place but may put you are a
long ways for from her actual
actual residents so on on that
land but anyway.
My next question Madam chair
representative.
This this budget commission
in the is a little bit audited
and I was thinking of the the
good humor man in the.
A little truck that has
amplified.
Amplification device that
specifically targeting every
house in the neighborhood with
the message come out here of by
some subjects are always great
and certainly that's not what
we're what we're intending but
I'm wondering if the definition
of picketing would include the
good humor more.
Madam chair representative of
that is something that we're
going to work on I I have to
confess because and I don't know
how you do this but I think we
missed that that because I'm
sitting here thinking that is a
fair question Madam chair
representative as I'm looking at
it and I'm going really it's not
about the picketing that I'm
worried about it's about the
target residential picketing
because I'm looking at that
number.
We really want to mention right
they are are connected with that
that would be something harmful
I think coming out here rules
are laughing but I I am
concerned about that I think
that so madam chair and the
Representative my god I'm gonna
disagree a little bit with my my
co sponsor sure on that there's
reasons why I don't want to go
the route of Madam miseria.
But we've defined here targeted
targeting a particular household
and I think in your example when
you say targeting everyone.
That by the very definition is
not target.
Madam chair representative you
are targeting the neighbor.
That's not what an individual.
Well.
The targeting is toward a
residents lot of them to visual
is toward a residents.
Yes every resident which one
hundred one.
I don't agree.
You know I I I just.
We are walking a pretty fine
line and and and I think I think
we have to be really careful we
have to
really put in your things that
we meeting and say not the.
The.
But leave it up to of.
Misapplication of what what
we're expanding our I.
I thank god for.
What you're intending to do
I I.
I don't think that the freedom
of speech.
Allows us to exercise that
freedom.
At every possible public
enrollment for plates and I
think sprint Corp would back us
up on that
my mic my next the my next
question would would that
concern you know these
investigative reporters but the
that's not we are targeting a
specific residence maybe they're
not ticketing but they are
certainly are targeting
a specific residence a and they
are delivering.
That message and and
usually trying to point somebody
and not in a bad light on camera
I would would this okay but.
That type of action because you
know that that's the type of
action that would.
Probably find its way into our
courts so any comment with
respect to that type of
activity.
So.
Right Representative
Representative what I'm just
gonna say if you look at the
definition of picketing I do not
think that would cover for.
The definition Pickett.
But I mean.
Persons presence intended to
apprise the targeted individual.
Or household.
In those cases it's a targeted
individual of local.
In our messaging and sometimes
are you choose I'm on TV
sometimes it's
not trying to trying to report
the news get an opinion it's to
put people on the spot or send a
message and the.
I I just the.
Again just want to make sure we
don't the.
Don't cross that line.
I I appreciate your bring in the
bill.
It certainly is one of those
bills are really up what are.
training that our understanding
of the of the first amendment to
to.
Real challenge and and grappling
grappling with the these issues
as they ever never easy and the
I certainly.
what the
The intent behind us I just
think we need to get it.
Correctly balanced and
where it.
Can be enforced and is
enforceable without madam chair
all you'll the floor.
Then I share your next.
Thank you madam chair
representative I appreciate the
super smart conversation back
and forth we're building today
on this issue I think it's a
Manson deserves this level
consideration of like one of our
one of my previous colleagues
mentioned I also have faced
threats in elected office
and Sir in the sap with the
immensity of this question even
as I made my decisions about how
to best participate in this
hybrid session as I've shared in
other forums madam chair
representative my decision about
coming to Santa Fe was in part
because I wanted to make sure
that folks looking for me were
looking for me here in our
capital and madam chair
representative.
It's scary it is scary I
certainly am a big believer in
first amendment rights but I
also believe that we as elected
officials have room to survive
our office and deserve a
reasonable expectation of safety
as we show up we need our best
to the duties that we've been
elected to up hold on so madam
chair representative I have a
couple of questions.
just on what what that what this
what this moment merits and my
first one as I got into this
conversation early on with folks
about where I'd land and how I
do the session and what days I'd
be in the roundhouse and what
days I'd be otherwise here
inside the fifth and I'm far
away from my district was this
piece about what it's meant that
we are now up holding the duties
of our office often times from a
place we call home that often
has council members that we love
in terrace and certainly would
never want to compromise their
their security or safety in
anyway you all made some mention
of that that like the the the
world has shifted and now we're
doing this virtually have you
considered some sort of sunset
or provision that would
potentially up hold that what
you're trying to accomplish with
the ticketing because we're in
this incredible time that many
of us are doing our public
service and public duty in a
place in in in a in a residence
that we have.
So madam chair and vice chair of
thank you for that it's awful
question and I'm pleased to have
you been thinking about this no
even before this bill was
brought you know I.
I have four kids at home you
know
and you know someone was
targeting near my house that's
the one thing but if my wife was
trying to leave with my daughter
to go to jail lessons you know
that's that's something very
different.
And I think we we saw that in
one example that raised
Senator Holly his wife was at
home with their daughter.
Now scary to them.
So to to directly answer
questions what about a sunset.
Well I I think we would very
much consider that if this was
the first attempt at crafting
legislation like this.
if we were the first state
for the first sitting her first
County I would very much say
let's let's talk about
revisiting this and put a put a
date when we should revisit
that's.
I'm but the truth is we're not
the first we're not reinventing
the wheel here we actually
crafted this we off of.
Legislation or statutes that
were challenged at the Supreme
Court of United States up held.
and I mentioned well our teacher
earlier Albuquerque already have
these these ordinances so
I I would say I don't think we
need to include a sunset for
those reasons and also I do
appreciate your saying that at
this time we're kind of a
virtual we're actually going to
not be virtual again.
I still think the world is
changed to a degree that even or
not but again we're still gonna
be seeing these kinds of things
happen.
And and Madam chair madam vice
chair.
yeah I I I gotta tell you you're
listening to you and
representative Armstrong and I
think to myself this is exactly
why we're hearing this is I'm
looking at this and I'm going
this just isn't right I mean we
do a lot of sacrifices as public
officials on both sides of the
aisle.
They should not be one of the.
Our family should not be at risk
period I just don't have any
problems tell you that
as far as sunsetting what I
appreciate about that question
to be quite candid is the
optimism with which you raise
that.
And I don't share that optimism
I I wish I could tell you that I
think this is going to get
better.
But I don't think it's going to
get better and I think we have
to protect ourselves and frankly
people to enter the public
square.
from the threats that could
escalate pretty quickly and so I
wish I could say yes I'm
optimistic we could do a sunset
but to be quite candid with you
I I just don't believe that we
we can be optimistic I don't
think right now that's where
we're headed but I want you to
know that I do appreciate the
optimism very much I thank you
madam chair madam vice chair
very thoughtful.
Point.
On that point just to just to
make
double the point what happened
with me that scared my family so
much with signs in my arms was
has nothing to do with virtual
it was two years ago I wasn't
there I was in Santa Fe so it
was really just my family who
was scared and at risk because I
wasn't physically present.
So nothing to do with virtual
thank you.
Madam chair representative they
certainly appreciate the
reminder from terror Armstrong
and it's true maybe just on a
rough Monday morning when I'm
feeling all the emotions that
this bill brings up I want to
believe that humanity is better
than showing up at our homes and
threatening who we are and the
people we love
Madam chair representative I do
have a follow up question I am
grateful to live part of New
Mexico we all call our our New
Mexico god's country but I
certainly believe that in my
small town peace of the world
and I live on a sort of between
these examples I'm not in a
neighborhood nor am I on I
twenty seven sections of land
but I I live on several acres at
the end of a dirt road and when
I've considered the question and
and certainly in advance of this
legislative session made sure we
had our private property signs
up and I I take those very
seriously if if somebody's on my
property they will be
respectfully asked to leave if
they're there to threaten me or
pick it needs and if they don't
there is a different story at
play because if if they don't
leave I take that as a threat to
my children but my property up
but and your nation to a ditch I
live in the elephant Butte
irrigation district and so when
I was trying to imagine where
the parameters were and where
these public
Click there offers a.
The my gosh I'm forgetting the
right word but I even asked okay
on an irrigation ditch this is
not a public road and your
nation ditches and districts for
different reasons sometimes
don't let you pass or it's it's
not it's not always an automatic
right to be on the stitches but
what what kind of interplay when
we asked that question about the
end of the property line would
it have with different than use
of public lands.
Like in your.
Chair and.
We're and madam vice chairman if
Representative Harper does my me
answering the question that goes
back to use the same you know
it's the same kind of general
areas Representative line which
and I think what I want to be
careful of is not for purposes
of this statute to redefine
residency what I have to do is
go back which I should have done
is go back and look in the
statute for the definition of
residency and we're that's been
defined in statutory law and
I'll get that to you and so then
you know it'll be a hundred feet
and if that includes you know
look right away Soviet economy
because what we want to do is
make it very clear as to where
it is yes but it really does
depend on the definition of
residency which I don't have in
front of me.
I'd appreciate clarification on
that and whether or not these
irrigation districts maybe maybe
others and Committee understand
might have a better sense of
whether that's considered part
of public right of way but my
final question and I I I think
in the way that I read your
committees of this is clear when
we talk about targeted
residential picketing that would
mean where ever we we don't have
to prove residency so for
instance I have a beautiful home
in small town to see a when I'm
in Santa Fe I'm obviously
staying somewhere else
that has there's no
qualifications to ownership of
residential and other way but
most but more so that you are
targeting that residence for the
person and household members
that are within that residence
is that would that be accurate
within the way you've defined.
Your turn so madam chair
representative I don't think so
sooner is one understand the
question right if you go to
Santa Fe during the session and
you're staying there with your
family with that includes not
picketing that my bet is no my
bet is is that residency would
be defined in a different way of
would not include a temporary
abode but honestly I don't know
the answer that I'm just gonna
have to look it up if the if I'm
answering that question that
questions really important like
for me right now I would want
the protection from these
multiple residences I would want
my permanent residency at home
in district and I would also
want a reasonable expectation of
this protection to follow me
should I take up residency in
the course of my duties here in
our capital that for me is is
quite far from home and I think
that's important and madam chair
and representative I'm as a as a
rap
I think it's important to note
this is been a trying year for
so many of us some of us have
survived others have not one of
the this the small silver
linings for me that has come
with this virtual session means
that I feel safer in my day to
day life it means that folks
that potentially would follow me
out of a building or you know
try to see when I'm leaving and
events don't have the
opportunity to do so so just
just today that I know you're
specifically focusing on this
targeted residential ticket
picketing but there has been
something that has come as a
silver lining to meet that's
meant I don't spend as much time
this year looking over my
shoulder to see if there is an
imminent threat following me or
track you know trying to connect
to my person my body as I move
through my day is an elected
official here so certainly on
that note I would hope that we
could make sure those
considerations for where we take
up residence in service of our
duties.
Madam chair representative
that's their point and I will
look at I made a note to get
back to you representative
Nibert for this if this were to
get out of committee before it
hits the floor your point I I do
want to add that there was a
sixty minutes piece I want to
say last week the week before
about a federal judge who
was actually at her home and
that I a lawyer who is
disgruntled came to their home
shot and killed her son and so
she is pushing for legislation
in Congress that which you know
protect identities and
locations of federal judges and
and I think you make a good
point I mean it's not just the
residents as I'm thinking about
it home is wherever you are and
so that is something we're
looking at and I will do that
well madam chair and
representative not fully aware I
am if I am in a public space if
I'm in my office otherwise our
fair game but if I have taken up
residence if I am if I'm staying
somewhere because that is that
is where you take you know B.
for it for whatever purpose of
whatever length of time that's a
consideration I would want like
where I'm going to rest my head
at night kind of deal.
Thank you madam chair and
representative.
We have further debate and I
have I'd like before I go to
Representative Townsend I want
to correct a mistake that I made
which I failed to move the
committee separate discussion
purposes but I want to ask
everyone.
I could go ahead and move the
point to version because the the
committee analysis suggested
change that made it a point to
version our major analysis in
corporate is on the point two
version and if there's no
objection we would be able to
not have to require a.
Further floor amendment although
I know that the sponsors are
going to look into a couple of
other points out is it does
anyone object to.
I'm moving they point to
committee staff for discussion.
Okay I I don't see objection on
that so next on my list is
Representative Townsend.
Thank you madam chair.
Having all.
College.
The case that.
Well Representative Harper and
you live mentioned in Artesia.
And thank you when I first read
this bill that it was very
simple.
And looking at some notes that I
got I.
I have some questions
I think one of them is in line
with what records in and said.
If you rent a place in the state
there it standard period is that
real.
Is that a place that.
Yes should protect that person
from and if you don't protect I
mean if a person has.
Right in the in the in the
artesian instant.
The issue was a bargaining unit.
That was picketing the city.
The city council members who are
responsible for the bargaining
you.
I get.
But questions that have been
asked.
Representative that what yes.
It's becoming more and more
common that a person who owns a
small business also lives within
the small business.
Does that mean that a business
could not be it if they live on
the premises.
It's.
Madam chair representative the
answer is yes
I'm and thank god I think I want
to make it clear in that we're
not talking about just
politicians.
Business anybody will be covered
by this bill but I think the
short answer is that's a
residency is defined by the
statute yes you could include
systems that they're looking.
And.
G. in the case of the
legislature or for example or a
judge.
If you owned a business.
Some reason it seems like it
because.
That's an issue that.
In the with regard to the
political figure because I start
thinking what's the person's
Busto what's the person that
wants to.
Utilize their first amendment
rights what are they supposed to
do.
And where are they supposed to
do if it's a hundred foot from
the property line.
And that goes on.
Property.
That that's.
That seems to be an issue I mean
a real issue that we have to
address yeah.
Persons.
Yes in a multiple dwelling or
lives on a business that is
owned by.
Multiple people.
there's another issue.
Do you have some people talking
in the background there I can't
find anybody else who needed.
Because there's some
interference with our being able
to hear.
Settle better.
so.
I I think of Representative
that.
The question of what is a person
or what is a group.
What Avenue they have.
With an elected official who is
a state elected official who is
not subject to recall.
By partition.
What is the public.
What is the public's posted and
where are they supposed to do as
you see at with this piece of
legislation Representative this.
Yes thank you madam chair and.
For later for your your question
I think it really.
Speaks to the heart of what
we're trying to do and part of
what the first amendment is all
about.
Right the first amendment is
about being able to share a
dissenting opinion.
About not having your your
opinions
silencer censured or kept from
being share.
and time after time the Supreme
Court has said that this
includes public squares it
includes
You know being able to right
into your newspaper
includes being able to send
emails or make phone calls.
But.
There is a line.
Right the right to free speech
does not give you the right to
intimidate or to harass.
It does
It is we've learned recently
what when it comes to like
Twitter or or even on Facebook
that the right to free speech
doesn't mean you're you can have
an account on those.
Most mediums right there are
there are limits to free speech
but to directly get your
question.
What we're trying to say here
this legislation.
Has been upheld.
Is that if you want to share
your opinion.
It is not correct to do it
targeted and in an intimidating
and harassing way.
In front of someone's home or
they're essentially capped.
Yeah one if you want to March
down the street one of the
public square.
Get a permit with the city right
next off your permit for
protests right that that's a
limitation on free speech.
So there are there are many many
many ways that individual can
share their thoughts they do it
all the time during the session
we get bombarded all the time
lots of different ways.
Right in front of someone's
safe.
Sanctuary is not appropriate.
Yeah I and and madam chair in
representative shootings of like
to add to that is is the short
answer is anywhere else right
just not impressed on top so
anywhere else and I think it's
really important hasn't come up
that we need to point out this
is not content based
we're not restricting L. that's
that's what's report really
looks at is to make sure it's
not targeted content so when I
was a kid
you know that the neo ****
marched in Skokie and Ohio
outside Cleveland and basically
said and I mean this is
absolutely what happened.
March in support of the **** and
that you know the I mean it was
really officer speech to my
community and yet I'm they were
so high at they were allowed to
do that I support that right as
offensive as I find it we are
not based on content this is
strictly anywhere else you just
can't do in front of somebody's
house Representative Harper is
on Representative right to get a
permit you March enemy
thoroughfare March around the
courthouse you any one but you
can't do an print somebody's
**** that's the line were saying
you're not cross that line.
And madam chair and
representative only part others
me is do you the end because
these groups.
Get these.
Individuals whether they're
public officials judges or
whatever in the course of their
daily lives as they go to
restaurants as they go to the
store is is that going to be the
next Avenue is that you follow
them through their daily lives
and and have shot.
I think Representative just made
me start thinking about where
should a person have.
Safety.
Where where should a person be
able I mean if you get out of
your home and you're on vacation
are you subject to a if you're
if you go to the restaurant are
you subject to a if you rent a
motel because you want to get
away from your house as their
picketing at the neighbors a
hundred feet away but causing a
disturbance in your community.
yes I I get what you're trying
to do but.
I don't know what people are
supposed to do so I think it
needs work and I appreciate it
that I support what you're
trying to do but I think you
have holes in the process thank
you.
When.
You Representative Alcon but I I
I do want to say that I believe
With one of the analysts texted
me that's what's his name Mister
Goodbar Mr Goodfellow or with
what he called the that's
commercial speech.
So.
Representative local.
Thank you.
Gentleman I just the yes you
my concern of course is the
definition residents.
You have to find them and I can
find an answer for that we can
try and then trying to listen
and I'm hoping that the one of
the legal brains with the come
up with something that I could
hear what is not there.
You know and and I agree and we
your home your home should be
safe that should be safety
number one you should be
comfortable in your own house
twenty four hours a day a.
And
we know this last election.
I'm sure funding for many years
sixteen years judge the this is
my thirteenth in the legislature
and I will always felt
comfortable here in my house and
rely on a ship just lately.
This last election
the.
One of the political side.
It would be gone within five
minutes.
Mr.
My neighbors that would be on
that they have no fear of coming
into my yard and.
The sign or anything like that
without the was about it.
You know if you feel you feel is
the.
You feel if they are willing to
do something like that what
makes how much further are they
going to go into your property
or into your poll because of the
way they feel.
Before this is the first year
that I ever felt this
comfortable feeling
your home should be the most
comfortable place in the world
it should be comforting to you
and your family and everybody
who comes in this is to.
But.
That residents like I say it's
still a big concern but I
need to looking at their
ordinance and they have no means
no Booker G.
which is a misdemeanor.
No wonder if you look into it
and see.
If there's and you follow it and
see if there's anybody who has
been charged with the and if
anybody has appealed or done any
further in.
On the words.
So I.
You madam chair and the
Representative judge thank you
for the the great question.
and direct to directly answer I
have not done that homework to
work and see if anyone was
I can tell you based off of the
article I read in the Salt Lake
City case with the doctor done.
the officer showed up and
explain to the the Packers the
law and they moved and for just
it somewhere else.
My expectation would be that
there probably would not be any
folks charged because once the
officer shows up and explains
the situation they would
relocate.
but that's just me thinking I
don't know for sure.
We
both madam chair that's money
things I'm just looking at all
Kirk and I'm wondering where
that ordinance is gone or what
is happened I don't see any
records of anything happening
with all I know is that it's a
petty misdemeanor that's what
the charges the other thing that
I'm wondering is if there's ten
people there could be in front
of my house.
All people get charged.
So.
Madam chair and and
representative of a cone
But I would assume the way this
is drafted that those who do not
disperse and we're not willing
to to we would each be subject
to that that charge.
So.
The thing thank you madam chair
is not if you use force or not.
If you are.
You can be charged there's
nothing in there that says you
can yes you to ask your leave
in the if you don't leave then
you will be charged there's
nothing in the legislation that
says that in my right.
Madam chair representative
that's correct and if you're
involved in this activity you
get charged.
What the jury in violation of
the statute would be the more
accurate way to say correct
thank you madam chair of course
and that would be officer
discretion of course which is
something that's allowed us all
over and leave those to the
those tradition to questions
that I had madam chair I was
hoping somebody else would pass
for me thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative and
I've been texting who.
Our major analyst Jody your post
to do the analysis and she
thinks that under the Fourth
Amendment timber residence and
hotel attains the same right to
privacy is one one is that
is our own home or apartment as
she thinks the protection will
be portable if all other options
right ticketing parameters are
met in the location where
where the individual resides
but.
The New Mexico constitution has
even greater privacy protections
and under both you you need a
search warrant for a hotel with.
So she
we can if you have further
questions we you can ask your
you directly but I just want to
give you that information and go
next two revenue.
Yes go ahead Richard Sherman.
We yeah I I've been sitting here
trying to multi task to look up
those definitions if I can get
that for major that would be
great and I would share with I
could also all end up sharing
with our vice chair Cadena and
with the representative Nibert
because they've asked that
question so that to get me
started that be excellent thank
you madam chair okay great.
Representative.
You madam chair and Sanchez
thank you for bringing this I'm
just sitting here.
Looking at your substitute and
the definition of picketing
which means a person's presence.
Intended to apprise the targeted
individual or household vocally
or by expanding or marching with
the signing.
The inner sand at and fishing
device or other means.
You are message.
And so that's a pretty harmless.
Activity just you know holding a
sign outside somebody's house
and Hey I I don't like your your
policy position and we should
reconsider it.
And then all the stories we've
heard today are about you know
Callard sneaking on people's
property in the middle of the
night putting signs up which is
wrong and you know I've I've had
my sign stolen and passed and
you know it's it's a.
It's it's never fun but to but
you know it's against the law to
trespass on people's property
it's it's against the law to
solve people it's a gets a lot
of batter people and to murder
them like like the judge simple
and so V. you know all we're
doing here is just limiting
somebody's first amendment right
to free speech in certain
locations and it just kind of
it's troubling to me when you
take people who just all they
want to do is exercise their
first amendment rights they had
disagree with you know we should
reconsider and then lumping them
in with.
People their towers at best and
cycle having murders at worst so
I mean if you want to do that
that's fine I'm not gonna vote
for this because of these
reasons I I I don't think it's
right to I mean I understand
that there are limits to free
speech.
But I think when people are all
they're doing is taking a nap
like to deficiency in hate you
know listen to me please and
then and then they're being
compared to murders just kind of
audition and I wonder if you
guys have any comment about
that.
Madam chair and our reserve cut
thank you for for that question
and.
And I I don't.
So I want to first say I I have
I apologize if if this
conversation let you down.
That one of dots to someone
holding a sign as a murder.
That's that.
That that was not my intentions.
Representative is one of the
examples that was given about
why we need additional yeah so
Senator Representative going
back to that.
That simple what happened in Rio
Rancho we're not murderers but.
Have gotten Harry you had a
bunch of people who decided to
protest in front of someone's
home retired couple's home.
And yeah legislative side sure.
What was the point of following
up of sites.
Was it really to share a
message.
Because you know sure message by
friendly knocking on the door by
sending a letter making a phone
call.
We got a bunch of people holding
a sign of Russell's house that's
a different message that you're
sent.
And it is a message of Hey I'm
here right from your face and
that is scary.
Doesn't matter what the messages
that's scary that might be able
to get out of my driveway.
that's scary.
And then you have a case where
protesters the protesters show
up and they're waving guns.
Note that.
I'm sure no one was expecting
dissipating or be you know at a
shot fired but now you're in a
position where something like
that could happen.
So.
I.
You're you're you're right we're
limiting.
That very small.
I would call small but that
varies nuanced free speech of
I'm gonna hold a sign from
someone's house there are so
many other ways to communicate
that I really believe when
someone has in my mind I'm gonna
go this person's house to
deliver a message personally
with the sign.
That's crossed over free speech
now goes on to sure harassed.
So I know that because I think
it's important I say this.
We cannot restrict content we
don't that line we're in
trouble.
So look at January six.
Look at the signs that were up
people are holding usage people
are holding you know things one
write it out which those kinds
of signs we can't draft
legislation that says well you
can pick it ends up in front of
people's residences if you're
nice and it doesn't work that
way so when you say well you
know somebody made the tight to
somebody being I I'm Arbor yeah
I made that tied because you
can't make that distinction
between somebody protesting from
say I respectfully disagree with
your policies versus I have a
noose on this site you can't
make that distinction you just
can't first a member will not
allow you to do that to paid
content so instead what we're
saying is is on a very narrowly
tailored bases this is literally
the line you can't cross you
can't be in from the somebody's
house regardless the content if
you want to take an obnoxious
message and go out on the public
square you are free to do so but
you're not allowed to do in
front of people's homes period
so I I I'd probably make that
tied to say to you yeah we can't
go down that road of content we
just can't.
That's fine Madam chair
representative that I just the
point of my comment is that you
know.
All we're doing here is.
Limiting a place for people can
exercise their first amendment
right okay there's always going
to be the obnoxious people out
there there's always going to be
the on popular message out there
that you and I have every reason
to believe that you are a
champion of people saying things
that you disagree with I am too.
but it's it's what a noise me
what has bothered me during this
conversation is to just suggest
that everybody who that that
wants to exercise the first
amendment that wants to pick it
is doing it in in in
as socially unacceptable manner
and we're gonna limit that you
can go do your your silly
tickets elsewhere a hundred one
feet away but I doubt you're not
gonna do it a hundred feet away
from this house.
And I think that's my only point
madam chair.
Representative Cook yes ma'am.
Okay right.
So.
Thank you have any other hands.
So I move the committee sent for
discussion purposes.
Do we have a proper motion from
anyone for the.
Version two I'm move Committee
suburb.
Yes I do not passed house bill
L. two seventy six and I do pass
on House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill to
seventy six and to be clear it's
version point to point to
version okay I will second that
motion.
Is there further discussion.
The clerk to call the roll.
Yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Cook no.
Mr speaker.
Yes I'd like to explain my vote.
Representative Eli.
Yes I'm sorry my videos off I'm
trying to keep my internet
strong so yes.
Representative Lewis.
This.
yes.
Representative Nibert.
Not now.
Representative Rehm.
No ma'am.
Representative.
No I'd like to explain about.
Representative Lewis.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Give us the vote first.
Yes or no misters okay and I'll
call on that folks explain their
votes I think first it was I
think the speaker.
Thank you madam chair
I want to visit with the
sponsored maybe that a for
amendment do we know that
because I I want to make sure
that if we go forward with this
that the ability to have a
protest at the homes of of the
members of the band Nickelback's
producers sonic sure that we're
able to do that.
Thank you madam chair.
Those for you Representative
Harper.
It was also I was laughing out
loud while.
Representative.
The last explain your vote
Representative Nibert.
Representative Townsend.
Okay yes yes ma'am I did thank
you madam chair I'd like to
support this and I'd like to
have a method to point our
people's rights as best we can
and and I think I think the
effort is right it just needs
some more clarification thank
you.
Okay you have a I do passed
Representative Harper and
representative Ely thank you
very much for your work and I I
will share
with Representative Ely is a
major analysis because she
thinks that we got the job done
in terms of
Very narrow.
Tailoring.
Okay thank you so that you are
actually you know you're co
sponsored insurance with you
because she has access to it.
Okay.
Okay great I will do so madam
chair okay it will go on now to
Representative Cook.
And House Bill to sixty nine and
he has the experts that need to
come.
Joining us
We.
Go ahead will give.
Representative Cook.
Sorry madam chair go ahead and
do what.
Given names for your expert
witnesses please I have Tom
east.
Randall Marshall or a random and
Donald and Terry Stewart.
With I know at least two of them
were in the attendee list to
help you can promote them there
we go would Donald there we go
all of them are here with this.
Representative.
Thank you madam chair members
house bill two sixty nine as
amended what a man twenty four
dash fourteen meet at six and I
see in the electronic medical
records act permits disclosure
of an individual's electronic
medical records to a provider.
Health care institution our
health care group purchaser for
treatment payment or health care
operations activities if the
disclosure is in compliance with
the and forty two USC section
two ninety DD actually relates
to disclosure patients substance
use disorder treatment records
madam chair if you wouldn't mind
I would like to a.
Allow one of my experts any of
them would like to discuss the
bill more give a little bit
better opening.
Certainly got.
Thank you madam chair committee
members Representative Cook my
name is Terry Stewart I'm the
chief administrative officer at
synchronous which is the state
of New Mexicos designated health
information exchange.
So this is a New Mexico not for
profit organization I am
testifying today about the
importance of the health
information exchange the need to
allow for the appropriate and
timely sharing of health
information and ask for your
support of this legislation to
align the state laws governing
the disclosure of an
individual's medical record with
the federal law.
I have worked for over thirty
years within the healthcare
community of New Mexico in last
spring I joined the synchronous
team my experience is primarily
with the clinical laboratory
oncology research in specialty
practice administration I
understand the impact in the
need for data flow to health
care providers to improve health
outcomes for all New Mexicans.
Thank goodness is currently
working on a program to build
and improve the health
information exchange this effort
is supported by thirty one
million dollars in federal
funding from CMS hi tech funding
which was matched by three point
two million of state funds when
I was presented the opportunity
to join the singles team I did
not hesitate as I saw the
opportunity H. I. E. could bring
to physicians healthcare
providers and health care
facilities in our state.
The funding the legislators
committed to build the state of
the art each time he has allowed
singles to work collaboratively
with prominent health IT vendors
roads collective medical into
Ryan health as well as with the
New Mexico Human Services
Department in the New Mexico
department of health this public
private partnership in New
Mexico will be a model for other
states.
Over the past year as I've
learned more details about how
physicians healthcare providers
in staff access the records in
the I. H. I. E. I understand
some of the barriers of the H.
I. E. why this great tool has
not been implemented by a wider
group of health care providers
the current state and federal
funding has remove the financial
barriers for the health care
facilities however some of the
barriers to access the data we
mean.
With the funding the state of
New Mexico is building a field
of dreams for providing access
to health information to our
providers however the privacy
protections in the state do not
align with the federal health
insurance portability and
accountability act this you will
and this is resulted in the
unintended consequence of being
a barrier access H. I. E. I'm
more New Mexico health care
providers.
Current electronic medical
record act allows for medical
information to flow into the H.
I. E. without the individual's
consent requires consent to use
the data we have left a fence
around the field.
In it limits the ability for
everybody to play ball.
The solution is this proposed
amendment would allow the
disclosure and the individual's
electronic health information
specifically if the disclosure
is made to a health care
provider healthcare institution
or healthcare group purchaser
for hippa treatment payment our
operations that's a line in the
state privacy rules with the
federal privacy rules having one
set of privacy criteria for our
healthcare providers will reduce
the administrative burden.
This revision is needed to
improve individual health care
by sharing information between
health care providers to reduce
health care costs by eliminating
duplicative medical procedures.
One still insure disclosures
only committed at as under hippa
rules and still maintain state
protections against
inappropriate disclosures we
also need this revision
legislation to successfully
implement the program the
state's health information
exchange as we requested in
federal funding it is our intent
is to bring on eighty percent of
hospitals Indian health services
tribal health clinics federally
qualified health centers skilled
nursing facilities long term
care independent physicians and
behavioral health.
The federal hi tech funding
sunset September thirtieth
twenty twenty one we have seven
months to finish this program
and it would be beneficial to be
able to remove this barrier and
also leverage potential
additional funding.
During the COVID nineteen
pandemic the ability to share
health information was
highlighted as well of the
barriers in sharing information
across organizations thank
goodness has been able to allow
access to the H. I. E. for the
department of health contact
tracers for the Presbyterian
fusions we to be able to infuse
regressive there and non
Presbyterian patients who they
did not have access to their
records and we provided access
to the emergency medical for all
of those reliable disclosures
under current law but this
emergency you shows how the same
access can help better health
care every day I allowing the
sharing this information I thank
you for your time your service
in respectfully ask the
committee to vote yes on house
bill two sixty nine.
Representative do you need you
are.
Thanks for sustaining they are
they can they just be available
for questions I think they can
just be available for questions
chair.
All right let's let's go to the
audience now and we'll do a ten
second goal those in favor of of
well still to sixty nine
innocent opposition what's way
and not with a whole please.
Okay we have three in favor and
one opposed let's go to the
those individuals and see if
anybody there would like to make
a comment to the committee.
We would like to testify either
way.
Okay
Stetson Berg.
Hello madam chair and members of
the committee on Stetson Berg
interim director at UNM center
for telehealth vice chair of the
New Mexico telehealth alliance
president of the New Mexico
health care executives and
treasurer for the New Mexico
information and management
systems society.
If you vote yes on this bill it
would certainly increase UNM
providers access to information
they need to do better consuls
this will allow us better access
to patient's history for more
informed consuls easier to
transfer treatment documents we
can do quality chart review
follow ups C. patient outcomes
have access to value based
metrics and an overall reduction
in health care costs right now
the tens of thousands of consuls
that UNM gives out every year
our difficulty leverage patient
information because they are not
thank you an impatient and to
get consent transferred to us
and completely register that
patient in our system to
leverage the H. ID is very
difficult.
Thank you.
Thank you part of academic.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I speak in favor
of US Senate bill two eighty two
because it will improve both the
quality of healthcare while
reducing cost one of the chief
drivers of cost of health care
is duplicated yes and I will
tell you how it works in the
real world if I can get the
results of the test like a scan
it from another entity in a
timely manner I repeat it so
that I'd not delaying my
patients care.
The other process of quality is
that we try to use our patients
time wisely if I can access
their records before they come
to see me for a consultation I
can deliver a more valuable
service to that patient because
I can review their records I had
a time.
please support this particular
bill thank you.
Thank you I don't see anywhere
public comment so let me go to
the committee
Representative Cook did you have
anything probably not to add to
that before we got a committee.
After okay Representative
Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative we heard this and
had a good hearing in
house health and Human Services
Committee
it but I I just wanted to
A firm that
I we've.
My daughter Erin who's got a
very very extensive record and a
lot of providers this has is she
actually is a patient of UNM
but.
To go outside of UNM it doesn't
always work because of not
because of insurance coverage
but because of exactly what
Dr Meghan and he said if you
can't get access to the record
to review it before seeing the
patient it just delays things or
you end up ordering more tests
we've encountered that before
and it at this point to try and
stay away from any provider
outside of.
UNM for fear that that's what's
gonna happen including an
incident where she needed to go
to the ER and we were in Santa
Fe.
And I elected not to take
against medical judgment not to
take her to the E. R. in Santa
Fe and over back to Albuquerque
to go to UNM because of the the
I knew there wasn't a transfer
ability of records
there so it's a it's a real
issue and the important thing
about this bill is that
it complies then with have fun
with which is onerous in and of
itself the federal law.
We just had an additional step
in New Mexico law that I think
is unnecessary and becomes an
extra barrier so I just want to
express my support for this bill
and thank other representative
thank you madam chair.
Thank you representative
Armstrong I don't see any Kerr
had.
From committee members.
Senator all move the once the
committee.
Sure I and I had a question I
don't know if I had.
Yes I'm sorry I you just moved
up to the top did you have we're
going I did I did about madam
chair on.
So in the health Committee
amendment it's on page five
madam chair and.
In the new material.
It says so if we do you do if we
go to the new material this is
gonna be.
Section G. three retirement
releasing information to a
provider health care institution
those seem fine or a health care
group purchaser.
Madam chair representative what
is that is an insurance company.
Representative I can defer to my
experts.
Mr macdonell did you want.
Yes I have you madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Ronald McDonald.
attorney for synchronous and
I've worked in the areas of
medical records for sixteen
years and privacy and security
and in two thousand nine
actually helped draft and bring
to the legislature the
electronic medical records
in answer to the question the
term health care group
purchasers it is a terms defined
in the act and it's defined as a
person who is licensed certified
or otherwise authorized
permitted by the New Mexico
insurance insurance code to pay
for purchase health care and
pass it identified individual or
group of individuals regardless
of whether the cost for coverage
the cost of coverage Services is
paid for by the purchaser or the
person receiving coverage for
services so the answer the
question is yes that would be a
Health care insurer.
And the information is being
provided for you this is related
to the treatment.
Health care operations
activities but also for payment.
And so madam chair
Representative Cook.
Do we should we be.
You.
Taking a deposit for having the
patience information provided.
to the insurance company for
payment related.
Reasons.
Yes the you know Madam chair
representative I ask because the
questions or comments to her
leading up to this were about
making it easier for patients to
receive care.
there wasn't much discussion I
don't know if there is a
discussion about this
information being shared with
insurance companies for reasons
related to any payment.
Madam chair representative talk
about that a little bit.
Chair representative would like
to work if we can find for that
Mr McConnell against yes the the
three
major reasons that that yep
allows disclosures about
patient consenus for treatment
for payment and for health care
operations purposes
One of the reasons that it has
to be for payment is the
services have to be paid for and
that is been recognized as one
of the legitimate disclosures of
of health care information for
those purposes.
We just want to bring ourselves
in into line with that
requirement.
I'm.
Madam chair.
I'm it in addition to a provider
submitting a claim to the
insurer.
Often is needed that the actual
medical records to review for
appropriateness of care and for
covered services to determine
prior authorization and and
utilization management so it's
it is appropriate to
to get access to the full
medical record or or parts of
the medical record not just our
have a claim.
Thank you madam chair.
I feel like every time I have an
interaction with a.
Medical professional I have to
sign a form giving permission
for the doctor's office to give
information to an insurance
company.
With this mean that I this those
forms are no longer going to be
presented to patients that the.
And the information is is going
to be automatically shared with
an insurance.
Right.
If I can answer that I think
that that's hopefully the the
end result of this I think that
that will probably take some
time before that process gets
formalized in the system but
eventually I think that would be
the goal yes.
Madam chair representative what
is the problem that is occurring
now that we're trying to fix it
this call.
Madam chairman Saddam.
So madam chair members of the
committee there are.
I was for so statutes in New
Mexico that have that require
patient consent to deliver
disclosed.
Asian information without
without the consent of the
patient those of the statues
that the deal with sexually
transmitted diseases.
HIV aids tests.
Children's mental health.
A
health.
and because the HSA and
electronic medical records
cannot segregate that
information from the other
information a person's medical
record.
This the system now requires
that in order for anybody to
access medical records in the
system that they have an actual
patient consent before they can
actually
access any records this bill
would allow the disclosure that
information.
Without patient consent but.
Subject to the requirements of
the and subject to the
requirements of the federal laws
on the disclosure of
alcohol and drug treatment
substance abuse information.
Okay Madam chair representative
I get that but what what is what
is not happening now LFC needs
to happen.
In health care that will go
forward two bills passed in
other words what is the.
What is the problem that exists.
That is addressed by this bill.
Why do we need to do this.
Chair Representative Cook in
speaker Egolf I would like to
answer that one of the issues
and Dr MacNamee issues on board
she could speak up on another
issue as an oncologist.
Hi to her seeing a patient in
her practice she wants to obtain
all of the records imaging high
quality reports so that first
visit could be a complete.
Visit and they could share with
that patient the treatment that
they want to get to that patient
be prepared for that first
visit.
The consent form that you're
talking about right now that
patient has not been seen in her
office so the first visit the
patient would go to that office
would be have to sign a consent
before they could access the
data out of the H. I. E. which
is easier so instead doctor Mack
needs office needs to call all
of these organizations ask them
to fax the reports you might
receive the more not in that
practice in that first visit is
not as efficient or as able to
provide the best care in that
first visit because we need to
obtain that consent the simple
Stetson Berg so that would be
the simple.
Okay madam chair at
Representative cut that answer
makes yet Mr that totally makes
sense the where I'm where I'm
getting hung up is on the
definition of health care
operations activities.
Yes with that is.
As I'm reading it you can have a
patient without the patient's
consent.
Their medical information could
be shared with an insurance
company you could then use that.
For quality improvement
activities.
Whatever that means.
And for purposes.
In our administrative financial
and legal.
And that are necessary to
conduct business and to support
the core functions of treatment
and payment.
So it's the it's the insurance
company piece of this and the
quality assurance piece of this
that makes me feel like I don't
have any idea.
What is what my medical
information is again used for
the doctor Mack eighty simple
totally makes sense to.
the insurance company getting
all my medical information
without my consent to be used
for any of these activities are
listed in section H. I I I'm not
that excited for that.
Yeah and I and I don't know you
know what we why we need to do
it.
that.
I.
It just seems like with that's a
lot of the way.
Being given to insurance
companies and I don't know if
that would also include yeah it
may or may not madam chair
includes your pharmacy benefit
managers I don't know if it
includes you know affiliates
insurance companies I don't know
your based on the contracts that
we have.
I have quite frankly chair I
don't know if my
contract with my insurance
company Matthews company allows
them to share information with
affiliates and third parties for
various purposes but if it does
then you could have without my
consent information medical
information going to insurance
company and and share without my
consent and that they would use
the contractual agreement
potentially share that
information with.
Marketing companies quality
insurance companies.
Yes you can be widely dispersed
to distribute it and
hopefully there would be
security measures in place to
prevent it from being access
through hacking or security
breaches but it all starts
without my consent and that that
that piece of it gives me pause
sure.
And I don't know if you Madam
chair representative because I
don't know if it's necessary in
this.
Is it possible to limit this to
the.
Just for reasons related to.
treatment.
And leave out.
Amen or health care operations
activities.
More treatment and payment is
that health care operations
activities.
That is.
Meet at I'll be the first to say
yes to understand it
but.
This you going for all those
purposes without my consent.
US madam chair representative
capacity thoughts about that.
You madam chair thank you
Representative Mister would you
like to address the.
Yes yes madam chair
representative
so just to be clear
all that information can change
currently the shared all your
medical information can
currently be shared for
treatment payment or health care
operations under the regulations
and regulations apply except to
the extent that
the state's laws are more
restrictive than the hippa
regulations so your concern and
I appreciate your concern of
that's a license out under the
regulations that information is
already being share of and the
only thing that this this
amendment to this bill would do
or in this bill would do would
be to eliminate the requirement
that patient consent be obtained
for those specific specially
protected conditions that
require patient consent under
New Mexico law because one of
the provisions is that if the
state has more restrictive
requirements then the regulation
and hit them the state
requirements apply here the only
more restrictive
State requirements that apply
are those that relate to
information about the specially
protected conditions not to
health care operations
disclosures or disclosures for
paying.
That is that help.
I'm on this point madam chair.
Yes Representative arms
thank you madam chair and Mr
speaker just as another example
of why.
the insurance company would want
access to information.
If of for instance they they're
trying to manage care and they
it it.
say have a program for
diabetics.
Well they don't know who those
diabetics necessarily are unless
there's a claim that comes in
that has that as a primary
diagnosis or they start reaching
out and trying to get people to
answer on whether they would
or pre diabetic is maybe even a
better example because they're
not getting diabetic medications
but it's but they could be
intervening and trying to manage
their care more upstream before
waiting till they get as sick
and if you don't have access
where you can
review those who are at risk you
don't know who they are
necessarily to try and manage
that care and provide
additional supports and that's
just that's just one example but
there could be a lot of
different examples or you want
to try and manage a health
condition or disease state that
if you wait until they get
second often in the hospital and
you see the claim it's a little
late or or later than is ideal
so as we do managed care I think
that it's that is a
one major reason to have access
to that information.
Okay thank you.
So.
If I recall correctly we are on
a do passed motion is that am I
right.
I don't know maybe ask most
guidelines I am
I have closed the run away from
a facility in New.
At the same time is it is during
this over to vice chair so I'm
Representative Armstrong for
motion yes I'm I move I do pass
on house bill two sixty nine
second okay Representative
Nibert eight seconds the motion
is there further discussion.
It will the court please call
the roll.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Cook yes.
Mr speaker.
Streamlined eight ten yes.
Representative thank.
Representative.
Representative Lewis.
Representative.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative Nibert.
Yes.
Representative Rehm yes.
Representative Townsend.
Yes.
Representative Eli.
Yes.
Representative Lewis.
Yes.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Yes.
Twelve to zero.
House Bill to sixty nine.
Okay thank you very much it
looks like we might make it
through our agenda today with
the.
With one roll over so I'm
ambivalent the vice chair taking
over the on Senate bill and the
public comments reports if if
you'll do that thank you very
much.
Thank you madam chair in
senators about this with us and
ready for SB one eighty three.
Madam chair.
Representative agree.
There are I'm waiting for a bill
to come up on the same side as
till date the Senate just got
off the floor so I don't know if
that affects Center slant is
availability.
Okay I will text him now if you.
You know I can deal with that
my.
Client.
My mind is inclined it later I
actually I'm familiar with this
bill I will need to call it out
on that share file but I can get
started for the senator just to
save us a little bit of time I
know that.
This is a uniformed labelle and
I usually Jack John is here
thank I think Jack Burke Jr is
here and he could be moved out
from the attendees to the.
The committee so that we can ask
him for questions it's very rare
for the uniform law commission
to do a criminal bill and in a
way I philosophically this
relates to the bill that senator
Morris and Representative
Hochman Vigil have about
licensing for
those who are have been involved
in the criminal justice system
this is a uniformed law bill
they.
Collateral consequences of
conviction and I know that the.
I know this because it was right
after I got married and the two
thousand three there was a
hearing in Santa Fe when the
uniformed commission Inverloch
Commission actually had this
meeting in Santa Fe and I went
to try to attend that hearing
and they are rather I think
Representative Nibert G. serve
on that uniform law commission.
Yes ma'am but this was not one
of the bills you know where you
are in the legislature but
They are very.
Lengthy.
meetings where.
Why not.
You know lines and lines of
people from around the
commission lined up to speak
about every bill they ended up
not.
Bill that day and I I couldn't
attend and.
Okay so I never did
not it is something that our New
Mexico's sentencing commission
has studied and the this
particular bill although it they
have some changes Senate which
the senator and Jack Burton can
describe it was adopted by the
uniform law commission
eventually as Yvonne has to at
some point and the previous
governor it it it so I think
we're hoping to get the bills.
Passed in this session where
there may be a more favorable
reception for it on fourth floor
so with that I'm maybe I'll let
Mr Burton it's a little bit more
information while I try to call
up the bill.
Thank you madam chair can you
hear me alright you
yes we can go ahead hello thank
you thank you this bill.
Has been up past.
By both houses of the
legislature three times either
unanimously or with one
dissenting vote and has been
vetoed three times so we're
hoping that the fourth time is
the charge is this chart.
This bill requires that.
a judge.
When the judge are exceptional
guilty pleas court hello free or
sentences someone after the
conviction in a criminal case
inform them that it's not just.
A sentence of jail time or
parole.
There are what we call
collateral consequences that
follow.
The conviction.
Or please.
These things can affect the
right to a job or housing or
even right to.
Ownership or licensure.
And
So that's basically what this is
all about we feel that will.
help people to re integrate into
society following their.
We should not their debt to
society and as it has been very
successful to help you previous
sessions of the legislature.
So we all stand for questions.
Thank you
Just please stay with us on to
Mr and we're going to go to
quickly do public comment and
then we'll go to committee after
that so we'll do a ten second
pull first will get a pull up
for any of those joining with us
to soon to date will please
indicate whether you're in
support and opposition to SB one
eighty three.
Well it looks like we have a
handful of folks with us in
support today but we will ask
just in case if you happen to be
joining us B. as in home and
would like to weigh in in
opposition to SB one eighty
three please raise your hand
now.
I see no opposition or no public
comment for opposition will move
to those that might like to
speak in support if you'd like
to speak in support of SB one
eighty three please raise your
hand will start our House
Judiciary timer you'll have one
minute to make it public
comment.
First is Rikki Lee Chavez.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Rikki Lee Chavez
on behalf of the New Mexico
criminal defense lawyers
association we stand in strong
support of this bill we
appreciate the work of the
sponsor and we encourage you to
also support this is something
that we have been advocating as
a way to give a more broad and
comprehensive picture of what
our criminal justice system does
to those who find themselves
involved in it we think the
conversation will inevitably
help with affecting positive
criminal justice reform reform
overall thank you for your time
madam chair members.
Thank you next we have Douglas
Carter.
Thank you madam chair and vice
chair my name's Douglas carver
deputy director of the New
Mexico sentencing commission the
commission is the identification
agency that is tasked with
certain duties in section four
of the commission supports this
work we believe this bill will
raise the profile of collateral
consequences that's a big part
of present conversation on
criminal justice reform
nationwide.
And as it shouldn't be an undue
burden on questions work as long
as we are still able to rely on
the National Institute of
justice work that the both
provides as long as they do that
work will be able to accomplish
our tests quite easily under the
spell thank you madam vice chair
members of the committee.
Thank you next we have Barron
Jones.
You madam chair members of the
committee on my name's Barron
Jones with a skill you New
Mexico we stand strong support
of the cell legislation we see
it as a step forward
similarweb Mr Kirk said it
raised the profile raises the
profile of collateral
consequences and I believe that
it gives of folks who find
themselves intertwined with our
criminal legal system the
knowledge they need to make the
proper decisions when it comes
time to sign in please and
things like that so thank you so
much and I encourage you all
****.
Thank you that's the end of our
public comment
Madam chair or expert is there
anything you'd like to add
before we moved to our many.
I don't have anything madam vice
chair I don't have anything more
to add thank you.
We'll go first then to
Representative three.
Thank you madam chair and Mr
Burke nice to see a back
I'm in I'm in support of the
concept of got a few questions
and my first one madam chair and
Mr Burton we have something like
this a few years ago.
Of madam vice chair
Representative Rehm all right
you're absolutely correct in
fact we have to pass this bill
for the the legislature's
fastest bills.
Three times.
And the governor vetoed it three
times so we're trying to pass it
again with a different occupant
of the governor's chair and
hopefully she won't will not be
tell it.
Enter your Mr Burton is this
exactly the same as we just
reported.
Of madam vice chair
Representative Rehm it is not
exactly the same it is we we've
improved it actually a little
bit each time but it is it is
almost exactly the same as the
last time we we passed it we we
tweaked a little bit.
As a result of some comments
that the.
Senator studio Lopez may.
Chair Mr Burke are gonna several
questions together in an effort
to try to save some time so we
can get on the floor in Iraq
well judge for that but when we
go to page three we are one one
he is defecation the agency we
don't include the public
defender for a defense attorney
in in might deal with as why do
we not have everyone at the
table I mean actually the
defense attorney is the one who
knows the most about the
defendant and I mean it would be
his heirs Senator missions
insurance that might be a.
You know what state.
Madam vice chair Representative
Rehm up to raise well the main
reason is we we used to have the
Law office of the public
defender in there and they
wanted
us to be taken out they said
they didn't have the funding to
be and identification the HSD
the second reason is that the
sole purpose of the
identification agency is to
identify the felonies that go
into the list of of the state
and I implement.
So.
So long story short is the I did
I I identification when we start
writing this bill they used to
go I have to go out I don't do
you spell of these to list on
the list of collateral
consequences.
Yes
The sentencing commission
pointed out we've got this
federal database that lists all
these folks so all they have to
do is copy the list off of a
database or link to it so they
don't have to do very much and
but the real reason is that the
law office of the public
defender said we we don't have
the money to work with these
folks we don't want to be on
what good point thank you.
Chairman Mr Burton I think they
have a fiduciary and contractual
obligation and I think we ought
to consider admin Act on but let
me move to the next one.
Here is for if we go.
Warning one.
Actually I guess it's kind of
redundant outpourings.
We I see anyone use of you know
being sentenced filing this
petition and trying to if you
will would go out of some of the
consequences and you know a
couple things I see on the next
page.
For
point three you your.
Police officers go out I don't
wonder if you are allowing an
attorney to keep from being
disbarred for of based on who's.
Madam chair representative will
right you kind of faded out on
me I'm not sure I got a whole
year point but I think you're
your concern is less is exactly
the same as of.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Is it you're asking your
section.
It
is not a way for the.
For the defendant.
If that's the right word to get
out together to get out of jail
card free get out for a.
Is that your concern Sir.
Your Mr for up basically yes so
I I see anyone could go ahead
and file that and I'm worried
that it's wide enough that you
know people with why senses that
attorney from being disbarred or
thank it was so funny good you
know kind of get around it I
mean there's other consequences
as well about housing and all
other things but exactly
exactly.
Well as the as a matter of fact
we actually beef this up as a
result of studio Senator Sedillo
Lopez comments madam vice chair
representative right here here's
here's a different student has
to do with these definitions of
collateral sanctions collateral
consequences and all that what
this does not show in state even
if the judge gives this relief.
It does mean that you can't
consider what they did.
Here's here's here's here's how
it works.
It only it only operates is it
the collateral selection is is a
prohibition like they example
they given the comments is if
the statute says a paralegal is
prohibited if they get up this
type of such and such a felony
conviction they're prohibited
from working as a paralegal.
The judge could we leave that.
What they have to get a job as a
paralegal it means there are.
The paralegal board.
Consider that conviction.
And make a determination and
individualize contests
determination about whether they
can get a license as a.
Our legal.
The words are not prohibited
anymore just because of the
conviction they have they didn't
go to an individualized
determination.
That's what this thing says.
When you work when you work your
way through these definitions.
The same way with the lawyer
being disbarred if a lawyer
gets.
What caught embezzling.
I'm not sure what the rule says
what if oil says you can never
get you can never work as a
lawyer again.
Then.
They could say well you know
it's been twenty years you've
been pretty good.
You might be able to work again
with but is an individualized
determination all the factors
important that's what this says.
In a nutshell.
Good question I'd be worried
about it too we tried to fix it.
Madam chairman Mr Burton thank
you and but I really think we
are at the public after back in
because we need everyone at the
table but anyway those are my
comments thank you.
Thank you Sir.
Madam vice chair.
Thank you Representative
McQueen.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair of the.
Mr Burton I guess.
Excuse me Senator Cervantes is
here now so I just want to
recognize madam vice chair.
Senator does this.
Representative Chasey I was kind
of taking over for you so you
could get going I'm also having
a client emergency and I've got
my video up because the band
with so.
Let me first confirm can you all
have a certain standard job.
Can you all hear me speaking.
Yes.
Okay all right great well the
report I'm getting is a Micaela
is is doing great madam chair
you're doing great of and so.
I'm here to help any way I can
and not screwed up thank you
senator we've done public
comment and now your expertise
done quite well we move the
Representative Freeman now we're
on to Representative McQueen to
begin his committee questions go
ahead Representative we.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair center and Mr
Burton.
If we require this sort of a.
Yes Sir a consultation at the
time of the pleading you're
sensing would but there is if it
doesn't happen.
Or is just say.
It listed the the various
consequences left out something.
We need to know what for.
I think that the other day and
the defendant happens to be a
barber's one that.
What was the consequence for
many.
They're the.
The process as a whole.
Madam vice chair Senator the
queen.
First of all.
At the request of the public
defender actually.
We the legislative show you
don't have to go through and
list all the consequences at the
time of sentences what you have
to do is in essence give them a
written statement saying there
are a bunch of.
Well because
here's a link to the website
where you can go on look about.
You look at.
Three of the bill beginning on
page three.
You will see.
Inspection Hey one two three.
We said.
You cannot use this act as a
gotcha.
To say that if somebody screws
up.
And those with four view of all
these rights remedies and what
not.
Does not all the I's and cross
all the teas.
You cannot use it.
To invalidate a plea or
conviction or a sentence you can
you don't have a clause of
action for money damages and you
don't have a claim for relief
for a defense.
To a collateral consequences
based on a failure to comply
with this act.
We we tried real hard.
To pull about that particular
rat holes because we do.
You know.
Thank you back in the day I used
to represent these people of the
state.
These are accused folks and I
know exactly what you're talking
about so we tried hard I think
we did.
Madam vice chair representative
the queen.
Madam chair center Mr person
that answers my question thank
you thank thank you good
question thank you.
See any further discussion which
what's the pleasure of the
committee.
Over the past.
Yes on Senate bill one eighty
three do we have a second.
Second madam chair.
The motion for representative
Armstrong and a second for madam
chair representative
and mention.
Representative Nibert I see you
looking like you might be
reaching out are you good okay.
Of the clerk to call the roll
please.
Representative Alcon.
Yes.
Representative Lundstrom yes.
Representative Cook.
Representative Cook.
Mr speaker.
Mr speaker.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Lewis.
Yes.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative Nibert.
Yes.
Representative Rehm yes.
Yes.
Representative Cook.
This is.
Mr speaker.
Representative Chasey.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes to excuse me I do have some
financial aid three.
Judge I couldn't quite hear you
but to make sure you we have of
ten in the affirmative and in
the negative with that do you
happen eighty three.
Thank you senator.
And madam chair looks like with
the end of our agenda thank you
all very much back to Senate
