Representative Chavez.
Representative Hall.
Present
Representative Hochman B. Hill.
Represented Martinez.
Yeah.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen.
Yeah
Representative Reeve here.
Leader Sapansky.
Madam Vice Chair, here, Madam
Chair, here, Madam Chair, you
have a quorum. Thank you. So the
first item on our agenda is
house bill for criminal
competency and treatment. That's
a bill, um, on which I am a
co-sponsor, so I'll be sitting.
Um, presenting, and I've asked
my vice chair to take over.
The power. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Um.
For the audience here, um,
We have an amendment that will
be presented first, I'm
guessing.
Actually, Madam Chair, I thought
it might be helpful just to set
the bill up.
In a Broadway, and then I ask um
Megan Dorsey, um, who has worked
very closely with me on this on
this bill, to present the
amendment and then, you know,
hopefully we can adopt the
amendment and then move forward
if that makes sense, just so you
context, Madam Chair, do you
wanna do it before or after
public comment.
Um, you mean the amendment?
Yeah, I guess that's a good
question, I guess before public
comment.
So everybody knows what's on the
table, right, you have the
floor. Great, um.
So I will be brief, um.
Criminal competency was raised
um this summer uh by the
governor, as you know, and CCJ.
spent a fair amount of time
since I don't know, May moving
forward to try to get a handle
on a very important issue, which
is how does the justice system.
Deal with individuals that it
interacts with who have a
serious mental illness.
And there are some parts of that
incompetency is one subpar.
And criminal competency is is an
issue that arises when either
someone uh a defense attorney or
a judge or a prosecutor is
concerned that the defendant,
the charged individual, is
showing signs of a mental
illness that makes them.
Unable to basically participate
in their defense.
And there are criteria that you
need to establish, but that's
kind of the sum total of it,
does the person understand the
charges as a person understand
the process, is the person
capable of communicating with
their lawyer and, you know,
participating in their own
defense, and when that happens,
a process is engaged the
proceeding is suspended, and
then there's a, there's a
process that one has to follow
to determine whether or not the
defendant is competency
competent to stand trial.
If that person.
Is deemed dangerous and charged.
Is deemed dangerous.
There is a process where that
person would be committed and
evaluated to determine either
committed or they would remain
in jail.
In custody, um, a process to
determine whether or not they're
competent.
And whether they're not there,
they would be amenable to what
they call restoration, that is
bringing them to a place where
they can participate in their
own defense.
Restoration is a is a limited.
Approach to dealing with the
individual and that it's not
treatment, they're underlying um
illness is not addressed. It
really is just bringing them to
a place where they can be tried.
Um
We are, we are addressing that
and if the person is not um
dangerous and charged with low
level felony and the
misdemeanor, um, under current
law, if the person is deemed
incompetent after they've been
evaluated.
The charge is dismissed.
That's all that happens. We
don't
You know, try to get that person
into treatment, um, the person
is just released and has the
potential for offending again
and as and what what pains me
about that is we're not helping
the individual.
So we took the approach of let's
look at the.
dangerous issue and also what,
what can we do to improve the
law when the person is not
dangerous and under current law
would be just dismiss.
And we did a couple things. One
is on the dangerousness issue,
we expanded the list of.
predicate
And
What that means is.
If the
is deemed not restorable.
And that person has been charged
with a list of predicate crimes.
A process is then engaged where
that person might be criminally
committed.
OK. And, and that and and due
process, of course, is involved
and the person will be committed
only of certain criteria are
met.
We've just expanded the list of
predicate crimes there.
With regard to the lower level
crimes we said.
OK, it's, and we, we get this.
We don't have the process for
restoration currently, so we
adopted a process for
restoration, outpatient
restoration for for those
individuals who are not
dangerous and been charged with
relatively low level crimes.
We also um provided that the
prosecutor may um seek.
Assisted outpatient treatment
for that person. So in that
case, the case would be
dismissed, but the prosecutor
would be advised that they are
now eligible as a petitioning
party under assisted outpatient
treatment.
And lastly, we maintain what is
in current law, which is the
prosecutor may also seek civil
commitment and there are
dangerousness issues there, but
they're somewhat different from
criminal dangerousness.
Um
Lastly and maybe most
importantly, I'd like to think
it's a significant change. We
expanded the evaluation process
and um for um competency, so
right now, as I said, the
evaluation addresses only
competency, and we expanded that
to include an assessment of
whether or not the individual
might be eligible under assisted
outpatient treatment or civil
commitment.
And we did that because in
talking with the state with
stakeholders and actually we had
a really great conversation with
one of our first judicial
district judges.
He pointed out.
That family members and
prosecutors often don't have the
foundational information to know
whether or not the person would
be.
Eligible for one of these other
programs. So since we have the
individual being evaluated
anyway, we're saying, OK, let's
expand that, so we might have a
better understanding about how
we might address this particular
person, so it's done on an
individual basis where we're
taking into account all of the
individuals, individual
attributes, personal attributes,
um.
And I think I've covered
everything, um.
I, I think I said that the
prosecutor may now be an AOT
petitioner, which is not current
law.
Um
So I I think we're at a place,
Madam Chair, where we could
introduce the amendment.
All right, um, so for our
members, the 222 number, if we
can confirm is 230399.1.
Does someone want to move that
forward for consideration.
I'll move the amendment for
discussion. OK, so we had a
motion by uh Representative
Hochman Hill in a second by
representative Sapansky.
Um, let's, we're on the
amendment.
OK.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, um, I'm going
to go relatively quickly through
the amendment because most of
these are technical changes and
of course we'll stand for
questions after public comment.
Um
The First Amendment.
is on page one.
Line 14, we are striking uh the
words, the professional believes
and inserting in lieu thereof in
the opinion of the professional,
again, this is just a technical
correction that is using
language more appropriate for uh
statutory construction, the
professional, whether the person
will believe something or not,
is not necessarily the same
thing as their educated opinion
in a courtroom.
And that is the same thing that
we're doing in the 2nd Amendment
on page 4, line 5.
Um, after that, moving to page
6.
Uh, between lines 16 and 17.
We are inserting committing
murder in the 1st or 2nd degree
as provided for in statute. The
reason for this is this
particular section is outlining
the list of predicate crimes
that um are relevant to
determining whether or not a
defendant in the competency
proceeding is dangerous.
Um, and in consulting with um
our the co-sponsor now
Representative Reed
felt that it was important to
make sure that those very
serious crimes are explicitly
included. There was some
discussion about whether or not
inflicting great bodily harm
might satisfy that, but in an
effort to make sure that it is
very clear that we certainly
believe murder is a dangerous
crime we've added that.
And of course, we had to
renumber the succeeding
paragraphs.
Next on page 8.
On line 3.
are striking shall be approved
by the court and inserting
instead is a court approved
program that is designed to
store the defendant to
competency. This section is
referring to those defendants
who are deemed not competent and
also not dangerous and who are
sent to outpatient restoration
programming, and we wanted to be
very clear since in current law
outpatient restoration program
in New Mexico does not exist. We
want to make sure that those
programs as they are developed
are court.
On page 89, we are striking the
words competency restoration and
inserting instead participate in
a community based competency
restoration program. Again, this
is a technical change that just
more accurately described that
on page 8, 19.
After the semicolon, we are
inserting.
And again, that's just a
technical change.
And then on page 8.
Line 24.
We are striking and and striking
line 25.
Oh, that's right. I'm sorry, I
apologize, so the amendment in
number 8, we're striking the end
the end at the end of line 24
because in the next amendment
we're striking subsection E.
And what that does, uh,
subsection E starts on line 25
and moves through line 14 on the
following page.
Um, this is a bit complicated,
but what I'll say is at uh in
the restoration pro in the
competency process in the bill
as it stands without the
amendment, there are 3 separate
times in which an evaluator
conducts an evaluation.
The expanded evaluation that uh
Cha Chandler just described for
you.
We are reducing the number of
times the expanded evaluation
needs to be conducted. It will
still be conducted at the
beginning of the process and at
the end of the process, but this
place or subsection E is being
struck, is reducing it so that
there is a progress report that
is shorter and the purpose for
that is uh reserving resources
and just making sure that it
flows with the court process.
If I could just jump in, I would
note that the um the department.
He felt this was an appropriate
change as well.
and on that point.
In addition to the Department of
Health, we also heard that from
several stakeholders uh
including advocacy groups, the
laws of the public defender, and
I think also the AG's office,
but I could be wrong, um, just
on that point, so on this, can
you just briefly describe the
difference between an evaluation
versus a progress report.
Sure, absolutely, um.
So how we have been describing
it amongst ourselves. It's not
how it's described in the bill
necessarily, but we're calling
this an expanded evaluation
because right now in under
current laws, the chair
mentioned when a competency
evaluation is conducted, the
only thing the evaluator is
deciding is is this defendant
competent or not, that is.
And again, like the chair said,
what that means is, can they
participate in their defense? Do
they understand what's
happening? Do they know who the
judge is and what the judge's
job are, it's more of a a a
level of understanding.
And um our expanded evaluation
that this bill encompasses
requires the evaluator to if.
evaluator first determines that
the defendant is not competent.
Only then does the expanded
evaluation apply where they then
decide does the person
potentially qualify for civil
commitment?
And do they potentially qualify
for assisted outpatient
treatment.
Um, and there are a lot of
prongs in each of those
evaluations, but it requires a
deeper dive into the person's
mental state, their ability to
care for themselves.
Now that's
The expanded evaluation. That's
what happens initially when
competency is raised.
Progress report, that's up here
in subsection E that we are
striking happens after the
person has been sent to
restoration programming to try
to bring them up to a level
where they can participate in
their defense.
30 days after they've been
there, the evaluator does an
update report, a progress report
essentially, where they're
saying under current law.
Do we still think the person is
competent or not? Are they
making progress towards
attaining competency. Do we
think we're going to be able to
get there in the statutorily
prescribed time limit.
Um, and right now under current
law, that's all it says and with
if.
You choose to adopt this
amendment that will stay the
same. However, when restoration
treatment is, or excuse me,
restoration programming is
concluded.
The full evaluation will be
conducted at that point again.
That answer your question.
I think that helps. Thank you
for now. And we're on the
amendment.
I think, and that would leave us
at number 10, I think.
Thank you very much.
On
H9 line 20.
After the word person, we're
striking the remainder of the
line.
And on line 21.
We are striking services to the
defendant and inserting instead
supervising the defendant's
community-based competency
restoration program. Again, this
was a technical change that I
believe was raised to us by the
Department of Health.
Um, and this is for conformity
with sake, uh, earlier in the
bill, we are.
Directing who is to do these
evaluations and the way that the
draft ended up uh was
inconsistent, so this is just
making sure that we know exactly
who is conducting the evaluation
at the direction of DOH on page
16, line 11.
Uh, again, we're striking.
The Department of Health
believes and putting instead in
the opinion of the Department of
Health, as I discussed earlier,
it's just because that word
believe is to construction.
Next, for amendment number 12,
which is also on page 16 at line
24.
Same amendment.
Same type of change.
Then on page.
Between lines 5 and 6, again,
we're inserting murder in the
1st or 2nd degree, this is just
another place in the statue
where that list of predicate
crimes appears. So for the same
reason I described earlier,
we're including that very
dangerous crime.
And then in Amendment number 14,
renumbering.
On page 21.
Line 24 after the word
defendant, we are inserting who
is.
And that was just a clerical
error that needs to be in there
for it to.
On page 22.
Between lines 9 and 10, again,
we're inserting murder in the
first degree, it is the same
list of predicate crimes,
however, in this instance, it's
relevant to criminal commitment.
And then renumbering on page 28.
Between lines 8 and 9.
Thing again, the list of
predicate crimes 3 and
renumbering.
And then Amendment 2, which is
on page 30.
A line 6.
After the word act.
We are inserting, provided that
the report remains valid
pursuant to the timelines set
forth in the coder Act, and the
reason for this is here at the
very end, what we've done is
amended.
In the bill, we amended the law
so that this expanded evaluation
can be utilized byOOT
proceedings. Um, however, we
heard from interested parties
and potentially also the DOH I I
can't exactly remember where it
came from, but there was a
concern that that might result
in the use of steel or outdated
reports, which of course we
don't want to do, often very
quickly, sometimes very slowly.
It depends on the individual
person for that, um, whatever
appropriate timelines are
currently in.
statute for the civil commitment
and assisted outpatient process
remain intact if this bill is
passed.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, that is all of the
amendments in this.
draught.
And Madam Chair, before we go to
the floor, I'd like to.
the floor to my colleague Anaya.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, um, as you can
imagine, I was pretty timid to
approach this subject, uh, given
its history and how politicized
it's really been.
Um, but I'm really, really proud
of the work that we've done. You
know, we've done a lot of work
over a number of months, and
what I know is that Cha Chandler
and I have the same goal, and
that's to get the greatest
amount of people, the most help
possible.
Um
There are two things that I
really hope to add to this
conversation. One is hoping to
break down some of the
complicated language, um, so
that the public knows um what's
in this bill and what will be
affecting them. And then too, I
hope to bring lived experience
and a face to this bill as well.
Um, I let Representative
Chandler know before I decided
to take on this topic that I
actually called my aunt.
Um, and my aunt who's been
dealing with my cousin who's
been through the competency
system over and over. And
without a real explanation of
why I was calling her, um, I
just said, yeah, if you
had what you needed for Paul.
What would it be?
And to me, that was the answer
that I got to start working on
this piece of legislation. She
said one of several things, um,
that we address in this bill,
uh, one is, one of which is when
he's restored to competency.
You know, just restoration
alone, he goes to trial, he goes
to jail and he comes back worse
than he was before.
However, when he gets treatment,
she said he's back to being my
little boy.
And to me that um actually uh is
the big win in this bill in
particular is it's not just
keeping folks on the criminal
side over and over and over.
There's actually a pathway to
get to the civil side, um, so
you can get some form of
treatment, um, I will say it is
not the robust treatment that we
need, but we're working on that
this session and um this bill
would not stand alone in that
regard. So here are a couple of
um key takeaways from this.
Spell
So there's a path from the
criminal side to the civil side.
specifically for non-dangerous
defendants.
The expanded evaluation that uh
Cha Chandler spoke about, um,
would allow families like mine,
families like my aunt, to be
able to take the expanded
evaluation and use it on the
civil side. That would mean that
my aunt isn't going through a
whole series of hoops in order
to get an evaluation for my
cousin. She would be able to
access it because it had already
been done.
Um, it opens language to ensure
that inpatient treatment
programs are more than just the
behavioral health institute in
Las Vegas.
Um, this is a really critical um
need that we heard as we were
talking to a series of
stakeholders is that there
needed to be more options, um,
instead of just the behavioral
Health Institute.
Um, community-based outpatient
competency restoration for
non-dangerous defendants. I know
we've spoken about this a number
of times, um, but, uh, we know
that the um appropriations that
we hope uh pass this session
will also help guide this
portion of the bill.
And then, of course, in our
language is also a nod to the
diversion programs that
currently exist. We know that we
are receiving regular updates on
them and we know that in some
cases they're working, so I
think one of the things that we
tried to keep in mind was
keeping some language open for
us to be able to um
Uh, talk about and um.
And uh
And continue to assess um the
diversion programs that we have
in place right now. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. Um,
So logistically, we'll just go
to the audience first and then
we'll debate the amendment and
then the bill um that we can do
that. So for the audience, um.
Those that are in opposition to
this, please raise your hands.
All right? And um
Those in support, please raise
your hands.
OK. We'll start with opposition
in person um and online we'll
give 10 minutes, uh, 1 minute
each for those who want to speak
in opposition to House Bill 4 as
amended.
Um
We'll go ahead and start with
that. Is there anyone that would
like to speak in opposition to
House Bill 4.
here in the room.
Go ahead and
Oh, thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, I'm
not really totally in
opposition. I'm your name for
the record I'm sorry, Ellen
Pine's representing the
disability coalition. I'm sort
of in the middle because I have
some support and some
opposition, but you didn't ask
for the middle ground, so there
were fewer in opposition, so I
stood up. Oh, we very much
support the proposal to have
community outpatient
restoration, but as the sponsor
pointed out, those don't exist,
so although we like the idea,
we're not sure how much.
It will actually happen in
person. Our concern is the lack
of provision in this bill for
diversion out of the criminal
justice system. We believe that
people who are committing acts
that may actually technically be
low-level crimes but are
actually manifestations of their
mental illness should be
diverted out of the criminal
justice system and into
treatment instead and although I
very much agree with what both
representative Chandler and
Representative Anaya said about
the preference for getting.
treatment. That's not what this
bill does. What this bill does
is whenever possible, it keeps
these people in the criminal
justice system and does not
divert them into treatment. We
have very serious concerns about
that. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Anyone else in
opposition in the room? Anyone
in opposition online.
Please raise your hands.
Kim Chavez.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, Kim
Chavez Cook with the laws of the
Public Defender and as with the
previous speaker, uh, we're not
standing in pure opposition. We
uh do support some of the
underlying goals of the bill,
but we also feel strongly that
the criminal legal system is ill
equipped to address mental
health issues, and that while we
uh appreciate the public safety
goal of having fewer defendants'
cases dismissed, uh, we would
like to see more of a focus on
voluntary treatment and not just
the involuntary
treatment that this pill is
focused on, although we do
understand that that is one
piece of the puzzle. We want um
to recognize that there's
nothing currently in place to
serve as a statewide alternative
to prosecution for these folks,
we echo the comments already
made about um pre-prosecution
diversion. There's also no
infrastructure for meaningful
long term treatment, and we do
think it would be worth
considering incorporating a
continuum of care approach for
folks after their criminal case
to make sure that they can
Continue to access services even
after the termination of a
criminal case is over, um,
thank you for your
consideration.
Patsy Romero.
Uh, good afternoon to members of
the committee. My name is Patsy
Romero. I represent the National
Alliance on Mental illness in
New Mexico. I want to begin,
Madam Chair and members of the
committee that NAMI's position
is always uh asking that
involuntary commitment it's a
last resort for those
individuals who suffer with
mental illness. It doesn't
uphold the individual's dignity
oftentimes, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, we continue to
experience the stigma that the
mentally ill are a threat to
society. We understand the goal
of the of this legislation, but
the current competency statute
as it reads right now, is
already meeting that need. And
the most important piece that
we're missing here is the
community restoration programs.
They do not exist. They will
not.
be available if this legislation
should pass, civil commitment is
well written already in statute
in New Mexico. It's well defined
and nomi supported assisted
outpatient treatment. So it is
OK, well defined, and we support
that. Thank you, Mrs. Romero.
All right. Thank you.
Rowanisser.
Hi, thank you, Madam Chair and
committee members. I'm Doctor
Neer, I'm a forensic
psychologist and mental health
policy analyst. Um, I just have
some functional comments. I'm
not opposed or in support, I
guess. I'm still curious. Uh,
so, on page 28, line 17, um,
where it says necessary and
available documents reasonably
required for, and I would
suggest adding evaluation and
admission to allow our
evaluators to get access to
records in a more timely
fashion. Um, my last issue is
that I have, I have some
challenges and concerns about
the expansion of the evaluations
and that report being open to
community members, family
members, whoever wants that. My
recommendation would be that
possibly we split all in one
document, but maybe we have
section A and Section B and
Section B is that for the civil
side, and that's what's um
allowed and then competency
remains sealed since that's for
a criminal.
case. Um, I just think that
there's a lot of issues
releasing an entire competency
evaluation and what seems to be
pertinent is the, is the civil
side, and I think there is a
mechanism that we could use to
separate those two things. Um,
and those are sort of my
thoughts at this point.
Thank you.
We have an individual with admin
title.
Um, thank you. I believe, uh, my
name is Nat Dean. I'm a
disability advocate and a person
with disabilities, madam Vice
Chair, Madam Chair, and I
believe I see uh the speaker,
um, restorative justice is a
very important piece, uh,
understanding the trickle down
effect, someone that you took
someone's car, that family then
can't go to work, they can't pay
their rent, and often that
develops empathy. I think it's
very important to have the
forensic psychologist or
psychiatrist to evaluate because
they have
expertise that is essential to
create the evaluations that can
be effective. We need more
qualified providers in New
Mexico to provide these uh
forensic psychiatrists and
psychology psychologist
evaluations, and then access to
representation is a very, very
important piece of this. It's
not just a public defender for
everyone because they may not be
Uh, eligible for public
defender. The administrative
office of courts may or may not
have the expertise to act as a
medical evaluator. Thank you
very much, Mr. Chair. Uh, Madam
Chair, Madam Vice Chair, Mr.
Speaker, and members of the
committee.
Thank you.
OK, we'll go back into the room
for those in support that would
like to speak, um, folks will
have one minute, please try not
to repeat comments that had
already been stated, and then
we'll go online.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, Jeremy
Sco, police chief for Las Cruces
PD. I think one important point
is that I've been vocal about
this because we deal with this
in Las Cruces a lot.
The population that's not being
addressed right now are those
that have numerous crimes that
we cannot address because they
get dismissed. So just to give
some context, the AOC data says
that
30 people in the last 5 years
have 1,046 charges for those 30
people that have been dismissed
due to competency, and those do
not include municipal court data
throughout the state because
that's not tracked by AOC.
So in Las Cruces municipal court
data, my top 5 offenders who
have competency issues have had
1,247 charges dismissed in 5
years. I'll get first names as
quickly. Heather has 359.
Eduardo, 281 charges, Donald,
217 charges, Logan, 200 charges
1, 190 charges.
So I, I'm in support of this. I
thank the sponsors, Madam Chair,
for having the courage to take
this on. I think as written,
this would be a huge, uh, this
would be a lot of progress from
what we have right now. I do
have one concern, and that's
these people I mentioned are the
least likely to comply with
outpatient competency
restoration. Right now there's
no mechanism if they refuse to
comply because they have refused
to comply with the version
already, um, to make sure that
there's another alternative for
the judge. So I'd ask that the
judge have the option that they
may order impatient.
If they fail to comply with
outpatient. Thank you, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Gary Alpi.
I'm CEO of Disability Rights New
Mexico. We do support
community-based restoration of
competency, um.
Restoration of competency.
That is based upon the state of
the state is lacking right now,
but the state of state also is
lacking in the resources for
competency evaluations right
now.
And also there, there is no
restoration accommodency
resources, so there is no
miracle grow here, but we
already have a system that's
already
can't meet the capacity, can't
meet the demand, and so people
are languishing in jail right
now waiting for these
evaluations. So people are
already stuck in the system
waiting, and it's also an unsan
standardized system.
In a system that's not
organized, it varies from county
to county. So we also have
concerns about the expanding
evaluation.
But behind all this is we talk
about accountability. We got to
remember another player in this,
the managed care organizations.
Almost all of these individuals
meet Medicaid eligibility or
should be getting Medicaid. They
should be getting services and
care coordination so that they
can complete competency.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, member of the
committee, I want to, uh, I'm
Meredith Main speaking on behalf
of the American Association of
University Women, and I want to
thank the sponsors, and I want
to definitely appreciate the
testimonies that have gone
before, including ones in
opposition because I think um we
have
This bill represents it's a
bipartisan bill, lots and lots
of effort has gone into it, may
not be perfect, but it's way
better than what we have right
now, and the idea of treatment
rather than incarceration, um,
is
Absolutely essential. We've got
to fund the behavioral health.
In our state, make it robust
again and uh we have lots and
lots of bills that need to get
through all of the wickets in
this session, uh, but I urge the
committee to support this and
continue to make progress in
future sessions. There is no
reason not to have this one go
forward when it gets most of the
way there, but please also pass
the other funding bills. Thank
you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I'm Ben Valdez,
Deputy Chief of Police with the
Police department. Um, I want to
also thank the sponsors of this
bill, uh, the testimony by those
that provide the information and
um just express that this sounds
like it's a great step in the
right direction. Unfortunately,
we have folks that continue to
reoffend that are better suited
to get assistance whether
through this process or others,
but what's
right now is not working.
And our community is feeling
that harm because there is
nothing for folks that are
Offending in need of mental
health assistance need to be
evaluated. They are not going to
seek help unless we make it
mandator for them, but um I
appreciate your time. I ask that
you please support this, and
again, I believe this is a step
in the right direction. Thank
you.
Thank you Deputy.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Carolyn Wynn with New
Mexico State Police. We are in
support of this bill. Our
officers recognize there are
members of our communities who
continue to suffer from some
sort of crisis or mental
illness. And this is just
another tool to ensure those
individuals.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Bennett Bauer. I'm the
chief public defender since we
had somebody cautiously in test
line during the opposition, I'm
going to cautiously testify and
support. I want to thank the
sponsor and her staff for
talking to us over the last
several months about this bill.
It's a big lift, uh, I think
something needs to be done. We
have a bit of a concern with
expanding the list of crimes
eligible for competence
restoration and commitment. The
other thing I want to emphasize
as a trial attorney who's both
prosecuted
and defended crimes where
competencies is an issue is that
a lot of these people are
actually not guilty.
And so if there's some kind of
Assumption that what we're
getting to is finding them
guilty. I've represented many
people who when we would have
gotten down to the facts were
actually incorrectly or unjustly
charged, and please everybody
keep that in mind as we go
forward. Thank you, man.
Thank you, Ben.
All right, we'll go online, um,
please raise your hand if you
are in support of this bill, and
you have one minute.
Cherry coal
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, I'm Terry Cole,
president and CEO of the Greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce.
I appeared today in strong
support of Madam Chair's HB 4.
This bill brings much needed
reform to the criminal
competency statutes, something
long in need of attention. At
the core of the bill is
significantly expanding the
number of crimes to be
considered for competency
evaluation. That coupled with
improved evaluations by
competent.
Professionals work to do two
things, protect the public from
the most dangerous criminals and
channel those people into the
very best mental health
treatment for them. This creates
a win-win situation. We're all
familiar with the revolving door
in HB 4 is aimed exactly at
turning that scenario around
which too often results in the
accused being released back into
the community only to be
re-arrested.
On some other crime. We commend
the sponsors for carrying this
bill, and we urge you to vote
yes on HB 4. Thank you.
Thank you, Terry.
SP Pfeiffer
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
honorable members of the
committee, thank you for taking
up this critically important
issue. Um, my, my name is Shaun
Pfeiffer. I'm a resident, um,
lifelong resident of Donana
County. Uh, my husband and I own
a business in Las Cruces, and
this bill is going to make a
huge difference in some of the
issues that we've been faced
with in Las Cruces, most
specifically to help some of the
sickest people in our community.
I am in support of this bill
95%, um, I'd like to echo Chief
stories sentiment that if we
could go just a little step
further to allow for the judge
to make provisions for people
who can't complete inpatient and
we do have those facilities in
Las Cruces. If we could go one
step further to allow them to,
um, commit people to inpatient
care, that would solve so many
issues in Las Cruces. So I want
to thank everyone for hearing
today and hope that you consider
that that just little final
push, uh, to help the people in
our community. Thank you.
OK, um, thanks for those who
provided public comments, um,
we'll go back to the sponsors on
the amendments. Do we have, we
have representative Reeve.
I don't have a comment on the
actual amendments, um, just, I
was just getting on the list on
the amendment Speaker Martinez.
Uh, it's already been moved.
For discussion, you want to
adopt it. OK. I just have one
question. Is there any, are
there any other questions?
Um, just on the, um, inclusion
of the uh the.
Accusation, committing murder in
the first degree or 2nd degree,
just as a a refresher for me,
um, what currently happens in
the process where someone who is
deemed incompetent and also um
accused of murder. What, what do
we do with those individuals at
this time?
Madam Chair and Representative,
I'll take a stab at it and I'm
lucky to have a great expert
sitting next to me, um, that
person, there would be a
hearing.
Not competent and charged with
murder, there would be a hearing
to determine whether or not
they're dangerous.
Um, because that's a predic,
that's an important underlying
basis for having the person
criminally committed. So that's
what would happen, you have to
prove it by clear and convincing
evidence, and if
Um, the person is charged with
great bodily harm, we, we
thought that covered it, but
this clarifies that it does
cover it, um, Madam Chair and
representative.
And just thank you, Madam Chair,
um, just to clarify the criminal
commitment separate from this
bill, um, criminal commitment if
a determination of dangerousness
exists following that, um.
Charge. Criminal commitment just
means um jail time if I, if
that's, no. Can you explain what
that is and the addresses
criminal commitment and it, it's
actually um.
placed in a psychiatric hospital
currently in Las Vegas. It's a
locked facility and actually uh
the bill provides and current
law provides that that person
would receive treatment.
And they would be um committed
for no longer than the length of
the charge for which they were
um.
you know, charged initially.
Thank you for the clarification,
Madam Chair. Um, we have a, a
recommendation for adoption of
the amendments. We have a second
by Rep Sapansy, um, how, what's
the, we'll go ahead and go take
a call.
Representative of Beta.
Representative Chavez.
Yes.
Representative Hall.
Yes
Representative Hoffman B. Hill,
yes.
Representative Martinez.
Yes
Speaker Martinez, yes.
Representative McQueen, yes.
Representative Reeb, yes.
Leader Sapansky, yes.
Madam Vice Chair, yes.
Madam Chair
Yes.
We have an adopted amendment.
OK, we're back on the bill, um.
We have Representative.
Thank you, Madam Vice Chair and
Madam Chair and um that uh
representative of Beta and Miss
Dorsey, um.
I just, um, this was a big, big
endeavor, definitely, um, I work
this code a lot in my career can
tell, can you tell the members
of the committee, um, how old
this code.
is
Representative Ms Dorsey, if you
don't.
And I want to put you on the
side, it's old, I guess I I I'll
give you that, would you say
it's pretty old?
Pretty old.
1978 1978. OK, so this, this
hasn't been rewritten in that
length of time, sorry, I wasn't
trying to think you have to
research, but I
This isn't perfect by any means,
um, would you agree, uh,
representative, as far as
perfect.
I, I 100% agree.
I mean, it's a very hard topic
to take on.
And I think um both you and I um
represented would acknowledge
that we need to build out our
behavioral health system, and
there were obviously comments in
at various points in time in
public comment with that is
pointed out, but we know that
this year we're on track to do
that and eventually.
This bill
Those programs will come
together that's, you know,
that's the plan, right? And it's
Madam Chair or Madam Vice Chair,
Madam Chair, um, it's, it's a,
it's a great start, and I think
that, you know, we'll have to
work on this more in the future,
um, possibly, um, but for the
people who are saying we don't
have the programs in place. Um,
can you kind of explain kind of
what your, your job, our jobs
we're here to try to, what we're
doing with this piece of
legislation and what we're
hoping to happen, um, with the.
The actual resources and
programs that we'll need, I'm
sure.
I hope I can answer the question
as presented. Obviously there,
it's a two prong approach, one
is addressing those who are
dangerous and have been charged
with serious crimes, and we
think we've improved upon um
that portion because we've.
Increase the options and
pathways for those individuals
who are dangerous to be
addressed appropriately, but
we've also expanded pathways for
treatment, and I think that is a
very important goal and it
aligns with legislature's
interest in expanding on
behavioral health services and
building out.
The numerous programs that we
need community based programs so
that people get treatment, um,
if at all possible.
And Madame by and Madam Chair,
so what happens in the situation
where in your community and this
law, let's say passes and those
programs don't exist yet, what
what will happen?
Um, what will happen is if it's
a not, let's take the non the
dangerous issue off if, if we're
talking just about, you know,
um, nonviolent lower level uh
there will be fewer options,
obviously, they're currently if
those communities I'd like to
think will develop diversion
programs, and I am 100% on board
with the notion of developing
prep prosecution diversion, and
they have the ability to do that
now, and there are some in place
in various.
points in town, but there's also
the potential for restoration at
which the community-based
restoration so that and I
acknowledge that does not exist,
but we've given more options and
we're.
Funding, I, I believe funding
this session programs that will
address and support this effort.
Um, and I
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. In addition to.
But I
point on that question.
And because it was raised in
public comment as well. We
understand and acknowledge that
today outpatient restoration
does not exist. We are hoping
that is funded as part of the
behavioral health packages that
we hope to see coming over from
the Senate. In the meantime, we
know that's not going to happen
immediately.
It's gonna be a process. In the
meantime.
There are in this provision, new
alternatives that don't exist in
current law, as you've heard
over and over in current law for
those individuals who are not
dangerous and not competent,
their cases are dismiss.
And in this bill, if outpatient
restoration is not available in
the community where the
defendant resides in the
language of the bill, it has to
be in their community.
Then the the case will have to
be dismissed, however,
They will have access to that
expanded evaluation and the
judge is authorized to recommend
that the district attorney
pursue, um, assisted outpatient
treatment and qualified
petitioners can pursue civil
commitment if that is an
appropriate alternative. So we
are hoping that even when cases
are dismissed that appropriate
treatment is pursued through
civil avenues rather than
through the criminal justice
process.
And thank you, uh, Madam Vice
Chair, Madam Chair, and Miss
Dorsey, I think that the three
things I like about this.
This as a start is the
misdemeanors that you just
discussed because you are right,
they just, if they're not
competent, there's no
alternatives but to just dismiss
and then we just end up picking
up more crimes and they just
continue to sit in the jail and
continue to be in the system, so
I like the different
alternatives that we can at
least do something with these
misdemeanor crimes, um, and get
treatment, whatever we need to
do. Um, I love the expanded
evaluation process because we're
gonna save a lot of money also
on evaluations because.
That's something that is always
an issue, multiple evaluations
as you're in the criminal realm
then to move into the civil
realm, um, sometimes you have to
get another evaluation. I liked
the idea, uh, Madam Vice Chair
and Representative somehow maybe
splitting those she said AB
because there are some issues
with that, and I think that was
a great um a great observation
that maybe we should put in this
spill.
Um
Of course, my favorite part is
I, I do love the expansion of
the.
Criminal crimes, um, that are
listed in here because there was
a lot of uh violent defendants
who actually were falling
through the cracks and we were
not able to do that commitment
that you discussed uh
representative Chandler about.
Having the clear and convincing
hearing the court does have to
find them dangerous, um, and
they have the potential for
committing those crimes, and
then they do if they do get
committed to Las Vegas, we still
review it every 2 years to see
if they've been restored to
competency, um, and can go back
to the trial process, so those
are the three things that I
think this bill accomplishes it
is by no means perfect, I agree
with you, but I think it is a a
very good start in the in the
right direction to deal with
what I've seen just as a pro.
computer over my years, um.
Just not having any options, you
know, with some of these
individuals that maybe as even
uh Mr. Bauer said, aren't guilty
or.
Or, um, just need to, to somehow
be stabilized, I appreciate you
tackling this and taking my
suggestions on a lot of the
stuff, Madam chair and um, I,
yeah, I'm a sponsor, so I
definitely will be supporting
this bill, but um.
I, I think this is a, a very
good start. So thank you, thank
you, representative.
Representative Martinez with
Martinez.
You, Madam Chair.
I, I thoroughly enjoyed the work
during the interim and I
understand that.
work that you
getting us to this point.
Thank you.
Can you put together to get.
Get this
It was a monumental.
I want to thank you for that. I
do have a couple of questions.
Um
There was discussion during the
interim and and I was.
Kind of going over the bill.
Um
How many people do you think are
gonna be impacted by?
I mean, even a percentage of the
cases that we
Oh, I, if I understand your uh
question, um, Madam Chair and
Representative, the information
that we received during CCJ is
individuals where competency
comes up is roughly the highest
number I've heard is 5% of
criminal cases. I've heard
numbers as low as 2%, but.
5 to 2% of the criminal cases
have a competency issue raised
if, if that was your question,
Madam Chair and Representative.
Madam Chair, Madam Chair, um,
That, that was exactly.
question that I was asking.
Um, this is a great starting
point.
For the package that I hope we
deliver to the people of New
Mexico.
Um,
This is one
Small tool in the toolbox that
hopefully.
6 weeks from now, we deliver to
uh
The people who sent us here.
Um, my, my last question.
Um, when you were compiling the
list of
A new
No crimes to be included in
this.
How did you arrive at that list?
Was there a specific?
Uh
Process that you got that got
you there.
Um, Madam Chair and
Representative, there was um, if
you remember through CCJ, there
was a Supreme Court, um, mental
health and competency
commission. We looked to them,
they, this is a list that was
included in.
Madam Chair
And we added murder.
Uh, in consultation with our
co-sponsor Representative Reed.
Madam Chair, Madam Chair, again.
I want to thank you for the hard
work it took to get us to this
point.
I like
Thank your representative, uh,
Representative Hochman v. Hill.
Thank you very much, um, Madam
Chairman my chair, Madam Chair,
um, representative experts, I
too want to commend you on
taking on an extremely difficult
issue that we have been needing
to tackle for quite some time
and I admire your courageousness
in your intestinal fortitude
going through all of this, um, I
am very interested in some of
the questions that have already
been broached on the interplay
between the criminal side of
this.
in the civil side of this, so we
know that um with criminal
competency as a system stands
now, you have people waiting for
competency hearings, languishing
in jail, they get the hearing
and they're declared with, you
know, competent or not, but now
you're proposing this entire new
process, right, which includes
an evaluation by I'm assuming of
um a provider or someone
qualified to do this evaluation,
and if it, if
The person is accused of
specific crimes and competency
is a part of that evaluation,
does that stay within the
criminal context.
Or if they are not found to be
competent in the criminal
context, you then open up a
civil case on the civil side to
get them to AOT. How does that?
What is that
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative,
I would be happy to answer that
question. I'm glad you brought
it up because we've been.
Um, it is a good one.
I'm gonna try to take a slight
step back because it's
complicated.
In this
Provision, what happens is that
when a person is charged with a
crime.
And somebody involved in the
case, the prosecutor, the
defense attorney, or the judge
raises competency.
Then a qualified uh
psychiatrist, psychologists or
other qualified professional,
that's current law.
Conducts a competency
evaluation.
If that
Evaluator determines that the
defendant is not competent.
Then they conduct the expanded
evaluation to determine, do they
qualify for civil commitment.
At that point in time, the judge
has to have a competency
hearing.
And usually the expert comes,
they testify, defense counsel
can call their own expert. It
can be a battle of experts if we
need to be, but at the end of
the day, it's the judge that
decides is the defendant
competent or not?
After that, then the judge has
to decide is this person
dangerous or not?
And if they are dangerous, then
they proceed with um competency
restoration and a secure locked
facility.
Um, through the dangerous
process.
If they decide the person is not
dangerous.
Then there are options.
The prosecutor can ask that the
person be sent to outpatient
restoration treatment if it's
available in that person's
community.
Or the case can be dismissed.
And then a separate civil
petition filed or separate civil
proceedings in a completely
different case. And that was a
big discussion that we have had
with the Department of Health,
um, because they had the same
question. This seems confusing,
what do we do if the evaluation
says the person is not competent
and also qualifies for AOT.
That is not going to change in
this process, what happens is
the criminal case must be
completely disposed of before
you can pursue a separate civil
case under a different case
number.
Thank, thank you, Madam Chair,
and, and, and thank you, Madam
Chair representative Ms Dorsey,
um, that that's exactly the
answer I was looking for,
because of course there are
consequences to having a
criminal record, right? And
there are actually consequences
to civil commitment. Many people
don't know this, but if someone
is committed civilly, you are
added to an FBI list. You may
lose access to Section 8 housing
benefits, so there are
consequences even to the civil
process, so if someone were to
be
recommended to AOT will those
same consequences follow them if
the civil case is.
Opened as well, or we don't, is
that too in the weeds for this
bill, this moment.
Do we have
Madam Chair Representative,
happy to answer that question.
Um,
the consequences that follow a
criminal conviction are not the
same as the consequences that
follow civil commitment or an
assisted though the collateral
consequences to a criminal
conviction are far and wide and
varying and very damaging for an
individual's future.
Those will cease if the if a
person is civilly committed,
they will, they will, um, if
they are subject to assisted
outpatient treatment.
I am sure that there are
additional civil or excuse me,
collateral consequences that
follow that type of order, I
would imagine without knowing
with certainty that they are
less than those equivalent or
that those that happen in the
civil commitment process.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Miss Dorsey, Madam chair,
just food for thought, perhaps
as we get further through the
process and and codifying AOT in
law, perhaps expungement after a
certain amount of time might be
an idea to consider as well. So
thank you very much for
answering my question.
Thank you, uh, Hoffman v. Hill.
We have Speaker Martinez. Thank
you, Madam Chair and Madam
Chair,
and Mannaya and Ms Dorsey, thank
you for the presentation and I
want to add my, my gratitude to
you all for the hard work.
That you've undertaken.
Um
Since April.
Of 2024.
Um, and, and this process that
we are going through this
bipartisan process, um, even
hearing from the audience, Madam
Chair, uh.
You know
Some opposition, some support.
A lot of it in the middle.
Is exactly what we're going for.
Um, and this is one of those,
um,
Moments and
Legislative process when
You find that perfect.
Fit that perfect bill almost.
Uh, you know, one of the things
we said, um,
During that special session in,
in, in July and
Leading up to it and right
afterwards was that
His legislature needed the time
to do this.
In the right way.
Because what we didn't want to
do was
Act.
Um
And be careless.
And potentially,
harmed the very same communities
that.
Um, that I think have asked all
of us because we all have these
communities in all of our
districts.
To help them, and it's both the
victims of crime and and and the
perpetrators of crimes who are
sometimes ill themselves.
Um, and in, in, in the process
of being ill, they also become
victims themselves. And it's
just revolving doors, the
cyclical thing.
That
Oh
Uh
Is that you?
Um.
Wow
Some powerful words there.
Um, it's, it's that cyclical,
um.
Process that I think
Um
has given way to to
To what we see in our
communities. And you know, I
represent.
Part of downtown Albuquerque, I,
I see this every day. I see it
outside of my house, right?
People who should otherwise.
Be supported by the criminal
justice system and the
behavioral health system.
Being failed over and over and
over again, right? And
oftentimes it falls to
Law enforcement to respond over
and over and over again to
somebody out on the street,
right? Oftentimes it it it it
falls to neighbors calling.
help for somebody who
Um, just can't receive it right
now. Let's remember that.
This bill is not moving on its
own. There is a package, uh,
also of, of.
Behavioral, health.
Infrastructure.
Rebuild, if you will, that is
coming from the Senate, that
will be a part of the system
that we are creating together,
right?
Um, and it is that system that
I believe
Will yield
The best possible results for
the community's most impacted by
crime as well as the people.
Who in many cases are the
perpetrators of that crime, but
again remembering that these
folks are themselves victims of
other systems.
So for you all to come together,
um, in bipartisan nature.
And come up with what I believe
is, is a very, very good.
Um, system.
That to, you know, the point
made earlier, we will continue
to improve upon, right, because
there'll be things that we
learn, this thing will evolve as
time goes on. Um, I'm extremely,
extremely proud of this, um, and
I just want to reiterate that
gratitude to you all, Miss
Dorsey, for all your work,
chairwoman, representative, um,
to the experts you've brought in
over the last.
Several months to help build
this out, um, and to members of
our caucus and the other, the
other caucus as well Ree and
others who have been involved as
well.
To make improvements.
Um, I'm, um, I'm grateful and
I'm proud.
Um, I can't wait to see this.
Play out in practice?
Um, and I can't wait to see.
The restorative impact it will
have.
I think on, on
All of our communities.
That's what
This is what legislating for the
people looks like.
And not legislating score
political points.
Or legislating out of.
s
This is how it should be done.
Um, thank you.
I can't wait to support this. I
can't wait to get this on the
floor of the house. I can't wait
to get this over to the other
chamber for them to to do the
same. Thank you, Madam Chair,
and thank you sponsors.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Representative Hall.
Madam Vice Chair, Madam Chair
Representative.
Miss Darcy, um,
I was looking at the fiscal
impact report.
And
It this is over 3 years
estimated that uh I read this
correctly, in total.
$43.9 million roughly. Is that
accurate?
Just looking at the FIR.
I accept the numbers of the FIR.
I don't have any basis to
challenge them one way or
another, um, chair and represent
him. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Spicer, and where I'm going with
this is we heard a minute ago um
that 5% this roughly affects 5%
of the
People
Do you have any numbers because
I, we got to hear uh one of our
police chiefs roughly say how
many.
Times
Not even responding that people
were arrested, so it doesn't
even count responses. Do we have
any numbers throughout the state
with how many times our law
enforcement has to deal with
this.
I know it would be astronomical,
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair and representative,
I think your questions are
really good one. Certainly chief
story has went in when I've been
communicating with him. He has
provided data, at least for the
Las Cruces area of the number of
individuals who's come through
the system.
Which is a very high the similar
it's the same offenders over and
over again coming through. He
has data for his community. I
don't know if we have data on a
statewide basis, um, Madam Chair
and Representative, but it's
compelling, um, actually, and to
your point about the 5% and
actually representative
Martinez.
People, you know, one might look
at that and say this isn't
really very significant.
And might want to minimize the
impact that this bill will have,
but for the chiefs and the law
enforcement who are dealing with
the same people over and over
again that are part of that 5%.
This is a significant issue for
their community and us taking it
on, I think, Madam Chair, is
very important as a public
safety measure, Madam Chair and
representative, I hope I didn't
go on too long.
Madam chair, Madam Tres, I know
where I was heading. This has
been a cascading effect in our,
in our state. I know elsewhere
in the nation and to address
this, and so I, I think I I
would just caution anyone who's
listening in the audience when
you simply look at a number to
sit back and weigh what that
number is actually going to
mean.
Uh, because what our police
departments.
are incurring in costs our
cities.
Uh, all the other issues.
To come up with a bipartisan
Um
Bill to begin to address that is
outstanding. I just wanted to
make sure that everyone
understood.
There's no arbitrary, hey, we
just need another.
Um
50 million here and 50 million
there, so that, that's what I
was going after and thank you.
That's that's my commentary,
Madam Vice Chair.
Uh, thank you, Representative
Hall.
Are there any other questions
from the committee?
Right, I think um I think what
we want to do is, is roll this
bill.
Um
Until
Monday
I think we're gonna
Um, bring other other public
safety bills that we are looking
at and try to package them
together.
And vote on them as one bill, is
that correct? Yeah, the, the
plan at least I as chair of and
I've communicated with my
ranking member as to the
approaches we'll use this bill
as, uh, you know, one of the
safety package bills and we've
been discussing what other bills
might be included in that
package. It may, um, Madam Chair
and Mr. Speaker, not be till
Wednesday to the entire packages
is is presented for adoption or
uh.
by this committee.
All right. Well, thank you for
the discussion today, members,
um, you have a rolled bill.
Thank you
Next up we have Representative
Garrett, um, if she's in the
room. I don't.
Yeah
Um.
Everyone
The next item on, so.
Something I should have
announced before we started
criminal competency is the 4th
degree felony for shooting
through there is an amendment
and we are rolling that bill to
Saturday, so just be aware of
that one. We'll hear on
Saturday.
Tomorrow.
Today, today's Friday, right?
Like my world is like I never
know what day it is, um, so that
will be rolled till tomorrow
legislative day 3.
Oh, OK. Oh.
feels, Mister Speaker, like
about 2.5 weeks we've been into
doing this, you know.
All right, so I'm sorry to um
digress. We are now on House
Bill 38 possession of a weapon
conversion device is
representedates here.
Representative Little, next two
bills are representative.
I'm going to try texting her.
Hello, Representative Cates.
Good to see you. We're on House
Bill 38, possession of a weapon
conversion device and I know
there isn't amendment and don't
know how you wanna handle it.
You can present the bill and
then talk about the amendment.
your preference is in terms of
context and what you think makes
most sense.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, and
thank you, uh, committee, um,
the amendment.
Ah
Uh
Have have you received the
amendment, Madam Chair?
Yes.
OK, and we'll, we'll have it
distributed.
I'm not sure I have that but.
And
so the amendment that we're
aware of just so make sure we're
all on the same page is.
230295.2. Is that what you have?
We have 0.230392.1.
Was there an update? Was there
an update to that that we
received? We have a point.2.
Let me just double check my
records.
OK, so we have a point too. All
right.
So sorry, man, she's wrong.
OK.
OK.
the
Thank you, Madam Chair, that's
the amendment, yes. 0.2.
Yes, ma'am. Thank you so much.
So
To clarify, the number of the
amendment is the one that I read
230295.2, correct?
Yes, ma'am. OK, very good.
The floor is yours.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Representatives. You also
have another handout as well
that was prepared by the
Bernalia DA's office, um, about
gun conversion. Um, I, today I
have expert witnesses, one from
the Bernardino County DA's
office and also a police chief
of Las Cruces, uh, chief story
here. Um, gun conversion devices
are rampant currently in the
state of New Mexico, um, they
are specially.
Uh, attractive to juveniles,
they are plastic devices that
could be made on 3D printers.
And are found often um.
In crime scenes or in uh areas
where, uh, there, you know,
they they have a searched, um,
we currently already have a
federal.
Law in place, uh, making a
conversion devices from
semi-automatic to automatic
illegal, but there are so many
of them in the state of New
Mexico at this time.
That our federal authorities
have become overwhelmed and
often choose not to charge on
this charge.
Uh, maybe they have many other
charges they're working on,
maybe it's the only charge uh
for that.
incident and they they uh have
limited resources, so our law
enforcement and DAs across the
state have come and asked that
we make this a state law to
reflect the federal law so that
if the federal authorities
decide not to charge, they will
have the option to charge on a
state. I will now defer to my
expert witnesses to make a brief
statement. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Afternoon, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is Rob
Hart. I'm the director of the
Governor's Organized Crime
Commission, and I'm a deputy
district attorney from the 2nd
Judicial DA's office. Uh, we
were approached by the
US Attorney's Office initially
to introduce this bill as a
stopgap. And so I just want to
clarify a couple of things about
what we're trying to do. This
really is just supposed to be
going after Glock switches. That
is it. And so you'll notice that
there is a little bit of
variance from, say, the federal
statute for machine guns. That's
by design and what we use that
as our starting point.
We're not going after fully
automatic machine guns
themselves. That's not the goal
of this bill. It really is just
the switches and the autos
series. It's not bump stocks.
It's, it's really just those two
things. Um, I was able to meet
with Senator Heinrich's team
yesterday about this bill. I had
them look it over as well
because they're introducing
greater legislation to target
bump stock. And so we were very
clear about that. They were very
supportive of the bill, but they
agreed that this is very narrow
in that nature, um, so I just
thought I would offer that to
the committee as well. One of
the biggest complaints I've
heard in my role as the director
of the commission of the
Organized Crime Commission is
law enforce.
When officers encounter.
A lot of gang members on the
streets who have these devices
and when they, when they come
into contact with a suspect, and
the only thing they have are
these devices.
If it's not going to be
federally prosecuted, they have
to turn, they have to just let
them go.
And there are situations where
there's multiple devices,
clearly, violence is inevitable
with some of these types of
things, and there's absolutely
nothing they can do about it,
and it causes a lot of
frustration. So between, you
know, with that type of input,
we found that this was a a very
high priority for us.
I also do have case examples if
if if uh the committee is
interested in that information.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you committee members. I'd like
to have a chief um story speak
as well as he's the boots on the
ground, understanding of what
the epidemic we have with these
um conversion devices. Thank
you.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, Jeremy
Story, police chief for Las
Cruces Police Department. A few
years ago, I won't be here
talking to you about these
devices. For whatever reason,
we've seen this, this massive
increase in these devices on the
streets of Las Cruces and
clearly this is not just Las
Cruces or Albuquerque and the
communities that have not seen
them yet, will see them.
They can be purchased off the
internet many times they're
manufactured in China or Japan
or somewhere overseas, and so
they're just shipped to the
house. They can't be 3D printed.
And so we've seen them used in
A number of crimes in Las
Cruces. I could show you dozens
of videos I have from either
social media or search warrants
conducted on cell phones where
they've been used in drive-bys
in Las Cruces, um, or other
crimes.
One of the issues we have, so my
street crimes unit has been
dealing with this a lot. Now
their task force officers for
the FBI. So when they get it,
they have at least the option of
season it and presenting it to
the US Attorney's office.
potential prosecution.
Of course, it's already been
mentioned that they don't have
the capacity to take all these
cases. They have prosecuted some
of those cases for us, but they
can't take them all. Another
issue that hasn't been mentioned
on why do we need a state
statute if there's a federal
law. It's very important to
remember that.
Local and state police officers
in New Mexico cannot enforce
federal law unless you're a task
force officer.
We also don't just have to
follow the Fourth Amendment to
the Constitution. We also have
to follow Article 2 Section 10
of the New Mexico Constitution,
which is that search and seizure
equivalent.
If I have a Glock switch or if
I'm a police officer making a
traffic stop right now, just an
average police officer, not a
task force officer.
And there's 5 blocks with lock
switches, which is actually more
common than you would think to
see a bunch of them.
And the gun is not stolen or I
can't prove it's stolen, and the
person is 19 or older.
I cannot seize that gun. If I
seize that, I'd be violating
their rights under the Mexico
Constitution. Also can't hold
that car for a search warrant
because I have no basis for
probable cause for a search
warrant. So I had to let them
drive away.
With 5 machine guns in the car,
knowing that they're probably
going to be used for some type
of
nefarious activity.
The statute, my, my officers, my
boots on the ground, asked me to
be a proponent and to bring it
up.
Mr. Bragman in his office at the
same time we're also doing the
same thing. This is one of the
most significant issues that
we've seen in the last two
years. And it's going to get to
a point where some high profile
incident is gonna highlight
this. But right now, there are a
lot of dangerous circumstances
and damage that's being done
that just kind of goes under the
radar because it's not being
publicized um as it could be.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'd also
like to introduce one of my
co-sponsors was Representative
of Robo Caballero.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee and and
uh Representative Cates, I will
say.
That we've made a lot of
progress.
On this bill
Representative, thank you to
Representative Kates and others
that have worked from the time
that I first began introducing
this bill many years ago and I
appreciate that because we've
narrowed the scope.
Based on what Madam Chair, our
law enforcement, it's telling us
at the ground level and that's
really critically important, as
I've noted before, my life has
been threatened.
I live in an area that's high
considered.
Uh, high crime area.
Um, I'm constantly being, um,
told that I need to be careful
because these in Albuquerque are
on the street.
Um, and because I already have a
record of threats against me,
um, as an elected, uh, they
advised that I take certain
precautions, I know it put in uh
cameras at home, I've taken,
I've bought, I have a, a really
high crime fighting dog now, uh,
a new dog, a new pet, not to
minimize the importance of why
we need to be.
Taking this into serious
consideration. Our our law
enforcement and our DAs have
indicated that this these
mechanisms, these accessories
are those that are found most
frequently and um, I agree.
In closing, I agree that uh we
need to have a state statute
because we stand alone on this,
and we cannot, um.
Cross paths with federal
government on this because this
is our home, this is our state
and this is, these are our
communities. Thank you very
much, Representative.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you committee and just our final
comment is once again is um we
are looking to provide a state
statute for our law enforcement
and our DAs across the state so
that they if the federal
authorities are not going to be
able or not.
Prosecute or charge, we would
have that option. Um, this will
only affect the plastic
conversion devices, and no other
types. And so thank you we rest
for questions. So, um, just one
thing we haven't discussed the
option of the amendment to have.
Are there substantive changes in
this bill that might affect how
people view the the bit the the
ultimate bill.
Madam Chair, um, yes, it will,
and that's largely because a lot
of the feedback we got.
From our first committee was
that
We, we included a clause that's
going that adds unlawfully
obtained weapon conversion
device and that's because under
federal law, let's let's move to
consider the amendment.
So moved, Madam Chair, OK.
I'm sorry, go ahead. I didn't
mean to you, Madam Chair. So we
added that clause specifically
for anybody who has a lawfully
obtained machine gun, either a
conversion device or a machine
gun or something under federal
law.
That way this statute doesn't
sweep them up. That was never
our intent. We spoke a lot with
um some of the gun lobbyist
groups and we
We received a lot of positive
feedback. Most of this was
suggested by them actually. So
that's the basis of this of this
amendment. So, um, kind of our
practice is for is for you to go
through each one of the
amendments and explain why
you're asking for it if if.
Archair
Um, may I ask your administrator
to provide the copy of the
amendment.
Uh, we have the amendment.
They don't
Oh, you, I'm sorry. I, I just
want to make sure I'm looking at
the, uh, they can
copies of the.
It's happened to me from time to
time.
This is 39.
Madam Chair, we can proceed.
Yeah. Thank you.
So Madam Chair, on our First
Amendment is on page 1,921,
we're striking the word.
A and inserting.
Um, in lieu there of an
unlawfully obtained, and that
that goes to what we were
discussing earlier, so that the
clause now reads um a person
knowingly having in that
person's possession an
unlawfully obtained weapon
conversion device.
And then that goes right into
the 2nd Amendment.
Which is
Um, on page.
On page 1 line 22, we're
striking 8 and inserting that
same clause again in lieu of so
an unlawfully obtained weapon,
so.
I'll just read it. I think it
reads better if I just read it
in totality, so it makes sense.
So if you go to line 20.
consists of a person knowingly
having in that person's
possession.
The addition is unlawfully
obtained weapon conversion
device or on line 22, knowingly
transporting again an unlawfully
obtained weapon convert.
On page 2.
Line 5
After shoots were inserting
automatically, and this is again
kind of in conjunction with the
next amendment. So I'm gonna,
I'm gonna address them together.
We, we're changing.
Insert were inserting
automatically.
And then we're striking
continuously.
Held pole function of the
trigger, those two work in
conjunction with each other, and
this is really to be in line
with the federal definition of
what a machine gun is.
Um, there is some language of
this, and I apologize. I don't
know the exact citation, but the
Supreme Court case that
discusses what the proper
definition is of a machine gun
and addresses the bump stock uh
modifications. That's what
we're, what we're encompassing
with this amendment so that we
are in line with just the
machine gun modification devices
for Glock switches and auto
sears.
Then
On page.
Our 5th Amendment on page 2 line
11, strike, pull, and insert in
lieu thereof function again,
that goes to.
It it's, it's clear based on the
federal the federal case law.
They, they think that's a more
um
More definitive version of of
how a a weapon should be
functioning instead of saying
pull, it's a function of the
trigger.
Thank you for that explanation.
This is the process I'm gonna go
to the audience.
Yeah input on both the bill and
the proposed amendment.
And like the committee can talk
about the amendment and then
potentially adopt the amendment
and then we'll talk about the
amended bill. OK, so that's kind
of the process we're gonna
follow here, so let's go to the
audience, we're gonna allocate
10 minutes to each side, one
minute per person and uh in the
audience 10 minutes and then
we'll have 5 minutes online for
each site, OK? So, um, those
wishing to speak in opposition
to the bill.
Um, please
Come to the mic.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Nick Sanchez, first
off, I'd like to start by
commending the sponsors of the
bill of attempting to mirror the
existing NFA and federal laws
that are in place for this
already. One of our biggest
concerns in the last committee
meeting is not making this
illegal for criminals or felons
to possess, but the already uh
possessing members of the public
that went about it the right
way.
Some of my concerns, I'm in
opposition still to this, and I
apologize if some of that
language that was repeated in
that amendment, it's still too
vague legally.
When it comes to actual weapon
device conversion, and what that
means is we have a whole slew of
weapons device conversions and
the language does not state
automatic weapon device
conversion. If it left blank and
plain and weapons device
conversion that opens a whole
door to devices that just about
every gun owner.
Might possess legally.
In their possession
And furthermore, this is kind of
redundant. It has to do with
every one of these bills that
comes forth that introduces a
felony to someone. Criminals
aren't going to quit producing
these things, and the poor
members of law enforcement are
going to still have to continue
dealing with this.
And as I am in agreement that we
can't have these kinds of things
in the wrong hands, but all
these bills seem to reflect
Making a criminal out of
law-abiding citizens.
Because those are the people
that it affects. So if that
language isn't clear and
articulated you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name's David
Sanchez. I represent northern
New Mexico Stocklands
Association today.
Mexico stockmen's Association,
uh, has 16,000 members in the
northern counties north of I-40,
uh ranching families, uh, just
want to make it uh
Uh, clear to the committee that
uh
ranching families in northern
New Mexico depend on tools such
as guns.
And uh
We don't stand opposed to uh the
mechanisms that are on the table
today, but we want to make it
real clear to the committee
members that uh it becomes
apparent to us that this
committees are on some popular
role to attack citizens, make
them felons, and get rid of our
guns. We need our guns on the
ranching community. We use them
as tools and uh uh we would ask
that.
You would uh consider that in
all of these bills that come
before you and make sure that
you don't turn our farmers and
ranchers and felons uh over some
piece of legislation that is
just a band-aid fix, because
our.
Anyone else wishing to speak in
opposition to the bill in the
audience.
OK. Now, let's go online.
Those online wishing to speak in
opposite. Um, I don't see anyone
raising. OK.
So, um,
Let's now go to the audience,
those wishing to speak and
support.
the bill, please, um.
The gentleman
Try to limit
Madam, my name is Anthony
with the New Mexico Shooting
Sports Association, House of
represent the New Mexico
firearms Industry Association
and the National Shooting Sports
Foundation.
We were in opposition to this
bill, however, we were part of
the, the people that sat down
with.
DA Bregman and worked out this
the details on this bill.
So we're not in opposition
anymore, we actually are now
saying that we hope that you
approve this bill because the
wording, the main thing that we
wanted to know was that it that
it mimic the federal law.
And I think the wording that
we've sat down and talked with
the DA's office with does that.
Thank you. Great, thank you.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair Al
Park registered lobbyist on
behalf of the city of
Albuquerque. We stand in strong
support of this legislation, and
as the chair said at the end of
the last presentation, we think
this legislation is an important
part of the comprehensive
approach that the legislature is
taking towards addressing public
safety in all aspects and in a
holistic manner and for the city
of Albuquerque, that includes
not just this legislation, but
also addressing addiction,
homelessness, behavioral health.
So we believe that this
legislation is part of that
overall approach, and we stand
in support. Thank you, Madam
Chair, members.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, um, and sponsors. I'm
Meredith Main, and I'm speaking
on behalf of the League voters
of New Mexico and the American
Association of University Women
and uh I too appreciate that you
aligned the language with the
federal
federal law, um, and in the
comments that um I respectfully
the stockman's association is
saying, uh, we, we really don't
need assault weapons, um, in
You know, in the ranches, um, I
was told that the assault
weapons and these devices that
convert them into a sault
weapons, excuse my language, but
we'll pulverize, um, animals,
and so anyway, uh, I really
appreciate your work on this and
uh and I wish that we could get
rid of assault weapons entirely.
Thank you.
Madam Chair
Members of the committee,
Carolyn Wynn, New Mexico State
Police.
We are in support of this bill
as a New Mexican and as part of
our communities, we continue to
be impacted by violence.
And we have to create
legislation that will allow law
enforcement to effectively keep
our communities safe.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee today I represent New
Mexicans to prevent gun
violence. We stand in strong
support of this legislation.
Thank you.
Chair, members of the committee.
My name is Pam Campbell. I'm
here with um
The National Organization for
Women, and I strongly support
this.
Uh, Madam Chair and members of
the committee, I too am with the
National Organization for Women.
And we strongly support this
bill. We think it will help.
Make our communities safer.
Thank you so much for organizing
this bill and bringing it
forward. Thank you.
Um
Let's go to those individuals
online.
So we have um
Uh we have Chief Nunez and
remember we're gonna give about
5 minutes to this 1 minute each.
Yes, Madam Chair, I'm uh and
Chair members. My name is uh
Felix Nunez. I'm chief of Real
Community Police Department. I
am in support of this bill. Um,
one thing is these are dangerous
items that are getting out
there. Uh, we have a, we call
makerspace area and a couple of
summers ago, um, in that area,
we have 3D printers that we
purchased for the kids to learn
science and how to build stuff
on the 3D printers, and we ended
up uh locating that to a
teenagers, uh, older teenagers
were trying to actually 3D.
these and actually try to make a
lower pistols. So at the time
you just take the stuff away,
but we see this consistently out
there. My officers are seeing us
out there in the rural
communities, and this is like I
said, it's not big cities
anymore. It's in the rural
communities. We're seeing them
come with these, and it is a
threat to our community members.
Um, I understand the First
Amendment right. I understand
the pro gun, uh, side, but on
the law enforcement side, I
definitely don't want to see one
of my officers have to face this
type of situation, or one of
those guns. So I think
Legislatures in the right
direction and trying to get this
bill passed and making our
community safer. So thank you
for the time.
Oh,
Admin, I think that's that.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Madam
Vice Chair, members of the
committee, uh, for the brevity
of time and respecting that
brevity, I stand in support of
House Bill 38. Thank you.
Um
Let's see
Um, and Montoya.
Madam Chair, committee members
Marcus Montoya, a judicial
district attorney and president
of the New Mexico District
Attorneys Association. Thank you
for allowing us to speak this
afternoon in support of this
very important legislation. I do
want to applaud the sponsors and
drafters for meeting with all
interested parties so that way
we can make this bill appetizing
to um as many people as possible
and combating this very serious
issue of uh superior firepower
on the streets when it comes to
criminal activity, and that only
endanger
s our citizens, our law
enforcement, and so I want to
thank you and we stand in
support for this legislation.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Anyone else I don't see, all
right, so, um, we'll go back to
the.
Sponsor anything you wish to add
before I go to the committee.
for, um,
we need
we have debate on the amendment.
I apologize.
Represent.
Thank you, ma'am.
Uh, them chair representatives
and experts, can you, uh,
explain to me how unlawfully
obtains one of these.
Madam Chair, representing the
Queen, um.
There are exception, there are,
there's multiple ways you can do
it, but you can essentially get
a permit to do it. It's a really
highly taxed.
Um
Endeavor and it costs a lot of
money, which I think is also
what caused so much of the
concern because there are
methods you can, you can get a
federal license.
To obtain
Uh, machine gun conversion
devices, which is why we got so
much pushback, I think
initially, and it's very
expensive.
OK, uh, and Maer representatives
and experts and.
The flipside of that is how this
one unlawfully.
I mean
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, I wanted to let
you know that our, our chief of
police is not just the chief of
police, but he's also a marksman
and uh shoots competitively, so
maybe he can answer this.
I representative.
An important distinction is that
the glock switches were start,
as far as I know, started to be
manufactured after
The, the period of time where um
a conversion advisor machine gun
would be lawfully obtained. So
I'm not aware of any way you can
possess a Glock switch.
Waffly
You can't possess a machine gun
or the devices to convert a
machine gun pre 1986, you have
to go through the ATF under the
NFA.
And pay tax stamp, you can do
that.
But if I see a glock switch on
the streets, there's really not
a way to loftly obtain that. So
it's very easy to tell that a
Glock switch is not a lawfully
obtained device. Um,
But if I see a glock switch on
the streets, there's really not
a way to loftly obtain that. So
it's very easy to tell that a
Glock switch is not a lawfully
obtained device.
Ma'am represents expert, is it
unlawful to 3D print them.
It would
Madam Chair Representative, it
would be because that would be
something that is unlawful under
federal law.
It also be unlawful to purchase
it. So either way, it's unlawful
under federal law.
OK, so with the amendment,
The the crime we're creating.
is the unlawful possession of
one of these devices.
And the predicate for that.
is unlawfully obtaining one of
these devices.
It's only unlawful to possess,
you've unlawfully obtained it.
And that relies
On federal law?
Is that is a teeny one of these
devices unlawful under state
law.
I'm sure representative
So I guess maybe maybe I'll I'll
answer your question in a
different way.
If there is some type of
evidence that the defendant has
lawfully obtained these devices,
then even if he's in possession
of them, a crime can't be
charged.
So it may in fact, you know, a
prosecutor will have to show.
Right? And that could be through
circumstantial evidence that
could be through numerous ways,
but
If defense, you know, that's
going to be part of the
litigation process. So,
you know, if you're obtaining it
and you're in possession of it.
It will have to be unlawful if
defenses like, hey, I have a
license for this or if the
prosecutor has to check a
registry or something like that.
That may be something that has
to occur.
Madam Chair, um,
Representatives and experts. So,
My reading is that
It's unlawful under state law.
If you have violated federal,
and only if you have violated
federal law.
And that seems
Odd
me.
That the predicate to make this
possession unlawful.
I committing
A crime under federal law that
we can't prosecute.
So we're piggybacking on that
federal violation.
In order to create a state law
violation.
Madame Chair Representative
McQueen, though that's essential
that's exactly correct, right?
This is a stopgap law.
It's just filling the gaps from
federal law. We're not trying to
create a different law. We're
trying to just be able to
enforce.
The federal laws at the state
level when they're not being
processed.
Madam Chair, uh, represents an
expert, is there a reason why
we're taking it a step removed.
Like, why don't we just say,
Containing one of these devices
is unlawful.
Madam Chair Representative
McQueen, um, as chief story just
explained, there are scenarios
where machine gun conversion
device can be lawfully obtained,
so.
We, that's overly broad.
And we're trying to keep this
more narrow than that.
I, I am, um.
I, I appreciate and support the
intent I am perplexed by the
structure.
Uh, one additional question
since it was raised by a member
of the public.
On the amendment on page 2, the
Amendment number 3 concerning
the word automatically on line
5.
Does the word automatically add
anything to that sentence?
Madam Chair Representative
McQueen, this is more in line
with the definition of the
federal level, as has been
interpreted by the Supreme
Court.
Yeah, thank you, ma'am.
You represented anyone else with
Madam Cher. I'd like to move
that we adopt the amendment.
Second, and is there any
opposition to adopting the
amendment.
I don't see any opposition, so
you have an amended bill.
Representative
Now let's go to the discussion
of the bill.
Um answer questions from
members.
Thank, Madam Chair, thank you,
um.
representative case for bringing
this forward.
Is uh
You made reference.
That your officers in Las Cruces
are seeing this.
All the time
Um, can you give me
Kind of rough estimate how many
these devices have you
recovered?
In the last year.
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair Representative. So
there's two ways we're
discovering this, these devices.
One is through monitoring of
social media and then search
warrants on phones. So we may
have videos of them doing
drive-bys, and I have, like I
said, dozens of those that I
have where we may not actually
recover the device, but it's
clearly being used to commit a
crime. And then, of course, we
have the devices that were
actually recovering on a search
warrant or
Some other, some other means.
And there's, we've recovered
approximately 35 devices.
through those means. We actually
took them into evidence um and
tried a federal prosecution. But
again, the only way we can even
do that right now is with my
task force officers who have
some type of federal authority
for patrol officer tried to do
that. Technically, they would be
violating the New Mexico
constitutional rights.
So we try to make sure that
we're not losing those
opportunities by contacting a
task force officer if they see
it, but that's one of the
significant issues that we have
right now with no state statute.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Senator in chief.
Um
35 is it doesn't seem like a
lot, but
In the grand scheme of things,
that that is.
A lot of firepower.
My, my question for the sponsor,
Madam Chair.
So it's, it's.
The way this is drafted its
illegal to be in possession.
Of a sweat. I'm driving down the
road.
I get pulled over.
Has to be a switch on the
floorboard of my truck.
Officer seized it.
Probable cost of search.
don't have a pistol.
On me
In the truck, but I have this
piece of plastic on the
floorboard.
I get charged with it. Is that
my, my
Getting that right
A Madam Chair representative,
yes.
Thank you Madam Chair. It's,
it's kind of like getting pulled
over having a
A cork on the floor getting.
Forged with open container, I
mean, I'm not seeing.
I guess I'm not, I'm not seeing.
How having that.
One switch
Um
So dangerous that this needs to
be.
Charged this possession.
A man chair representative, uh,
it is already a a felony.
And at a federal level, it is
already.
Uh, I understand that, but we
just heard the whole argument of
Um
Officers can't
Enforce federal law.
My question is,
Why I'm
Trying to wrap my head around.
I could see if switch was on the
floorboard.
And I had a weapon in the
vehicle.
Understand the threat.
The availability
Um
I'm, I'm
I'm, I, I'm
fully supportive of what you're
trying to do. I'm, I'm just
trying to understand.
Why you, why you're charged with
a felony for having that piece
of plastic in your vehicle.
Madam Chair, Representative
Martinez, think of this more um.
If you, if for some reason you
made contact with an FBI agent.
With that exact same scenario.
You would be arrested and
charged with a federal crime.
So again, this is, in fact, your
scenarios, what we're trying to
go after. These devices are so
prevalent and so easy to obtain
and being handed off to other
people or one guy's making them
in a 3D printer and selling them
to a juvenile, that it is the
dangerousness of that device.
That's what's so scary. That's,
that's exactly what we're trying
to do. And in your scenario,
let's say there's a 19 year old
who has one or two of them.
The
US Attorney's Office isn't going
to prosecute that, even though
we know it's a threat to the
community, even we know, even
though we know these guys are
probably going to go attach
these to guns and shoot up a
place, and there's nothing a
state law enforcement officer
can do about it. So it's already
illegal.
But it's not at a high enough
scale.
Or the USAO to do anything about
it.
Madam Chair Representative, I
just like to add that um cheap
stories uh.
Estimate on a 35 uh conversion
devices that he has had
possession. He's not able to
take possession of more of
those.
Currently, so that is not a
reflection of how many are on
the street.
Thank you Madam Chair and
Representative, I, I understand
that. I mean, it's kind of like
saying,
You know, we, we pulled over 3
people last night for DWI.
There, there was probably 20.
3 is what you caught.
Um, I, I understand that.
But Madam Chair, you bring up a
whole other point if it's uh.
If it's
felony on the federal level, but
they're
I'm not even willing to
prosecute it.
Why is it such a big deal on the
state side.
Madam Chair Representative, it's
not that they're not willing to
prosecute it because they.
have chosen not to follow the
law. It's they have limited
assets, and there are so many of
them, it is an epidemic rate
right now, especially in the
state that they cannot charge
for every device that is found,
um, and they have chosen not to
cho choose it. Our local law
enforcement and our DAs across
the state have asked this
legislature to provide them with
the tools so that when the feds
do not charge, they can.
Manage, just to add to that,
that's exactly why the US
Attorney's Office has asked us
to introduce this legislation in
the first place, not because
they don't think it's a problem
because they think it's so vast
of a problem they're asking for
our help.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um.
Representative
I, uh, so the, so this.
The federal prosecutors are the
ones behind pushing this bill,
not.
Necessarily
The DA's
My am I getting that right?
Madam Chair Representative, I've
been working exclusively with
the DAs and local law
enforcement. Um, the DA's I'm
sure are speaking with federal
agencies.
Man it's, uh, Representative
Martinez, it's not mutually
exclusive. I mean, this is an
issue we're seeing at the local
tribal, state, federal level, so
it's not like it's, it's not one
or the other. We, we all want
this.
Madam Chair representative um.
I understand it's a problem,
and, and the problem is probably
a lot worse than
We know right now.
It's not that I'm, I'm
Opposed to this
There's just questions in my
mind that I'm trying to wrap my
head around.
Um, but
Maybe I'll be enlightened,
listening to more, more debate.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative.
OK, I have on my list at all and
Sapans you, Madam Chair,
representative experts.
Kind of, I, I'm not saying I'm
opposed to this necessarily
either, but I just have some
questions similar to uh
Representative Martinez.
Um
That was a concern I had also is
the firearm not being with the
switch, but I, at the end of the
bill.
On the last page, Madam Chair,
so am I reading the the last
part of the bill line.
13
Weapon conversion device means.
A part or combination, so it
could
Apart, could that be like a
broken Glock switch or?
I mean, could you get charged
if, let's say in Representative
Martinez's.
Scenario, there was a a broken
half of it.
Little piece of the plastic on
there.
Can you explain, Madam Chair,
what that means.
Madam Chair Representative Reeb,
I, I would think that.
It, it's the whole, the totality
of the clause is important. So
it's a part or combination of
parts designed and intended to
convert.
Um, as I've worked with federal
law enforcement agencies, when
they received broken parts,
they're they're not able to
charge because once it's broken,
it's no longer in a state where
it's designed or intended.
And so I think a prosecution
would fall apart.
And not be able to be charged on
this scenario that you
described.
So mountain chair and um.
Experts and so, but so you're
saying it's it's possible, I I'm
just wondering why it would
just, what's the point of
putting part?
That's how I, I guess that's how
I'm interpreting it as like a
broken piece of plastic, you
know, on the floor lock switch,
whatever share representative,
I'll I'll let you, I'll let my
expert witness answer in just a
moment, but, um, part of the
challenges of trying to create
these public safety laws is that
in the description, they can be
modified.
In manufacturing.
So there is no alternative use
for the glock switch.
It is only that.
So the part is whether or not
it's been made into two parts or
in the solid piece, which is
what it's currently being
manufactured at this would cover
that.
Um, as the expert witness is
that if it is not a functional
part then then as in all weapons
when they're not functional
parts, they cannot be charged
on.
OK, and so Madam Chair
Representative, this is,
they're, they're actually um.
Printing these or making these
in two parts is what you're
saying sometimes.
My
Thank you. I'll, I'll have uh
sorry, maybe I'm just not Master
representative.
There's really two things that
are targeted by this bill locks
which is, which is what really
what we're seeing the most of
and then A series, which is
another part that can go on on a
rifle like an A 15 to convert it
unlawfully. The clock switch is
a solid piece whether it's
aluminum or, or plastic. It's a
solid piece. I think another
point is that right now what
we're doing with the federal
agencies is when we seize one of
these and we're going to charge
it before we ever charge it.
It's installed and tested to
make sure that it actually is
converting the.
to a fully automatic gun because
if we, if that part somehow was
broken or modified where it
could not, we would not charge
it.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair, and
experts and represent, that was
one question I had, um.
I, I guess I, and I.
Suggested this language before,
um.
It makes it a lot more palatable
to me, but I, I guess I
understand we've talked about
this before, I think um when it
was presented, um, to the DA's.
I was on that zoom of possible
criminal legislation, but
I personally like the idea,
Madam Chair and and experts and
representatives saying something
like if you possess a Glock
switch with the intent to with
with uh if you possess a glocks
switch switch when in the
commission or attempted
commission of a crime.
First I was thinking a felony,
but I could see a negligent use
where you could put that glock
switch on and you know.
You around the neighborhood,
which isn't good. I'm not saying
these things are good, but it's
more it it makes me more
comfortable than thinking about
the situation that represented
Martinez described, um, so I'm
just kind of throwing that out
there for you as you as you mull
over your bill um it, it make,
it might make it a little more,
you know, palatable for some
people, but I'm not saying I'm
against your bill. I just
I'm just thinking of ways that
um.
I see it more in the
In the use with a firearm than
just.
Plastic switch on the floor,
which I know you do intend to go
after Madam Chair and
representative and experts, um,
so that's one thing I wanted to
bring up and, and I know
previously I think I've had a
discussion with one of you that
are you seeing situations where
there are baggies of of block
switches where people are
actually selling.
Selling them more than the 1 or
the 2, thank you, um, Madam
Chair and Representative, um,
yes, and if you look at your
handout, they do have a QRQ code
on here and um and if you want
to stay after Chief story has
lots of um uh tales to tell, um,
but yes, that is that they're
finding them that they are uh
Um, they are very comfortable.
Um, uh,
videos of themselves, um, a
duffel bags full, um, on the
floorboards and, and, and the,
and the sale and the exchange of
them, yes, um, I will, would
like to address just your last
comment is that the reason why
the bill is the way it is is
because it reflects the federal
law.
To make it as you suggested is
not reflective of the federal
law.
Mount Sharon so you're trying to
completely mirror the federal
law, basically.
Um, OK, cause I was gonna
suggest, Madam chair, you know,
you could also possibly have
language when you possess with
intent to distribute.
Block switches, um.
That would encompass people who
are actually trying to sell
them.
Or use them, you know.
You know, making him a mass and
then selling them, um, might be
an option of some language there
too, but I just had some
questions just to clarify for me
what this does, but I thank you
for your presentation.
Like a madam chair, a
representative would like to
comment,
I cuz we're done with the
questioning,
you asked the question about the
bags.
Oh, I, so I just wanted to have
an answer.
I think we've answered that
question. But I wanted to add
clarity just as an example,
Madam chair very quickly. They
are.
In our neighborhoods, there are
bags, they've been witnessed.
In our neighborhood and the kids
are getting access to them and
they're playing around as if
they're toys and they're selling
them for gum and candy, money,
or other kinds of things in our
our particular neighborhood, so
I just wanted to say that your
reference was absolutely clear
and, and right on. Thank you. I
appreciate that.
Representative Hall.
Madam Chair, thank you.
Representatives and expert
witnesses.
Um
Couple of questions.
First of all, the clarify chief
stories, not just the chief,
he's a national champion, and
I'd like to recognize he's quite
a shooter, and a United States
Marine.
Yes, sir. Thank you. um.
How many gun bills?
You not bills, pardon me, wrong
terminology, madam Chair. How
many, uh,
Of these cases, do you think
have been presented or do we
know to the United States
Attorney's Office.
Either in the Southern District.
Southern part of the district of
New Mexico or in totality. Do
we, do we know those numbers,
Madam Chair?
Madam Chair Representative, can
you clarify that question? What,
what, what are they being
presented?
Madam chair
when you take a case to the
United States Attorney's Office,
you present the case for
prosecution. I'm wondering how
many of
These have been taken to the
United States Attorney's Office
for prosecution, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair Representative Hall.
So it's, it's not always like a
formal presentation and then a
declination letter. Sometimes
it's just a phone call from the
officers on the side of the
road. And given that I, I
certainly haven't received any
numbers and I imagine they would
be reluctant to share those
numbers with me.
Thank you, Madam Chair, I
wouldn't.
Yes, there's quite a few. Um,
what's the street value of one
of these?
Switches
That we're calling a Glock
switch, Madam Chair, panel.
Madam Chair Representative Paul,
uh, thank you for the
recognition, um.
You can actually still purchase
them online. So I think the
average is $40 to $50 if you
were to go online yourself and
purchase some when they resell
them on like Telegram, it
depends again, it's supply and
demand. So they they fluctuating
in price from there.
Madam chair and panel and
particularly chief story.
Could you explain when one of
these are installed, it goes on
the back of the slide, my
understanding is where the back
plate is.
And converts it, would you
explain how many the what cyclic
rate is to the audience and
what, what it is on average
through one of these switches,
please, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair Representative Hall,
um, once it goes on, the average
rate of fire is about 0.05 0.05
split. So that's about
You know
19 rounds, 9, 18 rounds every.
Every 2 seconds.
I'm sorry, every, every second.
Um, we have, I did a video with
one of the testing we did with
FBI. And so we did it on a shot
timer, which records all the
shots of the, the first shot was
at 1.05. And the last shot was
at 2.10. So 1.05 to fire a
19-round magazine that helps.
Madam Chair, panel, so.
Would you say these are accurate
when they're converted?
Madam Chair.
In that video, one of my
officers who's a master class
shooter for USPSA was firing it,
so it can be accurate. Most of
the time, it is definitely not
accurate in the hands of the
people using them on the street.
Thank you, IRS, Madam Chair.
Thank you.
leaders of,
yeah, liters of pans.
Thank you, Madam Chair, thank
yous representative Kates, um,
just briefly, it looks to me
like the changes that were uh
adopted in the amendment,
particularly on the 2nd page or
basically to conform the
language to the Cargill decision
and I just wanted to.
Ensure that that was correct,
because that seems like a big
decision that we need to look
at.
For this legislation.
Madam Chairansky, yes, that's
correct.
Terrific, um, I, I appreciate
that diligence and in conforming
that language to ensure that
we're able to actually enforce
this law. Um, I, I would just
say I really appreciate you
breaking this legislation
forward, uh, it's truly
wonderful to see District
attorneys, law enforcement,
community members all agreeing
that this is a.
A tremendous public safety
issue, and this is a way to keep
our communities safer, um, and
we're also in this legislation,
not.
Restricting or preventing anyone
who can currently lawfully
possess or obtain a firearm from
doing so, isn't that right? Uh,
Madam Chair and representative.
Yes, thank you very much for
bringing that to the attention
representative.
Thank you. Um, you know, I think
this is just a great sort of.
Surgical fix that is actually
going to pay off, uh, in big
ways to keep our community safer
so just wanted to appreciate
that. Thank you.
Thank you, um, representative.
Representative Ribard yeah.
Oh, OK, thank you. All right.
Um, anyone else um?
I just would also like to
commend you bringing forth this
bill, you know, hearing the
testimony.
Chief story really helps me
understand what a serious
problem this is, I think on its
face, you think, oh.
We're just talking about a
little device, but what I what
we heard here is they're
prevalent.
Um
We need to do something to
protect our citizens and our law
enforcement officers who are
also objects of these, you know,
these devices that make on an
issue that was brought up during
public comment.
I hear the slippery slope
argument pointing, we're all
here to try to, many of us in on
the up here, including me and my
husband owned firearms were not
anti-gun, we're not, um, but we
are pro safety and we're pro
protecting our citizens and our
law enforcement officers and
It's very hard to think what
legitimate sporting, um,
activity can be enhanced with
such a device, and so, yeah, I'm
a little disappointed with the
old.
You know, slippery slope, that's
a common theme that we often
hear frankly from the NRA and
it's what we need to start
talking responsibly about these
issues, and this is a very
narrow indicated by our um
enforcement officers in DA or
who are pushing this and so
thank you. um.
I'm gonna suggest we roll this
bill, this is a possible um.
Public safety package will, of
course, work that out and if if
it's not, we'll definitely vote
on it and and get it out of
committee if, if, if there are
this is a support for it.
Um, thank you very much.
Appreciate your time.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
I'll be staying seated for the
next bill.
OK, very good.
And the
next item is impressive.
House Bill 39.
I'll give everybody a minute to.
Excuse themselves.
Yes.
There is a committee sub on this
bill.
Um
It will be handed out.
We'll have a copy for you. Yeah,
there will be handed.
See
Why is she growling?
What's that?
Let's see, Mo.
We did.
First
OK.
All right, um, representative,
this is House Bill 39 juvenile
record in firearm background
checks, um, you have a committee
sub.
230392.1, is that right? That.
Um
I'm assuming you're gonna be
addressing your remarks to the
sub, is that right?
I, I will do whatever Madam
Chair would like me to do. So
yes, we can, we can direct you
to the consideration of the sub,
that's where I'm, that's where
I'm going with this, so if
someone could just.
for that
I'd like to move it for
consideration, I'm sure.
Very good. Um, so as far as
yours.
I thank you, Madam Chair, and,
uh, I thank you representatives.
Um, this also is a very targeted
bill that um we may refer to in
general terms as a gun bill, but
it targets the criminal user of
the gun. And so I feel that like
the previous one is also very
surgical as well.
Um, the
Committee said before you is
just, it doesn't change the
substance of the bill itself,
but it clarifies as some of the
comments we received at the
previous committee wanted to
ensure that we were, um, that,
that juvenile records were not.
Open
An accessible.
long periods of time that this
was just a simple
A procedure where they either
qualify or don't qualify for
legal purchase of a gun.
Um, it is difficult to speak
about this sub without talking
about the the the bill itself.
So if you would like, I can back
up and talk with the general
about the bill as well, what it
addresses.
Sure, but a sub will include the
original portions of the bill.
All right, thank you, ma'am.
OK, so
Thank you for putting up with me
so.
So here, here, the current issue
is that if we have a juvenile
criminal, let's say 15 years old
that um uh committed a crime
using a firearm that if they
were an adult would have been
considered a felony, there are
juvenile and their records are
sealed.
And so if they serve their
sentence and their parole at 21,
they should, they are currently
eligible to legally buy.
buy a firearm because uh the
record has been sealed.
This bill before you.
Disquallifies them for.
Purchasing uh sorry about that
purchasing a firearm, um.
Through a licensed.
vendor
For the 1st 10 years after they
have served their sentence.
Um, it is, it is the same
process where
Um
Where they will be justices is
as quick the record is not open
and it's not accessible. They
are just put on a list that they
are not.
intelligible to purchase a
firearm.
We believe that this
Because we have such a um large.
juvenile crime problem right now
that
The access to firearms to
individuals who have already
shown comfort in genial.
to use them in acts of violence,
we would need some time before
we would want them to legally
access the weapon and so the
proposal is for a ten-year
period.
I will, uh, want to, um,
Introduce my expert witnesses. I
have Mark Lovato, who um is a
juvenile corrections attorney
Mark, we want to make a
statement.
Madam Chair, um, thank you,
Representative, um, I'd like to
talk a little bit about the
changes that are in front of
you, um, there's primarily 4
major changes, um, this, this
law makes um application of the
law perspective to avoid any
constitutional issues like
exposes facto, um, so that was
added uh recently. Um it
corrects the nomenclature
relating to juvenile
dispositions and um.
I want to correct something that
the that the rep said in that
sense that there's been a couple
of iterations of the bill, so it
gets a little confusing, but
it's actually 1010 years from
the date of disposition.
To clarify. So, um, the third
change is the elimination of
section 2 and it's a replacement
with a new section.
That specifies how and what
records will be made available
to federal and state
authorities.
Um, and that was in response to
um Vice Chair Romero's comments
at the last committee.
Um
And then it largely mirrors uh
statute 40-17-12, which is the
extreme risk firearm protection
Order Act.
Um, so that those, those two
statutes would mirror each other
in language.
Those, those are the changes.
Uh, in front of y'all. So, um,
I think at this point, unless
you have other comments on this
bill, I'll go to the audience.
Again, um, those wishing to
speak in opposition.
allocate no more than 10
minutes, 1 minute per person.
Anyone in the audience wishing
to speak in opposition.
OK. Madam Chair Anthony in New
Mexico Shooting Sports
Association.
We have a problem with this bill
because it's, it's fairly vague
and where there's a lot of
confusion, and especially that
I'm getting from the gun store
owners themselves.
A lot of them think that that
they're gonna have to do
something besides just put in a
uh a background check, we would
like to have that clarified a
little bit more.
And uh the other party is that
what about
Records for other states. Is
this just for New Mexico or is
it throughout the country, and
that's pretty vague, so we'd
like to have that clarified too,
so right now the way that the
bill stands, we're in
opposition. Thank you.
Thank you Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Bennett Bauer. I'm the chief
public defender. I have a couple
of concerns about first of all,
the logistics of how these
records would be sealed or
accessed, and Miss Travis Cook
may address you for just a
minute after this. She's uh
she's on Zoom. But the other
thing is that uh I just want to
clarify and I may have
misunderstood, but the way I
read this, and not only applies
to whether somebody can purchase
or receive a gun, but whether
they can be prosecuted for elon
in possession of a firearm.
Or this juvenile disposition and
the way I read it, it means you
can, and seeing as how this
legislature has pretty
consistently raised the
penalties for felon in
possession of a firearm. That
means juveniles who otherwise
are not committing any crime,
not doing anything else with
that gun are suddenly guilty of
a felony and facing many years,
and that could be because
they're in a car with parents,
with somebody else who has a
gun. We see that kind of thing
charged all the time with felon
in possession. And so I'm
concerned about how this
affects.
young people who had a felony
disposition, but nothing for 10
years as an adult. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
OK. Anyone else in the audience
wishing to speak in opposition.
I don't see anyone.
Let's go online.
The bill, um, please raise your
hand.
Diane
Yes, thank you, chair. Thank
you, chair and committee Diane
McCash. Um, I did hear what was
said about the intended targeted
scope of the bill, but I'm still
really concerned that our long
held practice of protecting
future adults from the mistakes
they make as children might be
compromised by the provisions of
this bill in ways that we don't
really understand at this point.
I urge you to really think twice
about supporting this change.
Thank you.
Thank you, Diane. um Kim Chavez
Cook.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Kim Chavez
Cook with the Law Offices of the
Public Defender. Current law is
explicit that delinquent acts
shall not be deemed a conviction
of a crime, nor shall it impose
any civil disabilities
ordinarily resulting from
conviction. It's one of the core
principles of the Children's
code to ensure that juvenile
dispositions do not carry
lifelong consequences. When a
teenager intentionally shoots
and injures or kills someone,
these serious acts of violence.
By teenagers typically result in
an adult sentence combination.
Yes. So I think that it's like
I'm sorry, I'm being interrupted
the chair. I'm not sure.
I'm sorry, Kim, we'll give you a
a little bit more time since the
infusion there. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Um, I think I just wanted
to point out that when it's a
very serious act of violence by
a teenager. It typically does
result in an adult sentence, in
which case the law already
treats that crime as a felony
and prohibits gun ownership in
adulthood, but when they don't
receive an adult sentence, it's
because a judge has found an
individualized potential for
rehabilitation or because their
particular
offense is something lesser,
something less serious by
definition already categorized
as a delinquent act. This bill
seeks to make an exception to
treat those as felony
convictions, and we strongly
encourage you to oppose the
legislation in recognition of
the high rehabilitation rates
for juvenile offenders. Thank
you so much.
Thank you. Anyone else online,
um, Enrique.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, we are in support of
House Bill 39, the chamber of
views this as a very targeted
action that we can take to help
keep guns out of the hands of
people with a record of violence
involving guns. Uh, New Mexico
does generally seal juvenile
records, perhaps, uh, to give
people a fresh start, um, as
they, as they grow up and grow
into adulthood. Uh, we do feel
that there need to be some
exceptions when the threat to
our communities is so great from
guns used by people with a
violent past.
In other words, the greater good
demands that we take this kind
of action. That's why we ask for
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, and sponsors, and
experts, uh, I'm Meredith Main
speaking on behalf of League
Room voters of New Mexico and
the American Association
Universityity women. I
definitely understand the
concern about juveniles, um, but
we know that there are a lot of
drug cartels and adults who are
basically forcing juveniles to
commit the crimes so that they
don't get the sentences, and I
think this actually
protects juveniles who um
otherwise, you know, I mean,
basically they can say, well,
I'm not going to do it. Um, I'm
not gonna do your bidding cause
I'll get the wrap. Um, we really
need to look at what's happening
in our society, and this is a
common sense and it doesn't mean
just because you have the law
that there wouldn't be any
exceptions to um to, you know,
the sentencing. Um, I think it's
really important and a lot of
you know, a lot of kids, um,
Uh,
you just have to take guns much
more seriously than they do, and
I appreciate all the work that's
gone into this, and I urge.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Carolyn Wynn with
State Police.
We are in support of this bill,
as I mentioned earlier, we
continue to be impacted by
violent crime.
And we do encounter as law
enforcement young adults who
committed crimes as juveniles,
and they continue to commit
violent felonies as young
adults.
We have to continue to keep to
find ways for law enforcement to
keep our community safe, and
this is just another valuable
tool to do so. Thank you.
Chair members of the committee,
my name's Miranda Viscoli,
executive director of New
Mexicans to Prevent Gun
Violence. We do stand in support
of this. We were on the fence a
little bit um for some of the
reasons that have been raised, I
really like that this is
mirroring the URO so that the
the young person's life is
protected. We work a lot with
young people and uh with uh
youth and young adult court, and
they take it very seriously that
they cannot have a firearm, and
it's actually changing how they
look at gun possession, and if
they're safe to have a firearm.
So I think this actually will
help keep young people out of
jail.
Online, those wishing to speak
in support of the bill.
Um
go back to the sponsor any um
remarks before I go to the
committee. Thank you very much,
Madam Chair, and thank you
committee members. So this bill
is to aim.
Uh, uh.
Uh, I would like to address some
of the comments I got in first
in the in the public comment.
So, um, a juvenile who has been
pulled over and has a gun in the
glove compartment with other
juveniles in the car, they are
not, they will not lose their
right to own a gun for 10 years.
This is only for an uh a
juvenile who is actively
Uh committed an act of violence
with a firearm on possession and
with them, that is what uses it.
It also um I am uh somebody
who's spent a career in um
providing services for people
with second chances. I'm very
much believe in second chances.
This does not enhance the
punishment for juvenile. This is
not lengthen the punishment for
a juvenile. This just um delays
their ability.
to own a gun for 10 years. I
would like to introduce my other
expert witness, Benjamin Baker,
and have him make a brief
statement as well.
Thank you, uh, Representative
Kates, Madam Chair, members of
the committee, I'll be very
brief, um, and I, I think it can
be uh hopefully instructive in
helping understand some of the
distillations what this bill
will do is create another state
prohibitor for reporting.
To the FBI for firearms
background checks, um, state
prohibitors are not new to this
state nor this legislature and
I've gotten to learn a
tremendous amount about this and
I'm grateful for it, um, in
2018, the felon in possession
statute was changed to include
new types of disqualifying
incidents to be reported to the
FBI for the purposes of
background checks, including
certain domestic violence
misdemeanor crimes and arrests,
temporary restraining order,
restrained parties, and
stalking.
So 2018, 2019, this legislature
passed a law related to Earth
pole, and we've covered that.
Um.
This is creating another state.
what we are, are uh interested
in doing here. Um, currentlyer
information is sent to the FBI
and a number of juvenile
records, which I think are
important.
To note because I think there's
a misnomer that no juvenile
record is reported via this, and
that's not, that's not true.
Earth records, TRO records for
restrained party as a juvenile
in a teen dating violent
scenario where the.
Duration of the restraining
order lapses into one's
adulthood, those are
disqualifying events, more
particularly the bipartisan
safer Communities Act of 2020.
2 Federally changed the law on
required states to conduct
additional background checks for
those 18 to 20 years old.
To buy a long gun, which is
legal and it directs criminal
records and mental health cases
be examined.
Under the New Mexico Children's
Code, those adjudications are
not criminal records. That is
the fundamental problem, and I
hear some of the public.
Commentary. I will offer this as
an example that is not anecdotal
less than 2 weeks ago, a.
ly adjudicated.
Juvenile at 17 years old.
3
Voluntary manslaughters is what
the actual adjudication was for
using the correct legal
terminology with a firearm.
That is not reportable under our
current law, that person.
becomes eligible to buy a
firearm at their 18th birthday
legally with no.
This law seeks to close that
loophole.
and hold to account those folks
who have demonstrated an
inability to responsibly handle
a thing that we universally, no
one disagrees, juveniles and
guns don't mix. People are 9
times more likely to be arrested
for a gun crime if they are
arrested for a violent crime.
As a juvenile, and we are
experiencing unprecedented
And it frequency 2 out of every
3 days in New Mexico over the
last 3 years or the last
calendar year, a juveniles are
arrested in our community.
unrelated crime.
I ask your support in this and
I'm happy to answer questions
I've learned a ton about what
the record looks like on the
receiving end for the FFL what
the roles of the administrative
office of the courts and the
Department of Public Safety and
NCIC, so I hope to be of service
and I thank this committee for
its important work on this
topic.
You, OK, I have. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative. Um.
I know I've been saying for
years I wish that violent
juvenile records would be
unsealed when you're looking at
pretrial release, sentencing,
and other crimes when they're
adults, but I have a concern
that we're only trying to unsell
those records when it comes to
buying a gun, but not when they
are committing another crime. So
one that that's.
Something I'm very concerned
about because it's one, then why
aren't we doing that for
another, especially.
A violent crime is being
committed, um, but my second
question goes to, um, because I
do.
Work with juveniles at YDC and
try to talk to them and and work
on.
Juvenile justice. My question
is, um,
You know
As everyone likes to say, uh,
young dumb kids do dumb things
sometimes and if it's with a
gun.
Is this going to prevent them
then, um, say they're released
at 18.
They're not then allowed to
purchase a gun.
So they're 28.
Um, would that affect them if
they wanted to go.
In law enforcement or public
service to hold a gun then after
that.
Thank you very much, uh, Madam
Chair and representative, that's
an excellent question, and I'll
defer to my expert witness.
As soon as, yeah.
Sure.
Sure.
Madam Chair, Representative
Chavis, thank you for the
question. Um.
In terms of
Um, why is it not focused on uh
not committing uh.
Future crimes, we want to
emphasize that the language of
the bill focuses on the rights
of the adults. OK, so, um, and
we felt like a good starting
point was to narrow it down to
Um
Investigating
Um, unlawful carrying of a, of a
firearm as an adult.
But accessing um
The juvenile records.
So
That, um, so that, so the
language certainly just takes
its focus away on
The juvenile and focuses more on
the.
Don
For, for, uh, in, in the bill.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Representative
Chavis, thanks for the question
and thank you for the work with
our uh
Criminal justice affected youth,
um, is that presents its own
escalators towards future
criminality, which we are trying
to avoid. The goal here is not
to stifle the ability to grow in
one of the critical things you
raise, which I appreciate is
What does this do to one's
ability to grow, learn, and
recover from mistakes. And
that's a really important
question and something that we
we have hoped to address here.
The
unsealing or not sealing of
records, and I'm gonna talk just
about point of sale ability when
you have a state prohibitor.
And it could be, for example, a
domestic violence or restraining
or any number of things that
already exist.
If you are deemed incompetent.
You have a state prohibitor
regardless of age. If you have
been committed to a mental
institution involuntarily, you
have a prohibitor that the state
reports on. All of those things
have impacts on what folks can
do related to
Specific purchasing of a gun.
The, the question you raised,
which is not hypothetical, is if
someone wants to enter a
profession wherein carrying a
firearm.
is a predicate requirement and I
think that's an important one
and I'm that's something that's
near and dear to my heart, and I
will respectfully submit that
the answer is it could the same
way that a juvenile or an adult
incident in in any of those
things I mentioned earlier
related to mental health, um,
Competency, domestic violence,
temporary restraining orders
could also impact and do, and
when I served as our law
enforcement academy director,
there are some difficult
decisions that have to be made.
The good news is we have very
straightforward laws that talk
about the duration and the time.
the periods of prohibition for
mistakes that were made in one's
youth relative to their
application. And so the good
news is that depending upon the
timing, it could be an impact
just like it already is. The
better news is, is that all of
these things can be
rehabilitated by a function of
time, including some of the
things I mentioned.
Representative. Thank you, Madam
Chair, um, representative.
I'm more, um,
Looking at kind of the legal
definition of.
Um
Providing for a delinquent act
involving the use of a firearm.
Use of a firearm.
How are you defining um Madam
Chair.
Representative expert use of.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representative, uh,
you would.
have possessed the firearm
whether or not you have it.
On you while committing.
The um crime or pointing it or
firing it.
OK, and, and Madam Chair and
Representative, this is kind of
my concern, so when you, when
you do.
The adult, you, you, you take
something to trial, um, a jury
has to actually make a special
finding that the defendant or
the juvenile use, I mean, I
guess I don't even know if you
use it for a juvenile, but as an
adult, let's say you had to make
a special finding that the jury
finds beyond a reasonable doubt
that the defendant used the
firearm in the commission of the
whatever felony. So
We're not really, so, so are
you?
This who's gonna, who's gonna
define in this what the use of a
a firearm is, is it gonna be a
larceny of a firearm, is it
gonna be an aggravated burglary
where someone steals a firearm
or is it actually going to be a
murder where they're using the
firearms. I think that's a
really important thing, um.
When we look at what the law
currently is that it does
require require a special
finding by a jury, um, or I
don't know, I guess in a
juvenile case.
Maybe a judge if we're gonna do
this, um, that's kind of my big
concern um if that Madam
Representative, Madam Chair
representative
expert.
Madam Chair members of the
committee, Representative Reed,
uh, your time, lifetime spent as
a prosecutor, which I appreciate
the question and I know Mr.
Lovato have something said. One
of the things that's most
important, I think, to
understand is we're not trying
to write the entire criminal
procedure about how that is
accomplished. In fact, that is
case dependent and specific.
Really important distinction you
raise related to why there is
not an enumerated list and the
reason why that's important is
because I think this committee
in your debate and in your
deliberation.
If a juvenile brings a firearm
to a school.
And that were done by an adult,
that would be a felony.
And I think, and I speak for
myself and, and you guys will
draw your own conclusions that
that is a really strong
indicator of us needing to, to
take a very close look at this
person's future ability to have
firearms in their possession.
The court will determine whether
or not that firearm was used for
anything else, whether it's a
threat.
Every single case where other
things are much more clear,
shooting at her from a motor
vehicle, it would have to be a
determination for a finding of
guilt. So I think the the real
answer is and Mr. Lovato will uh
will add some things is it's
case evidence and either finer
factor it's a judge or a jury
dependent upon each case.
Madam Chair, Representative
Reeves, yes, leaving it to the
discretion of the court, um was
the decision in drafting the
bill to determine, you know, use
of firearm, we felt that.
Instead of giving an enumerated
list. All right, and so, uh,
Madam Chair and represented
experts, so I would think you
would want some language or
something in there to state that
what you know.
Who is determining the use of a
firearm, and obviously if it
goes to a jury, it should be a
jury making that determination
if we're gonna make it like it
is an adult, um, or if it's
going to be the judge, um, make
the special finding, um, that a
firearm is being used, um,
because you sure don't wanna.
You sure don't want to.
You don't want to punish
somebody who's possessing a
firearm for 10 years, um, when
they're not using the firearm,
that's just kind of how it is
under under the law and it's a
for 10 years is a pretty.
He, you know, sentence there,
but I, I think that's something
that needs to be looked at, um.
Madam Chair Representative and
experts, I
I hate to say this.
that I would ever ever really
agree with the public defender,
but,
but the um
that I would ever ever really
agree with the public defender,
but, but
on one thing, on one thing, just
one thing, um, I do tend to
agree that when you are dealing
with crimes that are uh firearm
related, you generally are going
under an SPU or a serious
violent offense often or
youthful offense. Um, so you do
often, you know, they're being
prosecuted as an adult, um, so I
mean I.
Uh, I just, you know, I, I, I
just point that out, but let me
just go to page 2, just so I can
get clarification on the line
10, Madam Chair.
An adult who was subject to a
juvenile disposition or
delinquent act involving the use
of a firearm, um.
When you say subject to a
juvenile disposition, is this
going to include time waivers
consent decrees or.
I chair, will it also, is it
just to your standard probation
or a commitment or.
or an adult sentence. So what
does subject to a.
Madam Chair, Representative
Reeves, um.
We certainly aren't talking
about the informal.
Um, cases that are handled by
the juvenile probation parole
office, um, so we're we're
talking about, um, dispositions
that include um consent decrees,
um, 1 or 2 years, um.
OK, and madam chair and.
Representative and experts. So
when you actually file these
cases, um, obviously I know
we're not talking about
unofficially handling them
because they're not even filed,
but you have them filed and you
can get a time waiver, which is
basically not an adjudication.
You can get a consent decree,
which I don't, so I'm I'm just
something you should think about
is um those aren't really.
I mean
I'm just they're they're like
the easiest best thing you can
get as a juvenile to really keep
their records, you know,
completely clear, even though I
know they're sealed, so, um, I'm
just trying to think is there
any case that's filed in court,
Madam Chair, and then has a
disposition of some sort and is
a time waiver and the consent to
create disposition.
And um
Madam Chair, represented Reeves,
that is a great question. I
think um this this position is
intentionally broad again to
allow for interpretation by the
courts.
Certainly, um.
Under the Children's code.
Alright, and thank you and Madam
Chair and Representative
experts.
You stated previously that the
10 years would start from the
data disposition. Um, I know as
an adult, it normally starts
from the end of their parole or
probation period, and you
explain maybe why you're are
treating that differently than
How we normally do it, Madam
Chair.
Adam Chair, uh, Representative
Reeves, um, looking at other
states, um, it it varies on how
they've structured the bill. Um,
some have used the final date of
supervision, which is, you know,
probation through the juvenile
probation and parole office, but
then they shorten the time
period.
After,
um, that it can be used in an
adult investigation and so since
we we felt that
The
The period was going to be 10
years, uh, we felt that that
disposition would be sort of
more aligned with the other
states. OK. And so Madam Cha and
Representatives could probably
actually make it shorter than it
would be for an adult, which I
think is probably better, um, to
do it that way. I was just
curious about the difference,
um.
I think I think it's that I
don't, I think my main problem
is this whole use of a firearm
and legal issues, um, about it,
I think that some of the
language could be tightened up a
little, um, so I'm just offering
those as suggestions, um, I do
understand the problem you have
with crime and.
And I just, as Representative
Chavez said, I, I just want to
make sure we're, we are.
Punishing someone for a very,
very long period of time, you
know, for.
Just
Some something stupid versus,
you know, the use of a firearm
and the possession of a firearm
or the stealing of a firearm,
and they're very different to me
and so I just wanted to make
that that that. Thank you. um We
Sapansky, I'm gonna call on
representative McQueen because I
accidentally missed him.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, and
And the experts, I, I just
wanted to um.
like an issue we've seen before.
which is present in this bill,
page 8, the committee said.
Uh, lines 13 and 14.
You have a notwithstanding any
other provision to the contrary
construction.
Um,
The, the concern over this
construction, I think is that.
You're effectively amending
another area of law, but you're
not stating in that other area
of law that you're amending it.
So if someone were to only read
the other area of law, they
wouldn't know that this this.
Um, I
I believe you will have problems
with this construction moving
forward.
This is something you should.
About the dressing sooner rather
than later.
And men chair if they want to
address that, that's fine, but
that's just pointing that out.
No, no, no, duly noted,
Representative McQueen thank you
ma'am.
Thank you, um, leader Sapansky.
Madam Chair and Representative
Kate, um, you know, I, I am very
concerned about.
Uh
The issue of young people and
firearms and, you know, some of
the issues that we've seen in my
community.
A lot of them are related to
young people, uh, with firearms.
I'm not sure that they had
juvenile records, but you know,
I think this is a
An issue really worth
addressing.
Um, I am really struggling with
this approach.
Um
The
Uh, the first, uh firstly.
Um
Creating, adding to the felon in
possession statute.
Um
You know, someone who had a
juvenile record that was related
to use of a firearm.
Uh, and, and representative
Reeve's concerns regarding, you
know,
that use of firearm was is
really valid, but it also just
seems like a.
Uh, uh, total overturning of the
entire philosophy of our
children's code, which is, you
are a child, you make mistakes,
um, you deserve a chance to.
Uh, restart.
Your life after you have served
your sentence and served your
time and you know, uh, met all
of the conditions of the court,
um, and then to turn around and
for possession of firearm, be
subject to up to 9 years.
Um, due to all of the recent
increases that we've, we've made
as a legislature to that
particular penalty.
It it just seems.
Um
It, it just seems a bit extreme,
um.
And you know, I, I, I'm curious
and I don't know the answer to
this, so this is just a.
Uh uh curiosity of mine there,
um, there was a recent 5th
Circuit opinion just relating to
the possession of
Um, semi-automatic weapons by 18
to 21 year olds, there was a
previous opinion in the 10th
Circuit.
Um, that sort of they're totally
contradictory opinions, but, um,
I was reviewing the 10th Circuit
opinion recently and it, it
deals only with sales. It
doesn't deal with possession and
I'm just curious if you all
reviewed, um, either expert um
or representative and Madam
Chair, if you reviewed those
opinions and sort of developing
this approach.
Madam Chair
representativepansky, thank you
for the, the question and, and
the deliberation and I too am
familiar with that and we are
reviewing it upstairs.
Our legal team as it relates to
some of our other.
More controversial regulatory
bills as, as, as you know, and
we have done in the past, um, I
think, I think there's a couple
of things and, and, and I think
if I understand correctly.
is
the difference between
on
And a
investigated as an adult for
something that was adjudicated
as a juvenile.
And, and I, and I appreciate
that and I think it will be
useful for the committee's
understanding that there are 23
states that have similar laws
and they vary.
And, and again, I'm not
comparing New Mexico, I think
we're unique and that's what
makes us uh awesome, but they
vary from any felony, so our
neighbors to the north in
Colorado, if you have been
adjudicated as a juvenile for
any felony crime. Think.
po s s es s ing the smallest
amount of a controlled
substance, shoplifting to a
felony degree.
You are prohibited for a period
of 10 years.
across the board, everything in
their book that's a felony. Um,
there are less restrictive
places, 7 years, state of
California says you have to have
reached your 30th birthday.
And then the most restrictive is
the state of Illinois, where a.
adjudication is a juvenile for a
felony.
may never
or purchase a firearm again and
so I appreciate the concern and
and and I agree with a very
clearly conservative, uh,
opinion.
From a historically
conservative.
District, um, the.
The difficulty associate
associated with how New Mexico
ought to navigate this very
varsity level very difficult uh
conundrum we find ourselves in,
which is, and I want to disagree
with Representative Reed, but
Most of these young people are
not being adjudicated.
Under an adult provision
That is fundamentally the
problem and I'll give you an
example of a person that killed
3 people.
with the farm and did not have a
prohibition. Thank you. Thank
you, Madam Chair, um, and.
Uh, Mr. Baker and
You know, I, I.
I think this issue of.
Whether someone should be
allowed to purchase a firearm.
Or whether someone should be
allowed to transfer a firearm to
someone who has committed a
crime using a gun under the age
of 18 is one thing.
them to the fall in possession
statute, I think is a
Uh, is an approach that that
personally I just don't agree
with, um, and I think you know
the, the second piece of this.
I think there's some really uh.
There's some really good pieces
here. It certainly represented
McQueen's issue of the
notwithstanding is important,
and I, I take that very
seriously, um, probably needs to
be addressed.
Um, but the, the, the piece, um.
Around allowing the data to be
accessed for the purpose of a
federal background check.
To purchase a firearm for a for
a seller to.
I think, I think that's a very
important public safety
improvement.
You know, I think that piece is
great.
I, there are no protections in
here though, for someone who had
access that information for
other purposes, so you are
basically the way this, as I'm
reading it and please correct
me, um, Madam Chair and
Representative, if I'm wrong,
you're making this information
available for the purposes of
background check, they're in one
spot, it does say for the
purposes of firearms sale, but
there are no sort of
prohibitions on using this
information for anything else,
so say
you have someone who turns 18.
They've got their life back on
track. They've had a, a defense
that would have been adjudicated
as a felony if they had been an
adult.
Um, and they go to apply to be,
uh, you know, any number of
positions that requires a
federal background check.
You know, I would love to see in
this legislation, um, something
that would limit the
availability of this data to
solely the for the purposes of
the firearms sale because the
way that I'm reading this
legislation now.
Um
That information could be
available if, for example, if
you're trying to rent an
apartment, um, you know, there
are landlords that do background
checks. There are certainly uh
employers that routinely do
background checks and, and so I
think that that, you know, I
would love to support some
version of this is I think what
I'm saying, but I think that
piece needs to be tightened up.
Um
As well as
The last section.
And, and I want, I will, I would
ask, would ask you to respond, I
just wanted to get to this last
point, the very last section on
page 10.
Um
seems to indicate to me that
that information is available.
Um, for any purpose, if someone
was doing a records check.
And so, so if you wouldn't mind
just responding cause I, I
really do think this issue is
important and I would love to
get this right, and I, I think
we're sort of.
Hitting something with a
sledgehammer that maybe needs a,
a, a, a more laser-like
approach.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, I think both my
expert witnesses would need to
reply. Thank you Madam Chair.
Representatives, um, we.
Section 2 has been um amended to
address those concerns, um,
it's, as I stated earlier, it it
mirrors the uh
The
The extreme risk firearm
protection um Order Act. So, so
we believe that in terms of who
can access that it's section 2,
as I started the presentation
has, has been changed
dramatically, um, so and we
think that addresses the
concerns. Also um under the
Children's code, um,
32A 2-32, um, the
confidentiality of records of
juveniles is
Can be accessed, uh, can be
accessed by law enforcement
officers when it's related to an
investigation of a crime. So
this is a new territory for the
state in regards to
investigating um crimes, even
when someone has aged out of the
juvie system, juvenile system
and has now gone to, to, on to
being accused of committing
adult crimes.
Madam Chariot and
representative, is that related
to page?
10 section D, that that last
statement.
You just made, yes.
Yes.
Madam Chairs represented, I also
like to have.
And speak as well.
Um, this is not
Uh, it is not an information
that will be on general
background checks. It is only a
point of.
Purchase
Um, in the firearms dealers.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee leader Sapansky, um,
yeah, I think that the important
piece here and it's difficult,
and I agree we're talking about
two different things, the
investigation of a crime or
whether or not someone is a
felon in possession of firearm
as an adult.
Uh
against the.
from
Seeking a firearm at the point
of sale that state prohibitor is
the really important part.
The latter, which means that it
is a decision point that the FFL
will see on their screen. It's
only 3 things. It's proceed with
the sale, denied reason not
explained.
Or uh timed out delayed. There
is a appellate
process that already exists
within the federal government
for that what we're trying to do
is populate that screen with the
folks.
This, this committee and this
legislature be believe should be
prohibited, which we, we do and
have done before um with that
information the record, the
content or the specifics about
it are not available to anybody.
So, so that piece I think comes
out when we're talking about
investigating whether or not
someone is a felon in possession
of a farm. That's a law
enforcement exception to the
Children's code. A landlord does
not have access to that
information. A college doing a
background check would not have
access to that information. Um,
so, so I.
And that, in that uh law already
exists as we stand today.
So Madame Chair and
Representative, if I'm
understanding you right, the
only people that have access to
the National Instant criminal
background check system.
would be FFL's law enforcement.
Agencies.
So if I
Madam Chair Representative, so
if I, um, you know, there's many
services online, right, where
you can.
He had a background check on
someone that you intend to hire,
for example, does that, does
that data come from a separate
source and not the source that's
named in the legislation.
Mm
Maner on members committee
leader Sapansy, I can't speak
directly to what a for-profit
entity that does background
checks. What we're talking about
is the CGIS administrator for
each state, which is the way the
criminal justice information
network works under the auspices
of the Federal Bureau of
Investigation designates a state
agency in this case, the
Department of Public Safety to
populate records from a variety
of sources, um, some civil like
her.
Heroes, some criminal, largely
criminal is what we're talking
about here. That information is
confined to the Federal Bureau
of Investigation and the sieges
portal, so I don't, I don't
believe that's correct.
OK, thank you.
You know, the, the, the reason
that I have these concerns is
you've got section.
Section 2, subsection A that
that keeps it specific to.
The purpose of determining
whether a person may receive
transport or possess a firearm.
Um, but the subsequent sections
don't limit it to that, you
know, they are talking about
the, the clerk of the court
providing this information to
this national database, um, and.
You know, I just wonder, Madam
Chair and representative, if
you're open to looking at some
language that would prohibit the
use of this information for
employment decisions for
Housing decisions, that kind of
thing, um, specifically so that
we can just be really clear.
That this real, this information
is is truly limited to whether
this person is eligible to
purchase or receive a transfer
of a firearm.
Thank you, madam chair and, and
thank you, uh, leader. I
absolutely we would be open to
it. Understand the version of
this.
from last year is not the bill
that is before you. I have taken
it to juvenile defense
attorneys. I've taken it around
town to say how are we making
sure that we are protecting our
public, but I'm a believer in
second chances as well and that
it does not hinder that if
strengthening, which is what we
thought we did with our
community because
Vice Chair Romero was very clear
with us on being able to confirm
a lot of these.
Concerns as well. If there's
other language that would give
uh this committee.
Um
I don't know support being able
to be able to protect that we
would be more than willing to
move forward on that.
uh
I, I think um Mr. Lovato would
like to speak.
I, I would just echo the
representatives commitment to
that.
Madame Chair and Representative,
if we get to that point, I'd be
happy to work with you.
On that, um, I think it's just
an important.
Protection to ensure that this
is
Targeted towards those specific
transactions as opposed to.
of bringing back this.
Um, previous juvenile history
into someone's life when they're
really trying to turn it around.
Thank, thank you, Madam Chair.
I'm at a place.
Like
We have a motion for a due pass.
Uh, oh, wait, whoa, whoa, oh
wait, we gotta do it the right
way or someone will remind me.
So do you not pass on the bill
to pass on the committee
Right. So, uh, do not pass on
what house bill 39 and a do pass
on.
Committee substitute.
Representative Avita.
Representative Chavez.
No.
Representative Hall.
No
Representative Hochman B. Hill.
Yes, and.
Representative Martinez.
No
Speaker Martinez, yes.
Representative McQueen.
Yes. Representative Reeb.
No, and I'd like to explain my
vote.
Leader Sapansky.
No.
Madam Vice Chair, yes.
Madam Chair, yes.
Um
Representative Mandijo.
Ma'am share just quickly, um.
I agree with the premise of the
bill. I understand the problem
we're trying to solve, but I
also like to echo the.
Comments on leader S Kapansky
and that I do think there's some
over broad issues and would love
to see, um, applications of the
of the potential applications
that are unintended of this
lobby.
Identified and pared down.
Just to make it, you know, make
sure we're solving the problem
we're in.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair. um,
I just, I just have a problem
with the language of the bill
legally, I, I just think it
needs to be tightened up and um.
I just, I, I think the the
language is so broad and.
The use of a firearm is really
getting me and so that would,
that's the reason I'm voting on
it.
So we have a tie, which means.
Not pets.
OK.
So, just a reminder, we'll be
reconvening tomorrow at a.
1:30.
Lunch will be brought in, um.
So with that, uh
we are adjourned.
Yes.
