Penske.
Madam chair here madam chair
here madam chair you have a
quorum.
All right we are on house bill.
The house bill two thirty two.
And I believe the some of the
the sponsor is proposing.
Let's give us a minute to get
the so because we're going to
ask you of course to read the
number.
Well welcome Representative
Sariñana in welchem Senator Ivey
Soto
the floor is yours thank you
madam chair members of the
committee
As I said and I are here to
present House Judiciary
Committee sub for House Bill two
thirty two which amends the ins
inspection of public records
act.
It is up for discussion thank
you.
Two two five zero one six one
one.
When let me just point eleven
yes.
The.
My sympathies Representative
Sariñana.
Okay I just want to start by
telling them chair us tell you
when hearing this bill so most
of you know I'm a math teacher
but before that I worked for the
department the army as a
computer programmer systems
administrator database manager
so this is really important to
me that we get this right it
started out as a information
systems bill but it's it's
expanded and yes we are in
version eleven and I'm sure
you're thinking wow they must
have had some great
collaboration and we did we have
worked with of fog the ACLU law
enforcement do it by tourism of
the municipal league and the
governor's office and I had to
work with this one so it's been
a it's been a long eleven.
When we come out with is a bill
that has narrowly tailored to
address specific risks and
sensitive information many of
the people who worked on the
bill our heroes expert witnesses
they're all over I think most
and so what I'm gonna do is
quickly go through the bill and
then we'll discuss it right so
section section one page one and
two is specific to tourism.
New Mexico will become the first
state to participate in the
tourism exchange a business to
business platform which connects
suppliers and distributors
parting with the tourism
exchange USA with the goal of
bringing travelers from around
the world to New Mexico with a
focus on small businesses like
our hotels with this bill we
want to protect the tourism
department's proprietary
information and consumers in the
vote individually at identical
if identifiable information
provided online as they use the
exchange rate.
section to page two and three is
currently is current law some
has been deleted and some is
been moved so we're gonna jump
down to page four J..
every person has a right to
inspect public records of the
state except in J. it's
information concerning IT
systems the publication of which
would reveal specific
vulnerabilities that compromise
are allowed unlawful access to
such systems.
we that is provided that this
subsection shall not be used to
restrict requests for records
stored or transmitted using IT
systems in this particular part
of the bill reveal specific bone
of both abilities what does that
mean well recently one of our
agencies was infiltrated the
system was infiltrated and I
paint and if a request was made
and some of the information
requested had several user names
and passwords.
The person the person within the
agency were asked to change
their passwords so would it
requests the passwords were not
the problem.
It was the structure of the
passwords or the naming protocol
that was a problem we all know
that even protocols right eight
characters capital letters
numbers special characters
For the past within the upper
document the request would be
able to claim for the patterns
within those passwords what the
pastor protocol was so did they
get a valid password from us no
but could they use the passwords
that were it not that we're no
longer in use to construct an
algorithm for guessing passwords
absolutely so alright the
we reveal specific
vulnerabilities is
is what we're trying to look at
here in this part.
All right page five section
Katie.
This to do with the office of
broadband and faith Fancher by
in the broadband grants
currently we are getting a lot
of money from federal grants for
broadband in this section gives
protection to by to ensure
fairness within the grant
process the concern came up
because they were having the
issue of when one company or
city but she submitted a grant
application technically ended
stature right now another
company or another city can you
for the grant information
submitted thank you get all of
the information copied the grant
and submit their own application
with upgrades so it's about fair
competition within this part
information in this parallel
support.
The protections that currently
exist in the procurement code.
Page I.
This is a new section section
three this is fourteen dash to
dash one point two the law
enforcement records.
Hello all over although law
enforcement records info is
within this one place
Twenty two a current language
just move from section two to
section three.
So the only items added when you
look at paragraph eighty on page
six and seven there two three
four and five.
This is dealing with the
presence of non public
information maybe redacted from
a written record digitally
obscured in a visual or audio
record and we're really talking
about body count for footage
primarily and the visual
depiction of a dead body or
great bodily harm of the visual
depiction of an individual's
intimate body parts or the
visual or audio depiction of the
notification to a member of the
public of a family member's
death.
for this one one of the issues
was there's this guy.
All he does for a living is it
provided camera footage I'm from
the police departments even
takes all this the videos puts
them on line item on an illicit
YouTube channel makes and makes
money off of people actually
viewing them.
the department has two or three
people on staff just dealing
with this guy.
All right thirty sorry
Representative Nibert is scaring
the where we paid seven.
To curb the body can guide we're
adding reached adding reasonable
specificity when someone is
asking for body cam footage they
can't just say I want everything
we have the request for release
of video or or or audio shelves
specify at least a few the
following one of the following
the the a record number or a
police report number it would
just asking for specifics
finance for body cam.
Eight seven eight following the
transparency.
C. ND except for confidential
source methods or information
the restrictions on the video
obscuring an audio securing do
not apply if you are viewing it
on site but you cannot recorded
you cannot you cannot copy the
video or the audio you can only
you can just view it and listen
to it so that's for the
transparency so someone comes up
the newspaper a person is doing
investigation you know something
happened in November he can if
he can ask for the to view the
the part in November and then
when he gets the party actually
needs you can infer that part.
Hey
very okay.
Eight eight.
Section four C. is definitions
some of the part we changed this
is information technology
systems definitions and within
this section we're talking about
systems the infrastructure but
not the data we talked about
passwords already so this is
just the definition for
information system technology
systems.
And I believe those are the
biggest parts the bills and
madam I'd like to defer to my co
sponsor.
Madam chair members of the
committee first of all.
The messages for yes.
I have allergies.
Good news for you is I will be
talking much.
This bill is not perfect.
It does not contain everything
that we discussed their
conversations about including
for example critical
infrastructure.
There are conversations about
including a schematics of
security systems.
Their conversations about
including personal health
information.
We have a commitment to continue
to have conversations going
forward over the next year.
And bring those back next year.
But these are the issues upon
which we were able to agree now.
And so not wanting to let.
Be the enemy of the good.
We're proceeding now but the
point eleven yeah this is gonna
say I can't imagine what perfect
would be numbered exactly.
It was a commitment to continue
to have for the conversations
over the next year in terms of
where April lies in this digital
age which is very different from
what it was originally written
thank you very much.
Representative center before.
Those wishing to speak in
opposition to the bill please
raise your hand keep in mind
we're going to be asking people
to keep their comments to ninety
seconds and only fifteen minutes
will be allocated to the each
side okay so anyone in
opposition please raise your
hand.
Online anyone in opposition.
I don't see anyone online now in
terms of support I know there
are a lot of department heads
out there and I appreciate your
attendance but it would help us
a lot if you could perhaps keep
your comments very brief maybe
just mention you know your
department that is in support of
this bill because we do want to
get through it and I sure sure
you can all understand that so
those wishing to speak in
support please raise your hand
Michael okay and there will be a
Mike if maybe if we stand in the
center here but
Okay not not back there sorry
sorry about that okay and people
want to go online often tend to
say very briefly.
Yes Sir.
trophies are deputy chief of New
Mexico state police we stand in
strong support of this bill
appreciate this sponsors bring
it forth
we think that this this bill
makes several much needed
updates to IPRA there's many the
department public safety handles
of approximately fifteen
thousand eight for the year
those ranged everything from
three or four page crash report
to a major incident with
hundreds of pages and hundreds
of hours of video and a lot of
that was not accounted for
expected I think when the
regional approach laws were made
so this health update a lot of
that and so we very much
appreciate the sponsoring four
thank you.
Thank you as I said grief is
good.
Madam chair committee members my
name is Peter then toss and the
secretary designate for the
department of information
technology.
We understand the need to be
open however we don't want to
tell the bad guys which windows
or unlocked when the security
guards come by that sort of
thing and we support this bill
thank you.
Thank you good afternoon madam
chair and members of the
committee my name is Rebecca
Martinez and I am here today
speaking in my capacity as the
president for the New Mexico
clerks and finance officers
association which is a
subsection of the New Mexico
municipal league I'd like to
thank the bill's sponsors for
their willingness to propose
updates to the inspection of
public records act of besides
slight modifications as you all
just heard the act does not been
amended in over thirty years
during this time there has been
advancements in technology
record content and the sharing
of information via the web one
of the ones practical safeguards
to privacy have largely become
obsolete in the digital world we
live in today there has been a
substantial increase in the
number of records requests
submitted to public entities
over recent years which
continually brings to the
surface antiquated procedures
within if Russia and questions
on the interplay with other laws
that make records confidential
as municipal clerks we honor and
respect our statutory title of
chief records custodian and
responsibility for providing
governmental records however we
are seeking long overdue
modernization to the act that
provides clear guidance on how
to process records requests
especially as it relates to
records that could compromise
privacy security and human
dignity the clerks and finance
officers officers association
recognizes this bill is a
starting point in the for more
visitation and that there has
been a lot of working
conversation to get the proposed
bill toward is today we wished
to show our support of such move
in and look forward to the
commitment by interested parties
for continued dialogue and
making up in the future thank
you.
Madam chair I do that actually.
I think and I say.
Yes you can.
Go ahead Madam chairwoman I'm my
collection and I'm the county
attorney in Sandoval county I'm
chairman of the county
attorney's affiliate of the
counties association and I rise
in support of this bill let me
give you some bad examples
Daniel Cao at is an inmate in
the state prison in Hobbs his
hobby is submitting it per
request he submitted hundreds of
them he's filed dozens of
lawsuits he's been so abusive
Johnstone in the fifth district
has enjoined him from filing new
lawsuits he keeps doing it
anyway
when I was senator County Frank
Thomas in Maine state prison
chaparral he was there on the
sentence of a rape charge he
submitted in April for the
videotape of him committing the
rape that he was in prison for.
we constantly get very vague
requests simply state police
report for I want every video of
a police chase over seventy five
miles an hour our there's a lot
of folks that think our systems
are like the starship enterprise
he can just say computer
generate a list of whatever
this bill is a good first step
we have lots more ideas from my
colleagues that we would like to
have for this
we would hope you would pass
this bill and work with us on
making further improvements to
the bill later thank you thank
you.
Madam chair members I'm point
Johnson I am the county manager
for central county and Sandoval
county stand in support of this
bill you probably won't find
anybody more committed to
transparency in government that
I am however there are some
problems with it as mentioned
before it's over thirty years
old didn't envision things like
well body cameras at that point
cameras are about forty pounds
and I used to carry one around
some thirty years ago so we need
this modernization desperately I
don't believe it quite goes far
enough particularly when it
comes to law enforcement the
release of videos immediately
after some instant whether it's
a police shooting or other
incident and criminal instant
and jurisdiction we would hope
that you will continue This
going forward but like you madam
chair I don't want to see the
version that is perfect in this
committee tonight so I don't
think we've got that much time
in the session so again Sandoval
County supports this effort I
appreciate your consideration
thank you.
Madam chair members someone just
open the Bernalillo county clerk
and what she said is.
We stand in support of this bill
this is caused undue hardship
sometimes and elected staff all
the jeopardy question we're
willing to work through it
nothing we do is a secret but
it's a little overbearing thank
you.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Brenda green I'm the Union
County clerk one of the smallest
counties in the state verses Mr
over being the clerk of the
largest county in the state
April impacts my office
tremendously I have a staff of
two currently on these are very
time consuming and very labor
intensive for us to try and
satisfy so while this bill isn't
perfect it definitely makes a
lot of steps in the right
direction to make our job a
little bit easier in our office
thank you.
Good afternoon madam chair
members my name is Katherine
Kirk shot on I'm a registered
lobbyist for the New Mexico
counties we stand in support of
this legislation specifically
our attorneys affiliate as well
as our clerks affiliate selected
at Praia and addressing it print
issues as a legislative priority
so happy to see this legislation
and thank the sponsors for
bringing it forward thank you.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Ethan Watson city
clerk for the city of
Albuquerque city got eleven
thousand requests for public
records last year we have
fifteen full time staff and I
tend staff all working on it for
a full time we are very excited
about this bill and all the work
that's been put into it we are
look for looking for the future
conversations but the city
stands in support just it
results much in need of update
and this does many things that
are very important thank you.
Scott Scanlon registered
lobbyists for San Juan County we
support the bill.
Madam chair as a committee my
name is relentless on the
operations manager for the
office broadband access
expansion we stand in support we
want to thank the sponsors
please do you have a do pass on
version eleven of this bill
thank you.
Madam chair members the
committee and to ensure
secretary of the tourism
department I'd like to express
my gratitude to both of the
Sanchez for bringing this
forward and also the the
different advocacy groups that
we collaborated with the good
faith over the course of several
weeks to get to a very personal
level Levin and also just what
it is just express how important
is from our perspective that
we're protecting consumers we're
protecting the public so thank
you so much.
Madam chair members of the
committee richtet wrote The New
Mexico district attorneys
association and we stand in
support of this and we thank the
sponsors for remembering that we
have victims out there and this
is a first step for us to get to
where we can protect.
information that is out there
that.
Basically supports the victim's
rights act in the rights that
are victims have so we ask for
your support in this thank you.
Madam chair members the
committee Jason Weaks register
of this for the house New Mexico
hospitality association we
support the bill for the reasons
that the tourism secretary laid
out thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee Jason Espinoza
registered lobbyists with the
New Mexico foundation for open
government we don't stand in
support or opposition of the
bill but we really do want to
thank the sponsors and and the
governor's office and the
cabinet agencies for working
with us for several weeks you
know the point eleven has been
mentioned a couple times at but
that really does show the back
and forth and I know the
sponsors were really amenable to
working with us except in a lot
of our changes so we just wanted
to stand up and say we do not
stand in opposition of the
legislation thank you.
Thank you that we have.
someone online those wishing to
speak in support online please
raise your hand.
there's.
Lame lame lame Akon.
Women look on.
Enough no one ever gets it right
along with well love it the
clerk.
And yes we as clerks of gree
with what ms Martinez says we
are in support we thank the
sponsors and we see it as a
starting point.
To further discussion great
thank you.
No also in Garden.
Madam chair representative on
the County turned familiar
county and I'll connect you but
one of arguments that thank you.
Lisa Johnston.
Thank you madam chair of a I am
a retired will work and we stand
in support of this bill and
thank the sponsors for bringing
these amendments forward as a
starting point for further
discussion thank you thank you.
Lance Pyle.
Lance.
Lance good afternoon.
Good afternoon I just would like
to go on record the curry county
is in strong support of this
bill.
Thank you lance.
Josh Rubin.
Josh.
Thank you madam chair my name's
Josh Rubin on the acting city
attorney for Rio Rancho Act echo
everything everyone's Ortiz said
for instructional and this bill
provides a good solid guidance
in clearer
clear the ability for the cities
to comply so we thank you for
the opportunity thank you
Michael fox.
Thank you madam chair
Michael Hoste co county manager
we are in support of this.
Legislation.
Thank you.
And lastly Rachel Hughes.
Rachel Needham youth.
Yes madam chair can you hear me
yes.
Thank you my name is Richard
Hughes city clerk in the city of
Alamogordo I've ever seen and
field records request as such I
am in full support of house bill
two thirty two particularly the
proposed exemptions under law
enforcement records not to
release visual depiction of
sexual exploitation of children
someone deceased or individual
body parts I believe this is
humane to release these records
also under personal identifier
information protected not to
release employees home addresses
in particular police officers
there in fear of arrest for
violent felons make threats
against them providing the
addresses of the officers and
their families put them in
danger I can attest to this as a
police officer's wife and also
personal health information
should be just that personal and
private I ask that you please
passed house bill two thirty two
thank you thank you.
I just saw someone put their
hand up this will be the last
person A. Cardona.
Good afternoon and thank you
madam chair at the village of
Williamsburg strongly supports
all that has been set.
Thank you.
That concludes our public
comment portion Representative
serin million did you wish to
say anything further before we
go to the committee.
So chair during the time of
public comment I had an
opportunity to re review the
title and I saw that there's
actually and oversight in this
point eleven.
Which is originally.
They'll have to roll the bill.
Right.
So on page one line seventeen.
What starts with the word and.
We originally did have records
not subject to disclosure that
are transferred from another
state or the federal government
that was removed from the bill.
So that should be removed from
the title and instead there
should be an item online sixteen
after the work programs okay so
we're eliminate on we're on
lines
the first front page at the top
line seventeen and we're
eliminating after the end
beginning at the end begin also
we take out the answer right
through the semi colon on line
eighteen okay and then insert
and and online sixteen after the
word programs.
after are we striking the order
online sixteen no.
It's a and proprietary tentacle
well I station I got it
I got it okay I think I did.
Okay well at some point will get
to an amendment on the
so we're anything else you wish
to add okay
Representative Eli.
Thank you madam chair.
I have practice agency will
offer dozen years and
Representative Benham my
existence I will say
they're very technical their
land mines if you don't have
them handled properly.
And so I'm glad to see an effort
to try to clean up some of the
provisions page two madam chair.
Representative A. as in Alfa.
I talked with the secretary of
tourism's
Staff and I understand the need
for this provision my question
is.
Why do we limit the state was
are thought to include local
government.
In this provision.
Madam chair and
literally so originally we were
going to try to have this and
within it prides itself so to
plan all public bodies in New
Mexico however we then got into
a variety of hypotheticals of
how it might be utilized.
And so that is one of the things
that we're going to continue to
have a conversation about but
to their credit both of funk the
the Wagner the ACLU what the
hold up of the bill over that
issue and nor did I want to hold
up the tourism exchange.
So so therefore we put it
specific to tourism.
Madam sounds like you're gonna
put a signal here and work on
that and then maybe something
along those lines okay.
Of same page program B. as in
Bravo.
A consumers individually
identifiable information so
again a I preface my questions
with the there's landmines in
this field.
From a compliance standpoint.
That raised individual
identifiable information is that
it's not defined in it present
defined somewhere within this
subset of statutes.
Madam it is not it is it is what
it purports to be on its face.
Madam chair which is which is
right lane blocked.
A because he done in general New
Mexico.
And
Using this platform.
And up and and we're not going
to we're not going to reveal
that pursuant to April.
Madam chair so you're saying
that the you can block I guess
the name in the typical I don't
know that there's very that be
entered in a website I guess
potentially those those kind of
things one million addresses
okay.
Page five madam chair.
So now in the law enforcement
records.
Can understand that there's a
general statement that that
these records are public records
and then we start to carve out
some exceptions.
So page five the first.
Subparagraph number one.
I noticed that.
We give sort of a laundry list
of crimes that these would apply
to and this is both the.
The alleged.
The finance I believe no these
are victims sorry victims are
non law enforcement witnesses
because there's another
provision on.
I think on the other alleged
defendants so madam chair my
question is why I'd if if these
are victims and and all law
enforcement witnesses and and
charges haven't been filed why
do we want to limit the type of
crimes that this would apply to.
Madam chair and representative
of laying that is with the
exception of need sexual
exploitation of children that is
existing law that you'll see on
page three.
Line six through sixteen.
And so we just simply restated
that.
We've had conversations about
simply referencing.
For victims of crime act.
Which has its own list there.
But there was one that we could
do right now so we simply
restated what the existing
exemption is except that we
added sexual exploitation of
children.
Madam chair these a conversation
worth having it's interesting
it's existing April law.
Of the customer of victim.
And and charges may not end up
being filed
Thing with scenarios so it's
interesting that that.
That there are certain crimes
that that that that would be
discoverable.
If they don't fit within these
these exceptions and.
So I guess something else to
consider as well on and page
seven I think this is my last.
Nope sorry spoke too soon.
Seven so.
Still conflict contexts is
record of law enforcement that's
not.
discoverable.
So.
Paragraph eight records between
physical mental examination
medical treatment persons.
Unless information could be
relevant to a criminal
investigation that makes sense
to me.
But what we're talking about
when we say an investigation of
misfeasance or malfeasance
because.
Those I think that the to me
those speak of civil concepts.
Share and Representative Lane.
They often speak a simple
concepts but but because of the
structure of our government.
Where certain things are also
right.
Then if law enforcement is
involved in the investigation.
Then we would not.
Suppress records related to
physical or mental examination
and medical treatment of someone
who is who is under
investigation so let's say for
example that that the state
police knocks on my door.
And and they asked me Hey you
know there's all these all these
things from a campaign account
what's going on and it turns out
I have cancer I don't.
Let's that go I have cancer.
Using it to pay for treatment.
That would not be suppressed.
Okay.
Last one.
of.
For on page ten.
So.
I like I like the addition of
this provision madam chair
so we're talking about basically
just employees of a of a
political body
I think if you're elected in
that stuff's is fair game.
I'm curious is there so the non
business home street address I'm
curious if there is any thought
given to a personal cell phone
because I know
a lot of times like with local
government they they have
spreadsheets of people's contact
information as soon as they
enter that into a spreadsheet
that's a public record.
And I'm guessing most public
employees don't want their cell
phones it brought.
Representative Lane originally
we had.
In this section we had not only
their street address.
What their personal phone
number.
And their non governmental email
address.
However again Senator the
building conversations to
have over time.
So they were on the table the
capacity to be on the table for
for the conversation madam chair
so those stakeholders that one
that removes I'm understanding
that is correct and chair
representative moment sure that
that's a little.
The disappointing understand the
Sanchez need to be flexible I'm
not sure why stakeholders want.
A government employee's personal
self on what the benefit of that
would be so was my questions
thank you madam chair.
Thank you madam chair
As the madam chair the senators
said on page one line sixteen
after programs I make it a
proposed motion to add the word
and.
And then on line seventeen
beginning with and the strike
the remainder of that line and
the remainder of the next line
up to the semi Mexico.
Online sixty day were programs
and line seventeen starting on
the wording and all the way to
the end of that line strike that
strike Paul line.
Team up to the company Sen
Michael into keeping the Santo
correct okay motion by
Representative rain delays and
Jerry just want to make sure
we're striking comments on this
right.
Yes know what yes yes I yes
ma'am okay so will strike the
comma online sixties yes the
amendment as the motion is as
was stated.
Right.
We have a second second body.
Do we have a second.
Thank you it's been.
I.
Sure this.
Thank you no there's a comment
on the amendment.
Madam chair just be clear.
We're not actually doing
amendment we're proposing a
point twelve is that correct
Madam chair representative
that's quite the that's correct
it'll be a twelfth.
Okay thank you Mr.
Call the roll please
Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey yes for
point of.
Senator lane yes.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen the.
Representative Nibert.
Representative read.
Representative Rehm yes ma'am
Representative Penske yes.
Madam vice chair yes madam chair
yes madam chair with ten yess
you have a point twelve CS thank
you.
All right we're now on
discussion of the amended bill
Representative review of more
you just ask them chair so you
can come back to me for a motion
okay thank you
Representative Romero thank you
madam chair thank you I know
this is a huge undertaking from
what I thought lost.
Committee
so I just thankful to the
secretaries examine discuss with
me what was in this bill wire
supportive I'm just wanted to
get some clarity starting on
page five
When we look at section three
and the the new language.
When we talk about before
charges are filed and the
alleged crimes.
With there's it doesn't follow
on when crimes are filed.
What happens after we do get.
the charges.
Madam chair and.
Madam vice chair.
As it is with existing all right
now.
Those are suppressed until
charges are filed once charges
are filed they're no longer
suppressed.
Thank you madam chair
representative that includes
what is currently exempted
before the charges are filed
madam chair that is that is
correct that is the language
that currently exists on page
three line six to sixty.
And so madam chair
Representative when we're
talking about
Anyone who can if for for that
that information.
Whoever is featured in
the long list for the list from
ADG is there any.
That that's public information
and so now once the charges are
filed you can Efrat and receive
that
share Representative Romero that
is existing law to stipulate out
there again.
Representative what's the time
line and just and I don't know
no and criminal law to
understand the fine line between
before charges are filed and
when they're filed what how long
with the length of time and
what's the importance of the
offer.
Fairly early going to be charged
because these are subjects you
know extreme crimes correct
Madam these are all crimes of a
sexual nature or intimate
partner nature.
And and a lot of times actually
in these crimes we end up with
cold cases.
Particularly when we talk about
the stalking cases with the
sexual exploitation cases we end
up with cold cases and and
effect with the with the rape
kit backlog also the the process
of education K. they have a very
long sometimes it can be very
long.
In terms of of of what that
would be.
but what it does provide for is
that during that investigation
time mmhm that information of
some of the press Hey what state
video delivered to them or they
have for the police report those
names are suppressed blurt out
to sleep scared.
So that is just as a way of
keeping it fair because for some
reason.
For a very long time has
suppressed the name of someone
accused of a crime but not
charged this is actually a later
addition.
So madam chair representative
just so I'm trying what I'm
trying to understand is if this
information is going to be
public at some point in time
What what's the point of having
that buffer before they're
charged verses after they're
charged.
And what's I mean how long is
that length of time that we're
just right now they're they're
not available to the public and
now they are I guess I'm trying
to understand the purpose of
the W..
The chief madam chair members
the committee trophies are
deputy chief Mexico state please
so what's going to a lot of
times of these cases so the way
it's worded it says before
charged but really what this is
get after is a lot of these
cases are never charged.
So they don't necessarily want
to be able to see that person X.
there is in the best that they
had a C. S. P. possibly commit
out of it a charge never
happened.
Is a lot of these cases there's
we they don't necessarily get to
the point where there is
probable cause the charges ever
come about but there's report
there is an extensive
investigation and we don't want
to release that victims
information the otherwise would
never even come come to light
that they were a victim of
whatever possible victim of
whatever incident that makes
sense for actual victims
Madam chair representative so
that becomes public regardless
yes want what's charges are
filed and that's all public
court record and and yes that
information is public when
there's formally charges and
that type of reference the
timeline I mean that could very
that could be an incident that
just happened
Officers went there is probable
cause somebody got arrested
right then that for could be
something that happened after
the fact we had to wait for
think it Indian a and it was six
months later the arrest warrant
so that really that time line
could vary drastically from
immediately to years later.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative I'm trying to
wrestle with this for the
information that if somebody
wanted to you know if their
children it's I mean I'm trying
to figure out how this how this
works out with public
information and then getting to
page seven on confidential
sources methods or information
how does how do the
How does the yes category
something is confidential or
that method of communication can
you just describe that yes yes
madam chair members of the
committee so usually that's
going to be some luck involved
in an operational plan that's
going to give specifics of
for example are I was torn or
cut X. an organized crime for
about a decade a lot of that
operational stuff that's
included operational plans as
far as how we planned to
effectuate undercover operation
and arrest certain methods that
we use to conduct the
investigation to do surveillance
and stuff like that is included
an operational plan and normally
of the vast majority that would
not be something that would be
released as part of an extra
Madam chair representative in
future iterations I know that
this is going fast I would love
a sort of clarification around
confidential my concern is that.
Anything between you know police
could be deemed confidential
because it was a correspondence
or something like that in the
pursue to have that
clarification on what that a
source or method of information
would be would really help I
think or to point somewhere else
in law where we could be sure
that not everything would be
labeled as such as such a would
be helpful to to just
And the same thing with page a.
do.
As used in this section law
enforcement records includes
evidence in any form received or
compiled in connection with
criminal investigation or
prosecution and I don't know if
this is
I get a little uncomfortable but
If you are their forms of
evidence madam chair
representatives that made the
Something that would be
interactive with the public that
we would foresee because I guess
when it's on video it's not it's
totally open to the public at a
certain point but this in any.
Our important I guess I'm trying
to understand the the overlap
between what's.
It's on video what's on paper
that can you can improve for and
then what what's used in this at
section in any form that is now.
Matter of close
inactive or closed investigation
madam chair representative.
Here before the deputy chief
response if you look on page
three line seventeen to twenty
four you'll see that that exact
languages already in law we just
simply restated down below when
we with the law enforcement
records down there.
But what.
I don't have much to add to
Madam chair of Representative
Romero other than I think this
is this is basically making it
very inclusive basically saying
that everything is a is a record
so I mean it's.
My understanding is very rigid
that it's basically.
increasing basically saying
everything that just you know
it's not the same just police
reports or or just videos
you know saying all these things
are covered in the record so I
mean that might be something
like emails or anything else or
are it purple to so if the I
believe is expanding the scope
as opposed to restricting.
I have to go back and try to
figure out what it's referring
to and I guess and I just need
to make sure connects properly
that it's not exempting
something.
Thank you Mr.
Madam chair of.
Madam chair representative
senator of.
One thing that I don't see here
and maybe of cells were in the
oval office the.
With respect to.
Counties court maybe corrections
department is there any proof
there any prohibition against
disseminating through it for a
the blueprints of systems of
blueprints of buildings that are
needing to maintain some level
security
And if not
Should we expand this to do
that.
Chair representative Nibert so
that's what what about including
critical infrastructure.
the federal government is best
critical infrastructure law
there sixteen sectors of
critical infrastructure not all
of them are government related.
Up.
There was an earlier version of
this bill that actually
Representative Romero saw that
included critical infrastructure
and unfortunately up that
section and of getting dropped
because we could not agree on
the definition to use of
critical infrastructure but that
is part of the agreement that we
have in terms of continue
conversations over the next
year.
Okay well it seems to me that
the counties certainly the
corrections department and the
courts would have a I think a
real interest in making sure
that
Those things are not.
Obtained by the public because
that could constitute a security
breach as was mentioned in some
of the testimony and then my
last question.
Madam chair representative is
over on page seven there's a
list where we have to be very
specific for a person us pretty
specific to to acquire that
information my question is can.
Someone if for a.
For the information that would
then allow them to make the
specific question other words
can I go on a fishing expedition
and ultimately get this
information to make a specific
request.
Madam chair representative
number let's say for example I
wanted to there is there is an
incident that happened that I'm
interested in in doing the video
I could I could impress the the
Candover.
For that incident.
Get the cat number and then be
able to to effort the exact part
of the video that is needed what
happens right now.
Is that because I'm not sure.
Then it bring.
Every video in a jurisdiction
for ten day period.
So the answer madam chair
Senators they could hear for a
generally what's available and
then make sure specific requests
to hone down Madam chair
representative Nibert that is
correct okay thank you madam
chair
anyone else.
Anyone else Representative
Chasey IP.
Just real quickly madam chair I
want to confirm.
That there's nothing here about
not really see video of
correctional facilities are
detention centers.
Madam chair and Madam leader
the this is specific to law
enforcement records law
enforcement records has not been
interpreted as extending to
corrections thank you very much
mentor and and one of the.
Observation I would just like
noted I could say let the record
reflect and have it mean
anything I would say that but
there seems to be a lot of
support for some tweaking of
infra so I've been hearing that
we have to leave it intact I'm
touch because it's so perfect
for thirty years so just that
Senator just one of.
Note that thank you very much.
Representative stands thank you
madam chair representative
senator I just have questions in
two sections one.
Page five section Kate I was
just curious how.
At the very top of the page have
you.
Fell upon this list of
competitive grant land lease
scholarship.
How does that interact with the
procurement coded and and why
these particular items.
The early madam chair and and
Madam major with so.
The start off with competitive
grant.
Then the card to be that
scholarships are the same way as
competitive grant.
There were the conversations we
had somebody commented the land
offices land leases in the same
way.
So.
So that's that's how that list
in the building there.
This is the same standard that
is used in the procurement of so
if if there is a competitive
procurement then once elected
servants or the word is given
them all the submissions are
made public.
Right thank thank you madam
chair and senator and then
Page eight.
Lines one through five.
Why the exemption for on site.
Video or audio you want that.
Inadvertently incentivize people
to requests to.
View these records in person or
or what what's the genesis that
section.
Chair and madam with so our our
experiences that people want.
Want us to use our time
reviewing everything they don't
want to use their time to review
everything.
And so part of the trade off of
the negotiations for the new
exemptions of law enforcement
records.
Was that someone wants to use
their time.
To view records maintenance.
So madam chair Senators so you
anticipating.
A less specific segment of video
being made available so that the
viewer can.
View the thirty seconds that
they wanted to see or is that.
I guess I'm not when you be
releasing the same record.
Madam chair and and with the so
again this is not released
video.
So somebody can view it but they
cannot copy or record it.
I see so they could just madam
chair and and Representative
Senator they could just request
to view any video correct on
site and go through it okay
thank you that's all my
questions.
I have one question that was of
really a follow up to what
Representative Romero was asking
about on page eight
we talked a little bit about.
section the law enforcement
records includes evidence at
cetera at the end it says
including in active matters are
closed investigations which I
understand is in the current
language but you left off from
the current language to the
extent that they contain the
information listed in this
subsection provided that the
presence of such information on
the law enforcement record does
not exempt the record from
expanded X. inspection and I'm
misunderstanding what was
include what was not included.
Representative.
Senator.
Roger that is up that language
was moved up.
To if you look on page five.
Beginning on line nine.
Long first records are public
records except as provided by
law and the subsection provided
the presence of non public
information maybe reductive
Representative record producers
live scared and visual or audio
record including.
Okay not quite word for word but
well actually not it really very
much like four four.
So I guess I'm trying to
understand.
why there is a difference.
You madam chair will be happy to
add that down below.
Okay.
So I guess okay the I'm just
curious to know then why I mean
I I am curious to know why it
was left off to.
Madam chair I don't know that we
really focused on that.
So including an active matters
are closed of estimations.
To be the language on page
three.
In a line twenty one after the
word of estimations.
Yes to to
What's missing is to the we have
to the phone.
Exactly well frankly I think
that opens it up more otherwise
it's pretty nailed down that you
can't get into the file for so I
guess I would like that language
added back in that would be
friendly madam chair okay.
So this will be point twelve yes
to the point twelve.
It would go at the end of on
page eight at the end of page up
page page eight line ten
after the word investigations
but before the area and.
We would add.
To the extent that they contain
the information listed in this
subsection the the section in
this this section now yeah okay
in this section.
Cold cold semi colon provided
that the presence of such
information.
On a law enforcement records
does not exempt the record from
inspection yes ma'am okay.
I can.
That's good so that's a that's a
family but will need a motion.
Okay the motion to amend again
and a point twelve seconds and
but and again it's to add the
language to the extent that they
contain the information listed
in this section semi colon
provided that the presence of
such information on a law and
for.
Not exempt the record from
inspection here and I can I can
give that to you and it's still
within twelve it's going to be
in the point twelve as well
would you call the roll please
on that motion thank you thank
you madam chair representative
of all time.
Representative Chasey yes on
point twelve part two.
Representative Lane yes.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen yes
Representative Nibert.
Representative read.
Representative Rehm yes
Representative Representative
Penske yes.
Madam vice chair yes madam chair
yes madam chair you have ten
yess for an approval of
additional point twelve part
two.
Asians
Representative remote.
Madam chair I'm to to do not
pass on house bill two thirty
two and a do pass on the house
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill to thirty two
point twelve version.
Okay we have a motion is our
second.
Okay so we have a motion of a do
not pass on House Judiciary
Committee substitute I mean a do
not pass on house committee.
We have a do not pass on house
bill two thirty two and a do
pass on house committee
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill two thirty two.
Made by Representative Rehm
seconded by Representative
night.
Would you call the roll.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey yes.
Representative Lane.
Yes.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen.
Representative Nibert yes
Representative read.
Representative Rehm yes.
Representative Penske yes madam
vice chair yes.
Madam chair yes.
Madam chair you have ten yes
this for a do not pass on house
bill two thirty two in a do pass
on House Judiciary Committee sub
for House Bill to thirty two
point twelve.
Great thank you very much thank
you Sanchez thank you for the
very thoughtful conversation.
Hey next we have house bill
fourteen.
Next on our agenda is house bill
fourteen.
But I is Representative Lara
isn't high well here is he was
just right outside because I
was.
For HB fourteen yes we will.
Okay yes.
So I know there is so being
proposed so if we get that out
give us a minute.
Thank you.
Madam chairman of the committee
so for discussion point two two
five nine four three point one.
Thank you.
What.
The floor is yours
Representative are thank you
madam chair members the
committee some are to be here
today is my first time for this
committee our house bill the
house is to curb the Judiciary
Committee substring for House
fourteen proposes scrutiny for
most trusted tirelessly unlawful
for most private paramilitary
Act.
this act is of this bill what it
intends to do is provide
additional layers of security
and safety for our citizens from
part from persons who would
otherwise be imitating or acting
as law enforcement and with that
manager I would like for my
expert to introduce himself.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is mark Baker I'm an attorney in
Albuquerque and I've worked on
issues related to paramilitary
activity in New Mexico both down
here someone park and in
Albuquerque.
Madam chair and if it pleases
the committee I would like for
Mr right out there to explain
the the house committee so the
team is a little thank you.
I think we have that already.
Madam chair members of the
committee the substitute for the
committee substitute for house
bill fourteen has a couple of
changes first it changes the
term dangerous weapon which had
been defined in the original
draft legislation and shifts to
the term deadly weapon which is
already defined under New Mexico
law
seconds on sentencing there'd
been a multi layered tiers of
sentencing for different ways
that the crime could be
committed and
it was complex and messy in the
way that they interacted
together and so we looked at a
way to treat it as a single
unitary offense and to provide
the appropriate level we looked
at the anti terrorism act which
has provisions that prohibit
training for in doing some of
the things that this bill
actually prohibits engaging in
rather than just training for
teaching and that the anti
terrorism act as a fourth degree
felony since that's the
basically the talking about and
showing how to do it law and
this is the actually doing a law
it seems appropriate that it
would be one level up from that.
and then finally
there's a provision towards the
and page six.
well it's under the exemption
section of got the marked up
copy in front of me so I may not
be pointing to the right section
says the provisions of the
unlawful private paramilitary
activity act.
Do not apply to a member who is
a member of our to a person who
was a member of and the
substitute says he was acting in
their capacity as a member of
and the theory there would be
the fact that someone is in the
military and then shows up and
engages in paramilitary activity
outside the control of the
actual military that person
should be exempted from the law
so those are the three changes
into the substitute.
Thank you
Before we go to the committee
I'd like to ask for public
comment those in opposition to
the bill please raise your hand.
Those online wishing to speak in
opposition to the bill please
raise your hand.
See anyone those wishing to
speak in support of the bill
please raise your hand.
C. one back here.
So.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is James
Grayson I'm the chief deputy at
the attorney general's office
and returning general's offices
in support of this bill house
bill fourteen is directed at
very dangerous activity the
content not only endanger the
public but also threat law
enforcement responds to the
scene of crimes or to protests
this bill is
Is an important step in terms of
providing prosecutors tools that
they need to respond to
paramilitary activity and I work
with Mister Baker on the Civil
Guard K. New Mexico Civil Guard
K. while I was at the district
attorney's office and I could
see in that case the prosecutors
do not have the tools they need
at the moment to prosecute this
dangerous activity thank you
madam chair members of the
committee.
Thank you anyone else in the
audience wishing to speak in
support of the bill.
Go online I see then the wishing
to speak in support of the bill.
A person named Matt.
We took your hand okay
We'll go back to the sponsored
is there anything you wish to
say before we go to the
committee Norman turned on we
sent for questions thank you
okay.
Members Representative nine.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair representative.
Were you aware that.
In Raleigh.
There is
there has been.
The company that.
Gauges.
In the type of activity that you
are.
Talking about to train and to.
Show members of.
Security teams from foreign
countries I suppose even within
the country but primarily out of
out of our country
how to.
Conduct military type
operations and and how to drive
how to how to protect Saudi
princes and and others and.
How to utilize weapons how to
engage have a defend.
How to defend them
I think the full gamut of of
this type of activity where
you're aware that we've done
that in the state.
Madam Lyster Representative I I
was not aware that and I don't
know if my if my district is
aware that as well.
Madam chair representative
Nibert I'm not aware of the
specific organization or talking
about.
Well it was a call miss and they
rented a building from the city
of Roswell out on the old Walker
Air Force base have a firing
range out there they also least
ranchland we're.
they would teach these.
And I I'd say largely foreign
nationals who were parts of
security teams are to come in
and and still have a how to deal
with threats and how to
counteract the stress and and do
many of the things that I see in
this bill that we are now
outline and I'm.
Miss no longer existed got
bought out by
Have to accord  it.
Yeah I think it's after the and
I are doing this type of work in
law school right now I.
Certainly I think that the
prospects for us to attract that
type of of of activity is
something that our community has
embraced and and
You know many of us have gone
out of the tour not only is
there facility at the at the old
Air Force base budget the
rancher ranches where they do
some of that work and.
Early southeast New Mexico is
very similar to the types of.
Terrain and environments that
they come from and they find it
suitable for that type of
training activity and I'm
concerned that if it passes.
We won't be able to have those
types of
activities come to our community
stay in our hotels spend frankly
a lot of money
and and and you know it's
certainly not the things that
are dry that our government is
doing the exact same things at
the are being.
Prohibited here I don't see an
exception for that.
More sponsored Chandler
Representative Nibert I guess my
only response I guess two
responses to that one since
eighteen eighty six the United
States Supreme Court has said
that it's appropriate for the
states to prohibit paramilitary
activity and it was reaffirmed
in district of Columbia versus
Heller so from a legal
standpoint that's the first
issue from a practical
standpoint I guess it's hard for
me to totally understand what
mistake did but if they were
training to do things with
authority for example under the
law enforcement section the the
only prohibition is a exercising
or attempting to exercise
without due authority the
functions of a peace officer so
someone's in Roswell with the
authority to be trained to
become a Saudi princes escort
it seems to me that that person
has to authority to get the
training that they would receive
in Roswell if they're publicly
training to patrol as a
paramilitary organization in the
United States.
By patrolling drilling or
engaging in techniques capable
of causing bodily injury or
death.
Do that to me.
Doesn't seem to fit with what
you describe Mr doing but I'm I
confess that I'm not familiar
with the full scope of what they
did.
Well.
Madam chair representative on
page two.
Representative be at the bottom
fifth paramilitary organization
means a group of three more
persons.
So that would meet that criteria
the associate in under a command
structure they certainly have
that in place for the purpose of
functioning.
Well.
Not in public for the purpose of
training to function of.
I suppose in their public as a
law enforcement or security
services unit I mean that's
exactly what they're trying to
do
and and they're being trained in
New Mexico for the for that
purpose may not be more public
it would be and their public and
so
I I just have some concerns of
if we pass this we won't be able
to have that type of activity
going on in the in my community.
I.
I certainly and concerned about
that.
The
Over on page three.
At the top the main page for
line three.
I'm following.
Is is part of this already
existing law.
Don't we have laws on the books
now that prohibit people from
functioning as a peace officer.
Madam chair representative
Nibert there's a law against and
I'm presenting a peace officer
it's a misdemeanor and it
doesn't address the specific
concerns of paramilitary
activity which involves
orchestrated group conduct and
that's where you get back the
definition of a paramilitary
organization and the two
examples I have from my
experience here were can someone
park there were a group of
vigilante is gathered on the
border acting as if they were
border patrol and asserting that
they were border patrol New
Mexico was not able to bring
criminal prosecution in that in
that circumstance two charges
were brought one by the federal
government for the crime of
impersonating a federal officer
and that was a felony and
another person was prosecuted
for the crime of being a felon
in possession of a firearm which
meant that they had to go to
tools outside what was available
and I what in investigated this
and looked into it and went
through the laws that would be
available and they were meager
at best and so there was a hole
in this in this was built hello
is built in the wake of that
with a professor at the
university of Georgetown
University law school who worked
on me with on that with meaning
Mary McCord who previously
served as the national security
division had the department of
justice and was a twenty plus
year prosecutor in the federal
government she did this as a
model piece of legislation that
we adapted to to fit New Mexico
law
To prepare for today.
Of Madam chair representative on
page four lines six.
Interfere with the tennis says
for intimidate another person
I.
I think that that might to give
rise to some woman some
litigation terminate another
person that's.
Gwen in the eyes of the beholder
so to speak.
When I look at that full list
the paragraphs one through five
there.
All those things are are things
of the.
For previously involved with
miss doing things and and so hi.
I have some real concerns there
and then the I see and programs
see on page four there's also
for for for for the.
Representative the the property
would be forfeited live sermon
mystics.
Situation you forfeit all their
assets the cars the the again
range all their weapons that
they have and everything else is
very very utilized in and so
this would be a real of.
Deterrent to our community from
holding ourselves out as having
the ability to have those types
of situations in our community
and frankly was a tremendous
asset for community to to have
those people coming in have
those people trained here
most of those people were
trained by the former
Army and navy officers who were
in the seals or or in the
special ops and and had.
Very.
Specific expertise some
explosives and and all the other
tactics that they use of
probably many of which I could
reveal to the community but but
I I know that they were highly
engaged in that so I'm concerned
that there's no exceptions
provided for that type of
material that I of activity and
my community certainly would
Budget continue to benefit from
that type of activity occurring
at the Roswell destroyers Center
and and the ranches and surround
our job is County where they do
the training so thank you madam
chair representative.
madam chair and representative
kind of following up on
Representative night birds
comments so the page two one
twenty three that our military
organization.
if I take the Kerr military
military organization and go up
to command structures and then I
go over and grab security unit I
kind of think you grab a
neighborhood watch and
you know if there was a
disturbance and.
Three individuals came out of
the home different phones or
whatever and one of them went
ahead and said Hey grab that guy
he just stole something I think
you set up with command
structure.
And you know they're just trying
to protect the community so.
Comment on that or not.
Chair Representative Rehm I do
there's a two step involved here
you have to be a paramilitary
organization and engage in the
prohibited list of activities
that starts at the bottom of
page three Page three line
seventeen
and so a neighborhood watch
I don't think would fall into
that moreover you would still
have the standard accepted
common law the fences that it
existed for
Mexico history for defense of
another
self defense those are all still
fair game in available and so I
don't see that if the
circumstances were realistically
a prosecutor would see a
neighborhood watch trying to
intervene with somebody who'd
broken into someone's house I
would say that's a paramilitary
organization seems to have got
the definition of what an
organization is and you've got
the contact that's prohibited
you have to have both for there
to be a crime.
madam chair and
Representative.
I think it's a little loose but
was to move on to page three and
one twenty three wrote.
On the point that Representative
Nibert was on our department of
energy on Kirtland Air Force
base conducts a lot of training
two civilians and other law
enforcement agencies and I think
under this you're going to
capture them in their training.
The.
I don't know if you comment.
Madam chair of representative
Representative Rehm the the Q.
word on that licensing is
unlawful Act I would suggest
that those types of trainings or
section to provided the
government for by by the local
governments or other or other
other functions so if I if I if
I may Sir you know justice from
remind everyone that these apply
to unlawful acts not necessarily
sanctioned acts of training for
security forces with the
government and in those type of
those type of examples.
I don't know if you have
something yes chair and
Representative Rehm you also
have the supremacy clause issue
with that so regardless of what
we see even if we purported to
stop the department of energy
from engaging in training and
this may apply to miss as well I
don't know what federal licenses
were involved with that but it's
something section by the federal
government it's going Trump
whatever you you all say in New
Mexico statutes regardless of
how you dropped on.
Madam chair and Representative
so continuing on with that group
so the paramilitary
organization and on one twenty
three you have publicly control
so now you talk about a security
company an arm security company
and we go over to page five
flying twenty four you excludes
security service training.
But
I think you need to tighten it
up for a licensed because up
here you talked about if they're
licensed
by the state
but you just if if they're on
licensed instead of a penalty
from R. L. B. the Phillies of
third degree felony.
Madam chair representative key
point was for for that for that
stated please yes so you know we
look at the definition page two
twenty three and then we go over
the page three line twenty three
publicly patrol so you know
that's private security company.
You know they're armed they have
a command structure they train
that way.
on page five you're talking
about on one twenty four
security service training.
you know you're getting exempt
that
but the problem is if there
on licensed company.
Of.
Where are all the has.
More administrative functions
over on you now have made them a
third degree felony.
Madam chair representative in
Texas
I think you obviously have
circumstances were prosecutorial
crematorio discussion would come
into play that happens all the
time in the idea that somebody's
going to go off and and then
died somebody's license lapse I
think would be reach
the purpose and I think if you
read the bill in context for
this purpose of the prohibition
on publicly patrolling drilling
or engaging techniques because a
capable of causing bodily injury
or death is to prohibit the type
of intimidation that happens at.
Protests within you have groups
regardless of ideology showing
up and not engaging in speech
but stifling speech literally at
the barrel of a gun of others
and so the that's the purpose
and and I think the natural
reading of subpart a one in
section three I don't think that
any with one would look at that
and say well that's a unlicensed
somebody let their security
license lapse and so they're
now.
I'm gonna be charged as a felon.
Madam chair and expert I agree
that there's discretion from the
DA but.
Looking at this bill I have
concerns that it's that you know
you could end up having some D.
A. who has whatever you know
doesn't like the group he can go
out from but anyway thank you
madam chair.
Percent of representatives.
Thank you madam chair and all
chair Lara
I just wanted to ask about the
exemption because I think it's
it's written pretty broadly so
page I.
Winds twenty one three twenty
five for the to read section
four sort of together the
provisions of the act do not
apply to the forces acting
percent capacity as a member of
and if you jump down to do.
I just wonder if this sponsor
would like to comment an
organization that is authorized
by the state or the United
States to provide care military
law enforcement or security
services training for.
and I think to covers actually
the provision of security as
well as other law enforcement
if it's authorized so I I
wondered if the sponsor might
want to comment on authorized.
Security as well as some of
these training operations that
we know what happened in
multiple places around the state
is that the intention of that to
cover those those exceptions
madam chair
What the yes yes with us we're
trying to do I don't know I if
mark if you have anything else
to say about that but yes Madam
chair representative Spanky you
articulated better the point
when I was trying to make on
prosecutorial discretion would
have to be that someone would
have to literally say that it
wasn't on authorized security
force and a licensing issue or
something like that where
there's paperwork problems I
that's what I'm saying I see
that it's cap and already by the
language of the bill so you
don't have just open ended
discretion and narrows the
discretion very specifically
authorized conduct.
Thank thank you very much madam
chair and representative and I
think to
the point that was raised around
neighborhood watch they would
still have to complete all of
the elements of the unlawful Act
section three right so they
would have to be armed.
The firearm explosive device or
other deadly weapon.
And then they would need to
engage in.
One of these I.
enumerated.
Behaviors are right so they
would have to be a member of an
organization a paramilitary
organization as defined have a
deadly weapon explosive device
or firearm and then also to do
one of those activities.
Madam chair of settlement with
yes.
Okay thank thank you I just
wanna make sure I understand
correctly thank you
Representative for anyone else
comments questions.
I don't see.
Happy to entertain a motion.
Madam chair.
I'd like to do not pass on house
bill fourteen in a to pass and
has featured Committee
substitute for House Bill
fourteen.
Second services okay.
Of you needed to see.
So we have a motion of a do not
pass on house bill fourteen but
I do pass and House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill fort teen to call the roll.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane of.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen.
Representative Nibert.
Ram.
Representative read.
Representative Rehm no ma'am.
Representative Japan ski yes.
Madam vice chair yes.
Madam chair.
Madam chair with six test is in
four knows you have a do not
pass on house bill fourteen in a
do pass on House Judiciary
Committee SO for House Bill
fourteen thank you
Representative thank you Mr
Baker chair thank very much
thank you all.
So next on the agenda is Senate
bill on.
Sixty four
To which leader Casey is a co
sponsor.
Yes.
To see.
You know.
It
was.
The floor is yours have
different later thank you madam
chair.
I.
In so many people are sick I'm
wearing my mask but I'm to.
I'm trying to get too close to
the body for.
Everybody say
madam chair and members of the
committee Senate bill sixty four
is before this committee for the
third time but it is in a little
bit different form this year in
in the past two sessions Senator
Sedillo Lopez and her co
sponsors have.
worked diligently but in this in
term we consulted with both the
district attorney's association
and some of the victim advocates
and have made some changes to
the bill ending life without
possibility of parole for
children who were sentenced as
adults I have today with the
additionally Wilson who's an
attorney with the ACLU and she
can very quickly go over some of
the changes we only have a few
members of this committee you
haven't heard it in the past but
I will say that I it's really
important to know this is not.
A ticket to get out of jail free
this means you have an
opportunity that one has an
opportunity thank you sentenced
as an adult has an opportunity
for parole hearing at certain
stages earlier than the thirty
years which was never really
meant to apply to juveniles and
without I'm going to let an
Ollie Wilson just give you the
bare bones details of the
changes.
Madam chair members of the
committee this bill does look
different than it has in the
past and wasn't any problem in
the past but I I'm hopeful that
those changes make it easier for
this committee to pass this
legislation we did
We we we did as as that leader
to see mentioned we did work
diligently during the interim
session to come up with a bill
that the association of district
attorneys does not propose and
we are very proud that we've
done that the spirit of this
bill remains the same.
So we're ending life without
parole as a sentencing option
for children and we're creating
developmentally meaningful
timing for pool for those who
are serving long adult sentences
for for crimes committed when
they were children under the
previous version of the.
that timing was set at fifteen
years for everyone if you if if
members who are here remember
that now in rare and extreme
cases parole eligibility will be
set at twenty or twenty five
years into an adult sentence and
I'm not tier system you can find
on page eight of the bill.
So for first degree murder other
than felony murder an individual
will be eligible for
consideration for parole will
not be eligible until twenty
years into their sentence for
two or more convictions of first
degree murder
an individual must serve twenty
five years before becoming
eligible which is very
consistent with existing law
which sets prolifically on a
life sentence at thirty years.
and those changes really reflect
an effort to account for
heightened consequences in
extreme cases.
I do want to take just a moment
a brief moment to acknowledge
the presence of community
members and this hearing today
who are on both sides of this
issue in each of their stories
and perspectives is incredibly
important in New I'm so grateful
for the people who've had
conversations with me and with
the Sanchez
and we know that justice is not
a zero sum game and that our
compassion for those who have
been harmed
Is not diminished when we extend
compassion to those who have
cost harm but who've experienced
rehabilitation and
transformation and to celebrate
celebrate a life that's been
changed and a person that's been
changed it's not to minimize or
trivialize the harm that they've
cost as a community and as a
states I believe we can
experience the parameters of our
concern to create policy that
takes everyone into account and
I hope that the committee sees
that that's what we've done
through this bill and through
those changes last week's the
New Mexico Supreme Court
released a unanimous decision in
a case involving a child
sentenced as an adult and I
mentioning it just because our
court reaffirmed in that case
that children even children who
were in involved in very serious
acts of violence are capable of
of tremendous change and
rehabilitation and for those
reasons have to be treated
differently than adults in our
criminal justice system and
remarking on the decision to try
a child as an adult our state
Supreme Court said quote we are
hard pressed to conceive of the
decision that cuts closer to the
core of society's interests then
Alexion to give up on one of its
children.
With students.
Thank you thank you very much
before we go back to the
committee will.
take public comment those
wishing to speak in opposition
to the bill yes just be aware we
have a ninety second time limits
please.
Hello my name is Alexis I used
to call myself a mass shooting
victim but I don't call myself a
mass shooting survivors that I
could take control of what my
story and what happened but
really I like to refer to myself
as a warrior I I every single
day to get out of bed and
function my life was ripped from
underneath me on August twenty
eighth two thousand seventeen
because I decided to go to
Clovis carver public library to
print a paper for college I was
shot three times and my ten year
old brother was shot once I was
shot went over my heart where
the bullet ricocheted off my
sternum and blow up on the side
of my rib cage this bullet
missed my heart by one
millimeter hardly anything I was
also shot once in each need with
the football it so residing in
my left to be at today I was in
a wheelchair for three months I
cannot stand or walk too long
without having extreme pain in
my legs I have faced some of you
for the third year in a row some
of you it's the first time but
my message remains the same the
humans that deserve your to
average and motivations are the
ones who were violently hurt by
the juveniles you're defending I
do move a day this will no
longer suffers from gun violence
that dream is far from reality
as far as this world is today I
never thought I would experience
a mass shooting never I was a
responsible strong and motivated
young lady with her whole life
ahead of her I'm not motivated
by revenge or hate because what
is there to avenge what's done
is done what you can do now is
fight for the right side for the
two victims side show New
Mexicans you mean what you said
and be hard on crime and
criminals the main point in this
bill is that juveniles brains
aren't fully developed that
scientifically true but for
everyone in this room to what
makes them the exception there's
scientific evidence that we
mentally understand wells only
childhood Sarbanes are developed
enough to know right from wrong
you're choosing to support.
Thank you very much you.
anyone else in the audience
wishing to speak in opposition.
So.
So I come to you Madam
chairwoman and members of the
committee not in opposition but
the call Chavis not in favor as
well so my name is Nicole Chavis
I'm the founder of robbed
homicide advocacy group and this
is my son Jaden he was seventeen
years old when he was shot and
killed in a drive by shooting
six months later he was then
another individual that was
eighteen years old by the name
are to this was shot and killed
by the state murder.
The murder was seventeen years
old and some months he was
considered a youthful offender
so this bill would actually be
used to the advantage of my
son's murder I want to thank the
sponsors and the ACLU for
meeting with me this last year
in the last few weeks over this
bill we were able to make an
amendment and I'm very thankful
for that and with that amendment
is the only reason that I can
live with this bill as this is
the third year that I was
fighting against it without the
amendment this bill would have
let this individual out with
only serving four of my thirty
year sentence from my son's
murder because he serving a
sixteen year sentence right now
so would balk at it together we
made an amendment on the Senate
side and
Now he would have to serve that
time and then serve the twenty
years so this does take ten
years off of my son's murders
sentence if he is paroled but I
am willing to live with it
because at this point seven
years and I am exhausted with
this process thank you.
This is our co sponsor center
city of of this what was good to
see you Senator thank you.
No it's okay now let's go online
to those in opposition to the
bill please raise your hand.
Eight Turner please on mute
yourself if you wish to speak in
opposition to the bill.
Well I guess it's not working so
we'll have to go back to this
will conclude this will amount
to those wishing to speak in
support of the bill in the
audience please raise your
hands.
Okay great P. line up here we
can.
Happy to hear from you.
Sorry.
Good morning good afternoon
chairman and members of the
committee my name is Amanda and
I am here with the New Mexico
Dream Team as a youth org we
strongly believe in second
chances for all youth children
need the time to mature to
experience and to really think
about their actions life
sentences for children or
sentences the stack on top of
each other that sum up to ninety
or a hundred and forty two years
is robbing children of
redemption and a second chance
at other possibilities so many
different things like violence
and disadvantages can push many
to make mistakes at a young age
The New Mexico Dream Team
supports SB sixty four because
we believe every young person
deserves a check in second
chance twenty five other states
have already passed this type of
legislation New Mexico can do a
two let's take that step forward
for all youth today I strongly
encourage you all to vote yes on
this important piece of
legislation in the hopes that we
give our youth a second chance
to rejoin the communities they
belong in thank you thank you.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Sharon are tempered I'm a
nurse of top pediatric nursing
for many years children's brains
are not developed in the frontal
lobe and they should be not not
be judged by the same standards
that we judge adults please.
Have second chance thank you.
Thank you Sharon.
Good afternoon madam chair this
is in the north madam chair
members of the committee on the
reverent Holly Beaumont
organizing director of
interfaith worker justice New
Mexico and I want to begin by
acknowledging R. D. compassion
for those who have been victims
of violent crimes I understand
that this is a very very
difficult debate for them in
fact I think it is for all of us
we have a nation have basically
abandoned any notion of
rehabilitation in our
corrections facilities and
replaced it with a system of
retributive rather than
restorative justice what sets us
apart from the rest of the world
which is repealing the death
penalty and also not allowing a
life without the possibility of
parole for minors I'm concerned
not only with the impact on
those.
Miners who are sentences way I'm
also concerned about the climate
that we're creating in our
corrections facilities where
workers must on a daily basis
try to keep order people without
hope let me change that to
inmates without hope our inmates
with nothing to lose and this is
the client that we are creating.
In our corrections facilities
that are already suffering from
a great tale of problems
including suicide and sexual
assault
Providing someone with the
possibility with the hope that
if they change their behavior
and function in a particular way
they may at some time be paroled
and released is something that
we should take seriously as a
way of managing our corrections
facilities thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Anthony
through the L. I currently sit
on the New Mexico juvenile
justice advisory committee
currently as chair and the at
our latest.
Gathering we took a vote on this
on on this bill and by a
unanimous vote the committee
voted in favor of this bill I
thank the sponsors for for
putting this together and I I
completely feel for you I did in
the when I came to.
To the general justice the
committee I didn't come to it
from the.
Judicial law enforcement or any
of that kind background I spent
twenty seven years as a.
The juvenile detention Chaplin
so I am also a deacon and the
and from that part of me I also
and support of this bill thank
you.
Yes Sir.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Lucas got here with Americans
for prosperity a lobbyist and
Americans for prosperity we
believe in the redemptive value
of human beings and the human
spirit when Americans for
prosperity we also believe that
the just criminal justice system
when that is offers redemption
and treat everybody equally
the Senate bill sixty four
creates an opportunity for a
juvenile offender to be heard
before the parole board and like
the co sponsor said it is not a
get out of jail free this is
just an opportunity to be heard
before parole board will make
sure that the.
Potential parolees has gone to
all the redemption and all the
check marks and.
Benchmarks required of them to
be paroled before parole is
granted so please consider that
and support this bill I
appreciate you thank you.
Anyone else in the audience.
Let's go online we have a number
of people online.
Yes that you keep your comments
as brief as possible.
could we see there's somebody NM
cam.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my
name's heather Montoya and I'm
with and I'm can an organization
that partners with young people
impacted by foster care and
juvenile justice to improve
their transition to adulthood we
stand in support of Senate bill
sixty for a science tells us to
the brink of youth are still
developing in their decision
making and positivity and
response to peer pressure are
different from that of adults
and they also have the unique
ability for reform and
rehabilitation.
People who are under eighteen at
the time of their friends
deserve a meaningful opportunity
for at least I stated this bill
does not allow for automatic
release but gives you the
opportunity for a parole hearing
the parole board determines
whether they have sufficiently
rehabilitated for release we
asked the support this bill
thank you thank you for.
Reger.
Kurt.
Yes good afternoon good
afternoon madam chair members of
the committee this is Kirk
record director we can affix in
mystery New Mexico through
advocacy also represents the
position of the New mexicana
shins The New Mexico for the
troops include mainline
Protestant denominations and
three Catholic dices New Mexico
both organizations unequivocally
support SB sixty four I hope you
received a letter submitted to
the committee that covers our
reasons for sport SB sixty four
have an opportunity to review it
we believe the response to
violent crimes restorative
justice justice it seeks to
address the hurt each person
whose life has been touched by
violent crime as it relates to
the child offender life
sentences without possibility of
parole do not represent such
justice and they can deny the
offender of a of an authentic
version restoration when a child
offender causes harm they must
be held accountable but we
believe that accountability must
not take away the opportunity to
move forward into a transformed
life based on genuine
rehabilitation and hope for the
future we believe in granting a
second chance we ask that you
choose to do so as well three
support SP two sets asked the
sixty four thanks for the
opportunity to speak to this
afternoon thank you Diane my
cash.
A good afternoon sherry
Committee and experience why
middle school teacher once told
me that in order to encourage
adapted behavior rather than
maladaptive behavior you must
never strip away the opportunity
for redemption at the sixty four
offered an opportunity for
redemption for people of the
convicted a former actor you
without that path to redemption
hope is stripped away and
behavior that is adapted and
deposit it is disincentive by
providing incentives for
positive adaptive behavior and
personal growth will make
prisons safer for those who are
our server maintenance and for
prison staff all most people
learn and involved as they
mature the importance of the
knowledge that you can adults
are different we give them a
chance to show they are no
longer a threat as usual the had
thank you so much thank you.
Lawrence seven Sandler Sandler.
Madam chair and committee
members who are Chandler meeting
tradition here in Santa Fe I'm
here representing the New
Mexico.
Exercising the state chapter of
the American academy of
pediatrics.
Emailed you a copy of a op ed
piece that I had in New Mexican
supporting HSD sixty four so I
will be brief.
The two thousand and twenty
American academy of pediatrics
policy advocacy and
collaborative health care
justice involved youth ranks
many recommendations to improve
the juvenile justice system a
majority recommendation is to
abolish excessively punitive and
developmentally inappropriate
practices such as right without
parole for juveniles.
Intrusions throughout New Mexico
support SB sixty four thank you.
Thank you we have about enough
time for about three more people
so I.
The rules stop after three
Alison how to meal.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Allison
Hotmail I mean it appellate
attorney with the law offices of
the public defender I have
Representative many juveniles
sentenced to life in prison I'm
here to express the public
defender support of Senate bill
sixty four this bill would bring
New Mexico in line with current
brain science and psychology
which recognize that you are
different from adults in
important ways including
decision making impulsivity and
response to peer pressure youth
are also more capable of
rehabilitation the bill does not
allow for automatic release but
instead gives you the
opportunity for review it's time
for New Mexico to enact this
reform thank you thank you.
Michael rose.
Good afternoon madam chair our
members of the house Judiciary
Committee my name is Michael
rose I'm speaking in support of
and asking for your support of
Senate bill sixty four.
My son Jeremy is one of the
approximate seventy five persons
in New Mexico serving adult life
sentence for a crime he
committed as a child.
His sentence effectively locked
him away without hope of being a
free man.
This decision is a stark
reminder of an overdue
legislative action on this issue
in our state.
From a parent's perspective
redemption is possible Jeremy
was sentenced to life in prison
and a seventeen for twenty eight
years he has worked diligently
to make amends for his actions
as parents we live everyday of
that sentence we have never
denied the tragedy that occurred
we have never minimized victims
or their families nor have we
shied away from the consequences
my son faces sentence knowing it
was the path to redemption.
This bill calls for the
elimination of life without
parole sentences for children.
It also recommends that New
Mexico provide useful offenders
with meaningful periodic
opportunities for review and in
knowledge is the mitigate
mitigating factors of age.
We're not asking for a get out
of prison pre bill we know that
time must be served the
consequences exist for action.
We are asking dental sentences
and don't be zero thank you for
you Mr rose thank you very much
thank you you're welcome merry
car math all tweets.
Merry.
Madam DA.
Yes hello my name is very
comical trees on the first
additional district attorney I
my counties are Santa Fe Los
Alamos and Rio Arriba this I am
here just in my individual
capacity AODA has agreed to not
oppose this bill I however
support this bill this bill is a
result of a lot of compromise a
lot of conversation between
victims victim advocates the
ACLU defense attorneys all all
sides of this and I believe that
this compromise bill really
reflects where the sciences on
the teenage brain and I would
urge you to to pass this thank
you thank you that concludes our
public comment I just note that
there are about four or five
hands remaining just for
people's information
so back to the Sanchez if
there's anything to conclude
before your committee.
I don't know what was said in
the opening but we have done a
lot of work on this bill since
we first amended and I remember
of representatives of reap with
was part of the journey with
this bill and I I believe that
it does represent a compromise
and I'm very pleased that the
district attorney's association
decided not to oppose this bill
this year because of the changes
that were made thank you
senator.
He said.
Everybody believes you have
questions comments thank you
madam chair Senator madam leader
and expert yes I we we worked on
this bill a lot and and I and I
have talked to the district
attorney's and while they're not
really opposing it they and I
think we can all agree there are
some legal issues they had with
that and I would like to kind of
go over some of those issues
with you and the new parts of
the bill so my understanding
madam chair
Is there what do you want me to
address exporters are one person
will be answering the questions
or.
Fails to address the sponsor
sponsored a senator who will
answer okay I'm Senator an
expert
so the first part of the bill
that basically is on page two
line nineteen
that's part the provides that a
serious youthful offender given
an adult sentence shall not be
sentenced to life imprisonment
without the possibility of
release or parole that's kind of
the first big part of the bill
so how many people in New Mexico
are serving life without parole
for juveniles Madam chair
representative of there is no
one right now serving life
without parole at the present
time however does remain an
option and that's why it's
important to eliminate it and
madam chair and senator why do
you think you that it is that no
juvenile is is serving I
understand are serving life
sentences which are thirty years
but without Prolight why do you
believe that's the case right
now if it if it's not in the
statute.
Well that the court has been
asking the legislature to
address this for for decades now
but I would like to turn it over
to the expert who has a lot of
intimate experience with these
cases.
Madam chair representative read
I think part of the reason is
that New Mexico is one of the
last states to adopt to life
without parole even as a
sentencing option we did it in
two thousand and nine when we
ended the death penalty and so
the reality is that the sentence
hasn't been on the books for
very long we since it took the
place of the death penalty it
retains that the heightened
needs that that that the death
penalty have of.
Filing intent to seek
aggravating circumstances found
by by the jury all those things
that make it incredibly rare for
children and adults but it's
it's important as a statement of
our values and and community and
consistent with international
law and patterns we're seeing
across the country that we say
that it's in in an inappropriate
sentence for for those who are
under the age of eighteen and
just take it off the books the
end of madam chair and senator
an expert
but also it's in the case law
correct madam chair
Representative expert at that
you can't do life without parole
at this point in New Mexico for
juveniles would you agree.
Madam chair and representative
reap I think the law is changing
I think we we saw a really
strong the pattern in Supreme
Court precedent that we I think
advocates and and others hoped
would lead in that direction
with Robert that and of the
death penalty for children
Graham which apply to the
juvenile life without parole for
non homicide cases Miller which
was then homicide in juvenile
life without parole Montgomery
they gave it a retroactive
effect but we're what we're
seeing is that the federal
courts are are not interested in
extending in extending the
protection beyond a mandatory
life without parole sentence so
what our courts have said very
clearly is that yes life without
parole for a child should be
rare
and a mandatory sentencing
scheme cannot be applied
constitutionally to a child but
they have not created a full ban
on life without parole and and
have empowered the states to to
do that in the in the most
recent iteration of this
precedent and joins the
Mississippi which is two years
ago now I might be getting that
wrong a couple years ago that
the court held that the
mechanism by which a child was
sentenced to life without parole
and said that it's really
incumbent on the states to make
these kinds of decisions and
that's exactly why we're here
today and madam chair and
senator an expert I guess my
point is no judge or it that I'm
aware of in New Mexico at this
point has sentenced currently a
juvenile to life without parole
so that tells me and in my
experience as a prosecutor that
they're balancing that case law
on their balancing that a child
should have a chance to get out
at some point later in life when
they structure their sentences
and so to me madam chair Senator
an expert I think you have a
judge that is in a position to.
To hear the case listen to the
victims understand everything
that's going on and then
structure a sentence that is
appropriate taking into account
the fact that the child should
have a chance to parole timidly
and so madam chair and Senator
an expert and we could that be
the reason possibly that you
know the judges are balancing
and following the case law I
mean because if this is the
situation why is there not one
child serving life without
parole in New Mexico at this
point Matt Bevin.
Madam chair of the of.
Former Justice Boston used to
excuse to come with us and one
of the things he wrote an
opinion a few years ago asking
the legislature please deal with
this he the judges have been
doing it with it dealing with it
on a case by case basis and and
doing that balancing I believe
that they would like a clear
line and clear guidance and so
they don't have to be litigating
these cases one by one.
And that second thank you for
bringing answers as brief as we
can got a full schedule so we
don't need a lot of supplemental
if necessary.
And madam chair Senator an
expert when it now go to the new
material on page eight
thirty one dash twenty one dash
ten point two section three.
And madam chair Senator would
this be retroactive to kids who
are currently serving sentences.
Yes mention.
And Madam chair representative
expert.
I'm looking at the way you
tiered this down section one two
three and that's what I really
want to talk to you about
so let's start with section one
on line eighteen twenty five
years of the sentence if the
sentences for two or more
convictions of first degree
murder pursuant to thirty dash
to dash one and madam chair
Senator we all know that's the
first degree murder statute
so under this section is someone
in in can correct me if I'm
wrong madam chair Rep Senator an
expert if someone goes into a
school that's a juvenile and
kills fifteen people they will
basically.
Be eligible for parole in twenty
five years.
Yes madam chair.
And madam chair and senator an
expert
in fact they would not even
begin probably serving the next
victim sentence before they
would be eligible for up for
parole madam chair.
Is that correct.
The.
Madam chair and and members of
the committee representative
read
I just would like to pause to
say that you're describing a
case that we we don't yet have
in New Mexico a minute it is an
extreme case and in in such an
extreme case the role of the
proboards to consider the
severity of the offense and I
will answer the impact and and
position of the victims and that
will remain a principal
consideration under the the
section that we have drafted in
section three and madam chair
Senator an expert I understand
maybe that has not happened here
in New Mexico but it's happening
all over the United States madam
chair we're having mass
shootings and under this section
it's twenty five years no matter
how many people you kill madam
chair Senator expert is that an
accurate statement yes chair.
And I'm curious as to section
two
the twenty years of the sentence
brought chair Senator an expert.
Twenty years of the sentence if
the census for one conviction of
first degree murder and you also
included first degree depraved
mind murder in their can you
explain it madam chair Senator
an expert why did not clued
felony murder in their one under
thirty dash to dash one the
three first degree murders are
willful and deliberate felony
murder and depraved mind murder
madam chair Madam chair
representative read that was a
a deliberate decision and one
that was made in communication
with the association of district
attorneys and other stakeholders
nationwide one in more than
twenty five percent of children
per serving life without parole
or serving for felony murder
or other kinds of accomplice
liability and that means that
they you know many times were
not the primary perpetrator of
the crime did not intend to kill
anyone may not have even been
present when the killing took
place and so we need the
important policy decision to
preserve the timing of payroll
at fifteen years for this group
of people and again that was a
policy decision that was made in
communication with the
association of district
attorneys we did however and
tier twenty five in the twenty
five year term that does include
felony murder and so somebody
has two or more convictions of
felony murder they are included
in the twenty five year bump up
not the fifteen and madam chair
Senator an expert are you
absolutely sure that district
attorneys were fine with felony
murder not being included with
the other first degree murders
because I and I'll just be
honest I've heard completely
different on that for them.
I'm.
Madam chair and representative
read yes the clear communication
that we have from the but the
president of the association was
that in the and we wrote this
together was that it was it
wasn't they were amenable to
leaving felony murder out of the
the middle tier but bringing it
back into the twenty five to and
madam chair and senator an
expert.
What is felony murder.
Madam chair representative read
that felony murder under New
Mexico law is a killing that
occurs during the commission of
a felony and as I mentioned in
response to your previous
to your previous question many
times especially when a young
person and is involved a
conviction of felony murder
means that you know somebody was
not the primary perpetrator they
may have been adults or other
children involved and this
particular individual did not
intend to kill someone and might
not have been present madam
chair and senator an expert I I
guess I have to disagree with
you on that because if you go to
the U. J. I. on felony murder
this wrong place at wrong time
argument in the future I it
states you have to have an
intent to kill or in a fashion
likely to result in death or
great bodily harm so the jury
must provide you intended to
kill so for example if you do a
drive by shooting madam chair
expert Senator and you kill
fourth grade boy that spelling
you murder if you kill somebody
your I guess also second degree
murder would be included in this
first degree are this fifteen
year section three with that the
correct also.
Secondary murder we're without
fall.
Madam chair representative
Reeves that would fall in that
second in the first here in
fifteen years the fifteen years
okay so thank you madam chair
and senator an expert I guess my
question is one felony murder
includes thirty dash to dash one
includes willful and deliberate
felony murder and depraved mind
and and you know madam chair
expert what to pray my
murderous.
Madam chair representative read
if you let me pull it up because
it's of it's interesting reading
that I always stumble over it so
that it would be killing
That occurs by an act which is
greatly dangerous to another's
life madam chair and senator and
expert exactly and it also
requires an intent in the first
degree statute to madam chair a
an expert correct.
Madam chair representative
read but you may be more
familiar with this part of the
law than I am but my
understanding is that the the
men's ray is that that it be
committed with knowledge
that
That loss of life is is possible
which is the difference and I
have I think it's important for
the committee to to know that
that's different than willful
intent and madam chair and
senator and expert and they're
all under the first degree will
fall into that first degree with
an intent to kill type of intent
to so for example I guess my
question I have a big question
legally how this is going to
work out a madam chair Senator
when you go on to trial an open
count of murder that's all first
degree murders and a jury
doesn't have to tell you what
fear either gonna find it could
be premeditated it could be
depraved mind it could be felony
murder and madam chair and
senator an expert you don't have
to you can't go behind the
theory of what the jury at four
from could be finding one thing
for could be finding the other
thing and you never get asked
them so how is a parole board
gonna know which theory the jury
found so how are you gonna
function that with this bill
madam chair madam chair and
representative read that is
something that we talked to
association of district
attorneys about I spent a long
time reviewing the charging
documents and Janice and all of
the applicable cases and.
Did not identify any in which
there was not a theory of murder
that was
that was identified and so
you're you're very right that
it's true that a child as well
as an adult can be charged with
right this open count of murder
that means that there's no
theory of the three that's
identified generally though and
this is my understanding that
generally a theory of murder is
selected and charging documents
are amended once it becomes
clear what what charge or what
the reserve ported by the
evidence and in the rare case
when an open count is submitted
to the jury and the jury does
not identify a theory of of
murder in the conviction the
judge will generally identifies
theory and include that in the
judgment of sin and sentence it
then and that and that's what I
found in in reviewing the the
charging documents of those who
are
who are impacted by this tier
system and madam chair Senator
and an expert I I guess I just
really disagree with that and
for example take that take let's
say it during that Gallup parade
that person drove their car into
the kids and and adults madam
chair had this been a juvenile
Senator an expert
you could charge an open count
of murder and for all three
counts it could have been
premeditated could about a
felony murder it could have also
been a depraved mind murder and
madam chair Senator an expert.
You could charge all three and
happens all the time and you
don't know what theory the jury
convicted under and I I guess I
disagree with with the comment
that it's in the Janis it often
isn't and so I just see that as
an issue with the way this bill
structured
madam chair Senator and.
Experts and I guess my biggest
problem is that felony murder a
first degree murder they can be
something that happens during
the kidnapping are right second
degree murders and they're
aggravated battery aggravated by
air great back battery on a
peace officer shooting at a
dwelling dangerous explosives
robbery aggravated arson child
abuse if you kill a kid during a
child abuse this technically
says you're going to serve
fifteen years and madam chair
and senator an expert it's a
first degree and with an intent
to kill or commit great bodily
harm crime so madam chair and
then Senator expert it seems
like it would fit better further
up into the twenty twenty five
year range but I'll move on from
that issue that that is an issue
I have with that.
As far as the.
Madam chair the and senator an
expert the consecutive and
concurrent sentences I want to
just make that clear
Madam chair Senator an expert if
you kill.
Multiple people and let's just
say I was a prosecutor on the
library case which I was in the
drive and madam chair experts
and Senator the judge sentence
this child for.
Two murders running and
concurrent and then also the
shooting of miss Molina and
multiple other people and then
in addition there were
consecutive sentences for every
kid that was in the library that
had a gun pointed out we have
probably twenty victims and
madam chair and senator and
Representative crack expert the
judge took into account to give
every victim a sentence of time
and actually structure to sense
that was forty years for this
child taking in the county
wanted to be able to get out you
know on parole at some period
madam chair and Senator and
expert and so.
This child if you paroles at
twenty five years of age will
never serve any of these
consecutive.
Sentences under this bill.
Is that correct madam chair and
senator and expert madam chair
the problem with that is that's
assuming that he that this child
is going to get parole at the
twenty five years could you
that's a big if that you said
and with that as you will recall
the factors hearing kids could
include the severity of the
offence of the gravity of the
offense and so the proboards can
be very well aware of what
happened but they're also going
to be aware of everything else
going on with that child as well
and that's the purpose of this
bill and madam chair and senator
an expert I understand the faith
you have in the parole board and
I understand what you're trying
to do with this five year review
and and let's go ahead and go to
that I review.
Which I believe it is line nine
on page nine.
My concern is madam chair and
senator and expert.
The.
Trauma of a victim at you said
you've talked to lots of victims
and what did they expressed you
with regard to the trauma of
appearing at a parole hearing
every five years.
If anything.
Madam chair and Representative
read.
The the bill was originally
drafted.
In a way that's consistent with
existing law under a life
sentence at thirty one twenty
one ten someone who's considered
for parole from a life sentence
is eligible for a rehearing
every two years so as originally
drafted in in to reflect that
that Perillo par of of existing
law and after conversations with
both association of district
attorneys and individual victims
who expressed concerns about the
impact that that would have on
their life
we amended at two to five years
and madam chair and senator and
expert.
Online sixteen what does that
mean where available a statement
by a victim or relative of the
victim for the offense why is it
a statement.
Madam chair representative read
maybe you can tell me a little
bit more about what your concern
is but
of the and the the program has
promulgated rules that address
this and and the department of
corrections the work really
closely with the victims of
crime victims liaison
as a statement can mean and does
mean in these hearings any
number of things so someone can
appear by video these hearings
are virtual and they were before
COVID and and I think the board
intends for them to remain
virtual so can appear by video
they can appear by phone if they
do not feel capable or or or
able to presents the statements
themselves they can elect and
and advocate either a family
member or the victims liaison to
read read a letter it can be
submitted in writing they can
presents present pictures and
other materials that they see
that the I've seen a lot of
flexibility in the way that that
presentation works with the
department of corrections and
madam chair and senator and that
expert I guess my questions I
know when we work this on this
bill there are concerns from
victims to have to go back
through the parole board and so
I I was thinking you maybe put
that in there so that they would
have to actually appear in
person to re traumatize them
every five years because madam
chair and senator and expert I
think of the thirty victims I
had in the libration every
single one of them had
posttraumatic stress and madam
chair and senator an expert
every time they came to testify
in this bill that it re re up
their posttraumatic stress and
that's why they've kind of
dropped off at this point
so is that so that they can just
give a statement without
appearing in person.
Madam chair representative read
the the change that was made
from the previous version so the
section see you'll see on page
nine it says the board shall
take into consideration this is
to say a statement by that and
the problem is that there is
fear that that would read as an
obligation to to to victims to
participate and so we've added
the costs were available so
we're of a victim or a relative
of the victim is interested in
participating that can be made
available to the board in
whatever medium all right and
madam chair and senator an
expert and I I think part of the
problem that a lot of victims
have is that they feel if they
give a statement and they don't
show up to protect their PTSD
that the person's going to get
out there for they need to show
up in person and then be re
traumatized again and so I'm
sure you've heard that madam
chair Senator and Representative
but I wanted to make sure that
was the reason that was in there
and I'm I'm going to need that
minute madam chair
The going to these factors on
page ten
Madam chair and senator and.
Representative experts number
nine.
The brain development that
you've discussed I would like to
discuss that a little bit
because because it seems to say
madam chair and senator an
expert in line at the diminished
culpability of the juveniles
compared to that of adults it's
it's almost like you're stating
it as a fact instead of
you know a factor whether the
juvenile demonstrates they had
diminished capacity and.
Is that madam chair Senator an
expert just something that's
universally accepted or set
something that a judge would or
proboards would have to make a
finding on.
Madam.
Thank you madam chair just just
recently the Supreme Court
referred to diminish the
probability of of youth it's
it's stated as a fact because
it's so prevalent in the case
law.
And madam chair and senator an
expert but it's also.
Well established set a brain is
still growing to the age of
twenty four madam chair Senator
experts so would you agree
that's well established also.
Madam chair representative read
yes there is a lesson bring
science that that supports that
the brain is still developing in
these important ways related to
criminal culpability until age
twenty five is the year that
I've heard I've heard I think
though your question is about
whether it's.
This factor states that it that
the board is to consider
adolescent brain development and
the thing that we know from
adolescent brain development is
that children are key are more
capable than their dot com
counterparts of experiencing
positive transformation and I
think you're getting at that I I
agree with is that doesn't mean
that people will change a
capacity for change does not
mean a promise for change what
this bill is about is
recognizing that at age fifteen
sixteen even the judges that we
trust the most are making their
decision based on a fallible
picture you do not know the
person that someone will be by
looking at them at age fifteen
sixteen and
And this bill just creates an
opportunity to look and to ask
the question have you made those
changes.
Madam chair and as senator and
expert do you fear that this
bill because it does allow
children out at such a young age
could be used by gang members
cartel members to have children
commit the crimes because on the
way this bill as written on a
felony murder drive by shooting
they would be out fifteen years.
Madam chair representative read
I I don't know that I agree that
it lets people out at an early
age I think the earliest someone
would be out on the first year
is age twenty nine if you were
fourteen that's very rare so
more likely would be age thirty
and the second tier you're
talking about thirty five in the
final two you're talking about
forty years old
so sorry I want to push back a
little bit a little bit there
ians and most importantly in
this is something that R.
Sanchez led with we're talking
about an opportunity for release
and I I'm in my work now I rip I
appear for the our State
proboards often right so I
represent people who are serving
long adult sentences for crimes
committed when they were
children under existing law
which says that you have to
serve thirty years before
becoming eligible and supportive
I respect deeply does not grant
and all of my case it's you know
I've had about half of those
cases resulting in a grant of
parole and they're making the
right choices so in West
Virginia which is the state that
this legislation is based off of
they passed a bill fifteen year
parole eligibility in two
thousand thirteen their board
has since been released about
half of the people eligible none
of those have re refunded so the
board is making the right choice
and madam chair Senator an
expert let's talk about the
states as you said all so how
many states have adopted tier
systems like this and our life
without parole.
Madam chair Representative reap
so I can tell you a little bit
of the landscape so as I just
miss mentioned West Virginia set
said this it fifteen years for
everybody under the age of
eighteen or again as well as DC
as well and there's is extended
to everyone under the age of
twenty five Nevada has a fifteen
twenty years split like tier
system sort of similar to what
we've come up with
Maryland Virginia North Dakota
all have twenty set third their
eligibility twenty Rhode Island
twenty Ohio and Illinois for ten
years for everybody under the
age of twenty one with an
exception again this kind of
tier system for for the more
severe cases
and Minnesota and Indiana both
right now have fifteen year
parole eligibility bills pending
in their state legislatures and
madam chair and senator an
expert I I looked up all the
state's myself too because I
think it said an analysis or
twenty four states it's not all
statements twenty half the
states basically that of enacted
this type of legislation.
And it seems like the fifteen
was on very much the low and
madam chair senator and expert
soft forty years Nebraska Texas
thirty five years Louisiana
Massachusetts Pennsylvania
twenty to thirty years or six or
seven states and then there were
three states California Nevada
West Virginia at fifteen so it
seems like Madam chair Senator
and expert that we are going in
at the very low end of
This tier system and I'm
concerned with the bill Madam
chair Senator and expert because
we do have such a crime problem
here right now in the state and
we're trying to.
Wrestle with these mass
shootings maybe not New Mexico
but across across the country
for sure we're seeing all this
legislation on it during the
session but yet madam chair and
then Senator an expert trying to
pass a bill that's going to let
these type of offenders out
early.
In a situation and in the state
where we are in right now that I
I just don't believe we should
be so for those reasons I
appreciate that the great debate
on this and talking about about
this and through the state
agencies can't support
especially were felony murders
not included as a first degree
crime so I'll I'll deal with
that madam chair thank you
representative Representative
McQueen.
Thank you madam chair
Madam chair representative
center in expert
I.
Attend ask for questions on
bills that have except in areas
that experience with
and in those bills tend to not
be.
These this level of seriousness
this level for life in that so
I'd just like to say I
appreciate present reads a
question Senator expertise in
this area
I I just had
a couple questions not being
familiar with this and just be
clear.
When Madam chair representative
center an expert more talking
about for example of a mass
shooting and
in underage person who killed
multiple people
under this bill is it is it
correct that they're not.
Paroled in twenty five years
they're eligible for parole in
twenty for five years.
Madam chair representative
McQueen they're eligible for
hearing.
And madam chair said the hearing
is to determine whether.
Whether they could be released.
Seven seven chair representative
is there a difference between
being eligible for hearing and
being eligible for parole.
I guess not technically and
incidently having a parole
structure in place actually
increases the safety of the
prison as well and Madam chair
representative center an expert
At the hearing.
the parole board can take into
consideration the severity of
the crime food and then also
the the prisoners conduct wall
incarcerated and that includes.
Rehabilitation there and whether
or not they're involved in gang
activities
Basically their life in prison
it is that correct.
Yes the.
Thank you madam chair thank you.
Percent of length.
Thank you madam chair.
For me a lot of the centers
around sort of the.
The parole process floorboard.
System and I think at some level
the.
Level of confidence we have in
that process.
madam chair I I don't know a lot
about that process though so can
I just get just a real short
inside what is the full board
make up.
As briefly as you can we're
gonna be going to the floor and
I'd like to get at least two
bills the next two bills done
after this conversation one is
Representative frames and the
other is Representative Serrato
said I mean Madam chair
Representative Lane the parole
board in New Mexico is an
executive agency sorry might be
modeling those words but that
there are eighteen members I
believe
and if I have misspoke and
someone will tell me and I will
send you an email the in the in
a panel to consider somebody for
parole there are three members
that making consideration and
state make a recommendation to
our governor and the governor
then has the final word on
parole and and under law New
Mexico okay thank you madam
chair and realize that.
The governor the final say.
So do we know how many.
Juveniles are tried as adults in
a in a given year or maybe what
percentage of juvenile cases are
tried as adults trying to get an
idea like how big of an issue is
this.
Madam chair representative lane
I don't have those exact figures
for you but I can tell you
there's seventy five cases that
are impacted by this proposal to
seventy five people who are
serving sentence currently
serving sentences longer than
fifteen twenty or twenty five
years depending on the category
that they're in for a crime
committed when they were
child's.
And madam chair do you know for
for for folks that are eligible
for parole in the end up with a
full hearing.
What percentage of those folks
are are let out on parole and
how many are left of course
rated.
Madam chair representative lane
another great question that I
wish I had more specificity to
to answer I know that under the
previous administration which is
the last time there was an
investigation some kind of a.
Reporting done on grants of
parole in New Mexico on average
somewhere around seven percent
seven percent of those cases
were were granted from life
sentences I know that this
administration and this board
has been trying to make changes
to make the opportunity more
meaningful but it is in no way a
guarantee in my personal
practice and experience like I
said there's they've granted
parole in about every other case
that I've had before them wanted
to.
Madam chair
Page ten of the bill the
factors.
Representative three best phone
number nine.
I think the first six make sense
to me madam chair.
It makes sense to me.
I'm a little puzzled about seven
though can I get some
explanation as to why that's
being included.
Madam chair Representative Lang.
These are factors that we're are
based off of the Supreme Court
precedent related to to the
issue of excessive in extreme
need sentencing and one thing
that has been found and the
jurisdictions across the country
either in their Supreme Court
precedent or in their
legislative fix that they've
they've drafted on this issue
that they've they found to be
relevant is the presence of
trauma or abuse and and the
childhood and so whether that
had a mitigating circumstance on
you know that the crime that was
committed to us that's the
reason.
Madam chair at that factor makes
sense to me at the sentencing
level.
Because if it feels like to me
this is more like maybe.
There were some external
circumstances to the juvenile
that help sort of explain maybe
part of the the crime.
But when you talk about parole
it seems to me we're talking
more about the conduct since
being incarcerated the nature of
its defense itself.
compliance with rules he noted
tend to improve themselves those
things and but here it looks
like we're going back to.
The circumstances of the of the
juvenile.
So madam chair representative
read I'm sorry Representative
Lane
The parole board will always
consider the underlying offense
and the severity of the offense
and this factor and what other
jurisdictions have done is just
to directs the board to also
consider the circumstances of
the offender's life at the time
of the crime which may have
submitted may or may not have
some mitigating certain effect
on you know the the way that the
board's use their culpability
for the the underlying assets.
May Day then that these are not
all in sentencing so this is an
opportunity for the pro for to
look at it specially if it had
not been considering.
Considered when there was a
sentences.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative anyone
else.
Happy to entertain a motion.
Madam I'll move to pass on the
Senate bill sixty four.
As amended.
Second that motion.
Motion for to pass made by vice
chair Romero seconded by
Representative Sapan ski would
you call the roll please thank
you madam chair Representative
Alcon.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane.
Yes.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert.
Representative read no.
Representative Rehm.
Representative Penske yes.
Madam vice chair yes.
Madam chair yes.
Madam chair was seven yeses in
three knows you have it to pass
on Senate bill sixty four as
amended.
Yes thank you senator thank you.
So we are next on on house bill
three thirty seven early
childhood department background
checks.
And I believe there's an
amendment.
so.
There's okay.
We have a committee subs for the
thirty seven three three three
seven three.
Yes.
Thank.
All right.
Thank you.
Welcome Representative Serrato
thank you madam chair thank you
committee
thank you we'll discuss the
committees of students that are
eight we have a motion to be
moved it for discussion purposes
if you'd read the two to five
number that would be helpful
eight two two five nine three
four dot two.
Okay.
Right so what this bill does and
the committee substitute it
essentially as necessary
definitions to the statute
governing background governing
background checks for the early
childhood education and care to
me Department on the the
substitute was an important
because we recently heard back
from the FBI about well how the
definition should be made into
the twenty sep two has those
definitions included as they
requested it's really important
for this bill to move forward so
that allows us to you know pass
that do the national background
checks utilizing the FBI's
database appropriately it
protects our children in
compliance with the state law it
also ensures that we're able to
receive a substantial amount of
federal funding fifty million
dollars annually and with that
my my expertise strong with the
ECECD a general counsel we're
just going to I know we're
pressed for time so we I stand
for questions thank you very
much those in the audience
wishing to oppose the bill
please raise your hand.
Those online wishing to oppose
the bill bill please raise your
hand.
Those in the audience wishing to
speak in support of the bill
please raise your hands.
Those online wishing to speak in
support of the bill please raise
your hand okay anything well
there's nothing to respond to in
terms of public comment so as
the committee.
Okay Representative number Madam
chair on move a do not pass on
House Bill three three seven two
thousand of users of the
substitute for House.
So.
And we have a motion and a
second I want to squelch debate
so does anyone have any
questions about this bill before
we have a motion.
Okay
so it doesn't four do not pass
on house bill three three seven
but I do pass on house
committee substitute for House
Bill three three seven made by
Representative night for and and
seconded by Representative
Romero
but.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Alcon.
I
we have to break you of that
have.
Representative.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert yes.
Representative reeve yes.
Representative green yes.
Representative Penske yes.
Madam vice chair.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Yes madam chair with nine yeses
you have a do not pass on house
bill three three seven and you
have a do pass on.
House Judiciary Committee said
House Bill three three seven.
Right now we're going to move to
Representative remains bill.
House Bill three five nine.
And then we have been of little
amendment they're in the process
of getting.
Yes yes.
Hello or is it is it's amendment
now that's right thank you.
This was.
Well it was rolled over.
Senator.
Reference.
So the.
The floor is yours
Representative.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee the
amendment is two two five four
seven six point one.
And on page two.
Line twenty.
Strike for private Patrol
operators.
Okay well we need a motion we I
guess we move for discussion
purposes the amendment.
Yes you can do that I suppose of
moving.
If you are on the committee.
So
Having trouble finding bill in
my book thank.
For.
Thank you.
Discussion of the.
On.
Right.
This.
I
move to adopt the.
Any discussion of the of the
moment.
If you call
thank you madam chair
representative Oaklawn.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane.
Speaker Martinez Representative
McQueen.
Yes.
Representative Nibert.
Representative reap.
Representative Rehm yes ma'am
Representative Penske yes madam
vice chair.
Yes madam chair yes and I'm sure
you have nine yeses to adapt
Amendment right thank you now
we're on the bill.
Is there anything you'd like to
share all have money expert
Linda Trujillo from R. L. the
she can explain that faster than
I can thank thank you madam
chair to see you it is nice to
thank you for hearing this will
try to make this as quick or
quicker than the last bill.
to the LFC since that review
process yeah I board is one of
the boards that is up for review
they are being included already
as an extension to their sunset
in house bill two oh one which
is it just sits for the Senate
floor and will be done what this
does though in addition is we're
required by law this and set act
to look at these practice acts
at the sunset process in and
then make recommendations to the
legislature if there's any
updates that need to happen
these are those recommended
updates that need to happen the
first one is just basically not
there some basic clean up
throughout the bill that I'm not
going to address it also exempt
an employee furniture for four
attorney so internees employee
from having to be licensed as a
private X. of private
investigator it adds crash
reconstruction and skip tracing
to the P. I. licensure and
requires specific this crash
reconstruction
requirements that the department
will adopt by rule it exempts
engineers from that process it
removes good moral character
which most of you've already
heard that is indefensible and
we're trying to take it out of
bills out of statutes when they
become open it also requires a
requirement for us to be able to
register instructors we have not
had that authority so we've had
to approve instructors and just
put a list on our website
instructors would prefer to be a
registered in some respects so
we've added that in it removes
the surety bond which is a
little wacky it's a ten thousand
dollar ensure surely bond this
is only applicable to private
investigations companies if they
provide security guard it
instead requires general
liability certificate for both
private petrol companies and
private investigation companies
it adds
Fees for the company's private
investigation companies and
private toll companies there
were part required to license
them but there's no fee that's
authorized in the statute and so
they get those licenses for free
it changes the renewal date to
by any L. and what's most
important for me and the reason
that I'm really glad that you're
here in this is that we've been
requiring psychological
evaluations for any licensee
that carries a fire arm upon
initial licensure we don't have
the authority to do that and so
we've had to stop that practice
we only have the authority to do
that for level three security
guards however P. eyes private
Patrol PI employees private
virtual employees they all have
the option to carry a firearm if
they going to opt into care in a
firearm then we believe that
they should be treated the same
as security guard level three
and should be required to do the
initial psychological evaluation
at thank you madam chair will
stand for questions.
Okay thank you let's go to the
audience those wishing to speak
in opposition to this bill
please raise your hand.
Online those wishing to speak in
opposition please raise your
hand.
Those in the audience wishing to
speak in support of the bill
please raise your hand.
In those online wishing to speak
in support of the bill please
which.
anything else for Representative
Rehm before we go to committee
no ma'am.
Representative McQueen from the
bill.
The committee
Madam chair representative to
print in the superintendent you
mentioned
one of my questions was about
striking the insurance on page
eleven and that's have covered
by the insurance on page twenty
the correct Madam chair
representative that's correct.
And so that in short question my
other question was on page
seventeen striking the
psychological evaluation.
Madam chair superintendent you
you said you lacked the
authority to do that but.
That looks to me like that is
the authority to do that Madam
chair representative on that is
the authority for us to do it
for level three security guards
and so what we did is we put it
under the fire arms section so
that we have the authority to do
that for level three security
guards which are authorized to
carry a firearm and anybody else
who's authorized to carry a
firearm which would include
private investigators private
patrol so it struck from there
so that we could make sure that
it's provided for anyone
authorized to carry as a
responsibility for their duty
and our licensure to carry a
firearm.
And so madam chair
superintendent it's straight
from there and it reappears on
page twenty one is that.
Madam chair representative I
should know the number for that
but yes that is correct page
twenty one line seventeen
eighteen and nineteen thank you
madam chair.
Thank you Representative anyone
else with questions.
I'll make a motion to the house
on house bill two fifty nine.
As amended Senator.
We have a motion for a do pass
house bill two fifty nine
amended made by Representative
Romero seconded by
Representative Nibert to call
the roll please thank you madam
chair representative on.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert yes
Representative reed yes.
Representative Rehm yes ma'am
Representative Penske yes.
Adam vice chair yes madam chair
yes madam chair with ninety yes
is you have a do pass on house
bill two fifty nine as amended.
Thank you very much thank you
madam chair and I I just want to
say thank you again hi bill was
actually the first time I met
Representative Frank and like
two thousand and seven.
But has been one.
What loan that we're able to
help so I want to talk.
Our schedule we have been.
For for a bit and
Like to get through some bills.
Couple more bills.
Okay so that insured you know if
they're doing third reading on
for.
But we are doing third reading
this evening but they have not
begun roll call yet okay okay
and if we can get a little
update because of course is yes.
There are preliminary things
that happen on the floor.
probably more than the for for
five years so
Next on the agenda of the so
this is what I'd like to do I'd
like to hear
and the house bill five oh one
because I know there's some
changes cleanup language that's
necessary then Representative
Nibert it has
and Representative here all have
the ethics commission also it's
something enough and lastly if
we can get to it house bill
three three four which is an
amended its the removal of the
traffic thank you know car from
the line if there was an
incident that kind of thing so
we can do that we should be made
progress good evening
Representative chairwoman
Hochman Vigil and good to see
our old friends Miss Armstrong.
For the evening chairman and
members of the committee I
promised you we would not take
too much of your time so what we
are doing hearing house bill
five a one we are making a tweak
to the Elizabeth white build and
of life options act which
essentially protects those
medical providers who do not
want to give patients
information on medical aid in
dying from having any
consequences as a result of
their unwillingness to share
that information and that is it
I'm sure of this my expert and
we all know the wonderful Debbie
Armstrong she wants to add a few
words thank you madam chair it
is just fixing a lot of make it
really clear that if you have a
conscious objection you don't
have to do participate in anyway
and there won't be any negative
consequences that we stand for
questions that thank you anyone
in the audience wishing to speak
in opposition to the bill please
raise your hand.
Anyone online wishing to speak
in opposition to the bill please
raise your hand.
Those in the audience wishing to
speak in support of the bill
please raise your hand.
Those online wishing to speak in
support of the bill please raise
your hand we have a hand raised
net net fifteen.
Mr bean.
On me okay thank you unmuted so
please feel free to speak.
Thank you very much I stand in
support of.
Where we need to clean language
on a bill to help raise everyone
who supports and I am in support
of House Bill five oh one thank
you madam chair members of the
committee Representative
Armstrong and also
Representative huh sorry I'm
sick I'm doing my best thank you
thank you I don't see any other
hands raise
Anything else Representative
Hochman Vigil before you go to
the committee says it Madam.
Very good all right anyone.
The motion of the let me get you
some so.
Started.
Well.
Twice in a row we're gonna have
a motion for Representative.
Representative chases.
House Bill to sixty three.
I I I.
I wasn't going to
make
it.
Okay so I believe we have a due
pass motion on house bill five
oh one made by Representative
Romero seconded by
Representative nine for is there
any discussion before we take
the call the roll.
Okay Copley's Colorado thank you
madam chair representative on.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane.
Speaker Martinez Representative
McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert yes
Representative read.
Representative Rehm yes
Representative Representative
Penske yes.
Representative madam vice chair
yes.
Madam chair yes madam chair with
nine yeses you have a do pass on
H. B. five oh one privacy click
thank you.
Okay so I think that will be
going to move house bill four
six six which is the act ethics
commission bill is.
Make a motion.
Hopefully everyone hear you.
Thank you madam chair this is
house bill four sixty six and
there was an amendment and
the government committee so as
it stands now this bill the
century those.
There's two to
of changes that you need to know
on page four paragraph G..
It was change so it's if an
effective hearing officer
determines so they struck some
of the language there.
And then on page five one five.
The hearing officer chosen to
consider so we struck and
commissioners so originally we
had it set up where.
Two commissioners and one
hearing officer would make the
probable cause determination.
Because of some discussions with
the ethics commission by one of
their commissioners taken off
and so now only a hearing
officer would make the probable
cause determination as to
whether or not the complaint
moves forward through the
process.
madam chair representative I
think just if impetus for this
is that the commission was the
judge the jury and the
investigator and so we're this
clarifies that a third parties
actually investigating these
ethics complaints and not just
one body doing all of the above
so that's where this came from
which clarifies why we need to
have that objective view
and so with that that's why
we're here.
Okay.
Let's go to the audience those
in the audience wishing to speak
in opposition to this bill
please raise your hand.
Those online wishing to speak in
opposition to the bill please
raise your hand.
Those in the audience wishing to
speak in support of the bill
please raise your hand.
Those online wishing to speak in
support of the bill please raise
your hand.
He
Go to the Committee now
Representative ring madam chair
I move it do pass on house bill
six four sixty six as.
We have a motion for do pass me
by Representative Rehm seconded
by Representative Sapan ski
before we just to be clear as
previously amended its not
amendment as well as amended the
officer
So I have a question on.
So before this proposed change
the general counsel maybe the
determined probable cause
determination and you all
working together thought well as
one person.
Maybe that's not such a good
idea and so you came up with an
idea of a here at the hearing
officer plus two commissioners
so we had a three percent
committee it goes to government
and they pull out the
commissioners because I guess
the ethics commission and want
the commissioners involved in
that level okay I get that but
we didn't try to find another
opportunity to add another two
people into the conversation on
the probable cause determination
I think the theory was if you
had an independent person make
hearing the evidence of the
general council and executive
director bring forward to them
thank you make that probable
cause determination just like a
magistrate judge or other
official official so under the
for but without this bill under
that I guess current system the
general counsel would prepare
the case and decide if there's a
problem.
Okay.
How it doesn't compute that was
the problem that that's been
okay all right over here thank
you very much anyone else would
you call the roll please thank
you madam chair representative
of all point.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane.
You could Martinez.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert yes.
Representative read yes.
Representative Rehm yes.
Representative Penske yes madam
vice chair.
Madam chair yes madam chair with
nine it yes is you have a do
pass on house bill four six six
as amended.
Thank you so I would recommend
this record Representative.
Is that the eight you know your
changes to your.
Roseville removal of traffic
obstructions and then we'll
we'll try to get the I. H. J. R.
fourteen.
Madam chair this is house bill
three thirty four and it's
actually House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill three thirty four.
And hopefully the our goals
being yes the use of.
In the two to five numbers point
two two five nine one zero point
two.
it's being handed out.
I don't hand out the point one
version handout the point to
verse.
The papers.
So the floor is yours
represented by the madam chair
and committee this is a bill we
heard the the other day and and
working with the committee
suggestions and specifically
Representative McQueen clear
changed.
We have made some clarification
to to make sure that we were
dealing specifically with
the words on line thirteen on
page two the media public safety
hazard so the obstruction has to
constitute an immediate public
safety hazard map theme is.
Identical in line fifteen.
I believe it's also in line
twenty one.
I thought there was a fourth of
fourth place.
Do we have the whole bill tomb
how many agents two pages okay.
Okay sorry
it's two pages so line ten I'm
sorry I missed one line Tim line
thirteen line fifteen.
And
Line twenty one we we change
those and then I I'd expanded a
little bit because of the
committees concerned about
what's the roadway so it says
expanding upon any portion of
the roadway or highway right of
way in such a manner to
constitute an immediate public
safety hazard and with that I
think that.
Is a.
Wixen Office of the changes that
were made from the original bill
we talked about last last week.
I stand for quite a few new
questions have to do the public
will know this is this is a
return no.
Thanks.
Get a lot of help you any
comments on the bill
Representative Quinn.
Chair of the number thank you.
I just I guess just on the we
use immediate public safety
hazards I just now
is it sure everybody understood
understood that yes and so is
this I just like is this common
knowledge what an immediate
public safety hazard is since
its you will use it five times
we never define.
Madam chair representative I
would say that any.
Degree or car that is in the
drive line of a.
Highway is an immediate hit.
Public safety hazard but.
Apparently was important for
that language to be on here so I
did not to object to it Madam
chair that is used in other
areas of stature I guess is the
question that we just we know
what we're talking about when we
say this I don't know I think it
be up to the officer at the time
to determine whether or not they
believe that it constitutes that
immediate public safety hazard
for being in the roadway
I can't think of too many
instances where unless it was a
roadway that is never traveled
whether it would be that for
there's maybe some adequate
space for people to get around
it without the without a
problem.
Maybe the author of the bill or
the author of the language would
like to comment.
Madam chair on that point.
show go ahead so I think madam
chair I I agree with
Representative Nibert I think
it's it's we're asking the
officers or the DOT employees to
exercise their judgment I could
think of situations where you
don't have a it's not busy road
maybe you've got.
Reserve this flashers on Google
in regards you stop traffic
youth you're you're doing stuff
on the highway you've you've
secured location it's it's not
immediate and urgent at that
point
but again I just think it's a
judgment call.
Thank you Representative L.
column has so far away from.
Wait food of the rhythm the
security but one thing on page
twenty four of the two.
Other states
floor authorized by state law.
Hello the review for a or no who
is authorized by state law to
report criminal if that.
Okay so what this is telling me
it's the only one that can move
this is a state employee
authorized by state law to
report from stat fill me the
model for for profit could move
with the no Sir to two groups of
individuals can can attend to
that function number one would
be law enforcement officers at
that is broadly defined so that
we pick up not only the state
police but local police
organizations well sheriff local
please and then.
I think motor transportation
division is now under the state
police but it used to be
separate so this would pick up
that group of individuals
because they could enforce some
of the criminal law statutes out
there for for traffic safety it
would take those folks out but I
think I think that term was
meant to be broadly encompassing
people who are recognized as
being able to force our criminal
statutes okay okay can do that
Madam chair of the state highway
of really the.
With the homeowner the state
highway department employee is
not authorized to do this well
and they're not law enforcement
officers the state highway
employee can can move the
vehicle based on.
Line seven of page two.
For department of our ten
eleven.
Yes.
Department transportation for
you.
I am the chair if done that
madam chair but then again we're
going to the bottom and we make
it just the the location Porsche
preventive statute now we're
just defining law enforcement
officer madam chair and okay
chairman thank you in that
twenty two.
Representative ring did you have
your hand raised earlier.
just when you're ready for a
motion are we ready anyone else
with comments or questions we're
ready for motion Representative
entry.
Madam chair I move house
Judiciary well I move do not
pass on House Bill three thirty
four and a to pass on house
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill three thirty
four.
Okay so we have and is there a
second yes all right so we have
a do not pass on house bill
three three four but I do pass
on House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill three
thirty four made by
Representative redeem and
seconded by Representative
Romero.
You call the roll thank you
madam chair representative of
Oakland.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen.
Representative Nibert yes
Representative read.
Representative Rehm yes.
Representative Penske yes madam
vice chair of.
Madam chair yes madam chair with
ninety S. is you have a do not
pass on health bill three three
four in a do pass on house
judiciary committees of for H.
B. three three four thank you
for bending over backwards.
But don't expect it very all.
Okay we have Representative
Montoya and the audience.
We have had house joint
resolution fourteen.
The committee.
The floor is yours
Representative thank you madam
chair
Mr resolution fourteen.
Just simply.
That does two things it changes
our R. sixty day and thirty day
sessions to two forty five day
sessions and it removes the
prohibition of the legislature
from introducing
built on the even years
currently as we know that the
governor's you have to get a
call are you have to get a
message from the governor to get
something presented on during
that that year so madam chair
really what I'm trying to do is
we already have another bill
house general is resolution to
that is on the house floor
currently which is for two sixty
day sessions
The the problem we have with
that is the two sixty day
sessions is very unpopular wise
with a certain number of both
Republican and Democrat senators
and I'm really trying to just
get this passed out so we have a
vehicle that if the other goes
over and and fails that we are
still able to move another bill
forward.
Two for the purpose of being
able to
Make sure that we're able to
take back authority on that here
that the governor is you that
you have to get a governor's
message out and madam chair one
last thing and that is we just
pushed forward a bill which I
believe or house joint
resolution which I believe will
result in.
Likely two years out from now
going to the public for
Legislators to get paid if that
happens we will effectively I
believe come become full year
full year round legislators I
think what that would do is
allow for the interim to change
probably fairly dramatically if
that does happen to forty five
day sessions is probably enough.
if we are able to do explore
extend work during the interim
that to forty five days probably
more than enough
to to be able to actually vote
on bills so with that madam
chair stand for questions okay
Representative Chasey.
yes.
If we're if the room is full
It those wishing to speak in
opposition to house joint
resolution fourteen please raise
your hand.
Those online wishing to speak in
opposition to house your house
joint resolution fourteen please
raise your hand.
Those in the audience wishing to
speak in favor of house joint
resolution fourteen please raise
your hand and those wishing to
speak online in favor of house
joint resolution fourteen please
raise your hand.
All right so we completed public
comment Representative Chasey
thank you.
I did vote for this in
government so that we can have
the discussion the judiciary and
the because I understand that
Representative swished to give
every possible option at the
same time.
I don't think this is visible at
all because what this does is
what we all wanted to do it
removes the prohibition in the
The even years sessions on our
introducing our choice of
legislation and takes away the
whole germane this issue.
But.
Would be done by now with our
introducing everything we want
to be all over with this is the
were past forty five days and
it's completely unrealistic to
me when we're on restricted with
the legislators are on
restricted in what they choose
to get it all done in forty five
days so that's that's my view I
I think it makes more sense to
do.
Say sixty to forty five or two
sixties and of I mean who knows
what will happen with all of the
other house joint resolutions
thank you madam chair.
Thank you madam chair chair
representative Montoya you have
the bill on the floor.
Maybe two years ago that was a
sixty in a forty five and I
voted against that because I
don't think forty five as long
enough
I I appreciate removing the
germane this rule I think that
would be a good thing for the
legislature to do to help.
I mean I think we're a co equal
branch of government without
creating equal powers so I I
think that would would help get
us back up to level we should be
but I also think you know as
percent chasing pointed out
we're already past forty five
days I I mean it just I I.
We have so much to do I'm.
I hate the way we manage our
time during session we could
certainly.
I think we should be doing more
sooner in the session
but that being said.
And Representative yeah I I I
see you would like to respond
thank you so madam chair two
years ago Representative it
started as a forty five forty
five and what I did then is what
I'm willing to do now is to make
it a vehicle that whatever can
get past the concern is that
other cannot get past sixty
sixty I do not believe we get
past the Senate however if it
does get change that's what I'd
allowed last time was let's make
it our bill not my bill to get
rid of the Germanus it ended up
sixty forty five in part when
Ivey Soto if you remember
Senator Ivey Soto was my co
sponsoring this the concern we
have was during this the the
second session that if we go
sixty days it'll put us past
filing deadline for for
elections filing deadline is
March the first I'm sorry the
second Tuesday in March if we go
sixty sixty that puts us
at at least two weeks if not
three weeks into March which
would overlap that and I I've
been a county chair of any a
party official you end up if you
if you delegating all of the
signature gathering and all of
that are you end up.
Potentially with having to go to
court because.
something gets filled out wrong
with the top your name your
address if somebody else is
doing that and they'll be all
kinds of challenges when it's
unnecessary if we were able to
at least on that second session
go forty five days we would be
finishing no later than the
first Thursday in March and
still have five days at a
minimum before filing deadline
so if something's gone wrong and
you you can go out there and
hired canvassers if you need to
go that signatures at the door
so one of the problems that have
the the the second sixty that's
why we ended up sixty forty
five.
I I believe if if money goes
across the way it is it would
probably come back sixty forty
five.
I I I'm not guaranteeing that
but I'm willing to allow it to
become ours so we can get rid of
what we all agree is a problem
which is we're not treated as co
equal branch of government so.
Madam Representative Montoya I
appreciate
the issue with filing day
Gathering signatures is a huge
pain in the ****
I I mean I just I can't think of
another phrase to describe it
especially for
I can think of it and I I use
thank you there were issues.
Other ordered a lot of.
The US especially you know
frankly for incumbent candidates
right I I mean I have qualified
for the ballot for is doing it
every year is a pain in the neck
I do think
sixty sixty bill if he gets off
the house floor and goes over
the Senate maybe that can staff
sixty forty five I think at that
point it was really can sit but
because I do think we need to
succeed the session so Madam
chair representative thank you
for thinking about these issues
and being creative I do
appreciate that.
Representative Rehm.
Yes madam chair and yeah and it
Representative I mean we've had
a long discussion about having
the power on the forty five day
dinner deuce whatever we want I
think that's a good Avenue for
this the other thing that we've
had a discussion for several
years is and by rule we would
limit how many bills someone
puts in so that might be
something but anyway madam chair
those are the just my comments
Representative semansky.
madam chair and and
Representative
I totally agree lifting that
restriction on the second
session
and I I would point out that
there is a natural limitation on
the number of bills because the
number of days you have to
introduce the bills is reduced
so in a in a forty five day
session or in a thirty day seven
a thirty day session to be
fifteen days at a forty five day
session it would be twenty two
or twenty three days
and I have seen that just
naturally limit the number of
bills because there certainly
you know you start the opening
day and they're certainly bills
that sort of pop up that you're
trying to get in before the
deadline
and I would also underscore
Representative reams point eight
we could
as individual chambers impose
rules or even just do guidelines
suggestions we did that in the
past
during the virtual session was
over there was a request to
reduce the number of bills
because we simply we're not sure
how we were going to handle all
of the items virtually or semi
virtually
So I you know I I do wonder
though
If it makes sense in some way to
maybe just.
Just remove the limitation.
On on what can be introduced
Representative I don't know if
you have a reaction to that.
I'm madam chair and and
Representative I actually think
that.
Probably happened is the second
forty five we'd have.
Quite a few bills get that had
already gone through the
previous year maybe stop along
the way forget vetted with prop
you know a questions from
committees
and then.
That person just has to get
redrafted and it would be ready
to go even on early filing so I
don't know that we would have
necessarily reduced number I
think we have is a lot more
bills that were vetted.
Early and if we become a for a
year round legislature I think a
lot more of that work could be
done.
In the interim in a way that
then when it goes forward we've
done some vetting and some
things are off the table even
before we get to the session
but I'm looking this this whole
modernization effort right now.
There are several items that are
that are likely to see two items
that I think believe we're going
to of items I think you're gonna
end up and up to the voters and
that is first off do do we pay
legislators secondly
I think we get some sort of
hopefully
This either house back house
resolution to how services two
or fourteen.
And then
that's simultaneously we've
already in house bill one ask
for a study to be done to see
about the staff.
for legislators.
I think we have to pass some
thing.
That removes restriction.
Why would we do this pay
legislators and then go all the
way and not have the restriction
removed from the governor on
that second year it almost
doesn't make sense to pay us the
second year.
so really all I'm suggesting
here is.
if you I'm looking and this is
how I presented it to the
speaker is this would be a back
up with the other dice.
Because you know there's a
potential of if if.
That I'm willing to take on
which is whatever it comes back
whatever we can agree on what
ever those limitations are
whether it's sixty forty five
with forty five forty five
whether it's sixty thirty as it
is and we just remove the
limitation we just have to get
something out simultaneously
what we're asking voters to also
pay us so that we have that
restriction removed so what I'm
looking for really and this is
what I suggest is the speaker we
like to sit on the house floor
the other one is the vehicle
house joint resolution two is
the vehicle if it just
completely.
Doesn't make it over there that
we send something over that I
think will the reason that the
that I understand on the Senate
side even among Democrats that a
sixty sixty is not favorable is
because there are several
business owners over there that
don't want to spend that much
time away from your business and
I think that's why it some of
the headwind but secondarily is
that second year with the
Representative we have to get to
the floor assesses we get the we
get the point thank you I will
say I thought the drafting was a
little odd because it says every
regular session it doesn't say
what we other than we may
consider veto override built it
doesn't say we can consider
everything else.
It says removing.
Okay removing the.
It says every regular session of
the.
Of Legislature competing during
even number years may consider
veto override bills it doesn't
say we can propose legend it.
Yeah it was just a removes
language prohibiting.
From the removes the exemption
language okay then it allows for
veto overrides okay.
pleasure of the committee.
Madam chair I move the to pass
on house joint resolution
fourteen.
Representative concert madam
chair like to do is to
substitute motion to table I
think.
Well I can talk about why.
We have a motion to table the
motion tabled which is not
available right.
We have a could.
Motion to table could call the
roll thank you madam chair
Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane speaker
Martinez Representative McQueen
this.
Representative Nibert.
Representative read.
Representative Rehm.
Representative Penske no.
Madam vice chairman of.
Madam chair.
No.
Madam chair with five yeses and
for nose at H. J. R. fourteen is
tabled.
Thank you Representative so I
apologize we have been able to
get through our agenda we're
going to need to get back down
to the floor roll call called
in.
