madam chair members of the
committee my name is Marco
Gonzales and I represent both
pattern energy and Invenergy
which are to the largest
renewable developers in New
Mexico right now helping us
achieve our of of energy
transition I goals
the nature of the problem is
that we need water for the
concrete necessary to actually
build wind farms and
transmission lines and so the
numbers in this substitute do
not adequate be really allow us
to move forward with the
developments that we have
planned as an example in just
one basin
I am sorry in just one
development in three different
bases basins there are over a
thousand fifty
acre feet of water need to to do
that the construction the wind
farms in in in another area we
in three different other basins
there's over
I.
Twelve hundred feet of acre feet
there is is needed so we made a
policy decision a long time ago
that we were going to transition
to renewable energy we can't do
it because we can't constructs
that wind farms in transmission
lines with this statute is over
eleven billion dollars of
investment by these two
companies here in New Mexico and
we're sending the opposite
signal we have talked to the
sponsor about trying to work on
an amendment I hope that we can
work on that but as it stands
now this substitute will not
allow us to achieve our
renewable energy objectives or
are build out in New Mexico.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
You.
Good afternoon madam chair
members the committee my name is
Mike ball and on the executive
director of the New Mexico
minding Association when we need
water rights when we're doing
mine development in is our
opinion that this this bill will
delay that development so thank
you with that's the reason we
oppose.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Erin balik I am the
superintendent of the Pecos
valley artesian Conservancy
district within the boundaries
of the district we have about a
hundred thousand constituents
and about a hundred and ten
thousand irrigated acres of the
PVC the nor the the constituents
don't have any other mechanism
to move water around as surface
water districts do this creates
a logistical nightmare when when
people are trying to move water
to where they need water when
they need the water so I'll
leave it at that thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Taylor
reckons on behalf of New Mexico
will growers and we stand
opposed to this bill New
Mexico's farmers and ranchers
can't wait around for a
pulmonary approval process if a
transfers petition this bill
would make it up to two years
before water right to be
transferred and that is not
conducive to production needs
and crops will be lost this bill
would just place another
regulation on those of us trying
to find food and fiber for the
state thank you.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is sandy Morley a recently
retired from office of the state
engineer for twenty five years
of employment during my
employment offices state
engineer had an opportunity to
process hundreds of water right
applications filed under New
Mexico state statute seventy two
dash six dash one through seven
known as the lease at the types
of applications filed usually
set.
include farming and ranching
operations dairy industry oil
and gas industry municipal
municipalities cheese
manufacturing wind turbine
projects solar projects highway
construction systems on.
Currently the largest industry
Lea and Eddy counties oil and
gas industry which heavily
relies on preliminary
authorization under the lease
act Lupino cheese plant located
in Russell's currently.
The largest employer in Travis
county with the largest
mozzarella cheese plant in the
United States they currently
usually sacked for plant
operations the lease act as a
tool that allows industry to
file water right applications
request expedited process to use
the water but does not eliminate
the notice for the hearing
process HB one twenty one in the
amendments as presented are not
beneficial to the industry and
is my opinion that this is not a
one size fits all we're doing
with complex groundwater issues
surface water in the state yes
they're very unique and have
their own specific dynamics
therefore I respectfully request
that will house bill one twenty
one.
Madam chair committee members my
name is Bronson corn with New
Mexico cattle growers we would
like to stand in opposition of
house bill one twenty one as
you've heard so far you've got
deprivations culture speaking
against it yep clean energy feet
speaking I guess that you're
gonna have the oil industry
speaking against it whatever we
need water we got to have it now
seventy five acre feet of
subsurface water is not suitable
for the the man's that we have
in the agriculture oil and gas
and apparently in the claim the
renewable energy I encourage you
to listen to the industries that
provide the money for the state
thank you very much.
Good afternoon of by sharing
committee I'm Liz Taylor I'm a
water lawyer more than thirty
years here in New Mexico I
represent the same on water
commission and select energy
services at opposite corners of
the state and let me tell you
about San Juan water commission
they used to a preliminary
approval in twenty nineteen to
move seventy acre feet to a
community of the upper lip lot
of community for users it was on
it is on a ditch under this
amendment they could not use it
the expedited process at all
because Community dishes in the
sink is statutorily the same
they got a PA in forty days
which they used the the
application they filed was not
pro tested so should have gone
right on through and four years
later they got their permit the
one year limit on point on your
expedited permits simply not
enough time and.
In the limit on the amount of
acre feet fifty acre feet for
surface water is also not enough
they needed seventy acre feet to
keep this community water system
going you'll hear a lot of other
objections but I wanted to give
you one real life example where
the bill would really harm the
San Juan water commission and I
believe other community water
suppliers throughout New Mexico
also to get an expedited a
permit you have to do your
hydrologic analysis up front and
that'll be a huge burden
especially on small users small
water users who depend on the
water rights division typically
to do the analysis for them
especially in on protest
application so I stand opposed
thank you.
Madam chair and members of the
committee Tiffany Rivera with
New Mexico farm and livestock
bureau we respectfully stand in
opposition at this afternoon we
support the sanctity of private
water rights as defined by state
law and individual legitimate
privilege to utilize these
rights without undue
interference from the government
this legislation will create
that interference and cause
undue delays on water transfer
applications currently every
application gets due process but
work can be done and water
utilize it well the hearings are
taking place these
applications go through a
hydrological review process
prior to being issued and the
bill before you does not support
the needs of our agricultural
producers who need to be able to
move water quickly and sure that
when it is not economically
feasible to farm so for these
reasons we respectfully request
your opposition thank you.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee try to
stay registered lobbyist for the
New Mexico Chile Association we
represent New Mexico signature
crop we're opposed to house bill
one twenty one the water use
leasing Act in its current form
gives our farmers an immediate
option and opportunity to ensure
adequate water supply to grow
other crops when needed house
bill one twenty one with a sense
of lemonade the option for
farmers to least water times
they need it most we ask that
you oppose house bill one twenty
one thank you.
Thank you madam chair committee
members I represent the highway
contractors in New Mexico
associated contractors and this
bill would very negatively
impact on construction and
maintenance of projects all over
the state small communities
large communities and it would
really hurt the industry very
much and it would be an extreme
cost increase possibly thank
you.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee I'm
Mexico here and we represent the
cities of Jarrell Carlsbad as
well as Hobbes and Eddy County
we are in current continuously
encouraged to diversify our
economy to ensure we are able to
meet the conditions of the ETA
and with that in mind this bill
would not allow us to do so
making it more difficult to
diversify the economy and bring
additional industries into the
area thank you.
Good afternoon madam chair
members the committee my name's
Tony Trujillo on that registered
lobbyists for Freeport mac Moran
the largest to important
southwest New Mexico you've
heard our executive director for
the mining association talk to
you about the difficulties with
mine development with this bill
that's certainly one of the
concerns the other one is the
renewable energy folks of.
Is concerned about this bill and
we've stated many times that
without copper renewable energy
to Mexico's is difficult to
attain and so when they're
impacted were impacted we stand
opposed to the this bill.
Madam chair committee my name is
Laura Riley I'm a lobbyist for
gavel and solutions gavel and
solutions represents a variety
of farmers and ranchers of water
providers throughout the state
I'm not going to go and a lot of
the issues other people have
talked about but I just like the
committee did know the typical
growing season in New Mexico is
a hundred fifty days the
proposed timeline on approval in
this bill is a little over seven
months two hundred and plus or
minus days so so this bill will
eliminate a complete growing
season for our agriculturists if
they have a need to move water
and additionally the top limit
here is seventy five acre foot
that equates to about twenty
five acres of crops so so this
is a very limiting factor to our
agriculture communities and to
rural New Mexico so thank you.
Thank you anyone else standing
up in opposition to speak all
right we'll go online we have
about eight minutes remaining.
Do we have anyone on opposition
online.
Okay we'll start with Patrick
Killen.
Thank you madam chair can the
manager can you hear me OK.
Yes I can hear you.
Right madam chair and committee
members this is Patrick Killen
registered lobbyists for chevron
renewable energy group and
chevron pipeline and power we
oppose H. B. one twenty one as
currently written as the bill
harms renewable energy
development aspirations in New
Mexico we are currently
developing a twenty megawatt
solar farm on state trust land
in a county with fifty five
thousand solar panels we share
the concerns of the renewable
energy community that this bill
will adversely affect ongoing
and future renewable energy
plans additionally we are
supporting economic development
efforts by the village of questa
in northern Butchofsky county
where we also operate a solar
farm that supplies clean power
to local residents questions
plan for the development and
growth of agriculture light
manufacturing and new energy
production including renewables
could all be significantly
impacted by this bill we are
alarmed the house bill one
twenty one will inhibit the
growth of questions post mining
economy and it's just transition
as well as our state's progress
or lower greenhouse gas
emissions for these reasons we
oppose H. B. one twenty one as
currently written and we thank
you for the time.
We'll go to Aaron Chavis.
From.
Good afternoon madam chair my
name is Erin Chavis and I'm the
executive director of the San
Juan water commission the
political subdivision of the
state of New Mexico open okay
dated San Juan basin New Mexico
members of the San Juan water
commission include San Juan
County city about sixty blue
bill to the apartment in the San
Juan basin rural water users
association the semi Water
commission strongly opposes
house bill one twenty one for
many reasons already stated
Senator water commission uses
the leasing Act move shipped
water to its member entities
that need water rights in this
poll industrial uses in the
basin are made based solely on
surface rights we cannot use
groundwater wells the commission
member any serve about ninety
six thousand residents it is
imperative to be able to water
out not only for drinking water
but the economic development
initiatives are the sound Water
so my water commission use
deployment and others issued for
the quick move movement of
ninety acre feet from the upper
part of water users association
I ask you to vote against each
be within one and thank you for
your time.
Thank you Aaron season but l'or.
Yes madam chair my name is the
even Butler and board members I
am AT alfalfa farmer from the
fort Sumner valley and also a
soil and water conservation
district board member for region
five I stand in opposition to
this bill because the processes
that are in place are not going
to be efficient for the average
farmer with with fifty acres
atop Water and seventy five
acres of.
Underground water in order to
make certain crops viable we
already depend on on resources
bit are not always predictable
in the farming industry and so
to have another thing that we
would have to wait on could make
it or break make it or break it
for the average farm so I stand
in opposition to this bill thank
you thank you if than Tom
Shelley.
Thank you madam chair I'm
involved in agriculture.
And member of that cattle
growers and farm bureau in New
Mexico.
And I'm also involved in mining
in.
I am opposed to this bill thank
you.
Thank you anyone else in
opposition we'll go to support
is there anyone in support of
this bill.
All right will start with those
who'd like to speak and support
your limited two minutes thirty
seconds and will do fifteen
minutes so we'll.
The rate at one fifteen.
Good.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Paula Garcia executive
director of the New Mexico
seconds Association which
represents a sectors included
just around the state and we
send a strong support of this
bill we support of the original
bill we also support the
committee substitute that's one
thing I want to clarify that is
that if no bill passes.
Of there's they're still gonna
be a problem with preliminary
approval there has been a
District Court ruling against
preliminary approval it was
challenged by called better
education district and and the
judge ruled in favor of the of
the district against the
practice of preliminary approval
there's an AG opinion deeming
that preliminary approval is
unlawful and so so the fact that
this with the previous practice
of the state engineers office
that enabled
of circumventing of due process
just because it happen often and
repeatedly doesn't make it
right.
There's a fundamental principle
in our water law that says that
we protect existing rights and
that means that it and the way
the leasing Act reads is that
the stated there should not be
granting.
A permit to use water before
there's been notice opportunity
protest and a mandatory public
hearing on the protest
application and that's what the
Romero decision says that's what
the AG opinion says so all that
this this bill the original bill
would have made it more clear
but this substitute as a
compromise it creates a
statutory process for an
expedited hearing it's better
than the status quo it satisfies
us for the due process but also
provides a path forward for
expedited leasing thank you for
your consideration which urge
your support thank you.
Madam chairman members of the
committee my name is Lawrence
Gallegos and I'm Representative
with some landowners alliance
the national Latino farmers and
ranchers and also The New Mexico
Food Network all State Council
and I am here in favor of the
bill I I wrenched for thirty
years in southern Colorado and
the the real problem is is the
that all the waters over
appropriated in New Mexico as it
was in on the Rio Grande in
southern Colorado and.
The if you to keep on using
water that you the for you know
exactly what's who you're
creating in the long run it's
just for everybody a matter of
fact in Colorado where I was
representing
I I lost a lot of production on
my land because of of over
pumping the aquifer over there
and I think you need to know
what's happening before you
actually.
You know approve these leases.
Thank thank you.
Hello.
It's a hello I'm Herrell
Trujillo president of the New
Mexico Seckau Association and we
support this compromise and it
clarifies the law in a way that
is more reasonable I would like
to say that we have a second
have been subject really hurt by
this kind of process specially
in the Rideau so area where we
had a and the second that was at
the bottom of the
reach in there and they leased
their water to the city and the
city immediately started to take
the water so it affected all
thirty eight a second so we're
above that right and there was
no public notice for them to
learn about that process so it
took a lot of money you know to
to change that process so so we
hope that you support this
compromise and of course our
association supports it thank
you.
Good afternoon a chair and to
committee and sponsors of this
bill my name is Joan brown over
Franciscan sister and executive
director New Mexico interfaith
power and light we work on
climate issues care of community
care of creation and we're very
much in support of H. B. one
twenty one as it has been
presented with the amendments
we've heard a lot about the
water challenges today as
economic and political but we're
forgetting that pays real
challenges are ethical and moral
issues that we need to address
for the common good for the
communities in look out to see
pope Francis says that water is
a fundamental indispensable
human rights you and has
declared water as a human right
I'm really concerned about many
people in this state especially
on the eastern plains where the
Ogallala aquifer is no longer
going to be able to be used we
don't have that much surface
water and they're looking for
piping to address water we are
over extended on our water I'm
afraid that as we talk about
poverty and economic inequality
in this legislative body but in
a few years we're going to be
talking about water poverty
people not having water at all
we need to be very much the
gates in the ethical and moral
concerns water is precious and
we cannot continue to extract it
wantonly thank you you.
Good afternoon chairman members
of the committee my name is that
if you know somebody I'm on the
board of our regional secular
Association in the Santa Cruz
basin I'm a percent they into my
L. and as a small farmer and
water users the sanctity that I
would like protected of my
private property right is that
it not be impaired by these
preliminary use agreement so for
the reason spoken previously we
really do urge you to support
this bill thank you.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is that we Barker and I am the
water associate with
conservation voters New Mexico
in the interest of time I would
just like to say that for all of
the previously spoken reasons we
support H. beach one twenty one
in order to the committee to do
the same thank you so much for
the opportunity to speak thank
you so eight.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee was
going to with the Sierra Club
you're gonna chapter
representing a thirty five
thousand members and supporters
in the state we support this
bill it ensures fairness and due
process in the way of the office
of the state engineer granting
approval of non emergency water
lease applications if there is a
need for time critical approval
for water right leases the OC
should develop procedures
through the Legislative over
rulemaking process to consider
protections for existing water
rights we're asking the will
vote in support today thank you
you.
It's.
Hi my name's Jackie bell I was a
linking I'm a recovering licking
county commissioner for two
terms
we went through lots of
disasters watersheds destroyed
something that's come up the
last couple of.
Years is subdivisions drawing up
subdivisions we're I'm on a
small farm between read also in
Honda and of the the river dries
up a lot now our water in
Lincoln County is drying up
hello all the way around and
subdivisions out number our
agriculture by a lot so now we
have the problem of subdivisions
trying up subdivisions and
economics is that what you thank
you if you don't grow you'll die
but if you outgrow your resource
gonna die faster and that's
what's happening to us we need
to really pay attention and take
our time on what we're doing to
every drop of water thank you.
My name is Julie enjoys thank
you members of the committee
madam chair for this opportunity
I am a registered lobbyist with
rocky mountain farmers union we
stand in support of this we
Leave the each water right is
part of our hive hydrological
system and we need to look at
these decisions systemically and
we need to make sure that our
agricultural voices are at the
table when these decisions are
made and due process allows for
that opportunity thank you very
much thank you anyone else
wanting to speak in support of
house bill one twenty one okay
we'll go online we'll start with
Jessica Swanee of a minute and a
half.
Thank you madam chair and
committee my name is Jessica
swan hi Representative agricole
toward a cooperative network we
are a network of over fifty five
plus allied farmers throughout
New Mexico who hold five hundred
plus acres of land and aggregate
seven thousand pounds of fresh
produce every week to our people
in New Mexico we agree with New
Mexico Seki as.
Stance that this is a
fundamental principle to protect
our water rights and that we
also support the committee
Subsys sub substitution we stand
in support of H. B. one twenty
one and ask for continued
protection of our water with due
process in water the seeing we
are calling for real solutions
to addressing water use and
climate change thank you thank
you Jessica next we have D.
Garcia if you could tell state
tell your tell us your name.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members the committee my name is
that P. Garcia I am a policy out
that from Rio Arriba from the
sun the sun secular societies.
And I come today in support of
HB twenty twenty one.
The heat to decisions made by
preliminary approval are I find
against democracy and due
process in many ways oftentimes
leading to
the disposition of of both
resources from our our I
lowincome communities and also
our disposition of our you know
loan committees that have great
cultural resources and so I
often think that you know are
are are what we call what we
need to look at in terms of the
you know rather looking at big
industry is how how
the liminal lunarian approval is
quickly making hasty decisions
and we're just wanting them to
to to follow the law and so
that's with that I I think that
is this committee for hearing me
thank you this.
Next we have and the part be.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members my name's Jim
McCartney I'm a member of the
Lynsey of water watchers a
citizens group in Valencia
County organized to protect and
and advocate for better
management of water in our
county.
Yes Mr guy go said water in our
state is already over
appropriated the decisions
really must be looked at
hydrologically we think that
this process is much fairer and
and allows for the state
engineers office to do the work
that's needed to look at these
are requests are in.
All the number of users that we
have in the state and industry
and others coming forward to ask
for additional water rights we
stand in strong support of HB
one twenty one thank you.
Next we have the last semi of
food etcetera if you could just
tell us who you are.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is a beacon fellow policy
director and asked me if I could
Center New World and County we
support HB one twenty one
committee of committees that
because we're farmers we're land
stewards water protectors use
mentors students school
gardeners produce aggregators
community health workers and
good neighbors we just point
support the staff as we don't
work against them our workers as
farmers for generations before
us for today and tomorrow and
generations to come is bound to
the water our fate is the same
this is a compromise bill that
has the support of I see to
bring water leasing into legal
compliance and per tax
fundamental due process and the
thing water rates this farmers
in elephant Butte irrigation
district to aggregate produced
with thousands of other local
farmers and we're within a
network of farmers and house
Bernalillo grant of that on done
in the counties we've never
known any farmer Senator used on
lawful preliminary approval
process and indeed
economic development is reason
not not to oppose the bill but
instead to support it
due process community input is a
fundamental to just transition
so I'm alarmed at the misuse of.
Terms like just transition or
economic transition the goal of
that is to not replicate harmful
models and we want to make sure
that we protect farmers rates
which are definitely protected
in this bill and we ask you to
join farmers today and those of
us who supported just transition
to give HB one twenty wanted to
pass thank you thank you next we
have Steven Hernandez.
Yes this is the return honest
I've practiced Water law for
over forty five years and
Representative the farming and
ranching community most of that
time I'm general counsel for
Carlsbad irrigation district we
are the district that brought
suit in Eddy county in front of
the water court to determine
whether or not the morning
approval in the expedited
process was legal the court
ruled it was not
Subsequently we saw the letter
issued by the Attorney General
that also issued an opinion that
said the state engineer does not
have legal authority to continue
the preliminaries Authority
practice so there is no process
in place there is no expedited
way to proceed forward unless we
approved
what I think is a very good
compromise before the committee
today the act community has the
ability to move water.
For an emergency crop losses
legally defined as an emergency
so I do not understand the
problems with some of the
testimony by the tech community
and I fully support this
compromise thank you thank you
Stephen next we have Patrick how
to meal.
Madam chair of the committee my
name is Patrick how to meal I
am.
Work for the American friends
service committee with peace and
justice organization that has
worked in New Mexico to protect
land and water for the people of
New Mexico I'm also a farmer in
New Mexico and I stand in full
support of this compromise we
supported the original the
original bill as it other people
have spoken it was violating the
law and deprived individual
water right holders
individual New Mexican citizens
not lobbyists not industry
representatives in deprived
individual citizens of their due
process this compromise
Of holds.
Attacked due process but will
also as others mentioned
provided a cover the state
engineer who's been broke
breaking the law has been
they've been breaking the law
these last several years and
this will bring them into
compliance well still of
protecting the rights of of New
Mexican citizens I ask again
that we're in support of this
and
I will hold my two hundred and
is this the spurious and
disingenuous arguments but yeah.
Thank you support this thank you
very much next we have Julia for
non.
Hello good afternoon madam chair
and committee members my name is
Julie offered all the executive
director of public action
alliance we are a pueblo
indigenous climate justice
organization here in New Mexico
we are here to express our
support for our H. B. one twenty
one.
With the entrance that you know
as public people we have both of
variation of prior appropriation
senior water rights as well as
judicata Water Rights and so we
need to make sure that those
those rights are fully protected
by due process many of us are
also you know come from families
of traditional farming and
sustainable a sustainable
farming as well as cultural uses
for water those are very
connected to our culture and
again need to be protected but
we also standards of support of
this bill to protect our
fasciculus rates as well because
you know those are also
sustainable farming practices
that really do provide
ecological services for our
right period in silence here in
New Mexico and
you know we are experiencing
impacts of climate change and
that is going to deplete water
sources and so there needs to be
some type of systemic change arm
in order to monitor thank you to
the water transfers and really
other watery next we have we
have room for one more person
it's other Hyundai Alliance and
of discuss all the other hands
raise but go ahead on a hundred.
Thank you chair members of the
committee my name is going to
have the alliance and I'm a
coalition coordinator for New
Mexico renewable solutions we
firmly us support this bill and
its efforts we supported the
previous one and besides you
know the cultural reasons for
many of us that come from a
secularism land grants in the
reason why we support this is
also the legal reasons that
public Garcia brought up I think
it's really important for folks
to review the AG opinion because
currently the practice is
unlawful and I would invite
industry if they are concerned
about the the process with
office of the state engineer to
join us in the call to fully
fund the office of the state
engineer so that they can do
their job and their piece
because again without the water
here in New Mexico we will have
no economy and you know I just
really appreciate the Sanchez
for bringing this forward and I
hope folks start to look at the
the legal implications at this
is not passed thank you get
thank you Alexandria so we still
have about twelve hands up just
for the record folks that didn't
get to speak online but we are
stopping public comment and
we're gonna go ahead and go back
to the sponsors you want to
respond to anything yes madam
chair thank you and I believe Mr
checkers would like to also just
a few things okay I think we
cannot emphasize enough that
preliminary approvals are the
way of the past the they are not
going to be permitted going
forward bay's largest largely on
the attorney general's opinion I
would say so that's point one so
this process is intended to
assist actually and facilitate a
way to transfer temporarily
Water couple things Eddy and Lea
counties have not been the
subject or have not received
preliminary approval since
twenty twenty so those
individuals who testified from
those counties apparently miss
understand what has been
happening there and that is
because.
As of the District Court opinion
that was issued at around that
time and at that point in time
the state engineer stopped
issuing preliminary approvals in
that District Court district so
that is no longer available to
those individuals so there's a
agency apparently a
misunderstanding about what is
going on right now in that part
of the state
with regard to the pay goes
valley artesian Conservancy
district the same thing there
are no preliminary approvals
happening in that area because
they are part of that court
district so that has stopped
since twenty twenty
ever cultural emergencies such
as crop failures I think the
point was made there's something
called the emergency rule or act
that allows those kinds of
transfers to assist in those
sorts of situations so that is
no issue here
lastly I think I'd like to
address the issue associated
with pattern energy and those
that sort of thing Mr Gonzalez
indicated that they're
anticipating the need for over
one thousand acre feet crossing
several water basins well first.
I think I feel like they know
where the the line is going to
be and they have an opportunity
now to start the normal leasing
process there is a normal
leasing process that can be
utilized in plan forward they
they know what they will
obviously know the amount of
water they need and he indicated
what water basins were were so
you know impacted so it seems to
me that instead of relying on a
process that is no longer
available legally the right
approach would be to start now
work with the state engineer to
ensure that they have the
ability to access the water that
they're going to need for this
long term project in the state
you know I know we're all very
supportive of that but that is a
process that is available and I
think I touched on most
everything that was race madam
chair but Mr chair Chris I think
once at a thing or two.
Thank you madam chair and
representative I I did want to
you know I was when this bill
was first introduced I was on
the opposition side in the first
committee and we were you know
because the.
Similar bill that was introduced
two years ago and four years ago
and we fought on the other side
of this new legal challenges
that have been have been alluded
to
The issue is as as the
representative stated we don't
have legal clarity for a for a
process by which a number of
very important industry to the
state renewable energy oil and
gas technical chair have a way
to move water quickly unless it
falls under that emergency
statute to the representative
that the chair just just alluded
to and we the.
What we do what a pragmatic
solution that's going to enable
rapid Trancers of water for for
priorities but it's going to be
have to to be balanced with
ensuring that folks get a
hearing before before the water
gets moved and so what we try to
work out is you know what what
we what we think it could work
the sponsor we really thank her
for for being willing to talk
and and engage with us on on a
compromise process I know a lot
of the folks who rely on rapid
water transfers and I'm not
satisfied and will in kind of
work through what the specific
issues are and and see if
there's any common ground but
this is this is our agency
trying to step into the breach
here what we were doing things
before that we don't have a real
legal path forward on going
forward and we're trying to
we're trying to to provide an
Avenue for these these transfers
for really important uses
For to work we're committing as
an agency for these types of
transfers to getting to doing
something I don't think any
other administrative agency has
in the state which is get a
decision out on administrative
hearings about a hundred days
after
after there's a there's a.
Need for hearing and to do that
we do have to front load some of
the hydrologic analysis most
applicants already do that we're
going to be providing hydrologic
I'd lines for people to sort of
show what they need to show.
we're also going to need and
we've been made to sound like a
broken record but we need to
resources to make this work and
that's something we've been
building pursuing and every
Avenue we can and and and we
want to reiterate that here
clearly
it's going to it's going to take
the resources for agency to be
able to meet that statutory
obligation if if this goes
through I think if you if you've
FTEs you know in the right
places will be able to do what
we're trying to be realistic and
and appropriate with that
without funding request but
we've made you know that clear
to the Sanchez well into a lot
of other folks who we've been
talking to on this but as long
as we get that and we have a two
year grace period to make this
happen we're we're trying to to
fit in there and and get a
process that moves the water
it's not an emergency under the
emergency stretcher but it still
gets to where you know our our
important industry need water
thank you thank you Mr you all
right we'll go to the committee
will start Representative
Nibert.
Thank you madam chair
Madam chair madam chair.
I'm going to just focus on.
The area of the state that I'm
familiar with them that would be
the pick as well
I'm not familiar with how this
bill.
Would affect other areas so I'll
just focus on on the pages of
this ballet and and so my
question is how how is anyone
impaired.
If you have a declared
basically.
Madam chair all ask my answer to
answer that but the bill is not
a bill on impairment the bill is
a process bill that provides
what we believe is due process
so will answer the question but
I do want to remind everyone
what the bill is about.
Madam chair representative I
just want to make sure I I I
understand your question how is
somebody impaired if we have a
declared basin subject to state
intersection is that the
question so somebody can be
impaired if there's a let's say
we have to ground to wells
pretty close to each other
within less than a mile and some
of the sites I'm gonna move
twenty thousand acre foot per
year appropriation into that
well right next to this other
well that's going to draw down
the water table for the
neighboring well it levels in
excess of what we allow that
would that's what we call
impairments.
I understand the concept of
impairment the madam chair madam
chair.
What my question is if you are
leasing.
Your water right to a third
person.
And let's say that that person
is going to take that water.
Transported someplace else
Strickler basin and they're
leasing that we their their
water rights how is that going
to impair other water users.
It
chair representative if if
you're leasing your water right
to someone else to to withdraw
water from a different point of
diversion from a different well
we look at
the amount of drawdown resulting
from that lease if you're not
changing the point of diversion
if you're just changing the
purpose of use of the water is
that I I think that's what
you're sort of alluding to it is
it is that right.
Basically if the water right
owner.
Is putting their water to the
fish to use.
And for whatever reason they
decide that for that.
Growing season that year.
They are not going to use that
water on their field but they
want to lease it to some someone
else.
They would be putting it on
their field normally.
But they're leasing it for that
here.
Being compensated for that water
how is that going to impair
other water users in the area
because that water would
otherwise be going on their
field.
And madam chair Representative.
We really look at the impairment
from the move to location if
you're moving water I I think
the the promise if if you're
talking about the neighbors of
the move from well.
There's likely not going to be
impairments with whatever they
want to do with our water right
but if they're moving it into a
well that's going to be right
next to some other well that
that could be now affected by
increased depletions from that
well that's the type of
impairment we look at.
If they're not changing the
point at which the waters being
taken out of the aquifer I agree
would be very very rare
circumstance for their different
environment.
So.
Madam chair madam chair of I
guess my next question for most
of these leasing situations with
the water not be coming out of
the same well when they lease
it.
And of Madam chair
representative it there's no one
size fits all answer that
question if somebody wants to
take their your additional water
instead sell it for commercial
sales which is common and
they're using their irrigation
well is the is the place they're
going to withdraw it that's
likely not going to cause
impairment but a lot of times
the oil companies don't want the
water in the middle of you know
farmland they wanted out and you
know closer to where they need
to distribute it to their you
know teams are doing completions
and so and so if you're moving
the water to that other well
it's not being withdrawn from a
different place we have to
analyze the effect of that
change.
Okay.
Madam chair I would understand
if you're moving water from
state east of Artesia to south
of Carlsbad.
There there be a problem but if
you're if you're basically
leasing the water from your well
the thing going to a truck
instead of on the field and you
of course get a reduction in
the.
Number of gallons or barrels of
water that you're you're going
to be able to use.
There's no impairment as I see
would that be accurate.
Madam chair representative I
would agree with that statement
okay.
When I look at the bill
And specifically on page eight.
We have a revision to the
existing staff to under the
existing statutes.
A water ride owner.
Who would issue the protester
protests the application.
That owner bears the burden to
provide some specifics as to how
their water right be impaired by
this action.
But then I go down the beginning
at the last word on page our
online A. M. following.
We're no longer talking about no
we're talking about a person and
that person doesn't bear the
same burden do they madam chair
chair.
Of madam chair chair and
representative that's correct in
if you're wondering where the
genesis of this language come
from it's identical to language
in other parts of the leasing
Act.
Water code excuse me and Mr
chair Chris can explain that
madam chair if you so desire
Representative yes ma'am.
Yes madam chair Mister
Representative
You are correct in your in your
read it is a broader definition
of who can who can protest or in
this case subject to a a
transfer
Elsewhere in the water code in
every other in fact place in the
water code where where there are
types of transfers that can be
protested some of the some of
the criteria on which a transfer
can be protested or whether the
the transfer would and I'm
saying transfer in a general
sense these releases but.
Trying to go fast the transfer
would be contrary to
conservation water in the state
or detrimental to public
welfare.
Everywhere else when we put the
conservation of public welfare
language in this expanding
language was was added this is
it's been the position of the
office the state engineer that
it was a it was a drafting
oversight at the time the
conservation and public welfare
language was added everywhere in
the water code that this the
standing language should be the
same expanding standard across
the water co depending on not so
it's not dependent on sort of
what
article you're you're applying
under that the that you should
have the same standing
requirements everywhere.
So madam chair madam chair I
read this right if you're the
owner of a water right.
You have a higher standard of
them if you're just a member of
the public who wants to protest
the application.
Am I reading that correctly.
Madam chair representative I
would not agree with that you
have to
The substantially and
specifically affected by the
grant of the application unless
you're an instrumentality of the
state and then the the have a
sort of an automatic standing so
I wouldn't I wouldn't completely
agree with your statement is as
stated.
Well let's look at the words.
So if you're not owner that's
lines four through.
Eight loner.
The protest shall be specific as
to how the granting of the
application will adversely
affect the owner's Water Rights
so to me that says the owner has
a burden to bear to show how
it's going to adversely impair
their water right.
But if you're just a person.
All you have to do.
To show that the objector will
be substantially and
specifically affected by the
granting of the application.
That to me is is more is.
Water or more general than what
an owner has an obligation to
build and you disagree with the.
Madam chair representative yes I
do in one instance you have to
be specific as to how you're
affected affected the other you
have to be specific as to how
you're affected it must be
substantial.
One yes that first you have to
show the effect on your water
right the other you just have to
substantially and specifically
showing the fact and if you're
looking at.
What they have to prove it's
really that the application's
contrary to the conservation of
water within the state and I
think I could argue.
That any application water is
contrary to the conservation of
water.
I don't think that's a very high
threshold.
So I see the two being two
different standards and and I'm
concerned about the
I don't know what the.
What the court would do with
that but I just see to
potentially different standards
and your water right in my mind
there's a.
Much higher burden or a stronger
burden them does just a non
water right owner of.
Madam chair madam chair of.
You mentioned the limitations
For the number of acres that the
one could get this.
temporary tax provided temporary
lease and what was that number
of.
Takers for the ground a for
surface water its fifty acre
feet and for groundwater it's
seventy five acre feet.
And madam chair of.
Madam chair is there some
significance does the how we
came up with those numbers
madam chair and representative
yes we consulted with the office
of the state engineer and they
reviewed the records about what
in general the temporary leases
had been you know for planning
approval seven order and this is
within the range of those
numbers at is that a fair
statement Mr chair Madam chair
representative we we try to look
it just.
Lease application since twenty
twenty so actually most of them
weren't for preliminary
approvals but and it was the.
You know it it was.
Most applications roughly eighty
percent of them for for for
twenty five acre feet for
groundwater fifty acre feet for
surface water or less their
numbers are larger and have you
heard from a lot of industry
with the that have relied on
larger ones we are
internationally suggested a
number.
Five hundred when we're talking
about is this with this group
the state association is very
concerned that a that in in
Providence Lee allowed lease of
five hundred acre feet per year
could do some damage really fast
and they wanted a lower value
and so this was this was what
you know we we came to.
Madam chair of Madam chair of
Your expert talked about.
One in a pragmatic solution to
to.
I guess a so called problem of.
In.
So what are when I read this.
My real concern is that we don't
have a solution.
At least as for my part of the
state.
And again I don't know anything
about this ideas and and some of
the experiences of up in the
northern part of the state but.
In our part of the state all I
hear are concerns about what
this is going to to do and
that's not providing the
pragmatic solutions and so I'm
I'm just.
Wanted to know if there was any
thought.
Given to.
Coming up with some solutions.
Recognizing that I come from an
area where we have a declared
basin we will.
We we heard testimony about over
procreation Water I think I
think of at least my area we
have a declared basically we we
we have I think I've done a good
job historically of matching the
supply with the demand and tried
to make sure that the demand
does not exceed the supply
and so I'm really concerned that
well we have a bill we don't
have a pragmatic.
solution.
To the issue with respect to to
at least the the bank this
malady
and.
I I I am concerned with up and.
I told the the madam chair
earlier that maybe I may need to
work on this
if this passes may need to work
on this
this next year to to come up
with something that may be more
specific to deal with the issues
we see.
At the it does pose a a.
Problem.
I don't think it'll dresses the
the the crux of the issue and I
am really concerned with our
ability to.
Supply water that's needed to.
Fuel.
I say that.
Alright intended to fuel New
Mexico and to deal with.
The media needs of substantial
quantities of water to carry
forth the public policy that
this very body has has embraced
and of water has Water Street
provided for me to do all to
accomplish all those goals and
It seems to me that
By having.
The process maybe a hundred days
Hundred Days.
More may not allow us to
do some things that need to be
done and I remain concerned
about that so with that madam
chair.
Others can purchase is here
Representative Representative
Chasey.
Thank you madam chair thank you
madam chair and to disseminate
former classmate here.
Making.
helping us with this bill
Let me just ask you one question
that somebody had texted to me
as a potential solution and that
is we
This could be some of the
opposition could be mitigated by
increasing the cap on water.
madam chair and leader we talked
about that
but I would say five hundred
acre feet is not a non starter
five hundred acre feet is a lot
of water and this is intended to
address you know short term
issues a lot of water in one
year to be used as a lot of
water and.
I did not I water expert as I'm
sure is all evident madam chair
and later but
that's been universally
described to me as a very large
amount of water to be subject to
something like an expedited
review.
Madam chair
It what.
The question makes me think
about Representative Nibert
talking about what the crux of
the problem is I think maybe the
crux of the problem is.
That.
All the water on the planet
right now is all the water the
planet will ever have.
Is it there's not enough water.
Especially here.
As I say specially here but it's
so much more evident in such a
large state the era deployment
and so forth with is that
accurate I mean I agree it is
and I I think madam chair and
leader I think that's why you
need a process to ensure madam
chair and a leader that there's
a thorough review before there's
a change in you know there's a
transfer of the there's a lease
of the water to another the
point of diversion so you know I
I guess that right that's my
answer madam chair and leader
madam chair and clearly not a
wondrous assist either but it
was really is expanding the to
hear that.
There's no water coming from
anywhere else I mean if it's
here is here in our atmosphere
and on.
On the surface and and so forth
and not.
I guess I feel like.
I.
I haven't paid attention as I
grew out of that this is a
finite resource thank you madam
chair that's.
Thank you Representative Chasey
anyone else.
Occurred Martinez thank you
madam chair madam chair the
experts
let let me ask about the other
critical problem
and madam chair madam chair.
There is a need opinion that
came out.
January thirtieth.
They read it last night rate
again this morning.
I really came before I came in
the room.
The private practice.
It is.
And I believe madam chair madam
chair and then going on for ten
fifteen years more less.
That that practice was not.
And I don't want to put words in
your mouth but it's not proper
it's not legal is that accurate
madam chair and representative
madam chair and speaker yes that
the preliminary approval process
was not authorized by statute
that was one determination
through the District Court I
think it's the fifth district
down there and most recently
speaker and madam chair the
Attorney General agreed that
it's unlawful because it's not
authorized by law and secondly
they raise concerns about due
process both procedural and
substantive due process so there
could be a due process issue
here as well speaker in madam
chair thank you madam chair
representative and
Mr checkers you you are with the
offices and junior some of my
next questions can be directed
at you Madam chair
representative Mr checkers.
If a bill does not pass setting
up the process.
What happens.
madam chair Mister speaker I'm
glad you asked that's that's the
scary scenario that we really
don't want to see
as of now we don't have any
injunction prohibiting us from
doing preliminary approvals
but you know the AG if you
doesn't doesn't really pull
punches I I disagree with it
I've argued in court the
opposite of it but it's it is
the opinion of our Attorney
General I
have not and and and it's not
just me are or director of water
rates down Romero's here as well
we have not authorized
preliminary approval since the
disk in the fifth judicial
district since that opinion in
twenty twenty came out and we've
been very judicious elsewhere in
the state of because of the
legal uncertainty with the
Attorney General opinion I'd be
very hesitant to
to to to be comfortable green
lighting any preliminary
approvals anywhere in the state
if we don't have a bill that
passes out Madam chair
representative Mr takers no of
the AG's office is in the room
but.
Are they going to order the into
the how are they going to stop
you.
From I don't want I mean I I
mean I get it but in many I
would look I mean I I I I think.
Mr chair Senator checkers I
think I think it's a fair
question right I mean if if I'm
one of these B. industry folks
Ms and well maybe if nothing
happens rule does not go through
with you will get a water lease
and let the AG sumi so will the
attorney general's office other
than their opinion.
Will they will the use of force
of lot of stop you or your
office madam chair Mister
speaker I don't know is the
short answer I don't know what
they would do we take seriously
I mean all of our legal
representation in court comes
under commission from the
Attorney General the attorney
it's can that's completely out
well so so many legal positions
we take in court the Attorney
General
can dictate and and we've had to
do a great relationship with
prior attorney general's in
terms of their differing to our
ability to litigate Water basis
I don't know what would happen
now but I did the directness of
the opinion gives me great
caught because that if there
were legal challenge to the
process either through is
specifically Sir otherwise I
don't I don't know what the
state's legal position be.
Madam chair and representative I
think that that site and I think
you're right I mean given the
opinion is is very direct.
and I do wish they were here
because I would like to hear
from them directly that in fact.
That's what they would do
madam chair and and
Representative.
so.
If the bill doesn't of a bill
does not pass there is no
process for anyone from the
biggest project in the state to
the smallest is that correct
madam chair representative.
Mr speaker madam chair I believe
that's the case.
So madam chair representative it
is
It is a bit confusing to me.
That that message perhaps was
not.
Related or maybe it was related
but it's not being heard or
maybe it's being heard but not
being listened to listened to.
Because it seems to me that if
we and this legislative session
without an agreement on a
process.
There is no process.
And therefore the offices state
engineer.
Will not will no longer engaging
the processes that you engaged
in for the past fifteen years or
so is that accurate.
Madam chair Mister speaker I
think that pretty well sums it
up.
Of.
As with anything else chair
representative I think
News.
Twelve page bill
there's always room for for
change.
I'm gonna and those questions
asked if with your permission
and gentleman asking again how
did we arrive at the.
at the seventy five acre feet
for ground water and then I
believe it's fifty fifty fee for
service water how did we arrive
at that number in this bill
madam chair and representative
madam chair Mister speaker I'll
ask Mr takers again to explain
madam chair Mister speaker
when when the you know Sanchez
gracious enough to let us try to
work on the substitute the first
our first suggestion was five
hundred acre feet because we
understood that the road a
number of of these applications
in in that range from a number
of industries the the folks
who've been who've been moving
this bill in the sponsor we're
really worried that's a big
number in a far enough our
office just kind of approves you
know lease that we shouldn't
have for that quantity it could
hurt somebody and so they said
you know a smaller number and
and then asked for us to look at
how much leases have been
approved for or applied for in
the past few years and they've
ranged from small to big but
particularly
about eighty percent across
different industries of the
lease applications we've gotten
were were about fifty Ecker
feeder seven five acre feeder or
less and it was just a let's
find a you know this I am brown
number somewhere in between that
we can agree on it wasn't it
wasn't like a precise
calculation it was it was really
a rough what do you feel
comfortable with what we think
would sustain most of the
applications that we think might
need to you'd be used to to take
vengeance process it was not a.
There's no more sort of.
Scientific arriving of the
number than that so madam chair
representative Mr checkers there
is flexibility in that number
that's what I'm here.
Up or down
madam chair and speaker to some
degree as Mr chair Chris pointed
out eighty percent of the
applications that they looked at
for the last few years fall
within this range so from my
perspective madam chair
representative it's a reasonable
number you know there's some
potential flexibility on the hot
you know raising it by a little
bit more but certainly not Madam
chair representative to the I
mean in speaker to the five
hundred range that
Has been floated.
Madam chair representative
thanks for that answer
You know it when I think of
these of these transfers.
You know I I think of the large
scale projects right that we
will roads renewable energy
projects oil gas projects
generally speaking where those
projects fall in terms of the.
The the the water request.
Madam chair madam chair Mister
speaker to date over the past
several years so oil and gas
there we've had a number of of I
don't know if that's within the
projects you're you're you're
speaking of we've had a number
of oil and gas leases for you
know in the five hundred range
there are a few that were
significantly larger than that
in fact for highways the highest
we've seen is is fifty and that
that really informed our we
really didn't want to go you
know jeopardize our ability to
continue to to build highways of
for in a renewable energy
projects the highest we've seen
in recent years was it was a
single application for a hundred
acre feet we understand from
what's been said by some of the
proponents of some of the you
know folks behind renewable
energy projects
today the that they have the.
Anticipated some additional
applications for for more than a
hundred but today the highest
it's been a hundred for
renewable energy project.
Thank you madam chair
representative of thanks for
that clarification because that
was that was going to be the
next question I was going to win
and somebody's renewable energy
projects.
in terms of and I'm sorry I'm
trying to find feature but.
Of the seventy five acre feet
limit calf Madam chair
representative that is only for
the what it would preliminary
for the lease yes
madam chair and speaker yes this
is for this is for the app
expedited ten extremely
expedited temporary lease
process there are other leasing
process these madam chair and
speaker answered that's what
you're getting at where they
have the opportunity to seek you
know to lease water and madam
chair representative of if if I
have one of these be massive
projects the I'm gonna need a
lot more than seventy five acre
feet I still go through the
regular process is that accurate
madam chair representative madam
madam chair and speaker yes
thank you to access that water
absolutely and madam chair
representative
Years ago I served on the radio
County Planning Commission
and so if you want it you know
for seventeen wanted to double
carport
He'd have to ask for a for
permission and.
Often times a carport could take
months in some cases potentially
even here because of the process
hi can anyone Nibert come in and
say I object.
It sports entire processes there
are appeals that can be made
first to the zoning hearing
examiner than to the Planning
Commission then to the county
commission and then of course
you can always go to court at
the end the whole process.
A large scale project that
requires more than seventy five
acre feet of water.
Can you walk me through.
The protest and appeal process
and and I mean I know it's hard
to just ballpark it but how long
are we looking at before.
My large scale project can axes
four hundred acre feet of water.
Madam chair Mister speaker I
assume you mean under the north
under the non expedited pressed
it all made me water it's
director general rose is here to
he might you may fail and it
really the the the crux of is
whether somebody protests and I
think that was what you're
wanting to get that if if
somebody protests
we're looking right now on
average of most of those end up
settling like most cases in
litigation due but we have our
our protest period averages
around two years wanted
protested hearings years two
years Madam chair representative
why two years it seems like a
long time
madam chair Mister speaker our
administrative hearings we we
really do take your take great
care to to make sure everybody
is is heard in these hearings we
follow all the rules of civil
procedure which is not common in
most administrative hearings and
you know so I I I don't think
that's that different than what
you'll see in this report
because it's very close to
District Court
and we we are trying everything
we can to try and shorten that
it's rich it's an unacceptable
links to us right now we're
looking at more aggressive early
eighty are
and we've staffed up
considerably in the past couple
years
but that's that's it's it's like
you'd see in a in a District
Court case where people get to
wait and see the other side's
expert reports and then we'll
take some depositions and all
files and dispositive motions
and see what happens and and
then they sit down and start
talking Madam that's and
mentorship Representative and Mr
checkers.
Who has standing to protest.
Madam chair Mister speaker so
the expanding a provision I
discussed with Representative
Nibert is is what we use for all
cases and it is water rights
owners who may be affected that
their water it might be impaired
or other persons who meet me
personally substantially
affected by the by the transfer
or
political subdivisions of the
state Madam chair representative
distributors let's hone a little
bit on on on that piece because
how do we.
I.
I have I have irrigation rates
Peers laterally case anyone is
wondering the north valley.
Under what circumstances would I
be substantially substantially
impacted would be a project.
Along the line is ditch or could
be a project done in support of
County.
So.
Madam chair Mr speaker if
there's a project downstream of
you where the move to and move
from our downstream if you.
I can't think of a real instance
where you'd be where your water
rates would be impacted the
instance the that the is it a
sec up Garcia Hernandez spoke of
today is somebody's taking a
water right from below your
point of diversion and they're
moving it to above your point of
divergence another gonna take
out water before you we look
very closely at those and you
know I want to relitigate the
past I think we we do try to
protect everybody when this when
this applications come in but
that's the kind of instance of
somebody says oh I'm I'm taking
a lottery from Sokoto and now
I'm gonna divert just above your
point of diversion very impacted
by that potentially and that's
those the kinds of things we
might want to want to protest no
not to muddy the water.
But are we.
That does it matter if it's
surface water or groundwater in
that specific example.
Madam chair Mister speaker yes
and the impairment is a
completely different concept for
surface water or groundwater
okay and can you can you.
This is a crash course in water
lines you can imagine can you
can you explain what that means
madam chair Mister speaker I'll
try so so ground water if you're
talking about a common aquifer
you're gonna have a number of
straws into the aquifer any
straws gonna be drawing down the
water in we'll call Koenig
depression and it's going to
have an effect on other.
Another wells in new and we
measure how much your well is
gonna be drawing down other
wells the effects are slower
with ground water and there they
can be more diffuse with
ground water and with ground
water
the harms that come from an over
diversion can be more easily
remedied if you're talking about
surface water and some your
surface water isn't there
gravity means it's never coming
back but with ground water we
can tell somebody next year okay
you're not using water next year
because used too much last year
and then the water levels will
come up or at least not go down
as much as they were it so with
ground water you can you can
You you you don't have is
immediate harsh effects of of a
improper diversion I guess and
madam chair of Representative so
when it comes to.
Protesting.
Large skill.
Water requests.
We're probably looking at first
of all those requests are
probably looking at using
groundwater I would imagine.
Is the standard for protesting a
groundwater requests different
than a surface water request
madam chair.
Chair Mister state speaker no
the definition of impairment is
different but it's the exact
same protest expanding
requirement for both groundwater
and surface water okay so Madam
chair representative and Mr
checkers
out of an ideological position
on water use.
I can not protest at least not
successfully.
A water lease request.
For a large scale project using
groundwater he would be very
difficult.
Madam chair Mister speaker I
would agree with that.
couple more questions and I'm
sorry Madam this has been
factory interesting how the last
twenty four hours a day as
needed
And I apologize this is probably
already spoken to earlier before
I was in the room the department
transportation madam chair
representative Mr checkers
Are the.
What's their position on this
new process your attempting to
create madam chair and speaker
we have a gentleman from the
department but they are they are
supportive they're comfortable
with what we have negotiated
madam chair and speaker okay
because I'd heard of the one did
what I did hear somebody with
transportation projects former
those he's a.
Contractor Mr chair Mr speaker
so the departures petition is in
support contractors are not as.
Helms madam chair speaker at
least one contractor that.
Got it
Madam chair and representative
Is there the it.
Eight in in your
If we do and we go back to this
because I think this is super
important would be a different
animal if.
If there is not.
A.
Legal framework that we were
working with David as we are now
it would be different right.
with this bill passes or not
under the previous regime I
guess just keep doing what
you've been doing it for fifteen
years.
and business people and others
you know developers
and what not.
Can just fall back on the prior
process.
Under this twenty general
opinion.
then chair representative Mr
checkers.
Up.
There's no process there there
just is no process.
To follow for an expedited.
please.
There's no process and I think
that's what's important to
remember here if we do nothing
there's no process I'm not sure
what we can do I'm not sure how
we can proceed with large scale
projects.
Without a process assuming your
office in the will not engage in
that process.
In the book stops with you if
you telling us that you are not
your office chair representative
Mr checkers will not engage in
that process any more because
you train general's opinion has
told you that you cannot do that
because it's legal.
Then there's no other recourse
so that they can go to the other
office of state engineer into
this in another county or
Newport St.
And that's what's critical here
You know we take a lot of up and
down votes in this committee and
in this legislature you know
sometimes things passing
sometimes they don't and you
know nobody does come back next
year.
This is one that.
I can a few we better get done
at some level.
But I have to say
I would very much appreciate
madam chair representative Mr
checkers and other experts.
more flexibility in the numbers
and I realize that maybe seventy
five is too low for some and
maybe five hundred so high for
others.
But.
We cannot.
I was on the phone with
considered here right and and
and you know she she was asking
her you know one of the bill
said you know I don't know is a
tough one.
You know and and I think they
were kind of like when it's a
tough one right this second
behind it is water like what you
mean.
So well I'm hearing for legal
renewable energy projects that
this might not be.
Appropriate for their projects.
Right.
Right so folks Representative.
Communities that.
Are very much
you know
representative of the oil and
gas industry but there's an
entire new industries in the
state and that is a renewable
industry that's what folks of my
political leanings.
To love and appreciate.
We can't.
Say that we're all in.
And then have numbers that may
not work for those folks.
That's one of things I'm
hearing.
I don't know that five hundred
is the right number I know that
seventy five is the right.
But I sure as heck hope that is
is bill moves through the
process so many most of the
process and I hope in the
process because otherwise there
is no process to get an
expedited please.
I would hope that is is is built
for the legislative process is
that we are really thinking hard
about those numbers.
Because it is very hypocritical
of us to say we're all in for
renewables and in the same
breath save but the except in
this case.
And I'm just not gonna have that
this is not appropriate.
We're either in to diversify
this economy or we're not and
yes water is live and I was the
the.
To the leaders point blank the
real crux of the problem is that
it's a limited amount of water
everywhere and that is
absolutely true.
But I want to see some
flexibility I want to see people
work on those numbers to ensure
that we have enough.
enough Lee way in an appropriate
amount of leeway for folks to be
able to develop the projects and
further more madam chair
representative and experts
you know I I I I take it your
word that the protest process.
Is.
Effective and efficient but I
gotta tell you there could be a
guy that lives five blocks away
from Representative relates
house and he can absolutely put
his court poor on hold for a
year and that's not right that's
just absurd and I would hope
that this process.
Doesn't end up in that space
because I could think of plenty
of ideological people who are
gonna say well opposes project
it's nowhere near you it's not
true impacting you yeah but you
know.
One world one love rate laid
whatever happens in Chavis
county affects me maybe it does
maybe it does and I would hate
for this process to be used in
that way
also up there madam chair
representative you take as a
very tough this.
You're still smiling after all
it's also love a challenge madam
chair this year.
Thank you madam chair thank you.
Representative pants.
Thank you madam chair madam
chair of the you know I wanted
to ask a few questions about the
timeline in the protests so.
It is.
With the protests filed I'm
looking at your flow chart
madam chair.
It how many the I don't know if
you're experts can estimate what
percentage of.
Of these applications are are
protested.
Give us one moment chair.
That.
Madam chair of the.
Representative giver take fifty
percent.
Fifty percent so so about half
of the applications within the
would would be subject to the.
Potentially two hundred fifteen
day time line.
You madam chair I and madam
chair I I really see.
I agree with the intent of the
bill
for both fleet for the both
legal reasons that the speaker
so eloquently described but also
you know for conservation and
making sure that we really do
have the appropriate amount of
water to serve purposes both in
small and large I will I'm a
little worried that this is.
Doubling the workload of the LFC
and maybe I'm missing it but it
doesn't seem like there's a
connection between the expedited
lease process in the regular
lease process that's explicitly
stated in the bill so if you had
a project madam chair madam
chair if you applied for the
expedited lease and you went
through this two hundred fifteen
days potentially you know eighty
to two hundred fifteen day
process.
And then you're granted the
lease the expedited lease for.
Two years.
However your you know your
project is going to take five
years.
and so then you you.
Maybe you can just walk me
through that because I'm just
wondering do there's nothing
here that states that an
expedited lease application is
also viewed as a lot a long term
lease application madam chair so
then would you be also at that
time or upon the end of this
process filing another
application for a longer term
lease and and you know maybe.
I I I wonder if that needs to be
addressed in the bill but madam
chair I'd love for you to sure
you I'll let Mister checkers
speak to it I I think I have an
idea and that is this is
intended to last for two years
madam chair and
madam whip and if the an
individual or entity anticipates
the need for larger amounts of
water they should begin frankly
right away over a longer period
and be thinking about a long
term lease through the normal
process of the office of the
state engineer to agree Mr chair
Chris Madam chair representative
I I I do agree there's.
There's no
Prohibition on somebody filing
for an application to be to
begin using water two years from
now or or in the future upon
upon approval for this process
the state engineers office is
going to be using the exact same
criteria likely to analyze your
longer term lease than your
short term lease as your shorter
term lease so that will give a
lot of
clarity as to
Whether whether the lease
application is is going to be
recommended you know for
approval by the water each
division and and and frankly we
think that's going to also drive
whether your your other
applications gonna be protested
people who protest who knows the
the state engineer is likely to
prove the the application anyway
Actually don't tend to protest
as much so so if everybody kind
of knows alright this was the
outcome on the expedited
it's going to be there still is
going to be need to be another
application for a longer term
lease this is going to inform
the analysis of the longer term
lease.
Madam chair and madam chair how
does that compare to the current
process which as I understood
was was one case with a
preliminary approval and then a
longer process.
Is this is this now are we now
taking this in making this and
to.
Procedural elements within the
office too K. two separate cases
for that would have previously
been considered one case from
Madam chairman of the matter
Representative it would is that
those previously under
preliminary approvals it was one
case in these would be to cases
we would have again the same
analysis done so I don't think
it's a ton of duplication of
work but there is additional
work and that's why I said at
the beginning we really need to
make this work do need to be to
be funded to do it it will be
some additional work but I don't
know of another way to allow for
a speedy move of the water that
also gives hearings to the
people who who want to be heard
without doing it this way but we
are you know we're all about
trying to reduce our workload
obviously.
Chairman chair I I just wonder
if you might want to include.
Something in here that allows an
applicant for an expedited lease
to also.
Indicate that that.
That their intention is to also
request a full lease you know
said so that it's like a two
step process with the second
step being optional rather than
two cases
because I I know the Madam chair
madam chair I know the concerns
about is the work load have been
significant I know you all have
been
extremely
overburdened and overwhelmed and
and so I just wonder if if that
might be something that would be
simple to including here.
On the front end that would say.
You're gonna do you know if you
would like to do go for a full
lease or a long term lease
That you could indicate that
So that that would be it at the
suggestion Madam chair and madam
chair madam chair and then went.
We think we could do that
what Mr take risks indicated to
me is that doable but
understanding what have to be
for the longer term less there's
a fuller exploration of the
evidence and the full procedural
requirements with that apply
madam chair so just to be clear
about how that would play out
but sure I think we could
probably come up with some
language in and come back with
the some thank you madam chair
thank thank you madam chair I I
think that would be great
because I think it just might be
an opportunity to for us to
include some efficiency on the
front end
I just one more a section to ask
about I.
The the bottom of page eleven
sections C..
Services section section six.
C..
multiple applications for
expedited.
Temporary leases that involve
the state moved to point of
diversion should be considered a
single application madam chair
madam chair just wonder what
what sort of what the reasoning
was for that I I don't.
Really have the background of
that and.
They're debating themselves
madam chair
And madam chair of Madam
Representative and this was you
Mr Benavidez at the sickest
associations and gracious to let
me fill all your questions today
he he suggested sort of the
specific construction there but
we had we agreed on the concept.
It's the the limits of the
amount of water are meaningless
if you can just file a bunch of
applications on top of each
other to do the exact same thing
and this just is meant to say if
you're filing multiple
applications to to withdraw more
water from a single well all of
those will be added up to to
meet the seventy five acre foot
limit.
I see so.
And that would be.
Madam chair madam chair so the
but with that.
Is that told basically to the
time of application or where
what's that like if if you filed
for applications over the course
of four years how how does that
how is that.
Totaled on.
Madam chair representative that
is a good question so outlook to
my experts to so I mean I would
say Madam chair representative
so we we look at these
applications when they come in
is if there's a time period
under which the water is being
exercised
we will in our records say okay
this is the sort of amount of
water that can be withdrawn from
this well at this at this given
point in time so an additional
application comes in if it's for
an overlapping period of time in
the application then that's how
we would know that it's it's
that's a that's how retracted
its community so if it's I want
to move you know from you know.
David water right into my well
for the first year and then I
want to move you know
Representative Chandler is water
right into offered in the third
year those are not
Overlapping unless that the
period in which we're seeking to
use them is is the same period
if that makes sense.
Yes Madam chair madam chair it
might be just that it just needs
a little bit of
The language there to address
that the.
That it's the same move to point
of diversion maybe the same time
period of usage see the second
part of that sentence is is
calculating the total amount of
water to be released in the
period of time of the.
Diversion but it's not it's
almost like it needs that that
piece needs to be moved out
In that same section madam
chair.
just so that it's clear that
it's.
The total amount for certain
specific period of time.
Matt madam chair and madam chair
thank you thank you for
answering those questions.
The next we have Representative
Eli.
Thank you madam chair.
For the record I don't want to
carport.
So.
and I'm actually grateful listen
this discussion I am going to
water law either I think I made
the first correct career choice.
Madam chair how many of these
splinter approvals are on
average are issued each year
Madam chair representative about
thanks committee for students
to the preliminary approvals
since two thousand I'd say one
or two a year.
Representative.
Since in two thousand twenty I'm
sorry I said two thousand since
two thousand twenty one or two
here.
Okay madam chair.
I'm a little surprised by that
answer.
If I could please chair
representative prior to twenty
twenty
when the District Court case
blocking our practice in the
traditional district came out
On on our to sort of ballpark
memories are on on average
twenty five per year maybe for
the previous year period.
Madam chair that still is a
shocking number me I the way
that this is been pitches like
this is some.
Cataclysmic event that we have
that we've got to get our arms
around.
So we're talking about two a
month roughly before the
Carlsbad decisions that correct.
Madam chair representative
that's the tail that would break
down.
Okay
of madam chair we what's the
average acre feet for one of
these PA.
If there is an average
madam chair Mister
Representative the distribution
is skewed so median and mean
every different
If.
So average the meaning is I
think about a hundred and fifty
acre feet of the median is I
believe low fifty.
Madam chair and I I got a
bachelor's degree in math and
some call me a math eight so I
understand their concern mean
and and meet in their.
Regarding the my understanding
is is one of the ways that a
preliminary approval can be
overturned is if there's a
showing of impairment is that
right.
Madam chairman Representative
that's correct.
And for many Madam chair for
these big.
water applications let's say
five hundred acre feet of water
how many of those have have been
overturned.
Because of impairment.
Because impairment correct madam
chair Mister Representative
none.
Okay.
Madam chair.
Regarding the the class of
persons that can protest at I'm
a little concerned a little
confused I think by the the
dialogue.
That was had with Representative
Nibert of manager I'd like to.
point the committee's attention
to page eight.
Of the committees of.
And I as I understand the
section we're talking about
those sort of the the guardrails
for protest thing.
Madam chair so looking at page
eight paragraph B. as in Bravo.
Really the first full sentences
underlined starting at the end
of one eight it says.
Person who objects to the
granting of an application will
be contratado th in the state.
Mr madam chair you saying that
that class of person.
Is already able to protest under
current statutory scheme.
Madam chairman Representative
correct.
Madam chair.
Is the difference though that
when it comes to.
The I guess I'm just trying
understand why is this language
inserted here is it is it with
an expedited process that
currently that close a person is
not entitled to protest in our
carbon out for them I guess I'm
just confused why this language
is here.
Madam chair Mister
Representative
that language is the same
language that is it seventy two
dash five dash five and seventy
two dash twelve dash three which
are the other major sort of
statute under which people can
apply to do something different
with their water rights and the
it.
We've always since the
conservation water within the
state or detrimental the public
welfare language was inserted in
those statutes the end of this
one we have applied that same
standing
Standard to all three it's it's
our understanding that it was a
drafting oversight when the the
words
Conservation of water within the
state and and public welfare
were added to the worries
leasing Act it should have been
and and that's on page eleven in
the middle of of page eleven
that's existing statutory
language the that the standing
language should have been added
at that time it was not it's
created litigation headaches for
a lot of parties and this will
clarify who is standing and we
think it's.
Appropriate if conservation and
public welfare are are to be
considered that it's the same
standing
criteria for for all types of
applications managers are you
saying currently I.
In current law.
This section.
The only allows for protest by
owners of of water rights and
not this this broad
conservation concern.
Madam chair Mister
Representative the.
The statute is written is is as
it's written it only in this
section refers to the owners of
water rates for standing
purposes.
The madam chair so then this
would expand it to anyone who
objects that they feel like it's
contrary to conservation water
within the state and.
So where is that Senator plied
what other types of
applications.
Madam chair Mister percent of
that standards applied in all
applications currently.
Madam chair so you're saying the
practice of the office and
engineers supply that class of
persons to grant them standing
even though the statute doesn't
provide for that.
Madam chair Mister
Representative that's correct
there's several doctrines of
statutory interpretation the
state when there's a there's a
legislative drafting oversight
it's clear from the legislative
history that that you interpret
there are certain ways you can
interpret it so that that has
been interpretation for
sometime.
Madam chair and I actually want
to ask just I know I'm not
allowed to ask Representative
students you about her line of
question was actually three by
one of the suggestions she then
I don't know that I forgot my
arms around it so if as I
understand what this will do is.
We create this expedited path if
you get to the end of that
successfully then you have to
come back if you want to have a
more permanent police you have
to come back in and do the
process over again is that is
that what this would create.
I believe what Representative of
semansky was suggesting is to
streamline it and indicate with
the initial application for the
expedited process that you
intend to seek a longer term
process through the Newton
normal process madam chair and
representative and that maybe
that could
I think I got that right the
madam chair misrepresented if
that's correct in an applicant's
today when the order sort of
expedited.
Emergency authorization for
example under different statute
parties typically up front when
they apply indicate that they
want a longer term
arrangement and and we would
certainly welcome a
clarification and and the phone
will work on that.
The madam chair and.
So I I think my concern lies in
the fact that if you if we
create this new to to pathway
process to where.
you have somebody applies for an
expedited.
The approval.
There's a protest.
They get to the end that it's
it's granted the the expedited
request is granted and they got
to start back over again.
And I understand that you said
that it typically doesn't get
protest again but
my concerns are is that they're
back again fighting that same
issue.
I think what makes more sense to
me is if you apply for a
expedited permit.
And you intend to have a more
longer term lease I think there
should be a built in presumption
is how I would cal to that if
you get to the end of that I
there is a protest the protest
was not successful.
nothing's changed about the
water right usage for the long
term.
Application that there's there's
a built in
process for presumption within
that or maybe a higher standard
that the protest or would have
to show something like that even
I think would be helpful.
but just trying to remove sort
of these artificial barriers for
folks that have proven that they
they are going to be you know be
able to put these to beneficial
use and it's not going to be
impactful to other water users.
Madam chair I.
I'm really struggling with what
we're calling the current
practices not lawful.
I understand that there is an
Attorney General opinion.
And that's what it is it doesn't
have the force of law.
Chair on that well aware of that
but it has the effect on the
state engineers office to the
extent that they will not be
issuing preliminary approvals
madam chair and Representative
madam chair.
I understand the chilling effect
that's had on the state
engineers office but it sounds
like they are actually still is
showing at least a couple here
madam chair and representative
this opinion was issued in
January of this year so
And yet I'm not sure that any of
have happened since that point
in time madam chair
representative.
Madam chair.
So do we have any kind of
official statement from the
state engineer himself on this.
Mr Chairman representative no.
Okay well again it's it's an
opinion that doesn't have the
force of law.
And then so we're we're using
that as a basis to say that we
don't currently have any
standards in place which I would
submit is not correct.
The other thing that we're
marshalling is this
District Court case.
And madam chair.
Was can you describe what the
order was that the District
Court entered to enjoying this
kind of behavior.
Pardon me I'm sorry can you
describe the order that was
entered in the in the fifth
district join this kind of
behavior yes it was in response
to a writ of mandamus so it's it
was a writ of mandamus that
issued the order and
Madam chair and in fact wasn't a
peremptory writ of mandamus.
It was an alternative writ of
mandamus I have in front of me.
Can you give me the date that it
was issued Madam I'm concerned.
I don't dance on it.
madam chair and representative
of April of twenty twenty.
Madam chair was April first of
two thousand twenty
I believe so I think I said
April twenty twenty it's close
enough I guess we could agree.
The only thing mark managers
that's April fool's day.
That's been cropping up a lot
lately to earn reserve after.
and I did read the risk I pulled
it up I look to the core file.
It's a little under two pages.
Thanks to a different location
twenty three you know kind of
different dates on the state of
okay so so madam chair you know
I I again I come back to we we
have a historic practice in the
state.
There are a lot of these that
are happening anyways even
before this court case in for
the AG's opinion.
sounds like they they rarely get
overturned because of
impairment.
And.
We have a printer chairman damos
that I would submit is very
isolated so in other words
there's there's no.
Higher court opinion that is
in joined the the granting of
these PA's is that correct.
Correct madam chair and
representative.
So.
Then a.
The here's the issue I have sort
of with what we're being
percentages were saying we've
got this dire problem that we've
got to get ahead of which I
would submit doesn't exist.
We're saying.
There's no legal clarity right
now and that's premised upon an
opinion and isolated state
District Court there's no
higher.
court decision in joining these.
And I look at that those two
things and then I listen to the
folks who stand in opposition.
I hear the renewables saying
they stand in opposition.
I hear oil and gas in the state
in opposition to the Act
industry in the stand opposition
the mining industry saying they
sent opposition and if this
doesn't strike the heart of
every New Mexicans the green
chili industry is saying.
They stand in opposition.
And so the issue that I have is
you know we as a state of made a
decision.
We're we're taking offline coal
power power plants that's fine
we've made that decision.
We're supposed to replace that
electric generation with our
renewable energy.
We haven't done that.
And now with a bill like this
it's going to make it even more
difficult to get these kind of
projects in place for
renewables.
And so what we're really going
to do is at the end of day were
driving up the cost of energy to
working class New Mexicans and I
think that at the heart of this
really what bothers me about
this bill is it's one thing if
we have room to where we can
meet the different needs we had
a different process maybe the
current process isn't working
like it should.
We put something in statute to
make that clear.
But right now we're saying
there's no process in place and
so therefore we have to create a
process but the crop the process
that we're creating with this
bill is going to increase energy
costs make renewables further
out of reach is to make life
harder for farmers and ranchers
I just don't see how this is the
right fix for what I don't even
really see as a problem so thank
you madam chair.
Thank you Representative anybody
else.
Right madam chair of go ahead.
I'm tired I was I'm curious and
I thought I wasn't sure for
prison related are curious about
the same thing that
representatives Mexicans pay
proposed which is adding in some
kind of.
I don't know if you would call
it notice that of intention to
file for permanent.
Is that.
Madam chair if I could just have
that clarified Madam chair madam
leader
What I was thinking of was
efficiency so I think it notice.
But potentially that documents
filed could be utilized in the
long term.
lease pursuit case
Or something like that in this
at I'm not my area of expertise
but I I think it would be
unfortunate if you had a if you
were an applicant and you have
to file the same documentation
twice higher the same experts
again to the state you know just
it Representative madam chair
and Representative
What I'm I'd kind of fashion in
my mind is I think maybe in the
bill itself it should allow for
that kind of thing and then
defer to the rule making that
would indicate well you can use
the same documents you know that
those kinds of things madam
chair doesn't that and
Representative Senator makes
sense to you all that's sort of
where I'm hearing some of the
this going.
I was just curious about it
madam chair because it's you
seem receptive to the idea
Representative and.
V. we're here with your experts
now and maybe they could
advise.
Us and that that's all I I was
really curious because
If we can make it more efficient
for the applicants but still
have it be
Valid and.
Comprehensive.
Thank you yes Madam chair
representative and we're willing
to we heard some feedback madam
chair on some suggestions and
that being one from with Sapan
ski and there was another one
about how to describe the
aggregation issue and we're
happy to to work on that madam
chair and bring it back probably
Friday thank you madam chair I
just have a couple comments to I
just want to echo the sort of
challenge of finding the perfect
number and what is that
thresholds and if there's no
perfect number then how do we
come to a compromise that
everyone feels at least good
about because at this point it's
not just having a process but it
is having an approved process
the everyone's in agreement with
and I think that's what we're
trying to get to today and and
beyond that you know when we're
talking about having this sort
of non process process today
that may be available or may not
be that whatever the meter
median of these types of water
leases that go out we want to
hold it accountable to the law
and I think when we're looking
at what that compromises when we
see how an improved process
comes about that we get to
delivery on this and have that
discussion so I really
appreciate you taking this hard
very challenging discussion and
it's very emotional very you
know invites all of the public
it's at everybody's are really
appreciating this on and we'll
look forward to seeing that the
revised bill thank you thank
thank you so much for the great
conversation and comments.
Next up we have Representative
that I've some earlier but I
don't know if she's still okay
good.
That
can tell you
that that's where we're more
then I'd I'd like it hot today.
I didn't think about.
We're ready to start on the.
We're house bill one thirty nine
eliminating court fees.
Thank you madam to stage force
Representative thank you madam
chair and committee as the
previous expert walked away he
said that he left the State Farm
and I said I'm glad you already
took the hot seat we're here for
whatever comes next I thank you
madam chair and committee for
building us and allowing us face
to bring back house bill one
thirty nine that you saw
previously two weeks ago
I'd like to share that today
we're here because sometimes
democracy works and compromise
can be found as I shared
previously I was the sponsor of
house bill one thirty nine I
also sponsored a complimentary
related bill house bill one
thirty eight that was a bill
endorsed by the New Mexico
sentencing commission as many of
you all familiar the sentencing
commission is a bipartisan
Commission that touches about
any money there is to touch in
state agencies and other
government bodies that have a
hand in our criminal legal
system so that includes the dust
the public defender's the
corrections department so I'm
proud that house bill one thirty
eight was endorsed by the
sentencing commission what we've
done here after a lot of trust
building and conversations and
compromise between AOC and the
supreme court and Chief Justice
bacon and the sentencing
commission is take some time to
come back in front of you all
with the committee sub that
bring several key provisions
from house bill one thirty eight
the the committee the sentencing
commission bill and merges them
with house bill one thirty nine
so as a reminder house bill one
thirty nine was feeling the
nation we were glad to get
through here we move through
House Appropriations out with
the a unanimous vote I'm really
grateful for appropriators for
realizing this important
investment that eventually will
cost millions of dollars
today I will quickly outline the
provisions from one thirty eight
that we've included here.
first of all and in this piece
they certainly continue to think
about Representative Rehm and
his call that we incentivize and
and support New Mexicans hard
who are doing something
meaningful with their time so on
page two you will see that we
are adding different
opportunities to be considered
as community service so we're
adding in job training school
attendance participation in a
social service or we have
program so frankly that could be
treatment so we're adding more
options for someone to engage in
community service as part of
working down the debt they
potentially will still be facing
with fines a secondly and we can
now look at the age.
Three four.
Here at the bottom of the same
section we are talking about the
period of confinement and we are
also talking about the rate at
which someone would work down
the debt they're facing with the
fine if they did not have the
ability to pay we're not
eliminating fines we're not
reducing the cost of fines we're
creating some accommodations for
people that don't have the
dollars to pay those debts
this can be a bit confusing
because we're talking about
minimum wage no actual cash is
exchanged we're talking about
the rate in which someone is
able to work down their debts so
previously an existing law that
right match the federal minimum
wage in our US sentencing
commission provisions we are
changing that to the state
hourly minimum wage if someone
elects to do community service
we've offered and proposed that
they will receive a rate
conversion at twice the state
minimum wage.
If someone is ordered to a
period of confinement related to
this fine what we are changing
is that instead of being
credited for eight hours of
every twenty four hours
incarcerated they will now be
work they will not be able to
reduce that debt at a twenty
four to a one to one or twenty
four hour period so we imagine
and expect this will be actually
cost savings to the counties
again if someone is going back
to jail we're going to jail
because they did not have the
capacity to pay that fine
instead of incarcerating them
for several days watching that
eight hour window get eventually
to the cost of the full fine
they will get credit just the
hourly minimum wage state
minimum wage for every hour
locked up so set of taking a
course of several days that
incarceration rate will be
shorter again just when they're
there to face their debt on
these fines then if you might
turn with me to page nine.
One more thing on the bottom at
the top of page four again this
comes from the sentencing
commission.
When we're looking at the credit
that someone would accumulate
for the state we have included
that there presentence
confinement.
And that that time served as
part of the accumulation of
credit.
On page nine we're looking at
section five and section six and
section five we are changing the
cap on how many days one might
be held in confinement for these
debts we are dropping it from
thirty days which is current law
today to fifteen days at section
six.
Excuse me we are again looking
at the twenty four hour
Right calculation and then the
fifty day in jail sometimes just
repeats because you're looking
at whether someone's there on
their sentence or their their
for production of the state.
And.
I think that is it so again
those are the highlights we're
changing how community service
works we're changing it from the
state to the federal minimum
minimum wage where including
presentence confinement and
we're changing the calculation
right for eight hours a day if
you were taken to jail to to
address this debt to twenty four
hours for the twenty four hour
is incarcerated I'll turn into
to test if they can for any
additional comments
madam chair and members I'll be
brief this is the product of
three years worth of
conversation between the
judiciary and the sentencing
commission we began fairly far
apart and so these kinds of
measures have not carried the
day in the past and I think
we've taken the best measures
from
house bill one thirty eight and
move them into one thirty nine
so that they can move forward
together they're related and in
nature and seem to be best
suited to move forward together
so we would ask your indulgence
in the committee substitute and
otherwise we're happy to answer
questions.
Representative.
Madam chair expert
Representative America's Chief
Justice start
I know previously and we talked
to the hall a little bit about
this and whether these these
funds you know these I guess the
brain injury fund all these
different things I know leisure
lane it's just maybe moving it
out a year so can get in the
budget and I know you mentioned
that to me and I wanna call
modern thing but I can you just
explain that to me again.
I want to make sure
Representative.
To
make sure that it's Madam chair
representative
After a vigorous back and forth
over tax we did clarify because
of our delayed implementation
date actually all those
advocates and ourselves is folks
that move these provisions will
be in the appropriation process
next year fighting for full
funding for those programs but
before they before the feet
funding mechanism would be
effectively eliminated madam
chair thank you that was my big
concern last time and sorry.
Thank you how you have a
reasonable mind madam chair can
have a conversation and sort it
out.
Representative please madam
chair representative in Chief
Justice you think I would know
this after this time but we're
just one one thirty it's already
aware
Madam chair representative one
thirty eight had a hearing
emergency pack it came out on a
strong vote and would have been
scheduled in this committee but
since again there was
complimentary ideas there was
also pieces that didn't need to
be repeated twice especially in
that one thirty nine does the
field limitation so we wanted to
make sure to capture the
provisions come back in front of
you with the slot that one
thirty eight might have held and
instead merge them here and I do
just need to appreciate again
the deep and extensive work of
the sentencing commission over
many years we are having this
conversation today about feel
limitation and public policy as
it relates to these debts
because of their bipartisan work
over many many years and I just
have immense gratitude for
Douglas carver Linda Freeman and
the members of the commission
for creating this opportunity
for us to be here today.
Thank you madam chair so I I
guess we don't need to mention
one thirty eight you're just
talking about it it's kind of
going away and
I am also want to.
Recognize money golf with the
sentencing with the uprising
faced project which is actually
a national movement
with a lot of a lot of states
now you know various colors so.
I I.
Really appreciative but I what I
want to reminisce for a moment
and and grace Phillips is for
your time but I carried the bill
a long time ago to have the
eight hours to and the debtor's
prison and we what we were
trying to make it twenty four
hours David and Joe Thompson was
a representative and he sat
behind me on the floor and Gary
Johnson state governor and he
was trying to amended to eight
hours because you didn't really
think it was fair for people to
get credit for when they were
sleeping I think that's what it
was and so we didn't accept the
eight hour amendments and and I
still remember representative
Thompson soon they're going.
In
keeping with the veto message
impediment and I think we ended
up with eight hours as a
compromise to be sure to get it
Of some kind I I really it's it
actually save the state is the
county so much money so it's not
about.
Being on duly
generous with folks who owe
money it's it's it's really
approaching the problem from two
ends and so I just wanted to say
I'm glad we're going to twenty
four with this madam chair thank
you thanks for all your hard
work and for giving us such a
heads up and I've got marked up
copies of this in a presheaf
thank you thank you
representative Representative of
Oakland.
Thank you madam chair and
representative to the fifth I
guess a look at page three.
And we're doing community
service and we're going to get
credited by the right.
Of the prevailing favoured even
anymore right right right Madam
chair representative yes okay
but the.
If I get myself put in jail for
this Senator community service.
I would we would survive jail
time if twenty four time.
The prevailing wage.
Senate worthwhile for me to go
to jail and.
So for example a lot of issues
the extent of the.
having to pay the fine and
driving on a revoked license
okay I would on a revoked
license carries to mandatory
three hundred dollar fine.
Provided is the hundred dollar I
I can't pay it I get picked up
because I didn't pay this fine.
I mean this there were in no
time.
Well the community service will
take forever to do it.
So explaining the rationale in
that.
Madam chair representative we
may tend to them athlete to make
sure my mask on a post it is
accurate
Been incarcerated as bit as it's
been described to me can be a
pretty traumatic experience when
I think about the parents in New
Mexico and think about what it
would mean for them to have to
secure a safe place to the leave
their little ones over that
period of time or making share
someone was there to to pick up
a kid when they got out of
school or potentially their job
obligations like going to jail
certainly as it's designed to be
is is a disruptive events in
someone's life when we do of the
basic math thinking about and
the twelve dollars an hour for
twenty four hour period that
means that every day they would
work down the debt at the rate
of about two hundred eighty
eight dollars
again that means they would have
stayed for a full twenty four
hour period in jail when we
think about whether you would
double that for community
service they would be doing
about twelve hours of community
service so again it's possible
that someone might say I'm not
trying to better myself or show
up for my community I'd rather
just go to jail for twenty four
hour period at least then we are
still saving the county dollars
instead of having that person
incarcerated for three days at a
rate of a hundred thousand
dollars a day and we have the
association counties that would
likely speak to that but instead
they're paying to keep them
incarcerated for twenty four
hour window.
Okay so.
Madam chair representative and
and I'm not opposed to the idea
please understand that I'm just
trying to figure out how it
would be convenient for me to
settle this problem okay like
you Madam fifteen dollars to
twelve dollars an hour I'll be
working approximately US twenty
four hours a Mr Representative
lake probably figure my math for
patients he's a math guy and
then the but if I go to jail.
Of the jail for eight hours or
less.
And the will to be worth the
trouble of looking me on the
same day if they give me out on
the same day.
The server for the amount of
money I know just a thought
that.
You see that thank you.
And then all of a page but if
you decide to carry out that the
because we have a follows a bid
for the questions Madam chair
representative meeting here the
page number thirty three of
seventy three that we have the
magistrate court or comportment
the.
Program at this.
So.
Now that we're not gonna have
any more reason to have a.
A report by a magistrate court
Torrance program.
We can eliminate that program
can save that money and we can
use that to be building some of
these funds.
Madam chair representative this
was part of HB one thirty nine
as it first came to the
committee but if Justice bacon
would like to intelligence and
offer response and appreciate
Madam chair representative the
warrant Fund of the number of
things it's not just chasing
down the folks that have unpaid
fees the warrant fund the war
fund is used to facilitate
course work round ups looking
for folks on a regular basis
outside of this context and so
the lord Fund itself will
continue to exist but will be
coming forward in front of the
appropriators next year us to
replace the fee funding and
pursue general fund for the
replacement funds there so it
will continue to have a very
important purpose in our
criminal justice system mmhm so
madam chair representative
justice we will still a continue
to issue been for and.
As normal.
Madam chair representative yes
we will still be trying to use
warrants to issue to encourage
compliance.
The.
It is a model of the read this
you know one of the things that
New if the judge has to make
this magistrates to.
If you K. to the for the
speeding ticket.
I could defer to provide.
But I couldn't thanks to fees.
The survey came before me I
could go ahead and tell you okay
represent the overview of the
four years sixty dollar fund for
a ninety day probation with you
will have to pay the sixty day
notice please.
So maybe.
It is almost impossible to give
somebody help if you could do
it.
So anyway thank you madam chair
thank you Representative.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Anyone else she says questions
Representative O. ring the two
of Representative madam chair
and representative thanks for
the inclusion on page two I
appreciate it you know my
problem with this is the current
system is if you will a user
fee.
And I and I do agree we're
having problems collecting the
money you know all that.
But you know what I think you
said it appropriately
appropriately next year all
those groups that their fees are
cut out we'll be fighting for
full funding.
Before appropriations and you
know the problem with that is as
our budget goes up in our budget
goes down and and I think that
it's problematic in that area.
and I agree that.
They don't have currently a
constant budget it's whatever's
collected so I see both sides of
the argument
but I have a problem that we're
going to shift the burden of
paying those fees from those who
are for for the quarter the
users to those of the public who
are not using you know in the
yes Sir some there that so you
know that still use in the court
but mostly the public's paying
for it.
Anyway that's my comment but I
mean is philosophical difference
on I've I don't know how we.
How we mitigate that
Of but anyway thank you madam
chair.
Representative.
Thank you madam chair just
briefly page two of the
committee sub.
Can I get a sense of sort of.
What we view as the purpose of
community service.
Madam chair representative
first of all if people are
facing these fines because
hopefully if this bill passes
we've eliminated the fee side of
this if they have the ability to
pay that would be option one and
the state would electors
resources
previously and including yes
tapes takes leadership in
eliminating debtors prison
we as a body seem to establish
community service as one option
for reducing that debt with the
idea that someone would go out
and their activities an hour
spent in service would be up.
Of benefit to the public in one
way or another including.
The new provisions that we've
added like job training we have
programs school attendance our
idea and the idea of the
sentencing commission that
endorsed this bill for three
years is that when we know there
are folks that whether you call
them high fliers or people that
were frequently in and out of
our committee to systems that
we.
I have often hoped and pushed
and urged people to land on a
different path so what we've
done in the inclusion of these
provisions here is to say that
New Mexico will be better.
If folks that are navigating
criminally go systems different
different convictions and posted
education fines and and and
provide connectivity to these
convictions again they have a
shot at a different kind of
safety stability and purpose in
life that are greater good will
be improved
Seems like we got off on a
philosophical tangent here but
for me that's my sense of what
the the sentencing commission
was going for including these
provisions that are about
someone working on themselves
madam chair that you love us too
but I was laying a foundation I
I confess and so
as expected in that.
Madam chair and so.
I think I struggle with one
seventeen eighteen on page two.
and I
Freshers pro strong word I I
really want to support the
elimination of fees I've been
very vocal about that.
And then but now with some of
these concepts I'm not sure I
can support this bill I think on
a personal level I think I feel
a little bit of a disappointment
about that
So.
When I read the language in line
seventeen eighteen.
School attendance for example.
What I look at the community
services you there's been a fine
imposed against you you you are
not able to afford that fine and
so then we give an alternative
for you to be able to quote
unquote pay that fine in the
sense that you do and and the
the.
The language in the underlying
statues actually time of labor.
Which I think is probably an
outdated concept but.
The idea is that you bring a
benefit to the public
And so I wonder like okay we
talk about school attendance.
If I'm already enrolled in
community college.
I get you know pop for whatever
no insurance can afford it.
This is me continuing to go to
any college satisfy this this
provision.
Madam chair representative that
question is not addressed in the
legislation but I imagine as we
look at potential rules and and
the concerns and considerations
that would come with
implementation that could be
something that was clarified
Madam chair representative so
and the the manager the reason I
ask is because look there's been
a there's been a violation of a
statute
there's a fine imposed the
defendant can't afford to
provide.
If we don't require as part of
the community service something
they're not already doing how
can we say that that's community
service right
the house that benefit the
public if what they're doing
they're getting credit for that
they're already doing.
And so I think that's my
heartburn with this the
inclusion these things I do like
the idea of incentivizing people
to go to job training to attend
school I'm not really sure what
social service means that
rehabilitation programs you know
that's another thing too is
sometimes rehabilitation
programs are ordered as part of
a sentence.
And so you know it are we
cutting that out as well and so
I don't know if the concept
needs to be.
You know something along these
lines that that the defendant is
not already participating in.
I think that may satisfy some of
my concerns but I just again if
if the point of view Services
provided then for the public
I'm not sure that this close the
loopholes to make sure that
happens so.
That's that's my main concern
thank you madam chair.
The.
You madam chair I just worry
that with the doctor
Representative related not being
able to sleep at night but I
think the.
I think it would be up to the
discretion of that judge.
To the side if going to school
is sufficient to satisfy the
fight.
Okay it's not just give an
example one of my buddies got
taken for thought if I may and I
told the judge ruling before the
judgment would with him noted no
tail light believe it or not the
fix it they'll let but the dead
still hide them I'm on that
point of the I told that judges
you know we because of the
deadly into community service
working with the DA's office
does that help well you've got
to do community service it is
somewhere for he is doing to I
work.
Hey that's up to the judge thank
you madam chair.
Thanks for that clarification
Representative Eli.
Madam at the present that the
chance to have a rebuttal again
I I look at the language in the
statute yeah maybe of maybe just
to do it but that's not what the
statute says in front of us that
some of the bill says.
Thank you Representative night
Burt.
Thank you madam chair and mine
was really on that point too I I
when I read this I was thinking
that the the judge would have
the discretion and I took
meaningful as being something in
addition but I see the point
that was made to maybe there
needs to be some clarification
we could do that on the floor I
suspect that
I agree that.
If you have a.
The.
High school student that's not
going to school.
Community service may be you
better start going to class but
if you have a good student.
You're you're not doing anything
meaningful in my opinion by
making go to class so I would
hope the judges would react that
way but.
Now that he's raised the issue I
do believe we we ought to put a
word or two in there to make
sure that legislative intent is
clarified in that regard thank
you madam chair
Representative Chasey.
Announcer the direction I'm a do
not pass on house bill one
thirty nine and a do pass on
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for house bill one
thirty nine.
We have a motion made by
Representative Chasey of a do
not pass on house.
Committee.
of house bill one thirty nine
and you pass of House Judiciary
Committee substitute for one
third house bill one thirty
nine.
Made by Representative Chasey
seconded by Representative
seconds.
To call the roll Representative
Alcon.
Representative Chasey yes.
Representative Gleim no.
Mr speaker.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert yes.
Representative reef yes.
Representative Rehm no ma'am.
Representative is a Penske yes.
Madam vice chair yes madam
chair.
Yes two five photo too many
people talking to me.
By a vote of eight to to we have
a do not pass on house bill one
thirty nine and it to pass on
the committees the house
Judiciary Committee said for we
of thirty nine I'm Terry
appreciate the time I was here
was here so that I can invite
him in for program that I'd like
to bring a neighbor Department
on self.
Thank you thank you.
I want.
It's
to fight.
we are now on house bill three
fourteen.
Representative the floors thank
you madam chair thank you
members this is house bill three
fourteen is amended this is
essentially the promise made
when we legalize recreational
cannabis on what automatic
expungement means so what we
learned through the process and
what we have basically are here
to present today is that
automatic didn't need instant
and what that is is the what
we've seen through the data is
how it we work through the data
to ensure that we can expunge
these records rightfully so for
anyone that has
Session charge that is now legal
to to eliminate these records
and so with me today's Lena
Jones with the office of the
courts and she we can talk about
some of the technicality with
that but really this is a
partnership effort with the
courts with advocates for these
types of expungement nationally
and what you have today is is
that bill we've also expunge I
think fourteen thousand records
already and those are the easy
ones of this deals with some of
the more complicated versions of
that and with that will stand
for questions madam chair okay
Mr Jones did you want anything.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee
solenodons on the general
counsel with the administrative
office of the courts when he AOC
dug into the project of
automatic expungement of these
records under this bill what we
discovered is that the provision
requiring.
Questions of records to be
expunged related to mix charge
basis really would consume the
entire effort it wasn't a simple
cases involving just cannabis
and cannabis related charges was
the tens of thousands of cases
involving mix charges that would
require a manual review and
redaction very different than
dealing with what I'll call the
simple cases only involving
cannabis charges for those
entire cases can be expunged.
This effort would take a
tremendous amount of time
involving millions of pages and
involve issues like working with
microfuge documents and I'm not
even sure how we would do that
and really would become an
extremely difficult and what we
fear to be never ending task and
that is really the genesis of
the proposal here which focuses
on what I'll call the simple
cases and being able to
completely expunge the simple
cases and provided different
pathway for the next charge
cases that would still be
administrative and would not
require an affected individual
to file a petition but to go
through an administrative free
process through the AOC.
Thank you first let's go to the
audience before we go back to
the committee is there anyone in
the audience wishing to speak in
opposition to this bill.
Is there anyone online wishing
to speak in opposition to the
bill please raise your hand.
Okay I do not see anyone raising
their hands anyone in the
audience wishing to speak in
support of the bill okay
very good if you could keep it
to about a minute and a half
that be great
chair Chandler Representative my
name's Breanna semata I'm a
justice on the New Mexico
Supreme Court and I'm asking you
to support this legislation this
is one of the top priorities for
the Supreme Court we recognize
the need to do right by these
individuals this this is no
longer a crime but we want to do
so in a meaningful and efficient
way in order to do that these
amendments need to be made so I
just ask again that you
supported and thank you for
listening thank you.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Douglas
carver deputy director The New
Mexico's sentencing commission
and with our sensing commissions
legislative committee met to
discuss this bill we still
supported a unanimous
unanimously for the reasons the
courts have put forward thank
you madam chair thank you.
I am a committee and chair I am
Diane the cash and I'm just a
mom but I really support this
bill thank you.
There's no such thing as just a
more.
You madam chair members of the
committee my name is to nollie
Wilson I'm a staff attorney at
the ACLU of New Mexico and the
ACLU stands in strong support of
this bill and thank the sponsor
and and others for for bringing
and for their efforts.
Thank you.
Good afternoon chairman members
of the committee Lucila composed
with both futures and we worked
really hard a couple of years
ago to pass expungement
occupational licensing for folks
and for those reasons we
strongly support this bill and
we ask for your vote in favour
thank you thank you.
Anyone else in the audience
wishing to speak in support.
Just go online
those wishing to speak in
support online please raise your
hand I see a ban linger.
Good afternoon madam chair
committee members my name is
been no injure I'm the executive
director of the New Mexico
cannabis chamber of commerce we
stand in strong support of this
bill on behalf of the the new
adult use cannabis industry in
the medical cannabis industry
New Mexico at the same time we
passed the enabling legislation
to legalize cannabis for adults
over twenty one the cannabis
regulation Act we passed to the
the first version of this
automatic expungement and it is
as important as the enabling
legislation in this new industry
possible and I think these are
very sensible fixes and
desperately needed to ensure
that we are no longer
criminalizing people for
nonviolent cannabis offenses
that would no longer be illegal
after the passage of the
cannabis regulation acts within
the industry stands in strong
support of this bill and we
think the Sanchez thank you
thank you anyone else online I
don't see anyone else with their
hand raised Representative read.
Thank you madam chair
representative.
So I work this expansions tough
on a contract with the district
attorney's and it was a mess so
this is my question
on page two I guess we'll just
go to page two slide seventeen
eighteen nineteen automatic
expungement applies to quarter
agency records involving only
cannabis and cannabis
paraphernalia charges requires
destruction of the records what
I noticed and the questions I
have is.
It's not really specific so it
is still a crime to possess it
over eight ounces four hundred
pounds of it for the question
becomes madam chair
representative what if I was
charged with over eight ounces
and then it was pled down to you
know announce under an ounce I
think the rest should be not
expandable the conviction may be
expensed obviously expendable so
it seems very broad and I would
very much worry especially basis
that I noticed while looking at
this madam chair representative
that went like I am federal they
would be over a hundred pounds
of marijuana in the you might
never see him in the court
system because they're going
through a federal process and
those are just some of the
issues I saw and so with this
bill I feel like it's really
brought and I guess my question
we how are you going to address
the issues were maybe a judge
wants to determine if it's over
eight ounces and was put down
whether that conviction is
expendable because I noticed he
took out kind of conviction and
arrest and just made it
automatic for everything so
those are some of my concerns
and I think we're realistic
concerns of all the district
attorneys and and also depending
on what area you lived in there
obviously madam chair and and
Representative more liberal
districts in more conservative
districts and different dust
wanted to fight different you
know different things first a
conviction so can you explain
how that would affect like
something like that in any of
the circumstances thank you
madam chair thanks for the
question and I'll defer to
Selena I'll give my top level
sort of understanding so this is
precisely what we're working
through with this bill so when
you talk about those more
complicated charges for instance
and and Selena can speak to all
of this which was intriguing to
me is that cannabis in certain
circumstances across the country
are across the state are
categorized as either controlled
substances and sometimes
cannabis so when you look at the
chart.
Urged you look at will which but
which one is it for and
sometimes the charge relates to
the actual
you know the amount of time so
you can deduce what with there
being charged for so this is
precisely what they're going
through with that fine tooth
comb to be able to identify that
record and to work through why I
love this process as well is
that if your person who really
wants this done quickly you can
contact the courts and have them
identify that record
specifically because it's sort
of in this backlog process right
now we're you're saying I I just
need to get this job I'm you
know I just I for my background
check at such a can you work
with me to make sure that this
is expands they can go and look
through it and identify that
more quick more readily and and
specifically address that and
all different Mr Jones for for
more context thank you
Representative
chair and representative if
there is any ambiguity regarding
whether it's an offense
involving cannabis that's no
longer a crime that would have
resulted in our lesser offense
under the cannabis regulation
act that is the type of the
issue that if someone were to
come to AOC would have to be
referred to I think the
traditional expungement process
involving a petition.
Okay and so dissemination Madam
chair representative.
So the normal expungement
process which I I always believe
that's the way it should the the
normal one where you can just
petition at any time I think
that that's great I mean think
that really helps but so are you
saying this bill like if you're
just to see Madam chair
representative of expert
judgment sentence that sometimes
are just not really clear you
know just paraphernalia and
possession of marijuana and
maybe this is a fourth degree
felony for over eight ounces how
are you gonna are you going to
track those as this is going to
be through the court's going to
pick this up or is just gonna be
the search that's done and this
is going to pick up cannabis and
paraphernalia and then explained
all these records when we don't
really know the amounts that we
talk about this you madam chair
and representative a huge part
of the remaining effort even if
this this bill is successful is
the research into all of those
cases and the sponsor mentioned
that ambiguity that's in some
cases some of them are clear and
the charging a charging
documents are specific about
marijuana or cannabis others are
not and also while if we're
successful we are focusing only
on those potential cases that
might only involve the
misdemeanor charges that will
not eliminate the need for us to
touch all of them and review
carefully review the charging
documents to determine what
exactly the case and all.
Okay and so madam chair
representative expert.
If the process was the district
attorney's we're going to put
those on a list and they weren't
on the
So is that not the case anymore
madam chair representative I am
not familiar with the list but
I'll let and since I'm seeing
the DPS less guy and as a
manager so my understanding and
it was going to be DPS is going
to provide this list to
everybody and every district to
go through it and then they
would highlight the cases that
they wanted to challenge and as
you know that DPS list turned
out to have the methamphetamine
on it and it was it was a
nightmare.
You know not easily that but
there were cases on that list
chair representative expert that
should have been expunged there
are also cases that had to be
really researched and you could
tell he had to say okay this
this is a case that really did
involve a hundred pounds of
marijuana with federal so you
need to challenge this is that
process still available for the
district attorney's Sir.
Madam chair representative there
was a statutory deadline for
objections to be filed that
hands this that has already
passed and madam chair
representative you're quite
right that DPS was supposed to
produce a list and there were
significant problems with that
lists that make it unworkable as
far as a starting place of all
the cases that anyone who holds
public records could then taken
work from so we've had to take
another tack and a and and so
and I end up not speaking for
any other entity but just
speaking for the court what we
have done is a deep dive into
our records and determine the
different ways and things have
been coded a little bit
differently over the years all
the different possible charges
that we will have to look at and
again some of those are clear
and that's that's the reason
that at this point we have been
able to expunge fourteen
thousand cases are some that are
very clear the simple cases that
don't don't involve mixed artist
there are others which will be
part of this manual process tens
of thousands of more actually
but we were not we will not if
we're not able to rely on a
master list that I think was
what was contemplated by the the
expansion of the criminal record
expungement Act in conjunction
with that cannabis regulation
Act right Madam chair
representative of I I think that
first the timeline was not even
doable and and so I know that
has expired but those cases as
far as that were on that DPS
listed just go away on an
expungement unless they were
very clear madam chair expert.
And and madam chair and and
Representative that's correct
and so AOC is in touch with the
districts about that process
hearing the objections and what
happened to them and just as a
as a practical matter there are
not many objections that
have survive that process but
any that do are incorporated
into the work we will do and
would not be expunged if that
was the outcome of the objection
process in the district right is
so madam chair representative
and expert I guess I would just
feel more comfortable at this
language stated something more
it on page two that I discussed
applies to quarter agency
records involving cannabis less
than an ounce you know actually
listing what is no longer a
crime because to just say
cannabis you're going to pick up
all these cases that technically
are still crime and this
language worries me that is just
so proud that you're going to
get a lot of expungement that
don't deserve to be expansion so
that's just my comment on that
so it could I interject because
Representative Nibert had to
leave but he had I think a
suggestion Representative that
was intended to address what I
think you okay getting out so on
page two line seventeen
the new language after auto
automatic expungement
expungement add under this
section any pointed out you
added that in other places but
not here I don't know if that
helps but that was something
that Representative Nyberg else
that I point now at this before
stepped out of the room.
Or three years and so on after
records at under the section
online seventeen after automatic
expansion under this section
applies to court or agency
records.
But madam chair.
And Representative expert it
does it still click here I still
don't know if it.
It differentiates a title of
this bill really you know
automatics budget involving only
cannabis the state cannabis
under one ounce yeah yeah or
under eight ounces I guess is
what it would be Madam chair
representative so on the very
first line of the bill after the
title in section one AA if a
person was charged with an
offense involving cannabis that
is no longer crimes as of June
twenty nine twenty twenty one
and then everything that follows
is just clarifying that if it's
not a crime today as of June
twenty ninth it's no longer
crime on the books.
Thank you the that a friendly
amendment suggested through by
me for Representative night for.
Receive marketers addressing
their concerns I guess some
sorry interject let me know as
all this literature that's what
I was looking for something
that's fine madam chair.
perhaps.
For the motion.
Moved it out that amendment
there is a motion to amend.
At
seven after.
And.
Thank.
By Representative.
Okay is that for that's fine
yeah.
So
FYC.
Cover it right one billion.
Every everyone will get to you.
We're just go ahead.
J. C. yes on the amendment
presented late.
Yes.
Speaker yes.
Representative.
Representative Nibert is.
Representative read yes.
Representative yes
Representative.
Representative semansky yes.
Chair yes.
Madam chair yes.
We have
to.
You did come in the.
All.
Okay anyone else.
The chairman of Representative
last year I brought up that
you know we're going to sponge
the.
You can't take care of the FBI
records or a person that applies
for.
The state there have.
C. but that.
Why does is still in existence.
Background checks and one of the
things that I was worried about
is we sent a letter to
this to.
The
That you know if you're point
were sensitive job this still
could be discover I was just
wondering have your addresses
that issue well madam chair
representative we're still
advocating this at a national
level
To do schedule a cannabis as a
schedule one drug but that's
unfortunately out of our purview
for this bill for this bill
we're we destroy the record it
only pertains to add background
check for firearm we
unfortunately it's out of our
jurisdiction to to go there
however we're still advocating
for the best the federal level.
Any other questions.
You make a motion.
It would you pass second.
Thanks for the details on house
bill three fourteen as amended
made by Representative Chasey
second by Representative al cone
would you call the roll please
Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane yes.
Mr speaker yes.
Representative McQueen.
Representative Nibert.
Representative read yes.
Representative green yes ma'am.
Representatives of us yes madam
vice chair yes madam chair yes.
Senator.
Reporter.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair thank you
members of.
Good afternoon committee members
I'm here to just provide you all
with a substitute.
Madam chair I move house
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House solution eight.
For discussion purposes.
I number two two five seven two
six point three.
Sure the substitute is pretty
straightforward we removed
language that could later on be
done in and
What's it called I forgot the
name enabling statute yeah thank
you and so it pretty much just
the concern conceptually
everything is still there from
what I presented before we just
stripped down language that we
felt not necessary.
Okay.
Correct and there's no specifics
on commission like who should be
appointed things like that.
we heard this bill before I
train from public comment at
this point
discussion of the bill by the
committee.
Chair with a perforated move a
do not pass on how this.
Resolution eight forty two
thousand House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
our solution eight.
and I just want to thank the
sponsor for I think really
taking the time madam chair to
to look at this through the lens
of what will exist in the
constitution I do believe that
the prior language was too
detailed and in many ways took
away the ability of the
Legislature to to make up you
know to to to to really design
what this will look like so I
appreciate the the Sanchez
flexibility thank you Mr thank
you to have a second for the
second.
So we have a motion of do not
pass house joint resolution
eight but I do pass of House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House joint resolution eight
further discussion.
I don't see any further
discussion holy cow
We call the roll Representative
Alcon.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Chasey Casey yes.
Representative Lane.
No.
Mr speaker.
Yes.
Representative McQueen.
Where is Representative Romero.
I think you want to go present.
Representative night where.
Representative reef.
Representative brief overview no
ma'am.
Representative Sapan skate yes.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Yes.
Hey vote of sixty three we have
a do not pass on H. T. R. eight
and do pass committees
substitute for eight days.
H. state arts.
I think it was dying table yes
honestly.
Yes.
Okay thank you Representative
right madam chair thank you
representative Representative.
Thank you.
Yes we did.
I don't remember I would be with
the lord I will let you know
that tells you something that
you should ask me make your
amendment for you.
I have one okay Representative
lane house bill three fifty
seven.
Thank you madam chair with me at
the the presenters tables on
raven expert from LFC and madam
chair I believe there's a
committee sub that's being
passed around.
Someone want to move this up for
discussion so madam chair.
Okay.
Representative you have a four
thank you madam chair so madam
chair what the committee sub
does for house bill three fifty
seven is really what we're doing
is we're creating three separate
funds and each one is is
designed to tackle some vacancy
and recruitment issues are
having right now really across
the the public safety secretary
of New Mexico so there's one
fund that deals with police
there's one fund that deals with
public attorney's meeting
prosecutors and public defenders
and then there's a third funds
for detention and corrections
officers.
There's thirty six and a half
million in.
The current version of house
bill two that's contingent on
passing of HB three fifty seven.
and and really what this does is
it just meant allows us is the
legislature as the appropriators
to have
some guardrails in terms of how
these dollars are to be
allocated for recruitment and
retention
and we've been intentional out
trying to prevent poaching so to
speak between cross agencies and
and putting effort on recruiting
new
candidates in out of state
candidates as well to these
three areas of public safety so
the idea is let's try to
incentivize and grow these from
within
and so madam chair with that I I
stand for any questions.
Okay questions.
Yes Sir those wishing to speak
in opposition this bill please
raise your hand.
In the audience okay those
wishing online to speak in
opposition to the bill please
raise your hand.
No one those wishing to speak in
support of the bill please raise
your hand.
Okay.
we will start over here Sir.
And madam chair members of the
committee of one major deal
Wagner New Mexico state police.
And I stand in support of the
bill and will welcome any
legislation or ideas to retain
police officers are.
Retain police officers and get
new ones thank you thank you.
Back here I think we have some
Hans Graeser.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee and grace Phillips
general counsel for New Mexico
counties we are experiencing a
staffing crisis in our jails
more than half of our detention
facilities have a vacancy rate
of over twenty percent we have
County detention facilities with
staff vacancy rates of over
thirty forty fifty and in one
case over sixty percent
we really need this this help
and support for us to as the
state police officer mentioned
recruit new detention officers
and keep them and we're very
grateful for the sponsors for
including us in this legislation
and this is a priority of New
Mexico counties.
Right.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee Jason Weaks
registered lobbyists from
Bernalillo county we stand in
strong support of this bill we
have major staffing issues at
the metropolitan detention
center we are running at about a
fifty percent vacancy rate on an
ongoing the jail is not full but
we cannot staff
sufficiently to meet the
relevant demand it quite frankly
create some dangers in terms of
just handling the relevant folks
in the building as well as
transporting to the courts and
it affects the kind of cascades
down throughout the entirety of
the criminal justice system we
think that this is a good
measure part of probably a
broader package that needs to be
implemented to really start
trying to address some of these
critical shortages in terms of
folks being able to be Rick Rick
recruited to and then retain for
longer periods of time so that
we can meet the relevance
staffing demands and provide a
safe environment for those that
are detainer facility thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is been about
in the chief public defender I
really appreciate Sanchez bring
this bill and including public
attorneys in its including the
public defender's office is you
know recruitment retention is
very important for us
I do know to ask you to note
that the public defender is here
at four forty five so let's
somebody's here from AODA
perhaps an amendment to take all
of their money and give it to
the public defender's office
would be in order what we get
here to.
Sort of.
Thank you anyone else in the
audience wishing to speak in
support.
Those online wishing to speak in
support I see Henry V..
Yes thank you madam chair.
Henry Valdez with administrative
office.
there he was he staying at home
them.
And since we are here I think we
should get the public defender's
money.
But.
Seriously.
Thank the sponsors and the LESC
for working with the
disparities on this issue
throughout the interim we
appreciate a consideration for
the district attorney's this is
the number one problem facing
all district attorney's office
and that is the recruitment and
retention of qualified attorneys
thank you thank you.
Representative any concluding
comments before go to the
committee no thank you venture
thank you any Representative
Alcon.
Thank you thank you madam chair
on this front to get this
straight remind this is the law
enforcement and public attorney
Phil you Mike for us to do to to
not food Matt madam chair thank
you Representative so the the
original bill that is correct
the committee solve that was
moved as a third funded at the
end.
So madam chair.
It seems like.
In house labor we heard a
symbol of real like this this
last night or I don't remember
plan and make sure life
that covered the officers of my
correct.
and.
A manager I think we were having
a lovely conversation return to
work no no no that was before
that okay then I don't have to
work with awful.
That is here but I I don't know
why I thought that we had a
separate bill that was covered
needed to the officers unfit
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative.
I thank you madam chair and Mr
leader
I think this is great that you
are establishing this fund
I know there have been times
where we've had opportunities
for federal grants and and know
where well positioned to receive
those funds
to distribute them throughout
the law enforcement community I.
maybe to think about for the
floor and page five you have
specified that DFA can take
fifty thousand dollars madam
chair and representative every
five years to be expanded it
just seems like we're will be
back here in ten years changing
that amount
I think that it may be covered.
On page two twenty thirteen
through nineteen because you
allowed DFA to expand Fund
administrative costs necessary
including evaluating the
efficacy
maybe you could just put
you looking at work load.
In that
And and and and I think just so
that's just a suggestion madam
chair and
Madam actually I think it's a
good suggestions and it I know
that was going on page five but
there's some language for all
three funds throughout the bill
so no I think it's a and that's
something you know I.
Stated again so we can maybe
amended your page I fall to
let's start with two folks are
so I think I think I'm page two.
One moment madam chair I think
I'm and.
I think a page two one
seventeen.
after officers officers before
the semicolon you could add
Workload.
And workload studies and
workload studies.
you madam chair this is so this
is a substitute teacher the
committee substitute.
If you can steps to.
Thank you.
You can see that we just we just
announced Institute was as of
now that was a real does the
bill itself I think it's at your
discretion madam chair okay well
I don't want to hold this bill
of.
That out because of the
appropriation I'm happy to mark
them up young and and implement
those changes so on page that's
on page two on page five.
If you don't mind I want to make
sure everything is correctly
where we added on page five
Representative Eli.
And I think I'm page five than
we would be.
The leader it agrees at that we
would strike section three.
Madam I think we we want to just
make sure that we have the
studies and make sure that we
don't need to update this
criteria from time to time
that's the sort of the the
intent behind that paragraph.
I'm Fred for strict interpreter
for lose that the value of of
those reports.
Madam chair leader I guess the
alternative would be to strike.
It up to fifty thousand dollars
and replace with.
Administrative costs.
Something like that so madam
chair maybe to the department of
finance ministration.
And then instead of up to fifty
thousand put.
and amount to.
To.
Be expended in consultation with
committee for work with studies
and I think that still be bound
by the three percent cap.
Get more come.
Yeah.
That's really just striking and.
Well as I thought I heard more
words come out of his mouth and
mouth the phone I just want the
next sentence he was reading
chair he was reluctance.
To the Department.
Administration.
And amount okay.
Every five fiscal years so it's
going to re okay so we would be
adding two words online striking
up to fifty thousand dollars.
Can add a an amount.
That's on line twelve.
Yes.
And then I think we need to read
do the same amendment on.
Page eleven.
So it would be inserting.
And workload studies.
So and workload studies before
the semicolon online nineteen.
Nineteen.
Page eleven nine nineteen right
before the semicolon okay
concerns.
Folks.
And we're yeah you take out the
hands after defenders.
yep public defenders comma.
Yes madam chair I think it's I
think public defenders and
prosecutors a sort of a.
Collective noun in that sentence
madam chair and.
Alright we'll just leave it.
Yeah I agree okay.
And then page fourteen.
Winds eighteen and nineteen we
would be striking up to fifty
thousand dollars in putting an
amount.
We go in.
Up to fifty thousand.
I'm getting a little concerned
that we're getting just as we
have to do it one more time to
shop additionally you madam
chair of the third I I would
recommend that we bring it back
as a supplement can pass it out.
Or madam chair if the leader.
Thank you for amendment.
I think you have.
Well it's not like a debate.
So you know.
Madam I think if if the
representative okay with that
approach of the floor amendment
because it's it's a pretty minor
correction and it doesn't change
the substance of the bill yeah I
I guess I I guess if the speaker
is okay with that.
Okay with that.
Thank you run the for.
I I think that okay thank you Mr
can I carry it from one.
No definitely not okay all
right.
Chair yes ma'am I'm I presented
it to be a force of then because
I hate sending it over.
One minute where you've got the
floor in several spots on the
fact I I would feel better doing
here but if you want to do.
Reported out before Friday.
And I believe we're not doing
for subs Pfleger.
As a general practice.
Well we've certainly done in the
past Senator me a fine point so
that I can withdraw the
suggestion also I I really don't
want to hold up the bill okay.
Fair enough I
so I hear that there is no
motion to amend.
All right.
From half.
What.
Yes Representative outcomes I
think we can do a floor
amendment frankly so that the
procreation if we can fix it on
the radio appropriations it's
already been to appropriations
would backwards no no we haven't
stopped just to prepare for the
feel of this bill hello I'm
sorry I thought it had been two
appropriation okay but there's
no excuse me there's money in
the budget for it excellent okay
very good Maez.
Initiatives okay to I move the
to pass on House Judiciary
Committee sub for House Bill
three fifty seven.
The
move a do not pass on house bill
three fifty seven and to pass on
house Judiciary Committee sensor
for House Bill three fifty
seven.
So we have a do not pass on
house bill three fifty seven a
do pass of House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill three fifty seven made by a
vice chair Romero and seconded
by Representative night Burt
but Representative of Corona.
Representative Chasey yes.
Representative Lane yes Mr
speaker.
Representative McLean yes.
Representative night where yes.
Representative read yes.
Representative Rehm.
Representative Penske yes.
Madam vice chair yes.
Madam chair yes five nine zero
we have a.
As a musician.
The.
Thank you madam chair.
To
Motor vehicle code subrogation
rights.
We can get through this.
Yes it's house bill three
seventeen.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
We're running against the clock
so are okay so be brief.
I don't know how familiar
everyone is or is not with the
predation.
but this bill essentially has
two parts first of all this is
my expert witness this is David
rings a trial attorney out of
Albuquerque New Mexico and what
this bill does the first part
is.
It clears up some muddy water in
the law about.
Service providers and how they
pay out when they're awarded
damages after an an accident so
you get injured in an auto
accident if you go to a
chiropractor let's say for
services.
And that chiropractor.
Does not necessarily get paid
until you get paid and what this
does is it just clears up the
language that.
When you pay out to your
attorney for getting you damages
awarded that the chiropractor
would pay out a proportional
amount and help you cover your
lawyers fees so most lawyers pay
third charge a third of the fees
and this would just clear the
language that that chiropractor
or service provider would also
take a one third reduction and
money that they're awarded which
is what hospitals and doctors
already do there is we've seen a
slowing in payment.
In those cases because service
providers have made the argument
that they don't have to reduce
and that's causing a coming up
of the works in the courts and
this would just clear up the
language that service providers
all service providers would pay
a third and also
provides that the service
providers can file a lien to
guarantee payment when damages
are awarded that they did not
have the ability to do before
and the second part of the bill.
Deals with uninsured motorists
accidents.
And that clears up sorry I'm
just a couple of my documents as
a present.
And that clears up that
insurance companies when they
bring a subrogation.
lawsuit the it just clears up
that they have to prove their
case that most insurance
companies already do do this but
some insurance companies have
gone to file suit against the
uninsured motorist and said that
we don't have to prove that the
accident happens the way our
clients said all we have to
prove his insurance company is
that we awarded damages and this
would eliminate that thank.
The money paid the money yes
that they yes that they pay the
money to the client and this
just says that beyond proving
that you paid money to your
client you do have to prove your
case the reason why I'm bringing
this bill forward is because a
client another client sees me a
constituent of mine was directly
affected and to help explain the
bill in greater detail I'll
actually if you'll allow me let
no not sure we need to go there
okay maybe we could go to the
audience because I'll be
questions about the bill and
that will cause you for that
will give us an opportunity to
do that so I'd like to go to the
audience anyone wishing to speak
in opposition to the bill please
raise your hand and.
Thank you madam chair and Conway
and registered lobbyists for the
State Farm insurance and don't
stand so much in opposition to
this bill as just to express
concerns that we have with the
language in the bill that is
rest and I've spoken with a
sponsor and Mr ringing after the
last hearing but very briefly
are concerns here as I
understand it the first part of
the bill is designed to
basically codified a common law
common funds doctrine which
provides that when a plaintiff's
attorney obtain some money on
behalf of his client and some of
that money goes to health care
providers that those health care
providers pay their pro rata
share we don't have anything any
problem at all with that but
we're concerned that we're
giving new lean rights to cease
providers and are concerns that
that will slow down the
settlement process that we do
with our all the insurers
they're involved with an
uninsured motorist or then the
liability situation secondly on
the second page the definition
of service provider is very very
broad it says.
is rendered
provides care to an individual
injures and so you can be a
family member who would have
permission now to file a claim
under the only.
I looked for other statutes that
have more type definitions and
the only one that was kind of on
point was in the workers
compensation.
Where they declines health care
providers more strictly so that
they are.
Recognized licensed health care
providers would finally with
respect to the last section of
the bill
I think that the provisions.
Beginning on page eight section
the new section do clarify
existing law.
but I will leave that to.
Just to this committee I think
that something wrong the Supreme
Court has in the past indicated
that they don't want the
legislature to be doing
procedure or rules but I think
that's just codifying exact.
existing off and then finally
section ET on page nine.
That seems to be designed to
prevent and ensure from seeking
subrogation if the if the party
to cause the accident.
Has only the minimum liability
limits which are twenty five
thousand dollars and I suspect
the reason for that is is is
that if the plaintiffs attorney
has gone to the effort of
obtaining an award.
Then and there's only twenty
five thousand available that the
insurer for who has paid should
be able to get subrogation
rights on that through this
committee to decide I'm just
concerned were concerned that
that could be read to be a
broader that you couldn't seek
subrogation so long as they have
minimum limits but it might
include if they had more than
the men's.
That's the language in line
eight.
so those are just concerns and
questions we don't oppose the
protections Sanchez trying to to
get thank you.
Anyone else in the audience
wishing to speak in opposition.
Anyone online wishing to speak
in opposition.
Anyone in the audience wishing
to speak in support of the bill.
Anyone online wishing to speak
in support of the bill okay
So I guess before we could go on
the committee have you spoken to
miss Conway about the language
and have you been able to come
to some agreement about what
might clarify I'm.
I after speaking with miss
Conway and my experts I don't
believe that any changes needed
to be made it is true that the
definition of service providers
broad and yes if a family member
provided service to a patient
and wanted to
Like and then was expected to be
paid for that service then they
would be able to file a claim if
they felt it necessary.
That I think has a better
explanation I I can briefly
explain her concerns the the
concern about the a family
member of providing services
they would have to be a service
provider of sometimes we that we
encounter that situation you
know you can't just impute
minimum wage or whatever to a
family members care we do a lot
of things his family members for
sick family members and we do it
for free what we're talking
about a service providers and
anyone from a counselor to a
chiropractor except a others
management and the duty
especially at the face of Madam
as far as we're concerned that
it would
Gum up settlement from the
insurance side the insurance
side doesn't handle settling
with the service providers the
personal injury lawyers to.
if there's a lien filed than
that obviously we're already in
court we're not in the
settlement face that is also
dealt with that's negotiated by
plaintiff's counsel what our
problem has been historically is
a service providers don't know
many of the chiropractors many
the counselors many of the
therapist wide range of
therapists they don't have the
same experts running their files
that the hospitals to the
universal system Presbyterians
had
basically what this does is
clarify in statute so that we
don't have to go to court and
don't have to go to the Supreme
Court to clarify the common fund
doctrine
that the common fund doctrine
does apply equally to all
service providers not just
hospitals
and historically this is
something that has been done
with a lot of providers but some
providers don't do it that is
part of medical subrogation the
second part of the bill is
uninsured motors subrogation.
the uninsured motorist
subrogation portion this bill
has to do with the nature of
subrogation claims being brought
in District Court it is not a
procedural rule the right to
trial by jury versus trial and
equity things that nature are
statutory.
And that's why we're amending
those particular statutes about
subrogation uninsured motorist I
realize that this is really dry
and I want to answer all your
questions I realize we have very
limited time madam chair and
committee members for got to say
that the beginning.
Pope you excuse me
but if.
You know if there were other
concerns that
were dressed we address those
before the C. pack Committee of
the same issues of language as
far as the definition of person
we do have an amendment I
believe on the to clarify the
definition person with the I
don't have an amendment okay for
we but if there was one that was
willing to be offered okay I
it's not an issue that was
another concern that was brought
up was the definition of person
in the bill but I am it's just
the legal definition of person
in statute but if we wanted to
amend that to include that
language I'd be amenable to that
amendment.
Not madam chair I'd be happy to
make a motion on the language
okay I do have a.
The definition of percent.
if you give me a moment and if
there's questions and all all
find it more you're looking that
Madam chair representative I
just want to.
Clarify that the other concern
that was brought up in section
II.
Just as a driver who causes an
accident can't be sued at the
other person's insurance pays
more money under uninsured
motors because motorists
coverage and that's really all
that sectioning.
Like to I can explain that
scenario if you background which
looks where where were you
Representative Representative
where were you talking about
putting in a member.
Madam chair after the last
through section one subset of
paragraphs State for a page to.
Just.
Chair the definition
That would be entered into this
portion of the bill would be for
that to clarify with the word
person means.
So the letter D. yeah I
C..
Since the do but after letters
please.
The letter D. person quote
unquote.
Means natural persons comma
corporations comma companies.
Comma trusts come of
partnerships comma associations
comma cooperative associations
comma and any other legal entity
so it's the the legal definition
of persons and other forms the
statute just to clarify what we
mean in the statute
so if that's friendly well.
The firm and the little hard to
follow I thought we were gonna
talk about a word or two it
sounds like a whole foods the
account it would just be ins of
sorry madam chair Representative
that would be a friendly
amendment if you're willing to
do it on the fly it's just an
insertion of the legal
definition of the term person
and then you are going to be
proposing an amendment.
Yes I a
you know truthfully I'd really
rather combat for the real
amendment you know that's right
now so we I didn't have an
additional amendments that I was
proposing.
Just your.
That you've got
time to process on the person.
I what what we're what we're
hearing here is no it's really
an amendment on the fly because
there seems to be some need for
cleanup to make it all
consistent throughout the bill
that's what I just heard
Representative nine but say it
is okay yes I withdraw my okay
it does need for the cleaning so
I think we're going to have to
have a.
In a minute I thought I'd
recommend Representative thing
back committees of that has to
be the way you want to okay
thank you.
The person's.
Service
center Representative Nibert you
are correct that if we are
adding the definition for the
term person that would need to
be.
in front of subsection C. so I
will make sure okay sauce
dollars oh sorry.
Yes please madam chair
Representative I think if you're
going to be doing a
Committees you probably ought to
look at service provider and
address some of those concerns
because that's exactly what I.
have down the.
If I think there's a problem
there you probably want to type
in that definition up.
Because I've read it differently
than your council those and also
we're not gonna have a debate
about this will.
You have my recommendation is
representative you talked to
Representative Nighbor in the.
Dress code samples issues but
you're right you.
I don't the store floor session
started we're gonna send this
back and okay.
K..
Will will repair your bill thank
you madam chair thank you
members of the committee
chairman will of get with
Representative Nibert on
concerns thank you thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative.
Is the floor session started
would be happy to try to get
bills
nine quick.
Yeah sure.
We clear the decks for today and
that would be a good thing.
We're on house bill three thirty
four.
Thank you madam chair.
For my expertise major Travis
can with New Mexico state police
department and in the interest
of time I'm going to tell a very
short story and then open it up
for questions.
This fall I was traveling to
Denver I was behind a vehicle
that vehicle was passing an
eighteen Wheeler I was behind on
my was beginning to pass the
eighteen Wheeler when the
eighteen Wheeler lockdown.
When I got to the front of the
eighteen Wheeler I saw one there
was a car that had a blow out
that was in the.
The outside drive line of
disabled the car in front of me
got by and I got my the truck
had space to get behind me and
get by so there's no problem but
I
In touch with the chief Tim
Johnson New Mexico state police
told him is that mile marker for
on line disable car in the
North bound lane of our twenty
five few miles south of spring
or.
On my way back to rules will few
days later
chief Johnson called me and gave
me the rest of the story Paul
Harvey fashion.
Brussels story was that he did
have a unit responded that the
disabled vehicle but.
The police officer had to spend
significant time.
With their hazard lights on so
other vehicles would not the
impact that disabled car.
And I civil why is that he said
well we can't we can't touch the
vehicles they had to wait
several hours for tow truck to
show up and remove the vehicle.
There are a bill all so madam
chair before use house bill
three thirty four Senator
Neville what it says is that the
department transportation and
the any police agency of the
state that would include
sheriffs and local police.
Can remove the vehicle from the
drive line of a road or highway.
To allow.
Traffic to continue to move on
that drive line.
It also limits liability so when
the police vehicle moves that
the other vehicle were not
responsible for the damage that
may be caused by moving it
and so that's the guts of the
bill we have a lot of Colorado
studies on the issue of traffic
impairment things you'll note in
the FIR that originally the
department of transportation was
concerned about it but in the
prior committee
the secretary stood up and said
that they now supported and I
believe he'll do the same today
so with that we stand for
questions.
Okay let's go to the audience
Briefly.
Those wishing to speak in
opposition please raise your
hand.
Those online wishing to speak in
opposition raise your hand those
wishing to speak in support
please raise your hand.
She she thank you madam chair
members of the committee Rick
pretty executive director for
the department transportation
and we are in support of this
bill we want to thank the
sponsor for bringing four thank
you madam chair great thank you.
Representative McQueen and
Representative Chasey.
Madam chair representative
Nibert so when they're moving
the vehicle they're just king
behind in the cruiser and
fishing in the other way is that
so understood I would I would
say there are
For police vehicles equipped
with the
The bumper to to do that maybe a
chain may be pushing will
manually
Pushing it off the road whatever
we can do to get out the drive
line because the ideas you do
not want the motoring traffic to
come up on on one of these
vehicles and and get involved in
another accident and there's a
lot of studies to about the
these types of accidents that
occur with debris or
disable cars in in the in the
highway or in the drive lanes
anyway.
Madam chair representative
everywhere we're just talking
about cars that has a flat tire
and you can
Easier method to remove the car
from the from the roadway it
seems like you should probably
pursue that first.
All I can say madam chair
representative is the the driver
of that vehicle off to get it
off of the drive way.
When they can't in this car was
substantially disable and they
could not move it it would have
been nice if the.
Officer responding to that could
just pushed it off and.
Made sure that there was not an
event that would happen in the
hour and a half that it took for
the tow truck to get there of
the the if they had costs and
damage the the department as I
understand it now their policy
is not to touch those vehicles
for fear that they would be sued
for the damage that may result
from there moving and that to me
is unfortunate because we are
allowing a.
A potential hazard to exist
longer than it needs to exist.
It's safer if we move it off the
roadway.
Thank you madam chair.
You madam chair.
Representative Nibert I I see
what you're purposes and I don't
disagree I'm a little concerned
about whether the NATO probably
rules would have to be
promulgated but whether the
driver is able to give
permission to the law
enforcement to do it and if the
driver isn't in any shape to
give permission then.
We're freeing the law
enforcement from the liability.
Where we're as they don't have
they're not free from the
liabilities in other
circumstances and so it I'm
concerned about that seems to me
that there has to be.
Something about
Permission from the owner of
that vehicle to move it it's in
our analysis sure about the
major analysis because I was
just
I was just going there but it
seems to me that.
As it is it's not quite
complete.
Madam chair representative right
I I think the rules should be
promulgated that would.
Have them have the person who's
attending to that vehicle that's
the hopefully the owner or
someone authorized to drive that
vehicle to sign a release.
But there are instances where
those vehicles are in the drive
line and they are not occupied.
Somebody is is walking down the
highway or been picked up for to
go get help or whatever and in
my mind it's more important for
the public to have that vehicle
off the roadway even if it
causes I would say substantial
damage to that vehicle maybe
it's an in park and and
the the vehicles locked up you
got to put a chain and tow it
maybe that runs a transmission
but to me it's more important
for our state police of the
highway department to get the
vehicle off of that drive line
then to have a potential
accident that could be
catastrophic and and you know
I've come across some of those
situations and wonder why they
left the car there but I'd
never.
It was never in my mind that our
police in the state for the
highway Department would not.
Move that vehicle if they came
upon it
and they're not big because of
the liability issues so this is
just trying to address they move
the vehicle they should be
liable for getting that
vehicle off the roadway so madam
chair it I I don't maybe I'm
misunderstanding the analysis
but it seems to me there right
now they have that ability maybe
they don't do it maybe that's
not their policy that they have
that ability and they're not
free of liabilities if they
damage the car they're
definitely not free of liability
they are liable right I think
that's why maybe the the the
majority can can talk about
their internal policies but
they're not moving those
vehicles are waiting for tow
trucks to come and move the
vehicle because okay don't feel
like they can do that under our
current situation so if you have
anything that.
Madam chair representative New
Mexico code one eight dash three
dash twelve dash one four allows
law enforcement to request the
tow truck to move that from the
road the purpose of the
authority of removal is to
remove inoperable disabled
vehicles that are in the road
creating media hazard to the
motoring public the the intent
of doing this is a nationally
trained standard in the with the
goal again to free and open
highly this is ultimately going
to create secondary collisions
keeper firsters respond our
state again the curriculum that
is used it's a trained again
federally adopted standard but
it's the intent is not to simply
push a car that has a flat tire
anything like that it's to free
the roadway so that there's not
back ups resulting in secondary
collisions and and again the the
the primary focus is to to be
able to get our motoring traffic
going down the highway.
Internet completely understand
and agree with you I'm just
worried about the policy of
limited immunity and
That's that's my concern.
I saw a few hands but I had a
feeling Representative
suggested.
Development.
Is that what you've been working
on now the question.
Another question let's first L.
Representative.
Sorry thank you madam chair
under furious about one thing
not with that this legislation.
And state police discussed not
move that vehicle.
R. the state police or the state
liable the case of the happens
and they don't remove the
vehicle.
Madam chair and Representative I
don't think that that in action
That would simply make them
liable I I do think that their
job right now is to.
Do exactly what they did on I.
twenty five that day and that is
to put their lights on get
behind the vehicle for some
distance and to wait for the tow
truck to arrive whether that's
ten minutes or an hour and a
half later.
Madam understand that thank you
I think it's a great idea
because of hi we make travel I.
forty all day long.
And.
It could tell you how important
love is that there's that much
like I said my question is
basically we get this lie in and
for some reason or another state
state police just flies by
indefinite bother doing anything
with that disabled vehicle on
the road and something happens
now somebody going to turn
around and say Hey you were
supposed to do that half of the
did do it and now we're going to
sue you.
For lack of a better word.
The law.
The long poses liability when
you take no action
it's pretty rare if ever that
that occurs for the.
Some plaintiff's lawyer can
probably suits for anything but
I don't I don't know that in
action really live there is a
lot of lawyers out there madam
chair thank you.
Of rain.
Their second second okay
Representative Representative
McQueen had another question for
the phone to mentors and that
we're
Based on your story based on
what you presented
yeah this but.
It's not just law enforcement
it's department transportation
ploy it's not just construction
traffic it's proper highway
maintenance this bill would
literally allow you to a snow
plow to simply allow the cars
off the highway street view.
I think it's too broad there's
nothing in here about that the
officers use the phrase
immediate hazard.
There's no standard of hazard or
safety for urgency or anything.
Is any vehicle.
The truck in the roadway can be
pushed off and then talk.
At.
Appreciate what again but I
think it needs for the refund.
Representative right Nibert I
have a sense the there's going
to be a number of us who want
some you know additional work.
I don't know if this if you're
willing to withdraw your motion
but I have a feeling
mail pass if you if we take the
vote at this point so well in
the if there's some language the
that would time it up from I
mean there's some other laws in
other states that provide for
this and and there's of our
right of things but
The.
Your snowplow simple.
In fact this no plans apples
probably a good example because
often times you the snow plow
can't see.
That the cars even more can you
write it gets put first away but
is it more important.
To society to have obstructions
on the road or to allow the
state if you will to get that
roadways are cleared and and I
would say public policy should
demander should should provide
for the roadways to be cleared
and and the state should not be
liable for somebody abandoning
the vehicle in the roadway.
Madam chair representative I'm
very I think it's more nuanced
than that I think there's
balancing of facts and Services
circumstances.
Yeah yeah I mean if it's not
close doesn't see a vehicle
that's one thing the step of the
way.
I mean have they even check to
see if anyone's inside the
vehicle for just
in order to I think there needs
to be some.
Some safety listening in that
language is.
Find your I put some gross
negligence type standard is that
something that you would like to
see or or.
Negligence standard on what type
of standard would you be.
Wanting from the from the aspect
of the employee who is.
Engaged in that activity.
Madam chair representative
Nibert I I don't think it's a
negligence standard I think it's
a safety determination
if the
The.
Think about whether we should
include including two team ploys
and not just law enforcement you
know if
this is created in the media
safety hazard I mean I have to
work in the language but I mean
the the situation you describe
where you the vehicle that
stopped it's it's clearly
causing a hazard maybe it maybe
you know it's difficult to see
if it in busy traffic by all
means the I think safety demand
to get the vehicle off the road.
But put something like that that
given the circumstances.
Encountered by a law enforcement
officer it's warranted yeah then
push it out through.
But just it in at that the I
think about it.
Context as percent to see point
man suggests that.
This word we're probably going
to be needing to get to the
floor and it.
I will be happy to work with
Representative I believe
Representative has some thoughts
as well I was just going to
suggest same sort of safety
precautionary list it can be
exemptions for when you wouldn't
do it and the preemption as to
why would you know just a
clarification as to what rules
need to be.
Promulgated for that for the
reasons that you're talking
about because if there is and
then also on the road is it in
the middle of the road as and
like halfway I mean how much how
much effort are we talking about
I think for some of these very
nuanced questions and what
discretion we're giving to to
have that discussion
Representative.
Okay.
Of the two.
Hello madam chair and all the
committee what I want to just
let's talk for a moment about
the vehicles traveling eighty
miles an hour on the interstate
it's due in a hundred seventeen
feet every second so if the
person looks down at their phone
or whatever to second stir two
hundred fifty feet and once
someone swerves you know
particularly if they go off the
road there's a high probability
they're going to roll okay and
that was so let's talk we were
talking about language and I
think that's what Representative
Chasey one sorry about that was
one of the things in the
analysis which is sorry.
Which you might want to look at
is the language of
Department of transportation
about.
Dr ladies something to use their
language if you you've got that
committee analysis right
I think that backed off of that
but okay all right thanks very
have abandoned them the in the
last committee they said he said
something about their lawyers
went a little over four percent
of that fact of so I I
disregarded the DOT analysis
based on that last meeting.
Well if they're standard
language that gives it you know.
What's on the road went off the
road in might be helpful to have
that too for for D. O. T. it's a
lot different than for everybody
else that they view the road a
lot differently than we've years
of
All right we're gonna roll your
bill sorry but I sounded like
there was a lot of consternation
that was drafted.
Thank you thank you one of the
