For me all the roll call the
roll okay thank you
Representative Representative
Alcon do.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane.
Mr speaker.
Representative McLean.
Representative night very.
Representative reeve here
Representative green here
Representative ski here.
Madam vice chair here.
Madam chair.
We have here.
Okay thank you madam chair
The folks we work Saturday send
me up to the draft inflation
everything we finally came up
with something what we did is on
page twelve we added a
definition for creating that way
that entered everything at all
the question today the committee
had a.
During the last discussion.
Thanks to the big twelve eight
seventeen for there the
definition is added to the bill.
So.
Yet paragraph C. unders section
two.
Any members wishing to ask
questions about that specific
item.
Any opposition to the proposed
change and I think we need to
move the substitute.
We'll get to that
Okay.
Okay.
For the motion yes please
Senator move ahead do not pass
on house bill one of five in the
half fund House Judiciary
Committee substitute for house
bill one of five.
The second second.
Any discussion for the
discussion.
We so would you call the roll
please Representative Alcon yes.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane.
Mr speaker.
Representative McQueen.
Representative Nibert.
Representative reeve yes.
Representative green the loan
through.
The suicide no he said no.
Representative the Penske yes.
Madam vice chair just.
Madam chair yes.
Five of five to when we have a
do not pass on house bill one of
five and we have a two passed on
committee substitute for house
bill one oh five.
Thank you thank you madam chair
thank you thank you.
Thank you.
We.
We are now on house bill forty.
this bill was before us I don't
know a week or so ago and we had
some suggestions in terms of
helping to clarify and make of
the bill a little bit better so
the floor is yours chairwoman
thank you madam chair and
members of the committee felt
there were some concerns about
whether officers would have
connectivity in certain parts of
the state so we actually had if
practicable in their but we
moved it up to be closer to to
where it needed to be so we did
that point to where in okay so
on that's on page one line
thirteen
just yet if practicable yes and
then on page two line seven we
added dementia after behavioral
health disorder on page three
line one again we added if
practicable Page three line I
delete if practicable.
And then page five line twenty
two
the same.
up features that gap page five
my twenty two we inserted
dementia there.
And then we change the date from
January to July.
And that's on page nine line
twenty four strike January and
insert July.
Madam chair while you're looking
I learned something from Council
services because I had asked
them to say including but not
limited to and they basically
said we don't do that so so the
others of you don't make the
same mistake don't ask them to
do it.
Thank you.
Okay.
Do we have motion for discussion
purposes to to consider them
Representative Rehm second by.
Representative Romero so any
questions about the proposed
amendment.
The.
The F. of two oh two number is
Representative two two four
eight three six point two.
I'll give everybody a few
minutes to.
Look at.
We have a motion to adopt the
amendment to have a second
second second by Representative
of ram made by Representative
dot com.
Any further discussion on the
amendment.
Its coal yes Representative
right did you want to talk about
the managed care and of
Representative I'm trying to put
in requests and Policy John what
will give you mentor to but.
So one of the concerns that were
brought up that you could have a
situation where MCI cease down
so with practical another one
was you may not have to monitor
one that run a license check and
therefore you know you're
stopping the vehicle you're not
runny did we take care of that
that that's included madam chair
in the if practicable if it's an
emergency and they're shooting I
you're not expected to checked
that drivers like a checked the
license plate yeah and madam
chair and representative I
remember that Representative
Chasey was saying you may want
to put.
If you want a sticker in the
back window you can get it or we
can address that are we're not
talking madam chair and
Representative Rehm I heard loud
and clear from the disability
community they do not want that
if someone else wants to do
another bill to do that that's
fine but I'm respecting what
they've told me understand thank
you madam chair.
You representative.
Anyone else wishing to.
Okay so that we have a motion to
adopt the amendment is there any
opposition to adopting
amendment.
I see no opposition so we have
an amended house bill forty
any further discussion on house
bill forty as amended.
Okay yes I'd like to comment to
pass with a motion to four do
pass by Representative Romero as
amended and seconded by
Representative Alcon.
I see no further discussion.
Let's call the roll on this one
Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane.
Mr speaker.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert.
Representative greed yes.
Representative green yes ma'am.
Representative semansky yes.
Madam vice chair yes.
Madam chair yes.
Seven two zero two thousand.
For thank you madam chair
members of the committee.
And we did fast.
We are on house bill two oh five
meat inspection.
Thank you madam chair this is
the first time I've ever been in
front of Judiciary so.
Yes I'm hoping I'm hoping thank
you madam chair
I'd like to introduce my
expert witness Dr Hanisch
the house bill two or five
addresses the statutory
authority that is required by
the United States department of
agricultural food and safety
inspection services for New
Mexico to have an approved meat
and poultry inspection and this
will allow this process to move
forward.
Plain and simple thank you
Representative did you have
wanted to direct but want to say
anything that thank you thank
you madam chair members of
Representative the only thing I
would add is it dispatched the
statutes that you're looking at
have to be equal to what USDA
FSIS has in place right now in
the basically mirrors of what F.
as I just has every other state
in the country that has a state
meat inspection program has
something similar to this.
Thank you.
And with that madam chair this
is a just one little additional
thing to add is this is the the
first step in several steps in
moving this forward so this is
not the final time the.
You would see us here so this is
just a the first step of it so
with that miss and miss Mrs
chairman we stand for questions
thank you Representative well
let's first go to the audience
anyone wishing to speak in
opposition to the bill.
Right let's go on line if
there's anyone online wishing to
speak in opposition to the bill
please raise your hand.
Courtesy one hand raise.
Choice Gillian or Gillian Joyce.
Are you in opposition to the
bill ms Joyce.
All of these I'm in support okay
all of all right will be going
to the live audience will come
back to you thank you so anyone
wishing in the audience to speak
in support of the bill please
raise your hand okay
we'll go down it looks like all
of you are on the left my left
side so Representative Ezzell.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you all very
much for considering this bill
as a rancher and supporting all
ranchers and farmers throughout
the the state of New Mexico this
bill is beneficial it will also
create jobs right now we do have
to send our beef out of state to
be processed before because
that.
Dannemeyer you we have one of
processing plant that is
governed by USDA and they are.
They can process six different
varieties of me we are working
hard and diligently to get these
mates into our schools in
Georgia and this is for a
hospice.
We are home to I can't remember
how many thousands and thousands
of thousands of cattle in the
state of New Mexico that is
probably from that.
Why are we doing this there's a
waiting list if you want to have
the very process.
For your consumption it takes a
wait list of probably six months
committee of the process madam
chair working in New Mexico
State University we have
implemented the needs cutting
class so to do that to to
feature people have process.
Those are the jobs that will
remain free stated.
That I do with all.
It will be opposed to all thank
you very much thank you
Representative I think there
were some some gentleman behind.
No okay and then there's this
woman in the black man in the
red so.
Madam chair representative thank
you so much so we want to thanks
to school partly Representative
sells well the for sponsoring
Bill and to the left for New
Mexico department agriculture
I'm here representing Mexico
because Policy Council.
But this organizations and
agencies working together on
process issues we think this is
such an important huge step yes
Representative Ezzell just
stated of forced open new
markets and and further
expanding markets like schools
senior centers or day care
centers right now those are
schools and schools senior
centers across the state with
implement funding from the state
right now can use up to forty
percent of that funding to
purchase the Mexico need that's
born raised and processed in
state this will give us a huge
way up and we look forward to
support thank you thank you.
yes miss.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Taylor
reckons on behalf of New Mexico
oil growers encounters we stand
in support of HB so I for the
reasons previously stated the me
inspection act need support so
that we can get
rural part promulgated and funds
are available and we support the
program being set up and manage
five star Ford
this afternoon hoping for be
remains in state and provides
Mexicans with locally sourced
protein efficient confident and
feeding our families thank you
thank you anyone else which is
in the audience wishing to speak
in support yes.
Madam chair members of the
administration times and I'm
here on behalf of New Mexico
veterinary medical association
they wanted to send a statement
of the general support for the
bill I really appreciate
Representative Armstrong
Representative Ezzell and their
work on this and for other
proponents on the matter they
both stated the positives much
better than I probably could in
this area of specialty but these
funds in their support thank you
all for taking up and to do pass
thank you for.
Thank you anyone else wishing to
speak in support of the bill in
the audience all right so let's
go to the online participants
those of you wishing to speak in
support please raise your hand
all right Gillian Joyce.
Gillian.
Madam chair and.
Representative thank you for the
opportunity to speak my name is
Gillian choice I'm representing
rocky mountain farmers union
we're very excited to see this
legislation we believe this is
going to dramatically increase
the ability of our ranchers and
producers and in New Mexico to
get their product to market in
New Mexico we are in a really
dire situation with access to
processing in our state as
stated previously and that this
bill will will really help
address that issue and allow due
process is to come online and
allow more New Mexico grown and
finished beef to get on to the
tables of New Mexicans thank you
for your consideration I'm
excited to see this bill pass
thank you anyone else online
wishing to speak in support.
I don't see anyone else with
their hand race let's go back to
the Sanchez and anything else
you'd like to add before we go
to the committee no ma'am that's
all we stand for questions right
thank you Representative
McQueen.
Thank you madam chair Madam
chair representative Armstrong
can you explain the NMED's role
in this in this bill in this
process.
thank you madam chair I'll defer
to my expert witness.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair
Representative McQueen
Representative there it is
department of the environment
and the department health are
listed in this and they're here
and as an advisory as advisors
meaning that that that F. R.
inspectors are in a plant and
they see something that is not
right that that is out of our
purview or that we may not have
the expertise in then we
certainly want to be able to
call in the department of of the
environment or the department of
health to to use their expertise
in in forming an opinion as to
whether we need to to have some
sort of action or or there okay
to deal with this mainly on the
with the department health it's
the things as water and sewage
where their expertise lies so.
Madam chair representative
expert
So this this falls under their
jurisdiction because they have
food inspection jurisdiction
sorry.
Madam chair Representative
McQueen representatives that
right now they they do have some
food inspection yes because and
they will continue to have some
we will not be inspecting
anything on on on state that the
grocery store and if things the
restaurant aspect of it we will
be on the from the slaughter
plant to the processing plant
once it leaves there we won't
have anything to do with it
however the environment
department is involved with
again things like that water
sewage that that type of stuff
some of the sanitary issues same
thing that they're already doing
right now.
So madam chair and an expert
there jurisdiction is sort of
like what comes out the pipe
from the plant is that because
of that kind of thing.
I mean is it conditions inside
the plant or is it the emissions
from the point.
Madam chair representative most
likely there will be some
overlap there as far as some of
the things that they do and I
have talked to environment.
And and we have discussed some
of the potential overlaps and we
feel that we can work through
and and you that is needed so
that we don't have inspectors in
the plants all the time
Actually getting out of out of
the producers and processors
way.
It madam chair and that's for
the reason I ask you Sir so
we're feedback
is.
It's me.
It is to.
the reason I ask is is is what I
think of livestock when I think
of slaughter when I think of
processing I think of and then
DA.
The the NMED so.
Does NMDOH is not engage in
those are certain activities or
over is there an argument to be
made that this would.
I understand like what you get
to grocery stores different
situation but.
Terms of slaughter and
processing.
Would that be a inappropriate
role for an MBA.
Madam chair and Representative
McQueen Representative NMED it
will I'm sorry NMDA
will certainly part playing
advisor but they're mainly on
the marketing side it New Mexico
is a little different if we went
to other states their department
of agriculture's our our our
that this program falls under
the the department of
agriculture.
In B. D. generally in New Mexico
we are a little different being
that we have a livestock board
not all states have that and and
because of our our law
enforcement capability things
like that it seems to be a
better fit with in New Mexico I
stop work.
The madam chair Sir thanks for
that the.
Part of the reason I'm curious
about this is I know when I go
and buy gas there's a sticker on
the gas pump certifying the
accuracy of the pump from an
NDA.
Like why are they doing that and
not this.
Go head to head madam chair
Representative McQueen and
representatives.
This is the way that it was
handed down last year the year
before the three years that this
bill was heard when the it was
basically given to the livestock
board.
To go forward with it so from a
historical standpoint I would
have to go back and look at the
literature to see why that was
done in by the decisions were
made in that fashion.
In Madam causal off topic but
you have any idea why in the
committee to weights and
measures measures for a gas
pumps.
You madam chair and and had
hidden in Representative clean
and and and I I actually I can't
that that to standard throughout
the country you look at the
department of ag and and and and
other states and they have a
standards and consumer services
division and and they do weights
and measures so of the manager
seems like the seems like this
if you could swap but.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative Romero.
Thank you madam chair thanks for
bringing this bill forward
I I'm really interested in how
this gets executed on the
consumer side mostly you know I
used to have my own kids at.
Osher transient there was a huge
dearth of of being able to
process anywhere and so I'm
really excited for this although
the logistics or something I'm
really interested in in looking
at so when we look at part of
like the lifestyle and the
definition of meat versus
livestock this would not affect
exotic meats like yak things
that we see currently process in
New Mexico already today is that
correct madam chair
representative.
The madam chair yes okay so in
order to
see that the livestock board
would come on board madam chair
representative is only for these
these this the livestock that's
listed here is that correct
madam chair representative yes
chair so so when we look at some
current facilities that already
exist and I know it takes a lot
for them to get up and running
and an on board the current
practice madam chair
representative is for the FSIS
folks to come in and there's a
fee for that and then they can
get under way as soon as they
know that the facility is is
sound at a federal level Madam
chair representative so we're
we're kind of deciding that the
state should be in charge of is
it both of a the facility and
the inspection is it just the
inspection can we just described
how that process works federal
versus what we're proposing here
with what this which each is
responsible for now madam chair
I would defer to doctor Hanisch
for that thanks thank you madam
chair madam vice chair for
representatives
excellent question in in there
will be.
Different levels of inspection
and I would like to start with
the slaughter inspection
because that that.
If if if there is a slaughter
plant that uses for state
inspection we will have somebody
there from the times of the
animal show up to the time
everything is completed.
That will be done by by state
inspector if they are it's a
processing plant then we will
have somebody in that plant at
least one today that they are
operating they don't have to be
there twenty four seven but it
will be under state inspection
it will not be under both
federal and state the difference
being is that if they choose for
state inspection the originally
when we get this up and rolling
it will be for intra state sales
only there are some other sales
other levels that we can.
Obtain if if the producers
interested but but initially
will be for intrastate only
thank you madam chair thank you
representative of that that that
really helps me understand this
because I know there's been such
a.
Challenge with the fact that
what is it I've the statistics
seventy five eighty percent of
our meat now goes out of state
in order to come back is that
what I recall.
At least in the ballpark of the
challenge that we're trying to
meet today so that makes a lot
of sense and it we don't have in
this bill madam chair
representative what the fees are
for that because I know there's
a challenge right now with
getting the license of federal
inspector on site for some of
these processing
Just to give the go ahead and to
be on site for the start of the
operation is there an
understanding of what farmers
are folks will be expected to
pay to bring these folks to
their facilities how does that
relationship work madam chair
person I would defer to drive
him madam chair and vice chair
representatives the only fee
that we would be looking at now
would be a licensing fee or
permit fee and and according to
rules and rags the maximum that
would be a hundred dollars.
and then and then the rest is is
on is on us to provide the
service is that madam chair
Representative per of feet per
plate fee for service every time
they come out.
And
chair Madam baster
representatives now that is
their their permit fee and that
and that will be determined by
the board by the New Mexico
livestock board
as far as how that that gets
under the amount and madam chair
representative just so I'm clear
the the livestock borders
licensed by our LD to function
are they their own entity just
so I'm understanding.
There that madam chair their
their own entity okay so Madam
chair representative on the
licensing fees and permitting
fees who regulates how that gets
instituted.
To madam chair manufactured
Representative I understand your
question the the New Mexico
livestock board would with
promulgate that and rules it
would come up with the the the.
Licence fee basically and we
would go out and inspect the the
the processing plant the
slaughter plant to make sure
that it meets all of the
standards that of their
documents and in place the
critical control points are
identified their surveillance
recordkeeping so on and so forth
so madam chair representative
since it's not under the RLD's
purview is there any sort of
check or balance other than is
there like a reporting mechanism
anything that we would know as a
legislative body how the
inspection act is performing how
the fees are being assessed on
how you know essentially this
program works and since it's an
independent body that doesn't
fall under that umbrella my
concern is that we just want to
know what's how it's performing
madam chair representative.
Madam chair madam vice chair
representative yes it to two
ways one one is when the this
would be included in the budget
livestock board and budgetary
reports the data there stand up
and also annually.
We will be audited by FSIS and
so they they they will come in
and financial accountability is
one of the components that we
have to prove to them.
And lastly when the program is
up and running we will be able
to get up to fifty percent of
the cost of the program from
USDA.
Madam chair representative where
is that in the bill.
Madam chairman veteran vice
chair representative so that
that portion is not in the bill.
Okay statutory authority and and
madam chair Representative one
of the things this is just a
certain proponent of I believe
nine steps this is the first
step of nine okay thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative just want to make
sure that we built in those
guard rails for the program and
so that the legislature does get
to hear back about how it goes
from step one to nine and so I'm
just interested in and how that
gets seen through considering
how broad diss and and how
important it is to keep the
whole process state so I really
appreciate the responses and
would love to stay into are you
sponsoring online bills.
Representative madam chair you
darn right okay.
well I hope they continue to
come through Judiciary so we can
have a look at what the
guardrails look like but I'm
really grateful to see us moving
in this direction and being able
to certify food on our on our
own our own volition and and to
get the process thank you madam
chair.
Representative semansky.
Thank you madam chair I just I
just had a COVID IBM wanted to
thank you Representative and and
your expert for bringing this
bill forward I can recall
spending a large meeting of
agricultural stakeholders back
in two thousand sixteen madam
chair representative and this
was the number one kind of
actionable requests they had two
requests since that time one was
for a.
Value added food lab value added
ag food lab.
and the second request was this
in here we are seven years later
on step one of nine so that's
been really a long journey but I
just applaud your
persistence with it because I do
think it's going to make a huge
difference for.
The producers in the state
and certainly for our own local
economies and local you so so I
just wanted to thank the
sponsors thank you madam chair
thank you.
Anyone else with questions or
comments okay I have a couple
questions I just want to get
this straight in my head if I
can so right now the federal
government is doing all meat
inspection in the state that's
both interstate and intrastate
meets.
Yes then assistant okay.
And this would create our own
entity within the state that
would perform a similar function
I got yes ma'am do we have staff
are we going to be able to get
staff to perform those
functions.
Yes madam chair okay.
Okay so
This is one of nine a parent you
know kind of things that need to
be done to stand up the whole
organization is that what I
basically reducing nine correct
yes yes madam chair okay so this
is just saying they the agency
has the authority livestock
board.
Are you planning on promulgating
regulations that will implement
the program yes thank you madam
chair he if you'd like Dr has
could explain yeah I love it I
just I'm sorry I'm trying to get
the big picture is I wasn't
around in twenty sixteen.
I was around but I wasn't here
so if you could help me with
Madam chair representative yes
as a matter of fact the
livestock board has been very
forward thinking on this and
they have already in in in
conjunction with FSIS they've
adopted most what's called the
nine CFR for rules and rags so
so they've been very very
progressive in doing so course
we we need to statutory
authority to go forward with it
but but they are in place so
that we four with that of just a
few clarify the in place or are
they ready to be in place once
you're given the authority to
issue the rules and you're
talking to a lawyer so I'm
probably being hyper technical
so bear with me it's just my the
way my brain works you madam
chair and Representative you're
talking to a veterinarian you
have to have somebody behind
the.
Really good with dogs.
They did have a rules hearing
and and they did they did pass
these these these rules and
regulations right there's an
individual behind you
to enlighten us you might want
to come up and introduce
yourself ma'am and take the
Mike.
Thank you.
Okay thank you madam chair of
members of the committee I'm
Belinda garland I'm the
executive director of the New
Mexico livestock board there is
statutory authority that allows
the New Mexico livestock or to
promulgate the rules which was
done in July they are in place
they are effective so that was a
four thanking movement on the
board but we still need the
statutory authority according to
the FSIS that's why we're
bringing this bill to you okay
yes all right well thank you for
that clarification that I I
don't think I have any other
questions at this point I
appreciate you representative
Armstrong bring this for it it
seems apparent to me that
there's a lot of demand for this
and it will help our our
citizens and people in the state
who are working in agriculture
so happy to support your bill
thank you madam chair I would
just say we would love New
Mexicans feeding New Mexicans.
All right and Representative
bencher moved the passage
between five the second book of
moved by Representative of land
second by Representative Nighbor
any further discussion all
rightly so to call the roll
please Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane yes.
Representative looking yes.
Representative Nibert yes.
Representative we yes.
Representative Rehm.
Representative semansky yes.
Madam vice chair yes and I think
the ostriches should be added to
the to.
What you're out of order by
chair.
Yes.
By a vote of nine to zero we
have to pass on house bill two I
thank you very much thank you
madam chair you're right I like
being in from your committee.
However not always this nice
Representative McQueen on my
first bill ever yes.
Great thank you.
In the definition.
Ostriches we are now on house
bill ninety controllable
electronic records and I'm
certain it's going to be the
most interesting bill on our
agenda.
That is the most interesting
bill I've given to the.
Madam chair he's cutting off
debate.
Of order to.
Yours Representative I thank you
madam chair Greg Nibert the
district fifty nine and a
uniform law commissioners as is
our madam chair.
I bring for you house bill
ninety.
This bill is.
An effort to update the uniform
commercial code.
And to my left is my expert
witness Mr Jack Burton with the
roadie law firm.
Which has offices in at least
Albuquerque and Santa Fe
probably elsewhere all
but we we bring before you
at important piece of
legislation because the uniform
commercial code.
Serves as a basis for.
Most if not all transactions
that occur within the state with
respect to goods negotiable
instruments sales and other
things.
And it's the cornerstone of of
Law.
With respect to economic
activity so it's important at
this legislation be kept up to
date.
And with the advent of.
Technology and new forms of
money new forms of of
Move the money from one place to
another
We have to update the uniform
commercial code to keep track of
that.
It would be my intention not to
go through this bill unless the
committee has some specific
questions but to tell you that
the uniform commercial code the
uniform law commission develop
this legislation of we're
bringing it to New Mexico
there's a group of of
commissioners from New Mexico of
which the the chair and I serve
as well as senator serve on days
and Senator Baca.
There are other members of the
commission that are in the
building included roll to roll
Burciaga and Philip we're good
day
and then there are a number of
commissioners from who used to
be in the building but are no
longer here including former
house speaker Ramon Sanchez
Senator Cisco miss or make
sorely
Memorial we've a lot off Paula
Tackett who used to be the head
of Legislative Council Service
and then an attorney here in
town by the name of Serra
Bennett
in so this bill has been vetted
by the New Mexico group and is
one of several bills that they
have requests get advanced in
this legislative session I
happen to be the messenger.
With that madam chair less by
expert has anything to say we
stand for questions.
So please be on the bar exam.
Madam chair there will be
significant portions of this on
the bar exam including secure
transactions.
And negotiable instruments.
My vice chair is out of control.
Moving to path.
We might we might want to see if
anybody wants to be in favor
well we can take the motion and
the conversation so do pass by
Representative Romero and a
second by Representative Eli is
there any discussion.
Any questions.
Any interest.
All right I.
Representative opened.
Thank you madam chair to take
that.
Thank three three here in my
And the so my understanding is
this to the forum law commission
of which both the U. R. members
met sometime this year.
And L. all of you with the all
of the wording in this
legislation and agreed to send
it forward for a the passage.
Madam chair representative that
may be an overstatement
The the bill itself.
For uniformed law commission
spans generally several years of
time developing the uniform laws
and normally what what happens
is there is a law professor that
is usually the the reporter.
There are.
Volunteer members from various
interested
Professions that will
participate in that process and
it's generally a multi year
process that gives vetted both
among the committee members but
alternately gets vetted among
all the commissioners from
throughout the fifty states plus
the territories in this
particular legislation was
approved I believe in
Philadelphia this past summer.
And all the commissioners had an
opportunity to hear from the
committee.
To engage the committee with
respect to the changes that were
made and then vote on whether to
approve this for initiatives to
whatever states wish to pick it
up this particular
Act the uniform commercial code.
I don't know if we have a
hundred percent of the states
that have adopted the uniform
commercial code but certainly.
Ninety plus percent of the
states have adopted the uniform
commercial code and as I stated
it's the it's important that we
have identical rules between the
states as to how to handle these
types of transactions so this
bill.
I can't say that every
commissioner went through it in
line by line I can tell you
I've.
Since our office handed to me I
I have read it I can't tell you
that I fully understand the all
the changes are it's lot of the
uniform commercial code is B. on
my practice.
the health law school classes
that teach portions of the
uniform commercial code
including secure transaction
sales and and and other things
negotiable instruments
but keeping this piece of law up
to date is
is necessary and it is also
something that I think
is sorely needed because.
Economic transactions have.
Been.
Moving at a pace greater than
we've ever seen before with the
advent of of computers with the
advent of these other forms of
money with the advent of
basically going paperless so
this needs to be updated so that
we can accommodate electronic
records electronic forms of of
communication electronic
transactions.
It would be unlikely if can.
Thank you madam chair I just
wanted to vent to note the first
bill that are signed by the
governor was one of these bills.
This will happen that the the
Majority Leader discovery
there's opportunity here but we
were Mr Burton you're carrying
this bill.
That always a governor's this I
still don't know what I've pass.
Do it thank you madam chair
that's all I have.
I should at least ask is there
anyone in the audience wishing
to speak in opposition to this
bill is there anyone in the
audience wishing to speak in
favor of the bill is here
there's no one online so you
cleared the deck in terms of
electronic participants.
All right I just wanna make sure
I went through that just to be
consistent with how we handle
our bills.
Thank you any other commenter
questions from our members.
So just to be clear
The uniform commercial cold code
has been in place for decades
really and I thought probably
was one of the early uniform
laws if I'm guessing
first all of us here who went to
law school had the opportunity
to take a class and it it's a
really hard class.
I took a class in it it's
interesting but it's very
technical and as is evident by
the chief in the suggested
changes it's a very technical
thing and people specialize
often in this area of the law so
what we're doing as I understand
it Representative is taking what
we already have on the books in
updating and pursuant to the
advice of the uniform law
commission that met in
Philadelphia and July that is
correct all right here okay any
other comments or questions.
I think we're ready to call the
roll hello do we have a motion
from lane and Romero okay so
ready to call the roll
Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey.
Yes.
Speaker.
Yes.
That.
Yes Representative read.
Representative Rehm yes.
Representative semansky yes.
Madam vice chair yes madam chair
yes.
Earlier in two thousand.
Madam chair I might mention that
the unfortunately there's three
other bills of similar length
that are headed this way one was
passed out of government this
morning is headed this way and
then there's a uniform limited
liability company act that is
about a third thinker but here
and there will be hopefully
headed this way in the upcoming
weeks okay thank you very much
Representative thank you Mr
Burton thank you thank you.
Right we're making great
progress today.
Shocking yeah we're on house
bill one sixty nine.
All right we are on house bill
one sixty nine disclosure of it
of ethics complaints
Representative Sapan ski thank
you madam chair.
I'm.
I'm very pleased to bring before
you house bill one sixty nine
which addresses the inner
legislative ethics committee
process.
What we are doing is updating
this budget this section of
statute to address
constitutional issues and to
make the process more fair.
current law regarding complaints
filed with the interim
legislative ethics committee
prohibits the complainant the
committee and its staff from
disclosing any information after
finding of probable costs
however you're probably notices
you review the law the
respondent has no such
prohibition.
So I'm bringing this bill is to
ensure that our interim process
is as fair and equitable as
possible and also to ensure that
these policies don't run afoul
of our constitutional right to
free speech.
I would encourage you all as
you're thinking about these
complaints not just to think of
to think about all of the
parties involved for example in
my role as a staff person
previously I had to bring
forward a complaint due to the
policy requiring me to be a
mandatory reporter.
that complaint did not involve
me who was not actions that I
it experience but as a result of
this policy as I debated and
agonized over this decision to
bring forward this complaint and
look at the policy I could not.
talk about it as I went through
that process with anyone either
at because I was a complaint.
so I'd like to.
Introduced
my expert witnesses.
And actually before I do that I
just want to say there's a
couple of technical updates in
the language so you'll see if
you strike throughs here and
there that's just drafting style
updates.
the major changes page three
line let us and I'd like to
introduce my expert witnesses
first I have money on and I am.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee I am
money and that and I am a and
I'm here today in my personal
capacity as somebody who's been
through this process before and
just for full disclosure I'm
also registered lobbyists with
rain which the national sexual
assault hotline I'm I want to
thank the committee and honestly
entire legislative body for
being willing to listen to folks
and survivors have been through
this process before as you
update and change laws and make
it better for the next folks who
are going through and as we know
at victims of sexual violence
and violence generally need
access to resources to heal and
if this gag order is currently
has no limit and so as a person
is going through well I cannot
speak to my own personal
experience with it victims
generally don't know whether or
not they can talk to counselors
whether or not you know that
when their family asked what's
going on whether they can share
it with that they can talk to
friends and so I just really
appreciate you taking the small
step to help make this process
better for folks.
and secondly I have with me
Matthew back his in Albuquerque
attorney knowledgeable about
constitutional.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee
I've been practicing law for a
little bit over ten years I have
a very very practice but over
that time with the stand aside
from a stint at the US
attorney's office I've been a
cooperating attorney with the
ACLU and practice and first
amendment rights particularly
free speech free exercise
I took secure transactions Law
School.
Glad that I'm not here talking
with you about that
I am here to talk about
Regulation of speech by the
government and the supreme court
in nineteen ninety two the
United States Supreme Court said
that regulations which are
content based or quote
presumptively invalid and so
confidentiality statutes like
these that regulate the speech
of individuals about any content
are presumptively invalid they
are subject to the strict
scrutiny test which means that
they must be first this must
serve a compelling governmental
interest and second they must be
narrowly tailored to serve that
governmental interest.
Consent before nineteen ninety
two
the Supreme Court is not found a
government regulation which
passes that test and so the
Supreme Court has not gone as
far as to say that content based
regulations
like the statute in place now
are invalid per se stream chorus
certainly indicated that it that
it would provide that way and
that's true whether
the content restriction is just
on one person the complainant
for the respondent.
Or it's true when it's based on
both persons meaning that it
restricts both the complainant
response.
thank you from here today.
Thank you.
That I stand for questions.
Before we go to the committee
I'd like to see if there's
anyone in the audience wishing
to speak in opposition to the
bill.
I don't see anyone in opposition
let's go online I don't see
anyone online at all
So those wishing to speak in
favor of the bill please raise
your hand.
All right happy to hear from you
if you could limit your comments
to less than two minutes that be
great so raise your hand did you
yep will start here on just go
down that way right.
Chair and.
My name is a stellar Fernandes I
work with don't have to and I
believe that that eighteen point
sixty nine it is important for
the healing of the passage of
this bill is important for the
healing of sexual assault.
And.
Thank you.
Marshall.
Madam chair members of the
committee on March fourteenth
Social stigma of the society we
are raised in and the same
office experience and the
cultures of so much of our
culture on this country as we
teach people also are three
times more likely to experience
sexual harassment and abuse that
our system or and or sexual
appears and so for those two
reasons we think it's critical
that we allow folks to
brought forward these things to
be able to speak as the experts
said not only publicly but to
know that we can talk for
friends or family B. those
chosen our biological to a
therapist.
Otherwise all we're doing is
continuing to traumatized and I
specially where transfer
through.
Hi right so we just support this
thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee good afternoon
Alexandria Taylor with the New
Mexico coalition of sexual
assault programs we stand in
support of this bill survivors
deserve access to healing and we
know that sentencing survivors
as this time it statute does
only allows for the power
imbalance to continue I also
wanted to make note that in
twenty twenty at a chapter to
law that prohibit nondisclosure
agreements in private employment
and situated the decision making
of disclosing information to the
survivor and so we we recognized
in the importance of survivors
having a voice in the ask you to
support this thank you thank
you.
Anyone else wishing to speak in
favor.
Right we'll go now to the
committee I have Representative
lane and then Representative.
Officer I'm sorry.
All right there is someone
online now.
miles would you like to speak in
favor of the bill.
Yes hi thank you so much
chairman and members of the
committee my name is miles token
of deputy director Hey we are a
member based organization
representing workers and
and newly and naturalized US and
throughout the state and we
thought we are fully in support
of the spell
like I mentioned the first
committee we stand and support
all survivors.
and I think that we should
everybody should be able to
utilize their very important
voice thank you so very much and
please more two side to pass on
this important bill thank you
thank you we're back now with
the committee Representative
Eli.
Thank you madam chair madam
chair.
This bill only applies to
complaints filed through the
inner process is that right
that's correct Madam chair
representative playing.
Madam chair what is the
confidentiality right now for a
complainant.
If this is done during the
session.
That is the good madam chair and
leader lane is a good question
give me a minute I will provide.
Madam chair I will look that up
if the gentleman has other
questions.
Get to the gym come up with
other questions.
I do have I do have a question
So what we're looking that up.
With.
What's the confidentiality of a
complaint it if a complaint is
filed with the ethics
commission.
Madam chair representative there
is only restriction on the
disclosure of any information
regarding the complaint by the
staff and the commission itself
not on the complainant or the
respondent okay so madam chair.
The complainant.
Him or herself has the authority
to talk about this publicly or
with private with friends or
family and there's no gag over
supporters of speak through the
ethics commission process madam
chair leader lane that's
correct.
Do we have other than than the
interim process madam chair and
potentially during session as
may will get confirmation here
during this hearing.
Do we have any other provision.
That would allow for this kind
of
Gagging of a complaint is there
any other instance where we do
this.
Madam chair leader late I'm not
aware of any including
complaints filed to the
secretary of state's have no
such prohibition either.
Madam chair at United I've done
some
Employment law work with local
municipalities.
And trying to think I don't ever
remember this being an issue I
think this might be you need to
legislature.
if it is then that I think it's
probably a problem but I I'm
just curious to know if there's
if maybe the sponsor experts are
aware of the supplying any other
area of the law for whether it's
a discrimination harassment any
of those type of of complaints.
Madam chair later when I have an
answer to your question
regarding the the complaint was
filed during the session in
which case the members of the
house rules in order of business
committee and the staff may not
disclose any information about
such a complaint that there is
no.
restriction on the complainant
or the respondent.
So madam chair right now if if I
filed ethics complaints against
another member.
During session I could speak
openly about that is that is
that correct madam chair and
leader lane yes according to.
House rules nine thirteen to
nine thirteen three nine
thirteen for.
chair representative of lower in
session our house rules so our
chambers governed how our bodies
are meant to maintain its rules
in order of business and so all
of our house rules that are
published online forward session
Mason's fills in the gaps so we
we basically just follow that
protocol Madam chair
representative.
and madam chair so.
It's strange to me that we would
treat a complaint differently
different weather and social
session.
I guess I never thought about
until we got to this hearing
but.
That seems patently unfair to
the complainant
Whatever the body decides
whether it's to disclose
confidential or not I think that
needs to be consistent.
I do I think it's strange that
we as the legislative body would
sort of exempt us that ourselves
out of this disclosure
requirement so.
Madam think those are all my
questions thank you
Representative McQueen.
Thank you madam chair
Madam chair versus experience he
is there a current lawsuit over
this this language.
Madam chair representative I'll
defer to my experts money on an
idea on that question.
Madam chair members the
committee there is one that was
deferred.
It in the Madam chair
representative expert
The not a litigator deferred
meaning postponed.
and madam chair and experts
postponed.
Because of our session because
we're considering this or press
one for other reasons madam
chair members of the committee I
actually don't know the answer
to that question and I also
believe I may need to consult my
lawyer about that.
Madam chair Services Kaminski
You know I I read about this was
in the papers I think it's
appalling
it's it's not just that it's a
gag order.
It's that this whole incited gag
order I mean it's just it's it's
absolutely egregious and it
should be fixed.
think it's in all likelihood
unconstitutional
madam chair and members the
committee in our public records
acts and not the inspection of
public records with the SEC the
separate section for public
records I don't know why
there's language in there that
you that once you attain the
public record you can't use them
for a political purpose.
Also please only
unconstitutional and I tried to
get that fixed
and it got vetoed a few years
ago
I just I mean this is one of the
things I.
I.
I can imagine.
How this got through the process
was proposed and adopted and
signed into law with a straight
face.
Of the manager.
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair
I too agree that there ought to
be consistency and and that this
is what the Mexican system ten I
think we have to do it
I do think that.
The discussions the the I've
been engaged and with respect to
these issues is that will we.
Walk a fine line between.
Making sure that that.
People that need to file
complaints have ready access to
do so.
And at the same time recognize
that.
Once those complaints get filed
they have immediate impact.
On sitting legislators and.
They can be weaponized to.
The chief ethical purposes that
achieved political purposes and
and so that's a struggle I think
we all are are faced with when
we when we look at these rules
is trying to make sure that that
the the process allows.
Those things to be filed and to
be I would say probably address.
On the other hand recognizing
the.
The potential for.
The weaponization of this type
of these types of procedures of
for political
purposes and and so if that
change makes it consistent then
I'm all for it.
but I I do think that we need to
as we struggle with the ethics
commission generally as we
struggle with some of the issues
and some of the what I'd say
abuses that we.
Maintain some sensitivity to to
that very issue and so since it
does fall in line I will support
to your bill thank you madam
chair.
I thank you anyone else yes I'm
sorry Representative free Madam
chair representative and I'm new
so I'm just trying to understand
so at the current state of it is
if I were to make a complaint
against you.
The complaint would come out
publicly and the person the
complaint is against can talk
about it but the complete tend
can't if you can just kind of
clarify for me and madam chair
and representative read I I
think to follow that
hypothetical if you filed a
complaint against me.
You would not be permitted to
speak about it under this law
as it stands however I could
say.
Representative read has filed
this complaint it's outrageous
it's you know I wasn't even in
the building that day or
whatever I wanted to say and you
would have no ability to respond
to that in the public so
meanwhile under.
And and nondisclosure situation
with the staff.
And the members of the interim
legislative ethics committee
they would they would be
investigating but I would be
free to say whatever I really
wanted to try and.
You know capture the public
interest.
Potentially in my favor okay
Madam chair representative that
that's what I was thinking that
it meant and and why I I see
what Representative vipers as I
see it could maybe be used to
weaponize you know get your way
whatever you want to do during
legislative session on bills I
just think you've got a balance
I'm a transparency person and so
I can't imagine being in a let's
say a victim and something and
not being able to know who you
could even speak to about it I
think it would be really
horrible not to be able to
defend your side and and so I
appreciate this bill and and I'm
gonna support I'm I'm
transparent all the way on
things and so I think this is a
good idea.
Thank you madam chair.
Any other Committee members.
Well I just want to say I'm
please that we're fixing this it
was obviously I don't know how
we missed it when we pass this
bill it it's when you think
about it now it's just
ridiculous that we would have
such a rural and I guess I would
agree I think there's some
constitutional issues in terms
of gagging someone Sevilla due
to talk about a public something
that would be a matter of public
interest because if it's a
complaint against a public
official that would be a matter
of public concern and therefore
government the first amendment
and likely we would be held
wrong in terms of what we just
did in our statutes so I am
happy to be supporting this
Representative I'll come.
Chair of the
table.
Of the two.
Right.
All right move by Representative
of all come second by
Representative read the I do
pass motion would you call the
roll Senator.
Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey yes
Representative yes.
Representative include yes
Representative Nibert.
Yes.
Representative Reeves yes.
Representative green yes I am.
Representative said Penske yes.
Madam vice chair yes.
Madam chair yes.
Unanimous.
Okay I just wanted to chat with
the committee briefly about what
to expect for Wednesday
so we're hearing to bills on
Wednesday House Bill to ninety
seven that's the corrections
advisory board bill that
Representative Lara Cadena is
presenting and then we're going
to be hard hearing house bill
seven and house bill seven is a
I guess you could say a
controversial bill potentially
controversial I met with
our ranking member and
Representative Nibert this
morning to talk about various
things and we came up with a
plan in terms of our house bill
seven the the plan is of course
the sponsor will be permitted to
present their bill and we will
divide public comment up between
twenty minutes per each order
pro and twenty minutes con we've
asked each side if you if you
will to identify ten people or
so who can speak up to two
minutes on the bill and then
we're going to close public
comment I've spoken to some of
the advocates about this and
they're aware and apparently
okay with that approach and
my to Republican colleagues are
are gonna be working on on the
other on the other side so
that's that's the plan I just
wanted people to understand and
be prepared to address it and
along those lines so we're also
welcome of course always to
written comments and and and
that kind of thing but
appreciate your willingness to
work with us yes Representative.
Chair.
in my community there's been a
couple situations where.
The allotted amount of time
public comment might be taken up
by people in the room.
And I feel like I should give
people online an opportunity or
a divide between present and
online.
Fair enough
if we do have people online but
I as I've told you there's gonna
be some understanding of
analysts that's going to be
provided to me so if the names
are on line they will be counted
in the you know in the to among
the tens so there's the option
for among the tend to be online
or in person does that make
sense okay all right and I've
asked the advocates to indicate
