Which is in the heart of
Albuquerque for the most part
it's downtown and parts of north
valley I've been
in the state house since twenty
fifteen so what is is my the
here thank
great to be here looking forward
to this committee I once upon a
time served as a vice chair
under the leadership of chair
Chasey and to this day one of my
favorite committees although it
is a very hard working committee
so members take note will be
here late nights thank you from
we noticed a lot of bills have
been referred to us already just
by listening to the.
Madam chair thank you very much
Rhinelander represent house
district three a house issue
three is the lovely aspect one
proportion San Juan County madam
chair excited to join the
committee I I got booted off HFC
since I got into leadership so
I'm very happy to land on
Judiciary looking for the
important work that we do on
this committee so thank you
madam chair.
Thank you madam chair I'm
Representative bill Rehm
district thirty one far
northeast heights of Albuquerque
is where I Representative and.
I think I've been on this
committee somewhere around
sixteen seventeen years
somewhere in there.
So really enjoyed I'm retired
job.
W. share from the Bernalillo
county sheriff's department
thank you.
Thank you madam chair my name's
Rita semansky I'm brand new
Representative brand new to this
committee I represent house
district forty seven where we
are sitting right now
which is a lot of Santa Fe
County and that it's so it's so
wonderful to be on this
committee I appeared before this
committee many times as an
advocate so to be on the other
side of the desk I have a lot of
us connection in sympathy with
everyone who's presenting before
us so thank you madam chair
thank.
Representative this.
Thank you madam chair I
Representative it is too early
alcohol on this is my fiftieth
year in the legislature and my
fifty is here on this committee.
First of our another they just
didn't want to move me anywhere
I can't say that I have is the
lesser of the more gray hair
than when I started but has been
a lot of hard work this vision
interesting committed to be on.
Sometimes varied and sometimes
some teaching so retired
magistrate judge I served eight
years as a magistrate judge nice
to the before that I served
eight years as a municipal judge
of the length of the line so
how do you run the file
hopefully should be around a
long lot longer thank you madam
chair.
good morning madam chair my name
is Andrea re even I represent
district sixty four which is
curry Roosevelt part of Travis
county brand new member to the
house and I have a spent my
career as a prosecutor twenty
six years as a prosecutor
elected district attorney so I
presented on the opposite side
of this but very happy to be
here thank you.
Thank you madam chair the
committee members of the usual
suspects that we have here at
the house Judiciary I'm Gail
Chasey my district is in
Albuquerque includes the
Albuquerque campus of UNM and in
the former chair of this
committee and I really enjoyed
it I I like to be the judiciary
so much I went to law school
after being.
By chairman converges with the
chair so and I've practiced law
primarily in the field of court
appointed for adults and
children who whose families are
in protective services.
I
thank you madam chair
Representative Matthew McQueen
house district fifty I now
represent portions of Santa and
Santa Fe County so my district
changed substantially that it's
not the counties you see listed
in front of me I am in my ninth
year in the legislature my seven
year on this committee in my
thirty first year thing and
attorney
my practice however is business
and real estate oriented I do
not do any criminal law or
anything like that so
it's always education building
on this committee thank you Mr.
Representative Nibert the like
my colleague to the left much
redistricting change my district
as well I only represent
portions of Travis county now
and the I'm from Roswell New
Mexico I've been practicing law
for forty years now and mostly
in oil and gas and real property
issues I do not go to court as
the justices nope Act there were
if I do go to court is to
examine a probate or a quiet
title proceeding
then on this committee sense of
been in the legislature and it's
Always very challenging
committee for me learn a lot of
things that are way outside my
practice area and and that keeps
it the
enjoyable for me to learn so
many things and get the help of
a lot of smart people through
the process so I appreciate
being on here look forward to
good sixty day session.
Thank you madam chair good
afternoon everyone I am Andrea
Romero from northern Santa Fe
County from the City of Santa Fe
all the way through the Pojoaque
valley into the city of Espanola
we also for sovereign pueblos up
walk in on bass and all the fun
so into superb of those I just
got a law degree and I think
with you have just been here for
about fifteen or more years or
been practicing law I think I
was about fifteen or more years
old when that was your time but
I look forward to being.
Alright.
I would I very much look forward
to building up you are.
Building on this committee is my
first time on this committee and
I look forward to participating
in All Things issue area and and
being able to use the law degree
well thank you madam chair.
Thank you welcome everybody I'm
really looking forward to
working with all of you it's a
really great team I'm
Representative Christine
Chandler I'm from Los Alamos
I have been in the legislature
for well this will be my fifth
year I did serve on this
committee in the past and I
provide the topics very
interesting and I'm looking
forward to working with all of
you going forward I am a retired
attorney from Los Alamos
national lab work mostly in the
area of employment and labor
type law by some other things
but because there's a whole
array of issues that the levy
you can only imagine but of
enjoy the practice and I really
enjoy this committee Ellen would
you introduce yourself and then
introduce each analyst and ex
and maybe each analyst could
share a little information about
themselves thank you.
One research analyst for.
Judiciary.
Here.
I come from an education
background and then law
background.
And a long time.
Chandler the Los Alamos National
Laboratory doing the odds and
ends that you didn't mention.
And so you're going to be here
with all and it's a great
committee this is for some of us
see a
we have here a combination of
Canadian analyst for the C. and
there are three major at
analysts who are here this
afternoon and we can't forget
that three of our folks are
sitting out of okay one three
great some of the public and and
the server and summer okay so
could we could each one of the
and also just introduce
themselves so everybody knows
your name since.
So I.
To retire.
Thank goodness.
Background.
Each of health care this is
speech pathologist we're just
trying.
CYFD children custody and I
services state and guardianship.
Okay.
The reason trace that to Mexico
I am of our internet here for
for policy to transactional work
but I have experience in the
side
my background hello this is the
New Mexico state advocate for.
Right I have spent years at this
point working.
Specifically on the station
okay.
Others are required on in the.
Signification of my retirement.
We're.
For variety of.
People.
He early career this is a
council for exclude apartments
homes safety of her many years
of which of these families I
just and career as the director
of the national division of the
district will support so it's
very nice to see.
Conditions.
Gallery this is my fifth year as
a committee analyst my
background in health and so on
that the JD and that Ph.D
immersing most recent that
masters of public health
and also for probably the last I
guess maybe six or seven years
as a focus on I'm happy to be
there hi you teach health
policies.
My name is Susan lost major
focuses Committee this is my
first year million analysts here
I was in public public defender
for twenty one years out before
that I worked in your cases
implement law there and before
that I worked in rural Louisiana
the property the main off.
I'm very happy to be here and
back to a criminals of Bill.
Hello I'm Sheila Lewis said
budget committee a long time I
mostly focus on criminal bills
I'm a retired public defender
and of late I've been working of
gun violence prevention and
sexual assault and domestic
violence prevention services
thanks.
We're out here.
I'm Linda Johnson and I'm more
general counsel for the house
Republicans and also are are
needing a list on this committee
I have an international business
degree and also a JD from after
nine University and I've been
working with our team for about
a year now and I have one of my
counterparts in my other
counterpart is on display Law
School so he's just getting out
of class.
My name's John GORDNER on.
and an active member of the
California bar.
Practice status a prosecuting
attorney in San Bernardino
county for three years and then
thirty four years as a
prosecutor the state attorney
general's office happy to be
with you welcome.
Hi Lisa water resistance and
security for four years now.
And the legislature could I.
The committee assistant
Representative Chandler just
retired after twenty five
hundred education because the
one of my students.
Transcript
well as you all can see we have
a really strong staff with great
and diverse backgrounds so
there's a lot of expertise that
they'll have to assist us with
before we get to our bills I
just want to talk about some you
know housekeeping things most of
which you already know we this
committee meets most of the time
on Monday Wednesdays and Fridays
at about one thirty or soon
after the floor session and then
it's going to start getting a
little hectic and we might be
starting a little later and
later and then going later and
later and so that the general
schedule there will be times
when I think people should
expect that we're going to have
to me on a Saturday or sometime
on the weekend we do have a
heavy load this is the heavy
hard working committee and there
will be times or will have to do
some catch up to make sure we're
staying on track and getting our
bills reviewed and and pastor
not passed I don't think I need
to say this but I will
it's very important that we're
all very respectful with each
other and with the public and I
don't expect to have any issues
and generally we don't have
issues but some of our bills are
very controversial and people to
at.
You know you know exercise
occasionally it's general from
the public and I it's my job to
referee those those activities
and I will I won't tolerate
personal attacks from the public
or amongst each other which I
certainly don't expect but we it
there's going to be a quorum
here and we have to we're gonna
have some tough issues and we I
expect everyone to should lead
by example in terms of behavior.
I do want to say that the way we
get access to documents is
something I I looted to an email
to all of you there is a share
file and the analyses for the
bills by the committee analysts
will be put in the Here file
then there are also some folders
for the minority analysis in the
majority in else in it only the
members of those caucuses have
access to those so if you don't
know how to access the share
file I strongly recommend you
find out soon as possible
because the items will be placed
and I've noticed the emails have
started so you get an email
every time there some activity
in the Here file and that's a
clue to you that you might there
might be something new you want
to reference but you all have
the responsibility to try to
keep yourself up to date and if
you have any problems or of
course here to help and we will
as as best we can if you have
questions feel free to call one
of the staff in terms of whether
the share files been populated
and that sort of thing but
that's I think pretty much of
all of it me see if I've missed
anything we've gotten your names
and numbers so there's the
opportunity to taxed keep you
apprised of what's going on.
All right
I think we can get to yes ma'am.
Yes Representative madam chair I
just have one question and that
is I've got some holes in my
calendar house Judiciary shows
up every day at one thirty
including next Saturday so I
didn't put it that.
Just like somebody.
I have no idea I.
I did anyone else experiences
service they.
You okay thanks.
I'll let it know inequities
north yes so
we are at our on our first bill
house bill seventy six judicial
education.
S. V. C. S. fund and
Administration Representative
Hochman Vigil it looks like you
have justice Thompson with the.
I did madam chair hello members
of the committee and to happen
Vigil recovering Judiciary
Committee member message every
day actually and we're here to
talk about house bill seventy
six which would transfer
administration of the judicial
education fund to the at the
administrative office support
and create the judicial
education services division of
AOC.
even provided a detailed
analysis from a state AOC in
support of this transfer and why
it is necessary and at this
point I'm going to defer to the
wonderful justice David Thompson
to kind of tell you more about
why this is necessary bill and a
good direction for the
legislature to go.
Thank you representative madam
chair members of the committee
thank you for having me today
I can reduce my colleagues to
just speaking their Justice
Fargas to justice feels twenty.
Make sure I don't do anything
wrong.
hello I just have a quick
opening statement about the
concept here then I'm pleased to
stand for questions.
Those two simple things one is.
Things judicial education into
the AOC
And the second is a provides
adequate funding that we've
needed for quite amount of time.
Both of those concepts are
derived from best practices
starting with the national
center state court study that
evaluated our judicial education
program and recommended those
two steps.
hearing the biographies today
the members of the committee and
and your staff it it sort of
took the space of my opening
statement which what you're
describing your biography is
what comes to our trial courts.
Our trial courts match record to
municipal court judges trial
court judges mostly come from
mostly DA's office of public
defenders.
That is changing thank you to
you large part.
due to salary increases and
those issues but we have to
educate our judges in all these
other areas child welfare you
child welfare Act of oil and gas
commercial disputes.
New Civil Rights Act law
enforcement pre trial detention.
And we can't accomplish those
things anymore with one.
Class one two year which is way
we operated our judicial
education we educate.
Over three hundred sixteen
judges probate judges municipal
judges magistrate judges that
doesn't include hearing
officers.
We continue to educate ourselves
at the appellate level on the
palate best practices
and we have to educate our
staff.
So with that need in mind I
respect we come before you today
and ask for approval this bill.
And all staff professionals one
a small procedure cleanup madam
chair we do have a couple of
small amendments we would like
to put into the bill of course
we didn't meet your cut off to
get that amendment to you and
paper form so wanted to ask you
if you prefer for us to wait
till the next committee should
be lucky enough to proceed there
or if you wanted to make those
amendments and real time in the
bill at a different time.
How extensive are the amendments
to have a written down somewhere
they're not very expensive I
have them in front of me on this
computer and it looks like one.
Two three four.
I amendments most of them just
cutting one word okay well that
doesn't sound terribly expensive
so if if we want to try to
proceed along those lines are
any objection by any of the
members one of the.
If one of them is that not yeah
you probably Representative
Nighbor have caught all of the
little equipment and assets that
you were gonna reference.
Chair I was counting on it yes
Representative we are fortunate
to have him.
So why don't we try that and if
it seems like it's more than we
can handle and we can talk about
something else so sure go head
to do that now is your yes the
bill
what only a brief overview of
the bill and then why don't we
talk about the few amendments.
I'll go to the audience if there
any there's any public comment I
will come back to the committee
for more extensive discussion
Senator does that change the
substance of the bill but vice
chair Romero it does not.
One thing I would also like to
bring to the committee's
attention madam chair is there
as an appropriation assistive
this bill from the general fund
which actually changes the
structure of how this offices
and funded before which is
through test fees so that I'm
sure will be an important part
of the discussion but just
wanted to kind of bring that up
now because I know that
minority leader lane had a
question related to related to
that as well so will will
address all I'm sure you all
okay proceed all right so at
this point Justice Thompson
would you like to proceed to
questions or do you want to
defer to any of your colleagues
to add to the statement
I'll go and proceed to question
to two points I outlined is the
overview of the bill are
contained in subsection eight
which basically moves the just
just the judicial education
Center from the verse in New
Mexico into the administrative
office of the courts and then
there's the of funding provision
under thirty four thirteen two.
And with that
stand for questions for the most
efficient way
what what I'd like to do before
we get to questions is go to the
audience and and career public
comment
so those in favor of the of the
bill please raise your hand.
Okay those opposed.
No opposed those individuals in
the audience who wish to speak
in favor of the bill.
Just to speak in Madam chair
representative this is one of
our top four priorities this
legislative session we consider
bringing this bill four years
ago the university at that time
asked us not to do this and made
a series of promises about
change for the judicial
education center.
This is not come to fruition for
reasons that I don't need to to
bore you with but the the time
is now to to move the center so
that we can really fully
expandable Education.
And provide on demand repeat
training in person training
bench books and the like on
myriad topics including oil and
gas real estate business
litigation and criminal so we we
stand ready at the AOC to to
take this challenge on we
actually really look forward to
it.
Thank you just a.
Welcome to anyone else.
All right are there any comments
from our do we have any
electronic commenters from the
through the zoom.
I don't have anything okay.
I see some names up on the board
the need to have their O. okay
if they're individuals
participating by zoom and you
wish to comment would you please
raise your hand.
Right I don't see any hands
raced there we are so in terms
of the of amendments that you
were going to propose would you
like to do that now before we go
to committee questions because
maybe some of the committee
questions my touch on some of
the bill tweaks that you're
going to offer Representative
finally chair and forgive me on
the version I'm working on with
the amendment is not marked with
line items loan number so to do
this they can it looks like the
first change is going to be
One thirteen page one changing
the judicial to court.
For
the court education services
division.
The second change is going to be
on page two.
Thirty online.
Nine seven.
After sixty six staff sixty six
dash eight dash one nineteen
NMSA nineteen seventy eight
adding language as well as gifts
comma rants comma donations
comma and other appropriations
and distributions to the fund
made pursuant to the tax
administration act.
Third change madam chair under
section two still page two line
twelve.
After thirty four dash thirteen
dash to again just changing the
word judicial two point.
Same thing on line item
seventeen changing the judicial
education to court education.
And then the last change under
section four page three.
Active date and a language it is
necessary for the public peace
comma health and safety that
this act take effect immediately
period.
The amendments for.
Representative.
Chair and
Representative.
The state has.
Madam chair Representative Rehm
that is a great point and we
will need to to add that as well
thank you.
Anyone else any other questions
on the proposed.
Representative.
The thank you madam chair we
change the word judicial to
court in the title but there are
a number of judicial.
Of references throughout it that
we're not change your change to
Google but not all of them.
Or is it your intention to
change all of them.
Madam chair representative nine
birds I'm gonna defer actually
is art pop in here from AOC.
Alright would you like to answer
that question.
Roger I think you should speak
into alliance.
Here.
All the different.
Now press on thank you.
madam chair members the
committee and Representative
Nibert that's intentional
because you're talking about the
judicial fund to show ducation
Fund and if we change the name
of the fund that when AOC
becomes responsible for judicial
education the fund would
transfer to us unless we also
somehow in legislation change
name of the current Fund it
that.
To avoid and transfer it doesn't
matter that the fund is called
the judicial education fund
that's the only way reason why
that was changed so so that's an
intentional.
Madam chair representative
Nibert yes and then just.
One point and I would I'm just a
little bit surprise that one
line of page three line for
fifty cents work views now using
general fund of money is not
part of the amendment but I'm
surprised you didn't changes in
the amendment to leave the work
not so that the fund does revert
because before it was other
funds now it's general fund
money and I'm pretty sure
appropriations gonna make you
resolve those funds those are my
only comment
on the amendment.
They're gonna roll the dice on
what the appropriation committee
does was there to see what
happens okay thank you very much
Mr Pippen.
All right
This
is.
The action.
Senator by
The less that is injection to.
I see.
Thank you now we're ready to
discuss and we are ready to
discuss the amended bill
Representative Nibert did you
have questions I know you just
okay.
You for thank you madam chair.
Our sections three and four new
material.
Thank you madam chair
representative Nibert according
to my reading here they do not
appear to be new material.
Well that's a bill because madam
chair if talks about an
appropriation I assume that from
this fiscal year it has the word
twenty twenty four page three
line one and the effective date.
Is of in twenty twenty three so
if that's existing statute we
did something wrong before.
If it's this new material for
this statute.
Then it's new material and.
Legislative Council Service
probably ought to be directed
to.
Indicate such.
So that's my first comment are
assuming that it is new material
and not old material of.
I've already pointed out the
reversion area.
Because it seems to me.
If we're using general funds.
The general fund drive revert to
the state for future
preparation.
Since the funds to date were
from sources other than the
general fund hi I understand why
they should not refer but if the
general fund money I think they
should revert and I'm not going
to object to this bill
accordingly but I I just make
that comment I'm sure the The
appropriations committee's going
to the.
Take care of that.
my next question is how many
judges do we have in the state
of New Mexico that would be
covered by this.
Senator magistrates for.
Divert to experiment.
Madam chair representative.
Approximately three hundred
sixteen through all levels.
From us.
The court I serve on to what we
describe as courts of limited
jurisdiction.
A municipal probate and
magistrate.
That is our current plan.
And we hope to provide with this
funding education for our
hearing officers and
And staff attorneys as well we
also do provide education madam
chair representative for our
tribal court colleagues.
As as part of a courtesy to our
tribal court colleagues as well
so how many hearing officers the
That is a great question and I
would I will defer to a so if we
know that.
Chair representative Nibert I
don't know the exact count it
depends on various things
include contracts I would say
there's probably.
Two dozen maybe in the and all
of the district courts
throughout the state.
You madam chair and.
Address the expert directly
madam chairman misstep and at
how many other court personnel
will be covered by this Madam
chair representative Nibert in
the
State system about seventy
seventeen hundred fifty
employees I don't know how many
employees are in the municipal
and probate courts because we
don't as he doesn't oversee
those courts but there's at
least one or two in each.
Municipality that has some
municipal court and probably one
or none for the probate courts
provide judges to do their own
administration.
M..
Madam chair and and Mr program
could you kind of discussed so.
Who approves the attendance at
these courses and what's the
process for going I I I agree
with the the justice said that
education is critical but I just
kind of want to get a handle on
what the processes who approves
how do how do people go to the
courses that they really need.
Madam chair representative
Nibert I can answer that
question but I'm really the
money I make sure to pay the
bills on the scheduling things
there's an oversight body that
such to discharge education
every year the works alternately
under the direction of Supreme
Court justice Thompson and serve
for a long time I think
correctly on the committee
really it's ultimately suspend
corporate the committee makes
recommendations and they work
with the judicial education in
the state scored Education
Division to meet the needs that
the court is identified so the
suggests the court these are
areas we want to cover and next
year two years forecast the
court approves those and they
get set up and under C. will
also look for opportunities to
do real time education of things
that are suddenly hit the judges
you pass a new bill is an
emergency clause on it we need
to educate them on wanted to
does what changes there aren't
and how to handle that kind of
thing the kind of education
opportunities that haven't been
provided yet but it's in this an
oversight body appointed by the
Supreme Court that works to
determine the judicial education
calendar.
Madam Madam chair representative
of the the best practices would
be.
We have an oversight committee
that that really works on
curriculum and sort of long term
each individual court requires
different needs their statutory
requirements for judicial
education for some of our courts
in the those are certainly
mandatory and then those courts
would.
Legislative proposals as to what
the curriculum would look like
and then hopefully down the road
we can we can plan this out two
to three years and infants
judicial education is required.
so we really at this point just
meeting demand so there's demand
for we trying could everybody
but there are some that that's
just absolutely required.
And madam chair and and Justice
Thompson that's the amount of
money that's requested those
that
Does that.
Provide the service a sufficient
breadth of courses that you see
that the judiciary needs at the
current time.
Madam chair representative I
will answer that question in the
following way at this point it
does I will tell you honestly we
we anticipate coming back next
year once we have our feet well
planted in this process and
Task.
Probably for some additional
money based on what we have
analyzed so far this these meet
the needs of of the judiciary it
is a large operation to take
over quite frankly
and so based on what we've
assessed we believe these needs
are out of.
Back in my chief to see if I
said.
I'll tell you if she's going
okay let me know.
Madam chair and then just as
Thompson would you say that the
process is more self executing
or is it kind of the Supreme
Court justices or whatever maybe
suggest that certain courses be
attended by certain judges or a
course at the judges at the
local level but say Hey this
would help me.
Expand my knowledge in this area
and I'm getting more more cases
that I need I need this
education would you say it's
more bottom up driven or top
down to Madam chair
representative it is brought up
gentleman there are you know
there are occasions where the
Supreme Court says
you all need training in the
following areas pre trial
detention is one but more often
than not it is brought up so
what we do for our June conclave
and why we're asking for the
emergency clause or conclaves in
June we take submissions from
the trial courts and we do the
same with the magistrate courts
or the program we say submit to
us what purpose you think a
valuable for you and those come
in areas of a children's law or
oil and gas or transactional or
business structure in the
committee looks at those and
then proves what we can do over
those days and then hopefully.
those programs that don't fit in
our annual program can be
provided virtually if we need
intense a study for example in
the area of a particular
area the comes up guardianship
for example then we can focus
the training just on that but it
is it is brought up.
For the most part.
We are unified system Madam
chair representative.
You madam chair and dresses tops
and you've got a thumbs up on
that from your your Chief
Justice so that's good
you'd like come here is.
the be okay
Madam chair and and
Representative
You know I think it's critical
for the New Mexico judiciary to
be well educated and informed
and.
We are seeing.
Waste I'm seeing my part of the
world the.
Number of judges going on the
bench with a fairly narrow scope
of practice and so when they
step on the bench as you
indicated in your pulmonary
remarks they're exposed to the
complete gamut of issues that
would become come before and so
we need to find for that
education if we're going to have
a function functioning judiciary
and so I support the amount I do
have a concern with the
reversion
questions but I do support it
and I would hope that the
majority of that money is is
really hitting the judiciary I'm
not sure court person
You know some of that stuff
should be done in house or
within the AOC.
Maybe not the laws of funds with
the I'm pleased you brought this
and and I certainly would
support it thank you thank you
madam chair.
Representative Chasey.
Thank you madam chair and
representative what I was trying
to figure out is your current
funding what is that amount and
the sources all the sources of
it.
Thank you and madam chair
members and Rehm I will I will
give you the generalized answer
and that the current the former
funding comes from fees assessed
as part of the the court process
but how it is switching and the
exact costs are need for those
fees I'm going to defer to my
experts to systems Madam chair
representative.
Sanchez correct on that point it
was it is people ending
traditionally in the last three
years
we sing two things one is that
the management and the inflow of
through the funding second is is
a policy.
Change from the policy makers
away from people ending so that
money is become less reliable
and it's had to be supplemented
by general fund money so in the
past it has been a mix of the
funding
and then supplemented by general
fund money to get to the
particular the specific numbers
RD can you help find
Representative those numbers for
court.
What amount to roughly.
We want to get out of here.
The madam chair representative.
The general fund money that
there she got appropriated to
the university for judicial
education was four hundred
thousand dollars appropriated
that.
Maybe three years ago after went
through the university's process
of whatever process it is it
came out about three hundred
sixty four thousand dollars
annually because in the special
projects fund at UNM directed
to.
The the judicial education at
UNM at the law school the others
is all fees and those fees are
some filing fees and some posts
Education fees.
As justice Thompson said the
fees very dramatically
it's about a eight hundred nine
hundred thousand dollars a year
we expect maybe this year
because it's sort of a little
bit closer to a normal year they
went down below that of course
during the last two years when I
fewer fees are being paid
because last year things were
happening
but it's at the.
In the past.
It was general funded at several
million dollars and back a long
time ago the judicial education
center decided they would go
with the funding instead
thinking that would improve
their fiscal position the
opposite Mr not true and really
it should be a general fund
proposition I hope you agree
with that thank you.
Thank you.
Madam chair thank you so I see
basically we're raising from
about a million four hundred
twelve million three sixty four
to.
Two million one one four that's
that's what I was trying to
figure out thank you.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Chasey.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative justice
I was what I think in your
presentation justice to mention
that this was the top
recommendation by some body and
I didn't catch to that once.
Madam chair representative we
there was a study conducted.
About the time and I I took the
bench prior around two thousand
nineteen by the national center
state courts the recommended
they they looked at our process
specifically.
And in addition at that time
senior justice barber Feal was
in charge of judicial education
and this is a recommendation
that came from her as well as
the insurer Justice was that
because of.
What was being offered at the
time the scope in the depth and
so forth Madam chair
representative at that time
We were.
Struggling with.
The attention.
trying to get the attention of
the University of New Mexico to
provide adequate.
Judicial education which is
understandable because as large
as our budget is this was you
know sort of a rounding error
so at that point are hard Chief
Justice Judith Nakamura senior
just part of the Health sat
down.
with divers in New Mexico and
went through the study is part
of bringing that information to
them on best practices and
that's what the Chief Justice of
bacon was referring to.
Thank you very much thank you
madam chair what what I didn't
realize when we heard this and
interim anything you know AOC
and already knows is comes to
CCJ with their homeless we go
through those bills pretty fast
I hadn't realized that it had
the potential effect on the
Korean with children's law
center and that's my concern
because there's some shared
staff now who will be leaving
without replacement at UNM and
the children's law center is the
primary
source of trading for the
practitioners who work in of the
child protective services build
that babies and toddlers young
children and youth parents
grandparents and their attorneys
and the judges to get education
on.
Policy trends and the best
practice and what.
With the latest research is on
trauma and family separation so
for that I I just don't want
this and I think you make a good
case for it but I don't want it
to impaired that function in the
the scope and the breadth and
Just the depth and quality of
the crude oil children's law
center to the university way in
week two on this regarding.
As you said it worries me
because something that small can
be an oversight at UNM at their
with their budget so W.
reassurances for me Madam chair
representative I do we discuss
this with the Chief Justice and
and the data loss school for
background for the members of
the committee there's public
lots to to to the university of
New Mexico there are subgroups
within that one is judicial
education center one is a
children's law institute at
there is one other
Under that umbrella that's why
in my opening remarks madam
chair I said this is only one
part we are just is just a
judicial education portion of
that.
We are from holding harmless
obviously we share the same
concerns with regard to the
issues involving
The children's law and we have
had that conversation with the
University of New Mexico the
dean in particular and there
were still concerns expressed
about the impact on cream wolf
the director of cream wall full
remain the directors we
understand cream will do we will
not be impacting them we
continue to work with the
university New Mexico School of
Law.
Both and and and the judicial
education and having some of
their professors percent as well
so we can Representative to we
intended there will no be no
impact on criminals.
Chair and and justice Thompson
Representative Hochman Vigil I
appreciate that I just I just
want to see that come to be
true.
In the and and and it does worry
me about shared staff who would
be leaving to go with judicial
education and I've been also a
senior research associate at UNM
health sciences center years ago
and.
The university.
Does grab your indirect funding
and I and I it's very complex
there it is hard to to probably
staffed your projects so I I
just worry about that.
Madam chair representative I had
this conversation with my Chief
Justice we will have that
conversation with you to make
sure it make you feel
comfortable that
we can do whatever we can to
support Perrin will that is not
the intent part of this program
but likewise we felt slight
twelve I will be on the slightly
neglected by the school of law
and and we have to do things
which in the best interests of
our.
For constituent thank you madam
chair and thank you
Representative Lujan.
Representative McQueen.
Thank you madam chair mentor
just on Representative Nibert to
national points about the new
material looking at other other
bills this bill is consistent
with the the other bills
including for example
Representative reams bill which
is appropriations not labeled
new material and one thing to
know is neither the
appropriation or the effective
date I don't think either of
those gets codified into
statutes and that might be the
reason the council service is
incredibly deliberate about how
they do things so there this
might be actually the way the
they just do it thank you madam
chair.
Representative all come.
Thank you thank you madam chair.
Going back to where
Representative Rehm was that
earlier about the funding.
And I'm looking at the at the F.
I. R..
And I'm looking at the of the
judicial education program at
you in and received three
hundred sixty five thousand
dollars.
And at the very Max.
If all the fees reflective in
seven hundred thousand dollars I
would come in.
Through this program.
This.
Education program for the judges
will be run on a total of a
little over four hundred and
seven thousand dollars.
According to what the FIR says
to of the you and if you and
amendment of the school of law
revenue this program with the
just over four hundred KT hi do
you need to follow along million
dollars.
Madam chair thank you
Representative I I'm gonna start
and I'm sure of my actual finish
but I think it's important that
we take into account the
expansion of scope of these of
these programs and the
additional education that's
going to be given to these
incoming justices there's also
additional information on
diversity and cultural
sensitivities and lots of other
questions that we've not had the
opportunity to give our judges
before especially as it relates
to specific.
Types of materials specific
types of issues so it's really
just an expansion of a program
that has been needed to be
expanded for quite some time
I'll defer to my experts as
well.
Thank you representative madam
chair Representative I'm gonna
have a party give the exact
number so you you all have
because there are those are
tricky with regard to the the
funding in the General funding
but let me say this.
If this were not here.
We would still be coming to you
for this money because a
constituents who we have served
has not been served.
At approximately the the one
million dollars between the
fifth funding that was provided
in the general fund.
The fact that we have three
hundred sixteen judges staff
tribal members all we've really
been serving Madam chair
representative at this point is
are what I call our phone court
judges or magistrates judges
want to here a
and the our our limited
jurisdiction courts so.
This is a need even at the
numbers that we've had since I
became a justice in two thousand
nineteen for insufficient to
meet the constituency but let me
have already make sure everybody
understands the connection
between the people in the in the
general fund.
Madam chair representative come
members of the committee the
numbers I said before we're
weren't limited to the four
hundred thousand so this three
sixty five it comes in through
the general fund which where she
obtained in the intent at that
time was if we're going to stay
with University.
I thank the jazz Justice
Thompson described where we're
at several years ago let's go to
the general fund amount that
goes there so that we can
adequately fund education the
fees generate eight hundred nine
hundred thousand dollars a year
so it's about one point three so
adding a million million or so
seven hundred thousand depending
on which fee here you want to
use I think that's a start I
think we'll be back here for
more but our best guess as to
anymore staff to begin to serve
the folks who require this
education is what you have in
the bill to one one one four and
without appropriation we can get
started we have the FTEs lined
out we're going to need to hire
director
we will need to do more because
we are not meeting the
obligations provided in the
statute as the sponsor session
as justice Thompson said so the
numbers this about this lesson
million dollar increase in that
request could be substantially
more but we didn't want to over
reach into we have experience
with this and we'll be back next
year to tell you what's a
realistic numbers if we can't
maybe not this committee but
certainly in finance
the get the so that it's robust
education for everybody we are
supposed to serve as opposed to
the kind of limping along we're
doing it in the minimum that
that's current now.
So madam chair thank you for
that and we you know I mean my
numbers are pretty much right
off of the.
Written right down here so
that's what I got them from the
sixty five plus a maximum of
seven hundred thousand dollars
that's pretty basically what I'm
looking at which means a.
Because they have had to be
together for their so if we
would have provided the
university.
Two million dollars.
To run the program that they're
running today do you think they
could have expanded and continue
doing the what you're asking
them for to do even try.
Madam chairman and defer to
assistance and Madam chair
representative it's an excellent
question and we did try we've
tried since twenty nineteen
we even that will I one of the.
First meetings I recall when I
became a justice was Chief
Justice noch immer a senior
justice Barbourville sitting us
newbies down and saying here's
my plan for judicial education.
We all concede we've had some
issues.
and we're gonna have the study
from the national center state
courts.
And we're going to back go back
to the universe in New Mexico
and say what can we do to make
sure the judicial education.
is responsive to our needs and
we tried it for two years and
quite frankly representative did
not work.
We were it is important to us as
Representative Nibert describes
for us to identify the training
at the low level what these
judges need and for us to be
responsive to them it is not at
all an indictment of the staff
the university New Mexico there
are excellent it is
responsiveness and the feedback
we received and that we believe
we better serve our constituency
through a direct service
representative madam chair thank
you.
Someone who went to a few
classes.
The the judicial education
program I mean eight years as a
magistrate eight years is
indivisible
it was pretty very very intense
training and
But we did that in chair is a as
the magistrate judge we had a
committee of magistrate judges
that pretty much set up an
agenda for the training.
And we got together and we
decided where we were lacking
and what we need to do to trade
not.
And to basically it does work
from the bottom up then from
there with Goodrich judicial
education and give a hard
thought to and then that set it
up for our conclave which is
pretty good with the thing is I
don't understand you're saying
my my understanding that that
that I for a long time ago like
was under Howard judges Chief
Justice bring community and
chief justice mentioned earn a
long long time ago Hey.
They would set up the engine
they would set up the program
and everything and there would
be a one week training program
for the judges five days and
five days for the staff both at
the same time.
Is that happening today.
And madam chair deferred to
system chair representative
Eight it's similar to that
system is happening today miss
Representative that the limiter
stick the limited jurisdiction
judges magistrates in particular
or trained twice a year in the
in the matter you described
and the evolute there is
certainly an evolution of Law
and complexity.
Especially our our limited
jurisdiction that is requiring
more than twice a year he's
magistrates in our handling
complex evidentiary issues with
regard to detention issues than
first appearances the criminal
law would say have no large part
has become much more complex and
these are still for the most
part for the most part
not internet judges and
The the manner in which this
education is delivered to him
what we're understanding about
all adult education has changed
and that's what we're trying to
adopt.
Thank you madam chair
Yes the other I'm not opposed to
the idea it's just that I don't
feel that somehow another
there's something in me that the
from the administrative office
of the courts.
Is not prepared to take up on
another hole program.
When the building trying to get
rid of stuff that they've been
working on for the last fifty
years and now effectively they
got rid of other stuff another
suddenly want to grab on to
something new and that's what
bothers me more than anything
else I'll just leave it at that
madam chair thank you.
Representative Eli.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair I I have a question
so it won't my understanding.
in various Committee hearings
and offline discussions is one
of the other courts pride from a
primary bills is eliminating
fees so madam chair with that
eliminate this judicial
education fee that's also source
of funding.
If it's successful passing ships
and.
madam chair.
We're gonna.
Mr happen again on this one of
the.
Another be that many technical
questions madam chair and
Representative Lang.
Yes and no so there's a filing
fees that are judicial education
fees and are posted you to K. in
fees the bill you're talking
about which is one of the other
priorities the Supreme Court has
among for Mr Lim posted you to
K. in fees and that includes
fees to Mexico to judicial
education and those would be
eliminated in that bill in the
next court and then the from
state courts generally collected
in the match requests so we will
come back but the effective date
of the sunset on the fees the
July one twenty twenty four so
for fiscal year twenty four
those fees would remain in place
because we want to give an
opportunity for everybody who is
funded through those fees to
make an argument that has
appropriation and Senate finance
that they should be general fund
including myself insurance
programs which would include
judicial education should pass
this bill.
Madam chair so I.
If I understood I think the
answer is generally yes right
yeah so and I I support the bill
at that to me makes sense to
have this under AOC I'm not sure
why that wasn't done previously.
but Madam there's also think of
a bit of a roll of the dice to
put your your funding in the
hands of a hundred fourteen
politicians of tip my hat for
your courage for that I do think
though and I guess it's not just
appropriation it's gifts and
donations and so maybe speaker
Martinez woman as well and
include you as a beneficiary yes
but
But I do the reason I raise the
raise that point managers
because I think we need to
emphasize the importance of
judicial education.
And I think it needs to be a
funding priority if if a big
portion that is a good start
coming out of the out of the
general fund you know when you
go to law school then honestly
teach you how to practice law
when your lawyer doesn't Nestle
mean you're prepared to take the
bench and especially to talk
about the magistrate courts they
may or may not have much legal
training and so
when you when you talk about
taking away people's rights
enforcing contracts keeping
order we need to make sure that
our our judiciary is very well
educated so I just want to
emphasize that this is an
important measure for us as a
body.
Representative Romero thank you
madam.
I appreciate all the comments
and questions so far helped me
and for me I just have a couple
questions probably for a fifth
of their.
Well.
Please let me.
Thank you here to assist of the
and Representative Hochman Vigil
that said I do I'm just curious
more for most more so about the
training that the educators are
provided as well who are they
who is trained who are cheap
training our our justices today
and and magistrates etcetera so
just curious what training they
receive in and how that's
practice so for.
Madam chairman of the deferred
Justice Thompson.
Madam chair madam vice chair
very good question one of the
reasons why we come for
additional funding currently the
faculty is made up of other
judges in the.
In the state because that's a
that's in large part what we can
afford again the goal is to
describe to Representative
Nibert would have to have a have
a horizon that looks farther out
the curriculum planning and have
expert in the fields in that
particular area
for example of in the next
conclave we can probably afford
to bring one national person out
in that particular discipline we
hope to attract the best faculty
we hope actually to have a
faculty training program that
would build leadership within
part point to teach subjects
because one of the best ways to
learn about evidence as you
teach evidence we learn about
contracts or business structures
to teach it and it but we have
to build enough faculty
development to give them the
resources because it's not just
talking to judges you have to
know how it builds learn.
and how adults taking
information so currently it's.
Wherever we can find them we use
the national laboratories we run
a judicial science school that
is completely separate from this
in which we teach them
scientific thought and that's
wrong collateral to what we've
done here so we use the
resources we have New Mexico we
hope for faculty to.
Thank you madam chair thank you
for that I had no idea that's
wonderful to know and I think
part of the my second question
is just about the integration of
technology and some of the tools
that we have today to help
inform as the you know legal
profession continues to progress
but how you know.
Electronic tools become
available I was shocked to see
you in the UNM law school
library looking up K..
And this was shocked to find out
as well that you're and you all
don't have access to west law
we're students do and so madam
chair
Representative justice
I hope that this continues to
grow that opportunity as well
with that integration and is
this an opportunity as well to
to learn those tools or does
that kind of is that superfluous
to this type of education.
Madam chair madam vice chair is
not superfluous the worst people
technology our judges because we
trying to stay away from
everything right so we're like.
No social media note we we
really sort of bill that around
us
so it's not it's not to your
point about west law we have
corrected that the now give us
to be completed a full
subscription SO small victories.
yeah yeah we can retrieve this
is that's why I was at the
university New Mexico law
library at the time I was
reading a treatise of was not
provided as part of
subscription.
but we are teaching particular
classes on a remote appearances
and especially for our our rural
colleagues the end to as best
they can leverage the technology
we have to assist it exists the
access to justice and and and
those things so I am proposing
is more factor next conclave a
conversation about
the bots and the impact that
that New A. I will have on the
legal profession and whether or
not what we read in the brief it
was written by a human thank you
madam chair thank you for that
because I was hoping that I
would never have to write one
and chat G. B. T. which is very
we're gonna try and figure out a
way to identify what that is
that's great madam chair on.
I'm glad I didn't know what
lands that having this
conversation early and often
about how these tools are being
integrated and what we can do to
support you in that and thank
you madam chair support the
bill.
Well I just any other comments.
Are just briefly Representative
one little one madam chair thank
you I just want to think about
trading for judges when I became
a municipal judge I got elected
on Tuesday.
On Thursday I was sworn in
Friday I was on the bench I
defeated an incumbent to lift we
guarantee you that that income
that did not let me know how
those work so I played although
here until June or July when we
had our first the municipal
judge training that's just an
example.
While.
I think everybody's like while
I'm which I I think maybe proves
the point of what we're trying
to accomplish here which really
as you know elevate the training
programs amongst the judges and
in the judiciary.
I think that's a very important
thing I I really feel in the
state sometimes we just to too
much on the chief and I and and
we really start have to really
invest in our people and our
professionals and this is all
part of a trend that I hope will
continue on across the board not
just in the judiciary but in the
executive branch and legislature
so appreciate the bill I support
the bill and I I think we're
ready.
All the.
We have been heard like to move.
House bill ninety seven as
amended.
To pass.
Seconded by Representative free
so move by Romero.
Chair here's Mike is off.
Thank you.
So will the clerk called the
roll please.
Representative Alcon yes.
Representative Chasey.
Yes.
Representative Lane yes.
Representative Mr speaker yes.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative Nibert yes.
Representative read yes
Representative Rehm.
Representative Stefanski yes.
Representative Romero yes.
Madam chair yes.
Seven two zero together passes.
You have a do pass thank you
thank you we appreciate the
information thank you madam
chair.
Right we are in now on house
bill ninety seven Representative
re.
Right seventy six.
Right Representative.
Bream.
We're ready to hear from you
thank you madam chair we have an
amendment to hand out and some
information also to hand down.
Thank you.
Okay.
Madam chair and members of the
committee so about September
October of this year at our
courts and corrections meeting
the City of Albuquerque came
before us and spoke about the
warrant backlog.
Most of the won't backlog has
come as a result of the bail
amendment and all speak about
those warrants in a minute but
they asked for ten million
dollars and Bernalillo county to
deal with the warrant backlog.
They also suggested that we
should have ten million dollars
for the rest of the state to
warrant run their course
backlog.
We have seen these warrant of
round ups previously in of
multiple jurisdictions across
the state.
So the first thing is this news
article that's handed to you
from K. our QB this is December
sixteenth.
Of this year and if you go to
the last two pages that is a
letter from the Albuquerque
police chief.
The data to of had A. Lundstrom
of the LFC and a six point
eighteen what the problem is.
In December right before
Christmas mayor Keller held in
the
A discussion about crime in
Albuquerque and the initiatives
that they want they want to see
and Albuquerque and this is this
metro crime initiative and on
the backside we'll see we're he
speaks specifically about the
ten million dollars needed for
the warrant roundup.
in October right open the files
to get the money for the City of
Albuquerque V. and certainly
County to do this warrant back
up.
When we started looking at this
on Friday before the meeting we
came up with what we thought
would be a short ammendment and
I apologize because when I see
an amendment this large I really
think it needs to be a committee
set up but anyway I have an
amendment I'd like to move and
that number is two two four two
eight nine point one.
You're moving it for discussion
purposes yes ma'am.
Proceed.
This amendment and I could read
it line by line if you want but
what it's going to do is send
Bernalillo county is seven
million we'll go to the
Albuquerque police department
and the Bernalillo county
sheriff's department one million
will go to the DA's office and
two million we'll go to the New
Mexico state police for their
activities in Bernalillo county
only.
Then on the statewide we are we
are we will move eight billion
to the local government division
of the department of finance to
be distributed to the other
local agencies throughout the
state and two million to the
department of public safety for
state police efforts in those
areas that is the crux of the
amendment when we started
looking at if we realize that
for the
rest of the state really needed
to go to the local government
division of the department of
finance.
this there is.
One too many pages right.
We gain numbers from the
Bernalillo county sheriff's
department they have those all
the warrants for Bernalillo
county that's free PED and for
the
Bernalillo county sheriff's
department there are.
And if memory serves me
correctly it's fifty two were
fifty four hundred felony
warrants currently outstanding
and Bernalillo county there are
about sixty four thousand
misdemeanor warrants in
Bernalillo county only I think
this information was shared and
should be on your FIR.
With that madam chair I'll stand
for questions.
So we the committee were on the
amendments of I request that
your questions be directed on as
to the amendment any questions
on the amendment.
I don't see any questions on on
the amendment would you like to
move the amendment for adoption
Representative Rehm madam chair
I move the amendment for
adoption to house bill ninety
seven is there a second.
Seconded by Representative Eli.
Any discussion of the amendment.
Seem to call the roll.
Representative Alcon.
Yes.
Representative Chasey.
Yes.
Representative Lane yes.
Mr speaker.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert.
Representative right yes.
Representative green yes ma'am.
Yes.
Representative Romero.
Representative Chandler yes.
I.
Fota nine to zero you have an
amended bill Representative can
chair.
Now prepared to ask questions
about the bill and then we'll go
to the.
When we do this why don't we go
to the public and then we'll
open up for conversation okay
any
those in favor of the bill.
Okay and do you all wish to
speak in favor okay those
opposed.
All right so let's start with
the gentleman over here.
Thank you madam chair
I'm all for your support.
Welcome Mr how to meal.
Yes madam chair David how to be
a registered lobbyist for the
City of Albuquerque one of my by
our support for the bill of
qualified support it is sort of
one of those support but if this
needs more for more work just
sort of the originators of the
idea the the chief of police
chief Medina more stand behind
the concept of addressing the
crime problem in New Mexico by
focusing on the most violent
criminals who have outstanding
warrants that represents
probably about five hundred to a
thousand of the current five
thousand outstanding wards and
Revenue County can't speak for
the entire state I'm sure that
for that that was sort of the
origination of this concept I
believe Representative re at the
metro off from the shooting
press conference in which this
was discussed was also discussed
it CCJ since that press
conference and said CCJ the city
has been in discussions with
other state specifically to
point all in the county the
county who runs the M. D. C. all
as well as the public defender's
office I spoke to Mr dollars
this morning the reason that's
important is because of course
this bill addresses the funding
that is necessary for law
enforcement to go out and
actually execute the warrants of
course this is a multi faceted
problem that involves support
system of course all these folks
are still entitled to
representation in our
constitution as well as what we
gonna do these folks are brought
in where we gonna house and of
course that's going to be at the
jail to the jails need that of
course some of these folks all
these folks are going to be
entitled to due process of the
courts have to be
dressed I spoke with justice Bob
of bacon of the the for the last
hearing and of course AOC wants
to be involved in the discussion
on the more has has met with the
LFC the more Smith with the the
chairman Senate finance and.
Schedule to meet with the with
the house appropriators as well
to discuss overall funding of
twenty million dollars for the
whole state but to discuss how
that money is divided up among
all stakeholders not just the
district attorney's office and
the office law enforcement but
to make sure that this bill has
successful recession because I
think as this concept goes
forward and as it gets and
included in health bill to
you're going to hear from the
courts you're going to hear from
the corrections folks in the
counties you're going to hear
from the public defender's
office saying we need to ensure
that when this money is
appropriated that there is money
for their resources to respond
to what happens when these
violent folks are taking off
the car off the street and these
warrants are executed so it goes
without saying that we support
the concept since we initiated
the concept on the vitiated
discussion in the initially
started with ten million dollar
us thinking in discussion the
executive and some other folks
it was increased to twenty
million dollars of it'll be up
to the appropriators as to
whether our necessary whether
that sufficient after adequate
discussions had with all the
stakeholders so again we we
stand in support of this concept
to address these by the folks
were stronger streets but we
would say that more discussion
needs to be have refinement of
the bill as it works its way
through all of the appropriation
process of both the house and
Senate.
Mr Billington.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee on JD Bullington
speaking on behalf of the
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce today which supports
house bill ninety seven across
New Mexico the particularly in
Bernalillo county lots of
serious criminals who are
creating justice and they need
to be found and taken off of our
streets outstanding warrants are
a major public safety problems
and they are emblematic of a
justice system that criminals do
not fear for immediate
consequences crimes are non
existent and where the justice
system's default response with
most offenders appears to be
that's really seven and hope for
the best so the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
strongly supports the state
providing additional resources
for multi multi agency task
forces to prioritize the removal
of as many dangerous criminals
from our streets as possible
thank you.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee my name is Beth
our own people standards I'm not
speaking against this and
whenever Representative Lee and
I can the so what I say I would
try to do so
But look let me just say that
echoing what Mr Mueller says
part of this is just focusing
what we need to do with parts of
it's only been within the last
few weeks I heard that this was
made perhaps the critical issue
but it is actually in the
benefits of most of our clients
for their cases to be addressed
whether or not they always know
what or feel it ands and there's
various reasons before on March
is not just because they are
beating justice it's a price
because they are confused
because they're lost sometimes
perhaps because they're dead and
so we need to figure out what it
is we're trying to address how
we do it and how we properly
fund for gonna be putting money
into this it does have to go
have to go to the courts and to
the public defender's office as
well as part of the system thank
you madam.
Anyone.
Anyone virtually wishing to
speak please raise your hand.
Okay I see a person named Carlo
could we let Carl in.
Okay Carla can you hear us.
Thank you madam chair would you
give us your full name please.
Where is on that speaking on
behalf of part of Sonntag in the
New Mexico business coalition we
fully support house bill ninety
seven.
And this comes in the category
you're gonna be having all types
of legislation before you that
will grow government and set up
reoccurring expenditures this
bill does not either while it
does not just in the media need
that we need to help reduce
crime in our state.
And.
On a personal level I am retired
from the Albuquerque police
department and I can tell you
one of the most impactful an
officer to do this to be
assigned to a task force or a
tactical plan where money is set
aside specifically devoted grass
outstanding warrants that have
not been able to serve so the
New Mexico business coalition
always supports this bill maker
you do the same thank you.
Thank you I think that concludes
the public comment
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair representative Rehm
You use the term roundup
What what cases any insurance
that this money would be used
to.
A focus on violent criminals as
opposed to the much more
numerous misdemeanor offenders.
Madam chair and Representative
McQueen the target is to go to
the most violent first and to
look at other one such as
domestic violence and child
abuse of course there are about
fourteen hundred of violent of
a fence warrants felony warrants
right now so that is the target
now you'll find that many of
these individuals who have a
felony warrant also have a
misdemeanor warrant.
So it's it'll it'll help affect
that as well.
Madam chair of state ring choose
the target is violent offenders
wares that target.
where is that in the bill madam
chair and Representative McQueen
that is not CPAS specified in
the bill however in the plans
that was for pros it was to
we're going to go after violent
felons first.
Madam chair representative dream
Mr Bauer talked about
Basically if you're around the
people skip it burdens on other
aspects of the judicial system
does it.
Where they can get the money
because that's that's not in
this bill yeah.
Madam chair and Representative
McQueen after this committee
hearing I plan to meet with Mr
Bauer missed her harm you to go
ahead and amend this bill
further to go ahead and address
their concerns.
Okay but the bills.
The the future amendment M.
chairman Representative ring I
think I thought that if we had
some language that was brought
but apparently it's not broad
enough and I will take you to
page two wine.
Twelve.
Such funds needed for round
round up running backlog efforts
and I thought that was somewhat
broad enough but apparently it's
not I will make a broader.
The madam chair Representative
Rehm I've I've read about the
amount of overtime some officers
are racking up is all this is
money essentially going to
overtime.
Madam chair representative
McQueen that's correct and Madam
chair representative Rehm
It can can you explain to me how
the overtime system works is it
like time and a half hours it
with this the the pay scales the
dissection our your house at
work.
All madam chair and
Representative McQueen it's time
and a half.
And Madam chair representative
Rehm I I know that for the first
efforts to hire more officers I
know this efforts
it's not always easy we're
competing different agencies are
competing against each other
internally were competing its
other states then chairs of ring
would be better to hire more
officers than to
engaging more overtime work.
Madam chair and Representative
McQueen currently the
Albuquerque police department is
trying to hire more officers
they have positions open.
I'm not sure what the current
position is for the sheriff's
department or state police but
those agencies would also be
using men on men and women on
over time.
The US marshal service will be
participating in this program as
well.
Not receiving funds from the
state of New Mexico.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representative Representative.
Representative Chasey.
Thank you madam chair
representative and I don't know
that you know I I I I tried to
support the city and Mr
presentation of as well and the
violence intervention program
was part of that.
But I I don't think you can just
go get without court capacity
of.
The prosecutors the the court
person and the public defenders
and so I'm really not willing
for this to get amended later
I'd like to have it be more
specific about what it what our
purpose is our and you know
perhaps some of it
This sounds like you were
thinking some of it isn't even
necessarily.
Going to go to this effort but I
also think you should have the
language in there targeting so
that there's a triage.
Purpose and it's not just go get
everybody's you know somebody
who's in for
something minor I don't want
that to be part of this we are
those individuals to be part of
this week because we really just
really that dangerous people we
want to get.
out of the community so I'd
rather and it and
And have you meet with Mr Bower
and the district attorneys and
the courts and see what is
needed this is a lot of money
and I know it's one time money
and so.
Interview.
I think that's probably why
there is you're not looking at
hiring new people because they
knew hired person your created
an expectation of course if we
could hire more police officers
we would do that and I know the
governor's tried to provide
funding for that as well but I I
think this is a good discussion
to have and I
I'm not opposed to making her
street safer but I think we do
that don't quite have this job
thank you madam chair
Representative Oakland.
Thank you madam chair a pretty
basically along the same lines
Representative Chasey.
Look at the numbers again I mean
then on the account we have
three thousand nine hundred
seventy six warrants out there
for.
People that we'd like to taken
to jail we should do a round up
and we do this ten percent.
Are we going to house of what we
can do with them however the
court's going to handle.
I I I just don't see a I don't
see how to do this effectively
without over burdening everybody
else that's involved.
So does the to work I think the
honestly I think we will lower
it in the at and some of those
should work on it and see how we
can address those issues not
that there isn't a need for
warrant roundup the biggest how
do we handle what we do after
we've done what we did.
Okay thank you madam chair.
Thank you any other comments
from committee members of I
guess I would like to share
concerns of my colleagues
representative of of Conan
Representative Chasey I think
the goal is laudable and a very
important one but there's really
not a lot of criteria how would
we know if the program
successful how are we going to
decide how to prioritize none of
those things are addressed and I
understand Representative ring
you have a I think you said it's
not in the bill but there's a
plan will.
She is this is an umbrella but I
think the umbrella needs a
little bit more detail so I'm
gonna have difficulty supporting
the bill is is there a motion on
the on the floor.
And chair if I might that you
know with the
issues that have come up could
we roll it over till Wednesday
and that would give us time to
meet and see if we can come up
with the language needed.
Yes and just want to reiterate I
did send you an email today
Representative Rehm suggesting
that you might want to meet with
our staff because we're always
of a our committee staff is
always willing to try to work
with the sponsor to improve the
bill so I I don't have any
objection if if no one else
does.
Yes but we're we're not planning
on meeting on Wednesday so we'll
have to do it on Friday if that
can that's fine all right great
so at this point will roll the
bill to Friday and and hope that
we can flush out your ideas
thank you thank you.
The.
Hello we have to come harder
than we've completed the in the
word today's hearing any to
offer right now the New Jersey
thank you for being there
gentlemen and ladies.
Of the during the.
