A permanent repository and so
we're saying as many have said
we will not allow this material
to be stored here until there
the federal government has kept
the faith and follow their lan
has a permanent repository in
operation.
Finally I just want to say
colleagues because this is
important do not lose the forest
through the trees that are
there's a proposal right now to
store the entire supply of spent
nuclear fuel here in the state
high level with the fact the
proposal permitted is double
more than double the current so
I of of wasted exist in the
country.
That it would involve ten
thousand caps ten thousand is
being shipped in the state of
New Mexico for a multiple of ten
times all the shipments of ever
existed in the country and it's
estimated by the federal
government itself that there
would be up to thirteen rail
accidents coming in and then and
then presumably if it goes back
out to a permanent repository.
You know you could.
Perhaps consider doubling that
amount but that's were added to
a license of forty years and up
it really This facility chess I
think recognizes some important
states rights and
You know make sure we're looking
after our interesting without
madam chair I will stop and
allow if you like our co sponsor
Representative McQueen to say a
few words of course thank you
madam chair members of the
committee
I'm used to seeing it there with
you down here today this bill
this two things one is requires
the consent of the state to
store this waste in the state
and this is language that
mirrors proposals under federal
law that they don't do this
without consent is there some
noise in here could we.
Could we stop the.
I can see you're trying but.
Which is a yes.
Sorry.
So that's why we choose that
language the consent in until
that until that happens it also
prohibits local permitting and
in contracting to facilitate the
storage site so there is a
preemption question federal law
preempts the states ability to
regulate the safety your
handling of nuclear waste so
we're not we're not doing that
we're asking for the ability to
consent and we're saying that
the the localities who are still
under state control will not go
down this path.
This proposal what was at the
heart of this bill is is the
proposal which would have a
limited local short term
financial impact.
Well having a long term negative
statewide impact for New Mexico.
The New Mexico is doing what it
can.
to develop after TIRS Kanemi
retirement communities things
like that we don't want to be
the nation's dumping ground.
We New Mexico has a long
history with.
A nuclear material right
beginning with the Manhattan
Project.
But we also live with the legacy
of that the the the down winders
you know from suffering from the
train the last.
There are no remediated uranium
mine tailings throughout thin
part questions in New Mexico.
And there's already with the
waste isolation pilot plant
which is a permanent repository
for transuranic waste.
The state what they're now
proposing is to bring all the
highly radioactive waste from
literally all over the country.
To New Mexico.
And I think it's time New Mexico
to cost.
Thank you ma'am thank you
Senator anything else before we
go to the audience thank you
madam chair for free to me
another another moment there I
just want to say that it's
important to know that over half
the state to pass resolutions
saying they really would rather
not and they're opposed to this
waste coming through the state
and building this facility it
would all come in via rail the
armed guard and what the members
of Travis county specifically to
know that.
the rail every bit of the
country's lace would end up on a
final rail spur coming through
Clovis Roswell a point Allison
on Eddy County so that's ten
thousand cast a little ways
going through your community if
this moves forward I think
that's really important for
folks in the and that's all I
have Mister thank you.
So let's go to the audience we
are going to first do those
wishing to speak in opposition I
would suggest that you get in
the middle while we have a
microphone available we do very
good thank you and I have a list
so all to the list and then I'll
ask for people to raise their
hand if we have time.
Thank you admin more.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is that man
I'm a program director Holtec
public to cover the Nuclear
Regulatory Commission and the
licensing process the NRC was
created by Congress in nineteen
seventy four to ensure the safe
use of radioactive materials why
protecting people in the
environment the NRC's completely
independent and they report to
Congress.
In our State facility licenses
comprised of an environmental
impact statement the safety
evaluation report Holtec
received the final EIS in July
B. O. M. and NMED were
coordinating agencies and had
direct input into the process
the public also had input there
was a six month public comment
period and six public meetings
responses over thirty seven
hundred comments including those
from the governor's secretary
Kenny can be found in the I. S.
T. I. S. recommends a license
pending a positive safety
evaluation report or S. C. R..
Yes your documents the NRC
safety analysis of the facility
during operations and storage
and Holtec expects positive S.
C. R. N. license later this
month so in summary the NRC
executed open and transparent
licensing process over the past
eight years the licenses fully
coordinated with PLM and NMED
the masses performed by the NRC
is peerless making Senate bill
fifty three not necessary to
keep New Mexicans and their
state safe Holtec international
recommends you vote against
Senate bill fifty three thank
you.
Thank you read more.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Roy Moore
I'm a registered lobbyist for
the Eddy Lea energy alliance
these are the the local
governments were in support of
this of this project and I just
want to address something very
quickly as it relates to
questions about whether or not
there's existing authority for
the environment department to
issue permits related to this
project I would say there is no
state authority to issue or deny
permits related to atomic energy
act materials spent nuclear fuel
is considered atomic energy act
materials it is it would qualify
as either special nuclear
byproduct material when you look
to the hazardous waste act
there's a clear definition that
excludes atomic energy act
material and there's also a
provision in the hazardous waste
act that says nothing in the
hazardous waste act shall be
construed to apply to any
activity for material related to
the atomic energy act material.
There is also similar excuse
exclusions in the solid waste
act and the water quality act
which defines water contaminant
to not include atomic energy act
material so when you talk about
permitting issuing or denying
those permits they do not have
authority and that is very clear
when you look at the existing
statutory regime thank you thank
you more details Jan way.
Good afternoon madam chair in
committee.
My name is Dale G. and way and
I'm here today is the mayor of
the city of Carlsbad.
I'm here to speak in opposition
to this bill.
Very strong consent has been
established for the whole day
project please include your
resolutions in support but the
city and county level and Eddy
and Lea counties as well as by
their economic development
organizations consent was not
just at the regional level in
two thousand fifteen then
governor Martinez wrote a letter
in support of the whole project
project.
In in two thousand sixteen the
state house and Senate passed a
memorial in support this content
is also persistent.
Raul bad eighty county hall Gen
we county officials again
indicated their consent and
letter signed earlier this year
consent existed to payroll and
local level it has existed at
the state level having received
all this content hello take ten
invested eighty million dollars
in the application process with
the Garcia.
This came out with their final
environmental impact statement
in the fall indicating that this
project would have minimal
impact the recommended to
project the last and.
With a strong history of consent
strong safety basically would
like to see the whole take
project move forward when
encouraging you to vote against
this bill thank you.
Thank you anyone else in the
John low low low.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is John Lowe
and I'm a lifelong resident of
cross bat I'm here to speak in
favor of the Holtec project I
believe that this project is
safe and has been studied in
detail and I strongly strongly
encourage you to pose New Mexico
Senate bill fifty three thank
you thank you.
Anyone else in the audience
wishing to speak in opposition
Mr king.
Thank you madam chair Gary king
I'm an attorney I serve on this
committee for twelve years I
have a consulting contract with
Altec I'm here actually to to
bring up an issue because I I
think this committee has a
reputation for hearing of bills
and really working on and so I
appreciate that consider this
this bill in the long run is a
bad bill for the environment and
and I'll give you an example
when I was the Attorney General
I successfully fought the
licensing revenue really large
coal fired power plant in New
Mexico but I don't think that
you can be against coal fired
power and also be against
nuclear power if we're serious
as as elected officials in his
policy makers about global
climate change we have to have
solutions and one of the
solutions is nuclear generation
of electricity because its
carbon free.
And so.
One of the things that's
important that we be able to
successfully deal with the by
products of these nuclear power
plants New Mexico has the
expertise has the the right side
has all the right things to help
clean up all of the country so a
lot of people say oh will this
is us being away so on this is
us helping the country deal with
the significant environmental
problem potentially helping the
world the end of a climate.
Change and so I hope that you'll
consider that as you consider
this bill thank you madam chair.
Thank you Mr king anyone else in
the audience wishing to speak in
opposition okay.
We'll go online now we have
about ten more minutes seven
more minutes left on the.
this side
of Sam Cobb.
Mr afternoon madam yes good
afternoon madam chair in the
committee my name is Sam combine
the more involved in the current
chairman of the Lee at the Eddy
Lea energy alliance without
reservation all the state's
experts on revenue projections
in the future points to a
downturn in oil and gas and a
need to diversify the state's
economy southeastern New Mexico
needs a diversification its
economy even to a greater degree
the nuclear industry one of the
few industry interested in our
area that can provide high wage
jobs and excellent benefits in
addition very conservative
revenue estimates indicated the
city of Hobbs alone would
receive between fifty million
and a hundred million and
royalty payments from Holtec in
just in a twenty year period of
interim storage proponents of
the legislation say we have no
obligation to be part of the
nuclear fuel cycle they fail to
admit that in two thousand six
the state and the government
entities that make up Leah and
Senator the construction of the
uranium enrichment facility
located eighteen miles south of
Hobbs in Lea County it is
currently the only commercial
uranium enrichment facility
United States and one of the
largest in the world if the
state and local governments have
consented to the birth of the
nuclear fuel cycle we're
obligating be part of the
solution regarding a safe
interim storage of that same
fuel until the economics and
technology advances find for the
recycling of that spent fuel is
also appropriate we should be
able to gain an economic benefit
from our consent to the storage
consider this Holtec project for
interim storage will be less
than fifty miles where this
nuclear fuel is being created
thank you miss we are not
working thank you Mr Cobb
appreciate it Mr gill.
Mr gill bill gill.
Yes our madam chair committee my
name is William.
we lost we lost you for a second
there.
Mr chair yes again okay.
R. I'm the general counsel hope
that are there to address the
Pacific gas K. the proponents of
this bill argue supports the
idea that SB fifty three won't
be federally preempted in that
case the California legislation
posed a moratorium on new
nuclear plants until the federal
government showed it could
permanently dispose of spent
nuclear fuel the Supreme Court
ultimately decided to California
moratorium was not pre empted
also said have a good thing for
proponents of this bill however
if you take even a cursory look
at the case we'll see the
comparing SB fifty three Pacific
gas is like comparing apples and
oranges unlike SB fifty three
the state party to determine
whether California needed new
electric generation capacity and
have need would be that was
recognized before and throughout
the history Tomic energy act
eight minutes since the United
conversation not intend to limit
the exercise many state the
party to meet electric
generating needs it was not
preempted in contrast to having
sex with your high school is a
different issue Congress has not
allowed the state to retain all
the regular four regulatory
authority over spent fuel
storage it is only the nuclear
aspects of high Stewart inspect
you'll transportation associated
with the facility the proponents
used to justify SB fifty three I
asked the bill's proponents of
court last it when the time
comes what is this bill
supposedly protecting New Mexico
from the reality is that the
only possible after that
question is that SB fifty three
tend to protect against
radiological health and safety
concerns whether the language in
the bill described that way or
not and it simply cannot be
disputed those concerns are the
concern of the federal
government and the federal
government all the clear a
after realizing that this this
deal thank you thank you.
Kyle marks dean mark signer.
Madam chair and members of the
committee my name is Karl Marx
diner I'm a resident of Carlsbad
strongly opposed to this bill my
parents are both educators and I
certainly believe in doing your
homework the community is a Leo
and the on Garcia all did their
homework on this process for
more than a decade and I feel
like the case for Holtec project
is very solid nuclear should be
best viewed as an opportunity
not as a burden thank you very
much thank you.
Jonathan Senator.
Yes ma'am I'm here and madam
chair and committee my name is
Jonathan center finally county
commissioner and I'm from Hobbs
New Mexico I oppose Senate bill
fifty three I'm a native New
Mexican and I believe we need
equitable safe economic
development for all parts of the
state Los Alamos laboratories
are phenomenal for northern New
Mexico but we need good safe
jobs for our part of Southern
New Mexico to for us that means
we need the whole tech project
in southeastern New Mexico
Holtec has undergone rigorous
public and scientific scrutiny
proving they're a positive and
safe development the Nuclear
Regulatory Commission itself has
even issued a final
environmental impact statement
stating there no environmental
impacts that would preclude the
in our State from fishing a
license for environmental
reasons again I oppose Senate
bill fifty three and I urge you
to oppose it also thank you
thank you John Waters.
Madam chair could hear me yes.
Thank you madam chair for let me
to speak members of the
committee I I'm gonna talk about
two things real quickly one New
Mexico is definitely part of the
fuel cycle not only do we
produce the fuel Los crucis uses
forty eight percent of their
electricity from el Paso
electric as nuclear Albuquerque
is twelve percent that's the the
majority of people living in the
state utilize it as users you
pay money to the to your bill to
handle the disposition of the
material that's created as as a
by product for as as a a waste
this up partially spent fuel is
material that you're paying to
do something with we can either
step up as a state and be part
of the solution and let all of
that money from the state's come
in and help the communities out
in the state of New Mexico
across the state or we can
continue to be part of the
problem and throw down the can
until somebody else steps up to
the to the state and it takes
more money away for New Mexico
to deal with the problem this is
one of the solutions to this and
I know the whole tech project is
something that is is certainly
been discussed quite a bit but
this would also eliminate the
possibility of having a
recycling facility which of
those of us in in southeastern
Mexico are very interested in
these facilities employee up to
twenty eight hundred three
thousand people are we going to
go ahead and cut us off to not
not have that as well I would
ask that you not be short
sighted that you vote against
Senate bill fifty three think of
the future New Mexico thank you
madam chair Bernice.
Yes everyone keeps saying that
nuclear.
A name please Torrez okay.
Thank you everyone keeps saying
how safe this nuclear waste is
and how badly needed our state
needs for income our.
Budget.
You know it's safe to tell it's
not safe ma'am are you speaking
in opposition to the bill.
Thank you for all right well we
need to stop there will get to
those in favor in a moment.
Okay
Casey.
Cass.
Casey castle you speaking
opposition.
Yes sorry.
My name's Casey has a lifelong
resident of Carlsbad New Mexico
and I think there are need to
vote against this bill
other points have been made but
this there's no detriment to the
oil and gas industry and I don't
believe the real roots has been
reported that there are any
negative impacts here all
involved.
Thank you thank you.
And G. barrios.
Angie.
Hello you madam chair thank you
for the opportunity and members
of the committee my name is Judy
part of yes I am a resident of
Carlsbad asking you to please
oppose this bill like others
have mentioned the environmental
impact statement was extremely
expensive and concluded that
this projects would be safe at
all junctures and I I would
really like if you would oppose
this bill thank you.
Thank you one more and then
we'll go to those and support
Steve cope.
Top.
Steve are you speaking is in
opposition you need to you
yourself.
Steve all right we're going to
go on to the next person
Melissa.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members my name is
Melissa Saucedo and as a
resident resident of Carlsbad
I'm opposed to Senate bill fifty
three the NRC's projection of
potential accidents do not
include a single release of
nuclear material this project
can be transported safely and
stored safely thank you thank
you that concludes our the the
opposition peace will now go to
the audience to speak in support
and I do have people who have
signed up in advance starting
with rose gardeners so thanks.
I.
Okay.
Excuse.
The difference is that's all
right so
Keep in mind.
So to speak.
You.
I'm gonna do a.
If people could organize
themselves relatively quickly.
Okay.
Thank you mind at about five F.
at about after ten minutes I'm
going to go to the zoom so that
we some people online who can
also participate.
Hi Caroline good afternoon
chairwoman the members of the
committee my name's Caroline but
I'm deputy chief of operations
for governor Michelle Lujan
Grisham she has publicly opposed
the construction of Holtec in
New Mexico since the beginning
of the administration and
nothing has changed we stand in
strong support of this bill and
we have been personally
contacted by major oil and gas
producers in the area after
cultural industry in the area
and oil and gas trade
associations regarding the
construction of this facility
there and they do not want to
see to move forward so we stand
in support of Senator Steinborn
and Representative McQueen today
thank you.
Good afternoon very good
afternoon madam chair members of
the committee appreciate the
Sanchez bringing this bill
forward and and madam chair to
your point about civility as you
open the the the meeting today
as you know the whole tech folks
have actually answered every
question we vast and I
appreciate them being engaged
with us at the Environment
Department however there
accountability is not the
accountability that the federal
government has shown to the
state of New Mexico including
the NRC as a cooperating agency
as you heard we were at the
Environment Department we were
Representative relegated to a
very finite point of that yeah
yes and then we weren't able to
find they didn't address all our
technical concerns madam chair
I think this is a point that the
rest of the federal government
has taken point of privilege
with with New Mexico whether
it's P. fast contamination or
any of the other things that
affect your community up in Los
Alamos we're trying to always
gain more accountability with
the dip with these federal
agencies and we just don't have
it madam chair and I don't think
we're setting a good precedent
until there's a permanent
repository thank you thank you.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Anil and and well are on the
policy adviser for the energy
minerals and natural resources
department one moment I don't
think it's fair to you to have
this is always the same phone.
All right all right so so as I
was saying on the policy adviser
at the energy minerals and
natural resources department and
we are one of the existing state
agencies that are part of the
with the task force the
radioactive material suffers and
we strongly support this bill we
have worked with the environment
department on this we have.
Basically consistently
consistent with Caroline
statement for since the very
beginning of this that presents
an idea of this facility really
opposed it after working with
the existing
Low grade storage facility thank
you so much thank you.
Chair members of the committee
my name is Leona Morgan and I am
here just to speak on behalf of
all the data residents of the
state as we've lived here since
time immemorial I'd like to
think the sponsor and everyone
who's worked on this bill and
ask for your support we do not
need more nuclear this bill
actually promotes what is a
waste of our public funds we
could invest in renewables
without nuclear or nuclear
hydrogen and I acknowledge we
have a long line of people
behind me and there's people and
soon we might not get to
including the all pueblo council
of governors yucca and many more
and there's a lot of resolutions
that have been passed in the
state of the happy to share with
all of you thank you.
Thank you.
Yes Sir.
Madam chair and members of the
of the committee I traveled in
from Shiprock New Mexico my name
is Joseph Hernandez I am a
registered lobbyist with and
then made a vote I am also a
grand child of a uranium mine
worker who was one of many
Navajo people who suffered the
death of the impact of the
uranium industry we are asking
for your support on SB fifty
three thank you thank you.
What's the madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Joseph Stacey I'm an organizer
of southwest organizing project
I'm on behalf of the
organization to support pledge
my support for the bill I'm also
pledging my support as a member
of the green the pueblo where we
are living with contaminated
land the ground water right now
just a reminder we already have
two point one million tons of
radioactive mills stored at the
L. bar site and the recent
government count ability this
report shows that the wire mesh
right wire mesh wrap layer of
rock designed to prevent the
spread of those radioactive
tailings are crumbling now so
nothing is really full proof
thank you thank you.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee thanks to all
of you especially the Sanchez
I'm Camilla I am and director of
the Rio Grande chapter of the
Sierra Club is presenting thirty
five thousand members and
supporters we did a national
study on this problem and the
conclusion is that the thirty
million high level nuclear waste
fuel rods should be stored at
the closest safest location to
the origin Intel federal law can
be met which requires an
operating permanent storage
facility otherwise we become the
de facto permanent location
these rods will be transported
by rail through our communities
we have a right to be the state
that's known for outdoor
recreation arts and culture not
the country's nuclear waste dump
thank you thank you.
That's a good thing.
Hello madam chair and members of
the committee my name is Erin
Lee and I'm here to speak in
strong support of a SB fifty
three I want to thank the
sponsors and anyone here who is
push this bill forward it is
critical that we as a state
remain vigilant in protecting
our land air and water from
nuclear waste exposure and I
believe this bill addresses
exactly that I want to urge the
committee to pass this bill for
the purpose of preventing any
further contamination that may
harm our communities and
preserve our precious air land
and water for future generations
thank you thank you.
The morning Cherry committee
good afternoon storage of
radioactive waste is an endeavor
has commitments to last many
many years longer than any of
our lifetimes and our children
and grandchildren's and great
grandchildren's lifetimes over
all these years and lifetimes
the most unlikely becomes likely
the risk that isn't recognized
or imagined then do reveal
itself risking a future that
doesn't belong to us just seems
wrong thank you.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee I'm
Douglas Michael charming
Attorney with conservation
voters New Mexico CVM emerge
you to support this bill I'd
like for just a minute to
address the issue of preemption
first of all the case that you
need to look at is not the
Pacific cast K. it's the more
recent US Supreme Court case in
the matter of Virginia uranium
company versus Warren they're
the US Supreme Court pointed out
that states do have the
authority to regulate certain
aspects of the uranium fuel
cycle the second perhaps more
important point is that the
argument that a whole take is
pretending to to the effect that
the state is preempted it's
exactly the opposite of the
argument that whole tech
presented to the Nuclear
Regulatory Commission where a
whole text said we're going to
comply with new New Mexico's
environmental requirements in
the NRC agreed that Mexico tech
would be required to do that
you should not at this point
take a call text word that it's
not going to comply with New
Mexico's requirements thank you
very much thank you I think we
have one more in
I and then we'll go to the
computer hello thank you thank
you chairman and committee and
Cynthia Wheeler and I speak for
the two eighty five alliance I
urge you to support Senate bill
fifty three.
You know the derailment of
Norfolk southern
in Ohio reminds us that
accidents happen.
We don't want this generation of
New Mexicans legacy to be
radioactive contamination to the
next generation of New Mexicans
thank you thank you.
Now we'll go online.
Danny cross.
Danny cross please you yourself.
Danny I'm gonna move on Steve
cope.
Are you speaking in favor of
this bill.
You need done you yourself
Steve.
Prior chairman hear me yes.
Okay fine I tried to speak
against when I had the chance
and the I was muted can I speak
now Mr Mr call we we were on in
support now so we're going to go
on to
terrain villa.
She has.
Terrain.
Terron thank you for.
Good evening our chair and
members of the committee my name
is Terrence via the executive
director of the all public
council governors I'm here today
on behalf of chairman mark
Mitchell former governor to city
Pueblo and nineteen Google
governor's Mexico and one of the
governor of Texas to stand and
strong support for Senate bill
fifty three and alignment
what is an alignment to APC G.
resolution twenty nineteen dash
fourteen.
To preserve the public's natural
and cultural resources
fundamental to this entire
discussion is consultation not
only among states but also for
tribes
Opponents of this bill have
described sufficient
consultation and work has
already been done however and
environmental impact statement
only four tribes were actually
had their opportunity to respond
to their initial requests for
this project but in those
proposed for those purposes and
in opposition to a consolidate
constant consolidate intern Star
Trek so the APC creeks presses
for thank you thank you
rose gardener.
Rosalie.
GNU yourself please.
I see your name there okay Rose
put yes ma'am thank you madam
chair committee members I'm rose
gardener communis I'm with the
alliance for environmental
strategies I strongly support SB
fifty three and other mechanisms
to control and regulate what
happens businesses come to New
Mexico our people are deserving
of protection of our way of life
in our house and will be
protection of our lands are
agriculture admin rights state
of New Mexico from businesses
that have self interest that are
not part of our values in New
Mexico thank you thank you
so FIA Jenkins Nieto.
Th.
Sophia.
I can hear you but you need to
speak up please mark.
Good afternoon chair members of
the committee my name is Sophia
Jenkins yet though I'm here on
behalf of our care environmental
justice organization in Santa Fe
but thousands of members and
supporters to speak in support
of SB fifty three for reasons
already stated and including the
new statewide poll shows a
majority of New Mexico voters
oppose the proposed project
nineteen cities and counties
have already passed resolutions
of post that transport of high
level radioactive waste to their
communities New Mexicans don't
want this thank you for
protecting our communities and
our water and our environment
please vote in support of SB
fifty three.
Thank you we have time for one
more person
Z. for Romeo.
Disease heart of meal.
I don't see Z. for Zephyr will
okay as ever how do you.
All right I'll go to the next
person here you hear me yes.
Thank you madam chair good
afternoon members of the
committee my name is Dr how to
meal and I'm here to speak on
behalf of yucca use United for
climate crisis action yeah
because a youth led organization
with thousands of members and
supporters in northern and
central New Mexico concerned
about environmental justice we
stand in strong support of this
bill because we're greatly
concerned with this but the
generate generation
transportation and handling of
radioactive waste all kinds
whether that be from nuclear
weapons nuclear energy or from
fracking we're strongly opposed
to the idea that New Mexico
should be a dumping ground for
this waste as a group led by
young indigenous people this
bill is particularly important
to us our people are lands have
experienced devastating effects
of nuclear contamination we
appreciate this bill as it will
protect our communities from
further harm thank you to the
sponsor and thank you for ending
the practice of sacrifice zones
please vote in support of SB
fifty three thank you.
Thank you that concludes our
public comment portion of.
This presentation Senator did
you have any concluding comments
before it go real quick then
chair two things number one.
Texas was confronted with the
exact same situation in the last
few years and led by the oil
industry they passed a similar
law of which is still in effect
has instruct them other courts
with only three dissenting votes
in the whole legislature like it
led by the oil industry because
they're very worried about
economic malpractice as are we
bringing this material through
some of the most productive
economic regions in the in the
world for oil and gas not to
mention other industries were
trying to create number two I
think there's a little bit of a
misrepresentation about state
law as it relates to the
regulation of spent fuel not
concerning the authority that
we're starting that is
recognized in the environmental
impact statement by the Nuclear
Regulatory Commission recognizes
that there's six state permits
at least that the state has to
issue that we have authority
over this bill prohibits the
issuance of that and so I just
want to clarify that and if you
have any questions we're joined
today by the council for the New
Mexico environment department
so it's pronounced throughout
mispronounce sent these Basil
Basil of county state by the
Basil from the New Mexico
environment department if you
have any questions about legal
matters will will address thank
you Representative McQueen madam
chair members of the committee
just in response on the comments
it was suggested that there was
the potential for twenty hundred
high paying jobs.
That's not the proposal that's
in front that's something
entirely different to recycling
plant it's not we're talking
about in the reason you would
cite the jobs from entirely
different proposal is because
the reality is that after the
construction phase this this
project doesn't provide a lot of
jobs thank you Madam thank you
Representative out now to the
committee.
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair Senator
Representative.
Probably is yes the Senators
okay
What I was looking at the bill
of.
Madam chair and senator I see
that for existing statute has a
word and bill so.
What we need to amend the bill.
What do we need to amend the
statute with your bill.
Well Madam chair representative
you know it's it's all the
additional new language that
governs how we treat high level
waste in you know the conditions
of our consent or lack of
consent how we require a federal
permit repository so it's an
expansion off of what was
really.
Pretty limited language in law
and this is building off of
that.
So.
Madam chair and senator.
At the last minute.
Because apparently some.
There's an expectation of a
license being issued fairly
quickly we were considering
legislation that.
Could potentially undo.
Many years of work.
After some
of the courage meant from the
state of New Mexico and I heard
the expenditure of eighty
million dollars
and so at the last minute we're
needing to have an emergency
bill of prepared to deal with
that the.
For for what reason.
Madam chair representative it's
definitely not last minute I
mean we've been talking about
this for years governor Lujan
Grisham I would point out has
been our governor for the
majority of the life of the
project almost since right after
hi tech apply for license and
and hope that quite frankly has
chosen and we've had bills to
study impacts
They've chosen to ignore really
what has been the major the life
of the project the large
majority opposition not just
from our governor from a
congressional delegation from
our communities from all public
council governors so the bills
you know DS of licenses near but
this is not the beginning this
is not a last minute I mean this
this legislation existed last
session you know what passed
through this committee in fact
passed through committee in in
the in the house in the Senate
so now it it never was defeated
but now you know obviously work
read zero our with these guys
being given a license but it's
not we've been talking for years
we just happened and listen to.
So.
Well.
Madam chair and centers is.
That's not quite accurate is it.
Well listen to with all the
respect I will acknowledge madam
chair representative that there
are some who supported it
something again encouragement of
this I empathize with whole
thank you know for that kind of
genesis years ago although
certainly was not universal I
think the best thing they have
going for was that New Mexicans
didn't know about this and as
New Mexicans have learned about
this they have strongly opposed
to just recently even like a
month ago both Bernalillo county
in Dona ana county unanimously
and bipartisan past resolutions
opposed to it so
You know you have to I think way
all this information because in
reality this will affect all of
us and that's a really important
thing to consider this place
will not just come through all
parts in New Mexico and if there
is an accident impact that
community courting the whole
tech if there is an accident
emergency response will be the
responsibility of the local
community in the state but in
fact this proposal affects the
entire nation and and and lots
of people very concerned about
the waste unnecessarily going by
their.
Home one images go by the second
time if there's when there's a
permanent repository so.
Just just a few is bigger.
Egolf fact that sent a fax to
look at.
madam chair and senator have you
ever been involved in
environmental impact statement
process.
Madam only in a way I have
because I've worked in the space
of federal land management law
and so I'm quite familiar with
the I. **** and.
You know a whole range of our
MPs resource management plans so
I'm very familiar with the
federal planning process.
And madam chair and senator
would would you consider that
process to be an easy process to
negotiate.
madam chair I would consider it
is definitely not easy it can be
thorough but but but we all have
to acknowledge you can be
subjective we've seen federal
policy change on a dime when a
new administration comes in the
law and the comes in the office
as it relates to to to EIS and
our MPs and I can give examples
if you'd like
particularly as it relates to
industry so there's a
subjectivity in their this
sometimes driving these things.
Madam chair and senator the the
subjectivity part would be one's
view toward may be potential
outcomes but it wouldn't be with
respect to the science what it.
Well you know I would say madam
chair subjectivity may not be
the right word of mouth might
say it might be to the exclusion
of information is not included
in the first place I think some
of the critics of the CIS in New
Mexico where the data points
that were considered
so including social justice
things that the NRC pays lip
service to care about but in
fact they reach out to a single
try proactively I think the
answer might actually be now.
You know if you engage it was a
self selection process and then
they say we considered social
justice so so is that so
subjectively choosing a
different outcome or that's an
inadequate process thank you for
the secretary talk about they
had a cooperating a status which
is not the same thing as a co
opted status they got to get
some input but it was an
adequate so.
So I I think the we are we don't
we we don't.
And I would also point out that
for what it's worth the ****
also estimated thirteen rail
accidents so.
You know.
What they're to on.
Well madam chair and so let's
talk about social justice for
second.
Is there not a whole section of
the R. S. devoted to that very
issue.
they do address it but I think
again Madam chair representative
I've I've addressed what we feel
are the deficiencies with the
approach the R. C. on that.
But madam chair and work and
senator people are given the
opportunity to complain about
the lack of adequacy were they
not but the the fact of the
matter is there's a whole
section devoted that issue and
an agency is in making a
decision based on.
The information lane plus the
public input with respect to the
variety of issues discussed in
the of our mon impact statement
process so just copy of Arnold
justice but there are a number
of issues that have to
be addressed when putting
together an environmental impact
statement M. each of those has
to be a not.
Madam chair representative you
know first of all the I
participate actually in several
those
Sessions or whatever you want to
call and that the NRC had in
there a lot of complaints
because it was in the middle of
the pandemic raging frankly.
People couldn't go to public
meetings because they're
concerned for their health or
technological issues and
And so and I think there's a lot
of skepticism over whether or
not it's really of you know
something that's pre ordained
but but I think if you were away
the totality of public comments
I would wager to say they were
strongly opposed to it.
So that doesn't mean that the
NRC shows to agree with the
majority of comments that came
in but that's the reality of the
COVID did receive.
No but madam chair and senator
you would agree that they have
to address them and.
Respond to comments that that
were raised.
Madam chair representative again
you know quite frankly.
The NRC has a predisposition to
one to approve consolidated
interim storage if they don't
they are fast in this very
question to you because I was as
you know we may not know as the
chair twice now of the state's
radioactive and hazardous
materials interim committee we
actually have the NRC out to New
Mexico for hearing and I asked
him the question do you get it
aside this is a bad idea or not
they said no solar policy
decisions decision to with those
to look at this thing and to.
So I think of things like how it
affects our state and.
You know our economic viability
our quality of life not not part
of their criteria and and and
part of what leads us is New
Mexicans with our history on
these issues feeling
very deficient on a process that
doesn't but should consider
those things and our point.
Madam chair and senator to the
artist product so start
subsequent to March of twenty
twenty.
Well madam chair I don't
no we didn't start prior to that
but I went through that and the
public comment part of that we
had an initial comment period
but then they had meetings where
people could call and that
happened through.
Through the time period I was
talking about.
The the meetings that were have
Throughout the state in various
communities around the state it
does occur before March of
twenty twenty or after.
wealth manager Madam chair
representative I believe the
ones I'm talking about happen
after that point in time but I
mean I don't have the dates of
all those meetings in front of
me but I'm quite certain the
pandemic was in full bloom at
the time ma'am ma'am ma'am
that's not appropriate.
And madam chair and senator
there were some zoom meetings
after after COVID where they're
not Madam chair representative.
Yes but not everyone has the
technology we've all learned how
to use them now but that was
those new technology than.
Madam chair and senator I think
my point is that there were
public meetings around the state
before
We have the health orders but
there was even follow up after
that with respect to utilization
of technology
would surprise you to learn that
the environmental impact
statement process took over five
years I think about five and a
half years in this case.
Learn well Madam chair
representative I can't tell you
how long how long the whole
process started from the
beginning of the application
process probably.
also mannose.
You know might have taken that
long but again I'm not.
With the exact date of the just
from in the and madam chairman
and senator that certainly
fairly significant amount of
time
for the federal agency to to
study and although I have.
Always complained about the.
Time that these things take
because people are waiting to.
Two things and yet the federal
government requires this process
that not only takes a lot of
time it takes a lot of effort
energy by a variety of folks to
come together with a document
that then.
Provides multiple of
alternatives does it not.
And fair they usually do yes and
and then the agency generally
selects a preferred alternative
and that is what generally
guides subsequent decisions with
respect to
that particular topic that's
covered I.
You know.
Madam chair and and Senator
We've heard from from the
communities in my part of the
state
And we hear the the the the need
for diversification we feel it
every day because we know that
are part of the state is tied
to.
Largely.
One industry and maybe a little
bit from from another active
culture and we recognize the
need to diversify and and we
heard from them the more from
opposite the.
There were trying to do
everything we can to diversify
we see energy not just oil and
gas.
Also fuel energy the energy
generally as being a route of
diversification and and so you
know we we have have.
I spent countless hours.
As communities as part of the
state trying to figure out how
do we hold ourselves out at
attracting.
High paying jobs.
Jobs are given opportunities to
our children.
And.
Frankly we've had some success
stories of and and the more from
Hobbs mention one of.
there are other opportunities I
think that were alluded to that
this operation
this ability to.
Have spent nuclear rods that are
on the surface.
Of the earth scattered
throughout the country.
Exist at every nuclear sites in
the United States and they are.
You can walk up to.
I have walked up to of.
They are on the surface at the
site.
And they are temporarily stored
there.
And some madam chair and senator
what is the difference between
being stored in those variety of
places and then coming to
Carlsbad for temporary storage
where we hope and I say we
communities in southeast New
Mexico hope that one day there
is a use for those products that
will allow for the employment
opportunities the the
jobs if you will
so so.
What what what is the difference
there that that I'm missing or
or and to be concerned about
thank you madam chair seven
think there's that that several
big differences number one we're
proposing to transport this ten
thousand guests that are
government estimates will be
thirteen rail accidents now
federal government is required
by law to create a permanent
repository are they required to
do an interim storage facility
now set a solution that some
industry want yes they can
produce more of it yes that's
not necessarily a smart national
policy
one of those communities want to
get rid of it and they do.
Because that's be creating
applied to them that's creating
a liability to them number two
is very important these cast
that they're stored in our
license for forty years by the
Nuclear Regulatory Commission I
promise you're not walking
directly up to the rods are
walking up to cast where they're
shielded it from the deadly
radiation if you were walking
right up to them but these
casters on for forty years this
license being proposed here is
for forty years and then an
extension of four forty there is
no permanent repository after
that so you can't just look at
this in the context of walking
up to a cast that maybe is been
there for a year or two years or
five years or even twenty years
ask yourself what happens in
thirty years what happens in
forty years when we suddenly
have ten thousand cap of these
caps in New Mexico which is
what's proposed.
Let's say the company goes out
of business.
And yet there is a bond but
what's to say that sufficient
who takes care but then what
happens if you start having
major malfunctions so there's a
lot of issues beyond just the
fact that yes you can put these
cast a rod spent two brought in
a dry cask it may be safe on
site now it's all these other
factors which are really what
we're.
Dealing with your you know.
And madam chair and senator you
set there.
Some thirteen rail accidents are
anticipated that's what the
study may reveal.
As I understand it madam chair
and senator.
The cast that are going to be
utilized for transport.
Are designed.
Similar to the maybe not similar
but that are designed to
withstand the anticipated
accidents are not.
Madam chair they they are
reinforced very reinforce but I
would say to you you know the
the history of nuclear storage
and web is you can have heavily
fortified things and things
don't happen the way you always
plan.
And we had a billion dollar
incident with because they
loaded the wrong kind of Kitty
litter and a drum and the damn
thing blew up or burned or
whatever word they use but it
cost a billion dollar incident
there was you know potential
radiation exposure no one was
harmed thankfully said anyway
thanks I we're talking about
casks right now he asked if
there are four to five and chair
and I'm just saying that even
the N. R. C. estimates that
there is the possibility of a
radiological receipt release we
should be humble about that
thank you madam chair and
senator that Burke that you just
described it didn't occur within
a casted.
It was in a drum of low level
storage madam it was in a drum
buried in the San.
Fifteen hundred feet underground
in the salt that had nothing to
do with the transport to.
no Madam chair representative
of.
Madam chairman and senator I
think we we all
are concerned about the safety
to making sure that the
material.
This not only stored safely
today on site.
But that if it gets transported
it's transported safely and if
it's stored in another facility
that is stored safely there's
there's no argument there the
issue the issue for me those.
Has the.
The company.
This represents Holtec has hoped
to.
Done the job necessary to to.
Provide that level of of
The security and safety and
whether the NRC has has done its
job in in ensuring that that
level of safety occurs and and
it it seems to me that that.
You know we're used to the
weather trucks coming through
were you know it's no longer a
novel every day currents and and
and so it seems to us along that
route that you're talking about
that that.
We've had no incidents with
respect to transportation at the
transuranic waste.
And.
The rail lines that will be
bringing that bring you the
spent fuel rods to Carlsbad
we understand are designed to
withstand the anticipated
incidents
and so you know they do this
massive study and the study all
that and some really smart
people do that and it concerns
me that.
We're at the point of the
currently license issuance.
And now we're we're we're
talking about a bill that that.
May or may not be relevant
because the preemption issues a
lot of the your health this
committee is here to debate
preemption issues but that it
certainly
is a real issue.
That could.
Because the state of New Mexico
to be substantially engaged in
litigation for number years so
I'm I'm concerned about the
about the process and and
I really think that
That to a certain extent we have
to rely upon those federal
experts and and let them do
their job and let just like we
do the state agencies like the
state agencies do their job at
and and show us that the things
are done properly but I I I.
See tremendous opportunities for
southeast New Mexico with
respect to energy and a lot of
that revolving around for the
future nuclear energy.
And.
By encouraging these types of
Facilities will enhance our
ability to attract bigger and
More.
Robust employment opportunities
for the future because of the
materials are those facilities
are going to locate their.
Would you agree with that.
Well madam chair the one
opportunity that's been brought
up as recycling and I would say
to you there's no recycling of
spent fuel for the existing
reactors for technology that
exists in America so that is
purely hypothetical that doesn't
exist I mean so you can say it's
a realistic hypothetical does
exist in our loan madam chair
and senator.
madam chair a in some parts of
the world because we don't have
those reactors here we don't
have that technology here and if
you look at the timeline it
takes to get things permitted
You know those are very long
time horizons so.
You're not talking any time soon
so all the other concerns I
mentioned all apply because
you're talking very far in the
future.
So madam chair and senator as I
understand it.
The fuel cycle of a nuclear
plant.
Those rods are in place for.
Year and a half maybe two years
and then there remove and those
Rod Stewart some of them are
removed and and those rods
apparently consume about three
percent of the Energy that's in
that Rod so about ninety seven
percent of the Energy still
there and wells that there may
be some to carry over the course
of the forty years however long
it is they're still substantial
nuclear material we would be
talking about this today they're
still substantial nuclear
material in those rods that can
be hope hopefully with
technology and and and do
things.
That can take that brought.
We refurbish it and and send it
out for for reviews and and note
that you will of knowledge
that's where the jobs are in the
future
or I hope you with the topic
that that's really where we're I
think for our part of the state
that's where the jobs are is in
taking these fuel rods are
stored.
Bring them to the bring them to
the surface and then and then
Going through some process to
resell new rods to those same
nuclear reactors so for for us
it's a if it's an opportunity to
diversify our economy it's an
opportunity to
Deal with an issue that exists
nationwide and it's an
opportunity for us to continue
to have a vibrant nuclear
The clear opportunities within
that two or three county area
that currently exist and and I
think we heard from the mers of
two cities and and others said
to support this and so I would
encourage us not to passes bill
allow hold to to
save about it's license center
currently is forthcoming and not
be an impediment to that
activity thank you madam chair
thank you Representative
Representative Chasey leader
chasing.
Thank you very much madam chair
and senator Representative I
appreciate your.
Presentation and all of the
testimony in favor or opposed I
am.
I heard that it took a great
deal to present the.
For a whole tech to file as
environmental report and these
this is Vernon report that whole
take filed in twenty twenty
something that's public.
Madam chair
Madam leader of the well the I.
S. is public and.
So I don't know that's quite the
maybe that's question you're
asking yes that is public.
Chair Senator Representative in
that report the one I have
information about was filed in
November of twenty twenty.
And.
And we need to confirm or
straight me out.
Whether Holtec explained it
would be required to comply with
environmental.
permitting programs administered
by the New Mexico environment
department.
Representative yes
they did.
Make that statement.
Those would.
The madam chair governing the
protection of surface water
drinking water groundwater air
quality.
Holder Representative also would
include workers worker safety
issues as well and waste
management pollution prevention
historic and archaeological
resources.
And madam chair.
Has the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission.
confirm that whole tech will
have to comply with New Mexico
requirements.
Madam chair representative yes
they have.
Okay.
this from this is from the E. I.
S. madam chair the agencies
listed whose approval would be
required include
A number of New Mexico.
Agencies is that correct.
Madam chair representative yes
that's correct.
And you know we were told that
are there various
Because the atomic energy act
madam chair that there's really
nothing New Mexico can do to
stop this but
the Virginia uranium case of
twenty nineteen indicates that
the
The court there rejected the
mining companies argument that
the Virginia statute was
preempted by the atomic energy
act.
And Justice portion of course
it.
Other that opinion.
And madam chair.
He acknowledge that
the atomic energy.
Thank does give the commission
authority over some parts in
madam chair can you tell us what
the Atomic Energy Commission
economic control or Thor what
what they have authority over.
Madam chair representative.
The atomic energy act gives the
federal government authority
over.
radiation both the the
production of energy from that
and also the health impacts of
that.
But as justice Gorsuch said in
his opinion and it.
With that states retain their
historic authority in in the
areas where they have
traditionally exercise that
authority so that is why New
Mexico has the authority to
require permits in the area of
groundwater surface water
discharge hazardous waste
OSHA are a state OSHA has some
regulatory authority over
nuclear facilities and madam
chair that.
The nuclear nuclear regulatory
commission is.
It's its mission is to protect
the public health and safety
from radiation hazards right
manager that's correct Madam
chair representative.
Madam chair representative I
might that they have no
experience for jurisdiction over
groundwater and surface water
discharge right.
Chair.
That's what information that I
have is.
From.
So madam chair this legislature
and this executive has a
Authority to look at possible
impacts.
Of the proposed disposal and
storage of spent nuclear fuel
that are not covered in the
atomic energy act correct Madam
chair representative that's
correct.
We can also madam chair look at
Air quality hazardous waste in
occupational safety and health.
There's.
Another court case in the tenth
circuit madam chair that I think
the opponents have relied on the
skull valley banded Goshute
Indians do you want to talk
about how that is not consistent
with the argument they're
making.
Madam chair representative yes
that was the tenth circuit's
decision in two thousand and
four.
in the state of Utah.
and many of the counties around
for the proposed temporary
storage facility would have been
located
past a very broad and
comprehensive set of regulations
that would have prohibited.
and changed contract law so that
tell C. directors for example
with that individual liability
if there'd been a nuclear
Radiation accident things like
that it was quite a
comprehensive set of state laws
and county ordinances that were
put into place that was madam
chair in Utah that that was in
Utah and that was found to be
preempted because they were all
directed at the health impacts
of radiation and concerned about
that
and what the.
some of the commenters earlier
failed to mention was that the
most recent decision in this
area is that virgin uranium
decision that's by the Supreme
Court which would take
precedence over that two
thousand and four K. which was
not a
Factually very different from
what the statute fifty three
would do.
So madam chair.
the conclusion that I draw from
justice.
Little bit of information here
legal analysis of these cases is
that.
Because this bill is not based
on health and safety for
radioactive materials that it
would be here contention that is
not preempted by the atomic
energy act.
Madam chair representative I I I
I I think it would be highly
unlikely to be struck down on
preemption grounds that's
correct okay
so madam chair if we pass this
bill and it were challenged
legally.
It doesn't appear that the
Supreme Court precedent would
appall that challenge Madam.
Madam chair representative
that's correct.
Thank you representative
Representative of Oakland.
Thank you madam chair and not
being tried to run to get back
here today.
sorry at the bill over there
number one I just have a couple
of facts that I want to look at
that mention.
Number one this and I want to
bring back everybody's memory
how much money that it cost
losses to the New Mexico.
Would you cut the city of
Carlsbad had a hole in the
ground that they would not take
care of how much did we have to
spend out of the state of New
Mexico because they just read
away from the.
Madam chair I think a new maybe
we can offer crowdsources answer
but I I think it was fifty to a
hundred million dollars so as a
lot over thirty billion dollars
madam chair and that's where my
problem is okay.
Yes my problem is madam chair I
I live in New Mexico I was born
in New Mexico as were in
Colorado but I do do from yes
four years old and I did say
he'll.
But if we do this kind of stuff
and we bring this nuclear waste
into New Mexico.
As things fall apart is that
whatever you call it basket.
what's going to happen to the
rest of us I mean the people
that are going to bring it in
they're going to back up and
leave their bags go back where
it came from.
And the we're going to get stuck
here.
With a big mess that's my big
problem this number two problem
that I have is no real reason
are not safe I'll railroads are
nothing you are close to safe to
carry this kind of stuff in my
backyard madam chair I wounded
illegitimate line not even the
quarter mile from my house the
trains pass those three hundred.
Cars long.
As fast as they can go.
And that they're saying that the
the real rates are going to be
safe for this kind of stuff to
come through lived in eight I
don't think so madam chair this
is my big concern I'm the number
one is of course right now even
the we take pass a bill to have
the to make sure that there was
two people on that tray and then
make is that the.
Make it through the Senate
anyway but I don't we think he
would have to people on the
train to make sure that during
the safe much listed we have.
Of making sure that those tracks
are safe for that stuff to my
village this department madam
chairs I'm really not in favor
of this kind of stuff having to
buy the eight thank you madam
chair thank you representative
Representative ring.
You madam chair and senator I
have a couple questions I want
to follow up on it in the chair
and Representative style R.
Senator stand Steinborn of you
said that you just see in ours
and our see if it was a good
idea or bad idea and it sounds
like they just told you it was a
policy decision.
Correct chair that they said
they they're they're.
It's not within their purview to
decide if it's good policy.
Which is I guess what I'd just
madam chair and and Senator I
find that.
I find that
Response kind of flip and if I
can say it that way because I
mean their task is to go ahead
and protect the public that's
our mission so I would I would
say is well it might be a policy
decision it is in part in
conjunction with their mission
to go and protect the public out
of it so I just wanted to
clarify that and and then the
reconditioning of fuel rods
that's been asked that's what I
really see the company to in the
future and I think that's our
business model
madam chair and senator your
talking about the cast of
storage and I want to talk about
the cast that whole Texas using
can you give me a
example of when they will have
been compromised or anything
like that not talking about just
their cast their madam chair
give you a few examples the cast
is on is called the high Stewart
am sure maybe that's also
regulated by the Nuclear
Regulatory Commission I asked
the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission during the course
meeting chair I wanted to know
how safer these cast so I
actually asked if the Regulatory
Commission for safety data on
cast going back ten years they
found almost a hundred
incidences of potential safety
issues none that ended up
becoming serious thank god but
also again this is a fraction of
what we be dealing with let
alone over a much shorter period
of time there is almost a
hundred incidences some of them
involving Holtec again no one
was hurt also whole tech right
now manages Sentinel free some
dry cask storage center for
there's been some incidents just
again in the stuff happens
category of what I was saying
happens
where there was a cast that was
being loaded into the chamber
and almost fell and they stopped
and I think.
It one point time there were
concerns about the Shem inside
the cast which which help to
allow the air to circulate to
keep it safe which I think at
some point time in our State
actually put a pause and said we
need to re evaluate so.
So take your question there have
been incidences and you know.
When you magnify what we're
talking about here over ten fold
over longer periods of time.
It's not a matter of if there's
the situation it's when it's how
serious it's where it occurs.
And so that's the data in there
are there are those instances
which I've.
Madam chair and senator would
you just detail what an incident
is.
Is it a release of radiation
what is an incident I can't
Madam chair representative of
you know the the safety
instances over those those casts
that they regulate throughout
various sites I don't know you
know I kind of gave you the
bigger picture of what I know to
be true but I can't tell you the
details of what they involved
other than what I know about
what happened and sent an offer
a which.
Which was serious because when
you're talking about ten
thousand Cass you know that just
the mechanics of loading them
into chambers moving around
something gets bumped around.
You know you're talking about
the structural integrity issue
of materials and I don't even
though the site has a
repackaging facility will tell
you talking to some of the
experts who work on this
nationally in our laps
that was their big concern to me
was they said what happens when
you have to do re packaging and
so you have to worry about
structural integrity of moving
these things around what happens
when there's problems.
Madam chair and senator.
So in a previous committee when
you testified and Holtec also
testified the explained about
how the tests those Cass one of
the test was crashing into it at
a hundred twenty miles an hour
with no compromise so
You know is I testified in that
committee or ask questions in
there I have been asked to be
part of the we security team to
transport and
You know the have a lot of the
very strict regulations I
actually know some of the people
that worked on the design of the
semis and how they're
transported.
And we don't want to go into the
what's in there but madam chair
and senator let's move on so we
saw the highways upgraded in New
Mexico for the the
transportation to whip do you
foresee that they will upgrade
or improve the rails to their.
Madam chair representative I
would certainly hope so and we
for those kinds of comments but.
You know at the same time this
rails going to come in from all
over the country through all
parts of New Mexico does that
mean every mile of rail is going
to come in over all parts of
America are going to be
upgraded.
It did they think there was
gonna be accident and an Ohio or
the ones we see on a daily basis
so
I think probably some will be
upgraded because they're not
even physically suited right now
to the weight of these things
but do I think they'll all be
upgraded no such that you
mitigate all the rest I doubt it
very soon and I haven't heard
that to be the case.
And madam chair and senator in
the previous committee you
testified that the rail
transportation would be a small
train if we'll waive would not a
three hundred car trains with
of armed guards on it to protect
the shipment is that what you
think that would be.
Madam chair representative I
don't think I ever spoke to what
kind of training to use that
that was not something I testify
to okay and.
Madam chair and what's my real
problem is is whether it's it's
administration previous
administration but once we kind
of give the green light to a
company to come in.
And start building the
infrastructure I think that we
need to follow through and I
mean that for the current
administration if they decide
they want to invite whatever
company or work with whatever
company come in I'm really
afraid that
that New Mexico's gonna have a
breach of contract issue and I
don't like you talked about all
the millions of dollars that's
K..
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator good to see you
and representative.
I just wanted to return to the
bill
And you know I think this is
that.
Very significant piece of
legislation
you know it's.
The consequences of its
passenger failure I don't take
lightly
what is what I'm looking at page
for.
Lines thirteen and fourteen.
It's a it it refers to a
repository and it's basically
saying that.
This repository.
I think thank you I think the.
Requirements of subsection see
me in the this repository.
Must be an operation before.
Any permit contract lease or
licenses would be issued.
For spent fuel are high level
waste can you tell me about what
that repository is of that with
how that's defined in the
federal code reference will
Madam chair representative so
that is but the geological
repository as defined by the
nuclear waste policy act and
that's what that's a reference
to that's a requirement in
federal law that the federal
government ability to a logical
repository for permanent storage
and so that's one of the things
is both statuses until there's a
deep chill out for deposit Tory
New Mexico should not be
entertaining the idea of interim
storage because there's
basically no final solution was
federal government says there
must be for safety reasons and
does that is that repository in
operation currently Madam chair
representative there is no
detail off the repository in
existence let alone an operation
that was going to be up a
mountain yucca mountain of
course was a project that was
stopped there is no permanent
repository in operation or even
designated at this point.
And so the so this languages
basically mirroring the federal
requirement and so is it is it
the case that also in federal
law.
The permanent repository is is
supposed to be in place before.
A temporary or interim
repository would be in place.
Sure.
Madam chair representative could
you repeat the question to make
sure I'm clear that is it also
is it this bill is laying out
that this permanent repository
needs to be in operation before
Any disposal facility for spent
fuel are high level waste is it
permitted Center here is that is
that the same as federal
requirements is that nearing
federal requirements is that
permanent repository supposed to
be in place basically I'm asking
is is nearing the federal
requirements.
Madam chair representative.
In part it is it is the federal
policy in that statute from
which this definitions taken
that the federal government is
to I find work with the state
and get it built and operating
that is the right the federal
statutory policy.
They are still working in the
department of energy on a.
consent based policy of how they
will work with states that want
to host that repository that is
not yet final.
But there is they have it out
for comment we've commented on
it expected would be another
year before that policy is in
place and that would involve.
Quite a long list of things
department of justice the money
attached to it all those kinds
of things so it's in the works
but it's not yet a an official
requirement.
Thank you madam chair and
senator Representative
And then this this task force is
currently responsible for
overseeing.
What facilities and in New
Mexico.
If any Madam chair
representative of its way up
from that yeah that's what was
created and then it really
became dormant in reality until
until our crack staff let's
council secretary you know we
have this thing this reporting
to us every year and it was
interesting because we talk
about what governor Martinez did
with relation to this proposal
and they said this law as it
stands now doesn't require us to
contemplate a private facility
and that's one of the reasons
why we're doing this so
Yeah so it's it's wet.
In in your I see you're adding
additional members to the task
force what
could you just describe the the
thought process in terms of why
those individuals or those
secretaries were added to the
task force absolutely madam
chair here that the whole
purpose of this was to really
have New Mexico's back into to
be proactive these are the paid
professionals who work forty
hours a week you should be
considering these kinds of
things and being proactive about
how we consider New Mexico's
interests so as we kind of re
energized it and also in here we
change that they speak to us
annually not just regularly
which meant number
which cases to annually so by
adding homeland security the
Indian Affairs Department the
commissioner of public lands
wanted to be included we're
actually creating a robust state
apparatus to look at these
things and now put us to them
under this administration their
meeting they're having public
meetings they're considering
these things and that was
exactly what we wanted to do and
they're kind of doing some of
the things that we do
contemplating here but it's but
this will codified in law so.
Thank you madam chair and.
Senator Representative for that
You know I I I like the
structure of this bill because I
think you're building on.
an existing structure I think
you're creating some comparable
requirements to use the federal
requirements and you know I
think as a.
As a policy matter I think it's
very appropriate for the state
to weigh in on a.
Of facility of this of this
magnitude
and I think.
We've had a number of instances
in our history where you know
our lives were not necessarily
under our control we have
significant amount of.
Federal indoor video state lands
public lands
and.
You know I think the
ramifications of some of those
actions are certainly
Well it for me the health
impacts of some of those
prior activities weigh heavily
and are still present today so I
think it's very appropriate for
the state to have a body that is
designated a law that is you
know that you have made this
sense to more robust for these
additional positions that we're
creating some requirements that
near the federal requirements
were not you know creating a
higher bar within the state than
necessarily with the federal
government would be looking at
in terms of approving this and I
think it's important that we as
a state have that voice.
In something
that is.
X. it could be extremely
consequential and I appreciate
the thoughtful approach and I
appreciate that you have worked
with in some existing frameworks
that exists for us to to have
that places thank you madam
chair thank you senator
Representative.
Thank you Representative anyone
else with questions or comments
on the committee.
I have a few.
Thank you
this notion that of a state or
community an undefined
must consent which is what is in
our that the bill that you're
proposing
has anyone else enacted the such
a requirement Mr Senator.
It's good question madam chair I
don't know that I don't not that
I'm aware of I will say that our
current law says we must concur
we added the word consent
because that is where that also
tracks with federal policy now
or they have launched a consent
based process of of identifying
committees actually want this
and and have appropriated money
to move but they are calling a
consent based process so we use
this word to track with that you
thank you senator by consent you
meant consent to a permanent
facility that's how you
presented that
that.
That new kind of federal
approach to doing things a might
not correct I see Mr Basil
nodding its head so
Miss madam chair.
In a let the or just for answers
well thank the consensus to the
the interim facility.
I understand what the bill says
what I'm asking is what in
federal law is currently because
the senator has highlighted this
whole cuts this new federal
consent process and I understood
it to apply to a permanent store
the permanent storage facility
am I wrong about that and I see
Mr Basil Maine have some
information to share with chair
minor my understanding is is the
place to the they're dealing
with the interim facility I I
would like Mr but they still to
leverage.
Madam chair of the.
Department of energy process
consenus process that is being
developed is primarily driven by
the permanent repository
In.
It the federal government has
not been soliciting interim
storage proposals.
So and so it's as far as we know
so far it's just related to the
the permanent storage facility
okay I understand thank you so
we have no case law or any kind
of opinion that would suggest
that this is the this consent
requirement is enforceable
doing.
Madam chair I I don't know the
answer to that question okay
madam chair
the I was in the answer is no
that might be something that is
the subject of litigation I
would point out that the bill
source structure in two parts
the first being at the consent
and the second thing
the restriction on political
subdivisions activities that
further this activity yeah I get
that right now focused on the
consent part
so.
We don't know
we do know that the regulation
of.
I don't know how you want to
call it radio active activities
we want to call it that is
preempted by federal law.
This bill says we have to
consent to the Exeter of
radioactive activity before we
can move forward so you know I
maybe I'm a simple minded person
but that sounds like we're
trying to regulate radioactive
activity in the state and is
there for preemptive.
Madam to answer.
Madam chair in in the Virginia
uranium K. justice Ginsburg
address that and said
that in this area of federal
preemption
there's no requested the federal
government cannot require the
state to issue a permit for a
facility.
That's different than saying
we're regulating what's inside
the facility review act working
with radioactive materials but
she very explicitly called out
and said.
Just because at our C. D. O. E.
you want to issue a license
doesn't mean you can't require a
state to issue all the permits
to go for that facility the
groundwater what surface water
those kinds of things so she was
very explicit about that well I
thank you for that
Mr Basil but that's alright too
of the bill I get that
part one of the bill is even
before we get to issuing permits
etcetera etcetera we're
consenting and what I've heard
you all say is you don't know if
that's in forcible whether that
will be preempted there some
suggested it might be preempted
and as I said my little simple
money says this is a way to
regulate of the insertion of
radioactive activities in the
state which is pre empted.
Madam chair I would just add.
That I think if we pass a law
that that's that's.
Appropriate normal person would
say that that's saying a saying
we don't consent as not
regulating I mean it's saying we
don't consent and not an issue
the permits and we have a
rationale for not doing so but.
Post regulating at the
management of it ICS is I think
has been noted by at least one
of your co sponsors it it
certainly raises a legal issue
that I will definitely I know
that the litigated and I suggest
that because if it's this easy
to keep a nuclear facility of
your state
I'm sure the nuclear industry is
going to view this is a very bad
precedent.
Madam chair I will say that they
tried this in Utah they do not
succeed they tried in Texas
Texas passed a law this is not
stuff that happens everyday of
the respect and and so it's it's
there's I think we have a
reasonable chance of having this
not happen here and said the
other importance of this piece
legislation.
okay so thank you
I'm interested in this task
force because I think I'm a
member of this task force and I
don't remember having very many
meetings.
So I think there may be banned
I've been on it for maybe a
couple years and
I think there may have been a
couple soon calls schedule but I
can't remember any great like
insights into what happened in
terms of of radioactive
activities in the state so
suddenly we're all gonna be on
board with this task force and.
Actively monitoring what's going
on at the labs and that anywhere
else that we thank there is an
issue that right the madam chair
you know for proposals like in
this this this that yet that's
what we're saying that's why
adding that a total requiring it
and for what it's worth yield
energy secretary under the
previous governor testified for
Committee and and we said why
did you not do due diligence and
he said because we're not
required to by law and his
suggestion was changes task
force to expand it that was from
the previous governor the energy
secretary whose departments
tasked with this task force so
it's on them to do their due
diligence and that's the
important portents also of
what's in this bill where we
require them to report to us
annually instead of regularly so
that they're and habit of
convening of talking about these
issues and.
Being a lot more proactive the
last governor by your own
admission was not and and.
Okay
will happen again.
Thank you for that we talked a
little bit about the NRC process
and ari was not around I guess
when the NRC came to visit but I
also seem to recall a phone call
that we had set up with the NRC
through the radioactive.
waste committee that you and I
serve on Senator and it was a
conference call Senator with the
commission and that was arranged
by of the council service and
you know I have to say it was
almost I was embarrassed when I
dialed in and I was embarrassed
because there is not one other
member of the radioactive
Committee which is chaired by
either you or me or somebody
else during the interim and I
thought well this is interesting
if we were really that
interested in understanding what
was going on with the NRC
process and where we are going
we would have had of the whole
committee or at least
everyone who was seem to be very
interested in this whole process
and I stayed on the phone
because I was like my gosh we
just for this meeting and here I
am wanting to talk about it not
one other elected official who
is on that committee chose to to
dial in to talk to the NRC and I
have to say that was very
disappointing to me an
embarrassing frankly if we
thought this was such an
important issue so you know I
think these bills are great and
they certainly make a statement
give a message but I'm also
interested in legislating things
that are enforceable and I have
some serious doubts about the
consent process and certainly
these other issues about
permitting and whether or not
what what we can permit what we
can't certainly the Utah K.
allowed for some things that
didn't touch on nuclear or
radioactive but said yeah you
know if you're monitoring how
they dispose of their waste yeah
you can do that if you want
workers to be safe yes you can
do certain things with that but
it's a very my recollection that
basis pretty narrow in terms of
what one could do and the in
addition I'm a I would suggest
to you you have to do it to
other types of businesses and
companies because my suspicion
is if you just single out.
One over another you're going to
have some issues there as well
so
I have issues with this in terms
of preemption lastly why did we
transuranic waste to this bill
which is waste that you know is
generated at Los Alamos and the
ship to whip right now what was
the thinking behind that.
I can answer madam chair so we
we treat transuranic waste
different from high level waste
in this bill we broke it out
because because.
It was already part of our law
right but we wanted to make very
clear that what we're really
doing when we talk about the
prohibition of storage or
disposal we're talking about the
the high level spent fuel that
has these conditions attached
attached to it transuranic waste
has a different kind of current
status quo.
Policy yes Mr chair Steve or
briefly the transuranic waste is
exists the thing we do with it
added to the bill it's it's not
new language because I I was
reading some of the now says
that are staffed in the
suggested it wasn't language so
My apologies
I think with that I have
made my points and ask my
questions is there anyone else
before we the technician.
All right.
Would you pass on Senate
conservation committee
substitute for Senate bill fifty
three.
We have a motion for it to pass
on Senate conservation committee
substitute for Senate bill fifty
three made by Representative
Romero and seconded by
Representative Chasey to come
home thank you madam chair
Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane.
Speaker Martinez as.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert the.
Representative read.
Representative Rehm.
Representative Penske yes.
Madam vice chair yes.
Madam chair yes.
Manage up no I'd like to take
that back now.
Madam chair an opportunity to
verify the vote.
Mr chair.
We have six.
Madam chair with six.
The madam chair with six yeses
and I knows you have a do pass
on Senate conservation committee
so for Senate bill fifty three.
Thank you thank you center thank
you thank you.
We're on our next item.
It's House Bill five forty.
I for a business it is a sub.
Yeah they modify that they
modified it to address.
This bill is.
Actually eight.
That's what.
Thank
you have.
So just committee we are having
dinner brought in.
I know it's really out of
character for me to be so so
nurturing of the committee but
now.
You know I'm trying to to.
Is
never too late so it when they
arrived so let you know okay but
if we could try to have a brief
presentation level on a Genda
and people are tired as you guys
thank you yes definitely thank
you madam chair and members of
the committee house bill five
forty we do have a committee
substitute.
and I would just tell you what
this what it's about
At the the three forty and and
please excuse me if you feel
like you're lost because health
care will lose you in a
heartbeat.
But program that the three forty
B. program from medications this
our generate valuable savings
for safety net hospitals and
health centers providing
uncompensated care across New
Mexico the savings help provider
strict strict limited resources
to enhance patient services and
access to care.
House Bill five forty is not
passed underserved New Mexicans
will lose access to valuable
lifesaving care Representative
give me one second chair of the
committee so present I'm sorry.
Okay so
New Mexicans will lose lose
access to valuable lifesaving
care just pharmacy benefit
managers also known as PBMs
continue to a road the three
forty B. programs financial
support three forty B. as a
federal program to provide
financial support to safety net
hospitals and health centers
to discounts on prescription
drugs.
The purpose of the three forty
B. program is to enable covered
entities called to stretch
scarce federal resources as far
as possible reaching more
eligible patients and providing
more comprehensive services the
three forty B. program is not
designed to affect the prices
paid by paid sick patients for
prescription drugs but what
happens is that that the savings
you know madam chair I'm just
going to let my experts
introduce themselves and now
yeah this is pretty complicated.
yes Sir so madam chair and
committee members Michael
Richards I'm the senior vice
president of clinical affairs at
the university of New Mexico.
M. Kate Becker and the CEO for
hospitals okay great so.
I'm sure you can make it really
simple
We're looking forward to that.
So madam chair and committee
members so this as as
representative Thompson said the
three forty B. program has
actually been in place since
nineteen ninety two federal
program in its in its most
simple form what it allows is
for certain hospitals and
clinics that provide services to
a high number of indigent
patients and underserved
patients to purchase drugs at a
discounted price then those
savings from purchasing those
drugs can then be used to
deliver services to those
vulnerable populations and to
cover the cost of uncompensated
care that gets delivered by that
that limited number of
facilities the reason we need
this House Bill five forty is
that that that the
pharmaceutical benefit
manufacturers are pharmaceutical
been you benefit managers have
started to restrict access to
this program reducing the
savings and ability for the
safety net hospitals to
participate the house bill five
forty does not expand the
federal program it does not
create any new conditions on the
federal program it only
preserves the integrity of the
program in other states have
also found the need to do this
you know there are currently
about twenty one states that
that have been acted this kind
of legislation around P. B. M.
activities
this substitute bill from
representative Thompson does
include some substantive changes
that we would like to highlight
it focuses on the PBM practices
it strikes out the section that
was dealing with pharmaceutical
manufacturers it reduces it
strikes out the section on the
an enhanced reporting and it
also allows for the preservation
of a modifier which is a code to
know when the three forty B.
program has been used in as
representative Thompson said if
we don't.
Protect this program that we
will see that that this will be
a statewide impact there are six
hundred and seventy five
registered sites that deliver
this three forty B. program in
New Mexico most of them
community based clinics they
will not have the resources that
they need to provide care to
vulnerable populations thank you
madam chair and committee
members thank you
Anything else Representative
before I go to the audience okay
madam madam chair I believe the
amount that could be that it
could cost the state is twenty
two million dollars I'm in terms
of what we lose by by not having
this program so in another way
to put that it will if this bill
passes will save twenty two
million up no medical care with
this well if this bill doesn't
pass we will lose out on twenty
two million dollars of care okay
thank you
those in the audience wishing to
speak in opposition to the bill
please raise your hand.
Right those online wishing to
speak in opposition to the bill
please raise your hand there's a
John Jonathan Burton.
Jonathan please you yourself.
Jonathan.
This.
Thank you madam.
Your muted again you unmuted for
a second.
Okay thank you can hear me now
yes.
I'm John from Boston with the
pharmaceutical care management
association we represent the the
pharmacy benefit managers and we
stand in respect for opposition
to the bill we are not aware of
what's in the current committee
sub but I know that one of the
elements of your original
concerned about was the
elimination of the modifier to
identify which plans qualify for
three forty.
Current law all mandates that
Medicaid claims in.
Forty B. savings are not
available to Medicaid patients
and so picking out and we're
these are restricting the use
the modifier limits our
abilities to make sure that
we're not allowing double
dipping into rebates and three
forty been savings and so
restricting that modifier is
something we have concerns about
in the original or the last
maybe some of the bill that was
a section entirely unrelated to
three forty be related to PPM
Reporting and we would ask that
the business committee wants to
consider three forty B.
protections that they stick with
that.
And at least aunt.
Related to the three forty B.
program again only speaking from
the the previous committee seven
Lansing this committee set but
I'm looking forward to working
with that sponsored move forward
but we do stand opposition this
time.
Hi there I'm good afternoon
madam chair and members of the
committee my name is legion
Amanda's Harper I'm a pharmacist
and work for prime therapeutics
which is a PDM I'm also going to
echo some of the sentiment that
that Jonathan shared we are just
reacting to the previous version
we haven't seen this committee
seven I I couldn't quite hear
what the proponents said was
happening with the modifier
isn't will difficulty here but
again that the concern that we
have is the modifier is
something that we use it's
already in the claims pharmacy
claims systems that pharmacies
use every day and what we're
using that modifier to do is to
provide some transparency and
accountability into that
rebates that manufacturers
provide so they many factors
provide rebates as part of the
three forty B. program and then
they provide rebates outside of
the three forty B. program and
what we're using that modifier
is to make sure that there's not
any double dipping into those
drug rebates and so that's
really our concern is just
trying to make sure that we have
the tools that we need to ensure
there's the transparency
accountability of those rebates
so thank you for your time.
I see no other comments
decisions those issues.
See you at and madam chair I
apologize I didn't get my hand
up working hours are still
trying to figure out what's in
the sub
Madam chair a padlock speaking
on behalf of prime therapeutics
in the last committee we spoke
to the original bill because we
were not able to see that sob so
in this committee I'm gonna have
to speak to the health
committees because we have not
seen the current substitute my
comments I won't take up a lot
of time because Mr Mendez Harper
covered a lot of ground
But like we say that the
modifier language and I'm not
sure if that's in our outside in
quite catch what the experts
said is what allows the.
Plans to make sure that they are
appropriately applying the
discounts and rebates and
without it then there's no way
to tell if there's double
dipping going on or not so I'll
leave it at that thank you.
So the audience now those
wishing to speak in favor please
raise your hand okay we'll start
over here get the money with you
and madam chair what he's coming
up the the modifier is back in
and that reporting is out so
what they've discussed we took
care of with the sub very good
thank you Representative.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is drew Center
registered lobbyists for pharma
and with the changes adopted by
the sponsors supporters which we
appreciate them working with us
we support legislation thank you
thank you anyone else damn.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Dan weeks with a
hospital association I won't go
over a lot of details in this
because it is very complex but I
will tell you there twenty
hospitals of our forty two
hospitals that are affected by
this legislation there are two
shots was no name or very
quickly Lincoln County
Presbyterian UNM hospitals UNM
Sandoval regional Cibola Gerald
champion regional Sierra Vista
so coral dancy trick Espanola
Holy Cross normally planes
Rehoboth Roosevelt San Juan
regional center for medical of
San Crist is and you County
thank you anyone else.
Ma'am.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee and me that I meet
as Ammerman and with the New
Mexico primary care association
is CEO we serve three hundred
and seventy thousand New
Mexicans low income uninsured
mainly in the rural areas we
stand in support of this bill
thank you thank you anyone else.
Okay.
Senator madam chair members of
the committee my name's Nathan
bush I am staff at the
university of New Mexico really
appreciate you all listen to
this bill I'll be very brief you
H. is the biggest provider of
internet connection care
services the state we do not
turn patients away this.
In you know this this revenue
source is extremely critical to
our outreach to the most
underserved New Mexicans we have
a comprehensive cancer center
that is also heavily reliant on
drug pricing and really
appreciate the feedback we've
received so far in the bill this
is a an important step it is
incremental in nature not
everything we originally
proposed thank you.
Thank you anyone else in the
audience wishing to speak in
support.
Anyone online wishing to speak
in support.
I don't see anyone raising their
hand so go back to the sponsor
some quick Madam chair what will
stand for questions thank you
very much Representative
questions.
Representative Chasey.
Which
K. is there in okay we have a
motion for do pass on a do not
pass on house health and Human
Services Committee substitute
for House Bill for five forty
but a do pass on House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
health and Human Services
Committee substitute for House
Bill five forty and
Made by Representative Chasey
second by Representative Romero
and I I I saw my dear friend in
way over there Representative
I'll call on raises hand so.
Thank you madam chair just real
quick the I heard the word over
and over again about double
dipping were they talking about.
So some madam chair and
committee members so the issue
around around double dipping is
that the state Medicaid program
is also eligible for certain
kinds of pharmaceutical
reimbursement that that if we
don't identify the claims and or
the prescriptions that have been
filled by five four by three
forty B. then the state could
also try and apply for a
discount is so by being able to
clearly identify the
prescription has as having
already been a process using at
three forty be claim we prevent
from trying to get an additional
rebate or reduction on the price
from the three forty B.
prescription.
So well just a the staff at so
how would the hospital flu
thought of this.
If this doesn't pass our yes I
would end up it Madam chair
representative Al Capone
basically what by saving the
money on the prescriptions in
the first place using three
forty B. that money can be sent
could be used to do more care
for more people so that they're
not getting the discount then we
will lose that amount of care
because they are not saving
those dollars to put back into
the clinics and hospitals.
Thank you thank you madam to.
If you.
Thank you Representative I see
no other hands up would you call
the roll please thank you madam
chair representative of all
client.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane.
Speaker Martinez is.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert.
Representative read the.
Representative Rehm.
Representative Penske yes.
Madam vice chair yes.
Madam chair.
Yes.
Madam chair with seven yeses you
have a do not pass on house
health and Human Services
Committee soap for House Bill
five forty in a do pass on house
judiciary committees of for
human health and services
committee said House Bill five
forty seven yes it's important
to seven yes four names okay
thank you thank you very much
share thank you cancer.
And members.
All right we have next of.
No if Senator Padilla is here
yet the he was here for a while
as
Okay so let's move to the next
item and you know we'll call of
his I
on when he gets here for all
the.
Hello
sure you could that's okay
so
we have now Senate Bill to
fifteen.
Is are you are you going to
handle this Representative
Romero okay very good.
Just.
Okay.
Just finding my place okay and
it looks like they're handing
out an amendment.
Yes madam chair there's an
amendment
so why don't you to ensure the
amendment for suggestions okay
so we have a the minimum for
discussion might want to give us
back from the older voters don't
really want to hear all that
much about it okay.
I'll be very brief madam chair
is very dark subject
Senate Bill to fifteen
criminalizes animal sexual abuse
**** in New Mexico we are only
one of two states that doesn't
create this crime despite the
fact that we do have many
examples and exhibits of this
happening in our state for for
over the decades
so what this statute does is
establish that crime and set
parameters for it and and how of
course what we understood needs
to be investigated and and
criminalize based on really
heinous activity and with that
is my expert as good Johnson
with animal protection voters
New Mexico
And with that madam chair I
don't know if you want to say.
Other than we can introduce the
The amendment yeah what we talk
about the amendment the
amendment in short was the
unfortunately we had it amended
in Senate judiciary that
amendment never actually made it
into the bill this is a really
hard to read I think just the
substance makes it challenging
so it's just unfortunately it
was just an oversight that was
missed and so we're doing that
now
if we if we can madam chair okay
so if I understand help I'm
looking at the right okay Senate
Judiciary Committee substitutes
in our book and it's a point
three is that right that's
correct okay and what you're
saying is here on page two
straight subsection B. so we're
eliminating the is this
In its entirety that's correct
madam chair.
But mind.
Might be is a definition of ****
so one of my
okay
and then re letter accordingly
so I'm sure you have an
explanation for why we're doing
that yes madam chair so in the
current structure of this item
which was discovered and senator
sherry the definitions not
necessary based on the statute
one because of the way that it's
describes into its
There was a conflict in the
language between contact and
insertion in the way that the
language was used so we just had
to clarify it so by eliminating
it.
Madam chair yes Representative
Eli thank just going along with
that I think if I look on page
three.
On section three paragraph A. as
in Alfa I think that basically
has been right so that's kind of
duplicitous.
Thank you for that explanation
from somebody want to move the
amendment.
Madam move adoption of the
members.
Second.
Any opposition to the amendment.
So I think the record can show
that all Representative support
the amendment thank you madam
chair okay
Now back to the building is
there anything else you'd like
to say before I go to the public
will stand for questions madam
chair thank you those wishing to
speak in opposition I'm pretty
sure there's not going to be
much opposition okay
Please raise your hand okay
anyone online wishing to speak
in opposition.
Okay.
You.
Yeah.
Sorry I appreciate that speaker
I can only do one thing at one
thing at once.
So those wishing to speak a line
in opposition please raise your
hand.
Those in the audience wishing to
speak in support please raise
your hands okay
Here and then we'll go over
thank you.
madam chair.
Madam chair members of the
committee Karen Canaday with the
national association of social
workers New Mexico chapter and
of we are in strong support of
this and believe that people in
this category need to be held
accountable for their actions
thank you.
Thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Jason I'm
here representing the New Mexico
veterinary Medical Society right
stand in support of the bill we
Preciado Sanchez in the
proponents work on this bill I
keep it brief as I'm sure this
is not a subject you know like
to expels on for very long but
we really appreciate that the
work in support and we are to do
pass thank you okay in the back
here
Yes ma'am.
So madam chair members of the
committee Belinda Carlisle and
I'm the executive director for
the New Mexico livestock board
we are the agency that is in
charge of unforeseen chapter
seventy seven and crimes against
livestock so we stand in strong
support of this bill thank you
thank you anyone else wishing to
speak in support of the bill.
Right back to the sponsor
anything you wish to say before
we go to the committee madam
chair this has had bipartisan
unanimous support and just want
to say thank you there are folks
on soon as well I'm sorry my bad
my apologies
Anyone wishing to speak in
support online.
Marcus.
Briefly
The more we are the the chart of
there being committee members
thank you for allowing us to
address here this afternoon
Marcus went to a judicial
district attorney and president
New Mexico District Attorney
Association I like to think
this.
Thanks for being a spill and
also like to thank is Johnson
the expert for contacting me
with the district attorney's on
the particulars of this bill so
that we were able to discuss how
the prostrate is crashing the
best maximize investigating
charging and prosecuting these
types of offenses and for all
the reasons stated before me and
for these reasons we stand
support this legislation thank
you chair thank you Taylor.
You madam chair members of the
committee I am here on behalf of
the Attorney General's office in
strong support of SB two fifteen
we wanted to take particular
note that our internet crimes
against children investigators
found past history in New Mexico
of organize gatherings on ****
having been hosted in New Mexico
and in addition there's been a
strong correlation of evidence
suggesting strong correlation
between **** **** in the
creation there of and child ****
so we believe this is a strong
build an important bill and
we're to do pass thank you thank
you.
David Levinson.
David or Daniel I'm sorry.
In okay thank you highs aren't
that great.
That's all right thank you madam
chairman and committee I'm a
part of the legislative
committee and past president of
the New Mexico veterinary
medical association and like the
people before me were in strong
support of this bill of course
is veterinarians we are in favor
of a healthy human animal bond
between pets livestock
Working animals food animals
whatever happens to be and we
are hoping for a passage of this
bill to stop anything like this
be Shelly that could be
happening.
Thank you.
And lastly.
Angela New Mexico dog.
Insula.
Hello madam chair and members of
the committee thank you so much
for hearing this and very
important and critical bill
today I am my name is Angela STO
I'm the founder and director of
NM dog we're New Mexico
nonprofit since two thousand ten
we serve victims of some of the
most rific animal cruelty cases
across our state.
I'm here today to speak in
support of SB two one five and
criminalizing the sexual assault
of an animal speaking from
personal experience I will tell
you there's no feeling like
looking into the eyes of the
sexual assault victims that have
no ability to speak for
themselves.
The level of pain both external
internal that these victims
experiences unfathomable.
Unfortunately out of the cases
I've been directly involved with
only one was able to make a
recovery condition with
conventional placement into a
new home.
I can't imagine the horror that
these victims experience and
their perpetrators are not
charged with the crime and they
could be anywhere please vote
yes this afternoon to protect
other analytic those as well as
the children of our state thank
you so much thank you that
concludes our public comment I'm
gonna go to the committee
speaker Martinez just.
So as amended.
We have a deep just made by
speaker Martinez second by
leader lane any
conversation about this all
right but the role please thank
you madam chair representative
of all point.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane.
Yes.
Speaker Martinez.
Yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert.
Representative read yes.
Representative Rehm yes ma'am.
Representative Penske yes madam
vice chair.
Madam chair yes.
Madam chair with eleven yeses
you have a do pass on could
Senate Judiciary Committee sub
for Senate bill two fifteen as
amended.
Thank you have a do pass
appreciate it all right so got a
text from Senator Padilla he's
still guessing part this what
I'd like to suggest we do is to
Senate bill forty two and
Representative.
We is.
Trying
to.
So okay let's do this thank you.
Yeah well I yeah I think we are
going to do Phil that.
Forty two forty two looking
ahead of the committee
substitute forty two that we can
put in the binder so on if I
wanted the amendment okay so I
guess there is a committee
substitute.
Not an amendment one no it's a
what we didn't put in our
mistake we just put in Senate
bill forty two if there was any
said that passing the previous
committee that we want to hand
you in addition to a proposed
amendment.
Okay so what I understand the
staff to be telling us is there
was a Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute Senate bill forty
two.
Which was not placed in our
books or handing that out and
then there is an amendment that
is available so does that
comport with your understanding
Representative Madam terreus
okay.
Okay so
My suggestion is we move the
amendment for discussion we can
talk about the what Madam I
think if you if I may Sir and
rather go through the bill which
is New Jersey the amendment is
house bill one of three okay
which is very passed right right
right okay so there were
amending the same area of law
talked with Center worth and
Senator Duhigg we decided to
come you know join forces so
that's what the amendment is and
we can get the I think once we
address the bill okay thank you
Representative.
Go ahead yes Representative for
it Madam chair
Thank you for sharing this bill
I'm joined today by Lindsey
oxygen director of legislative
and ticket fares at the
secretary of state's office in
the way this came about I was
working on house bill one of
three the centers are working on
forty two so I know more about
when the three than forty two so
I might lean on my experts
because she probably knows more
than I do Madam chair members of
the committee sent port Sen bill
for to the disclosure bill.
So as we know we are limited in
how we can regulate campaign
finance.
One of the things we can do is
provide the public with good
information about where money is
coming from Sen bill free to
reporters out of state groups
making independent expenditures
of five thousand or more.
To disclose the source of those
funds.
It requires disclosure on
expenditures for electronic
communications which would be
Facebook ads are disallowed
things like that.
It prohibits loaning money.
By a candidate to the campaign
committee at an interest rate.
So this is sort of a loophole
that the panelists happen other
states I don't think it happened
in New Mexico but the idea that.
You make a loan to your own can
camping committee you pay it
back with campaign funds with
interest.
You know.
Madam chair with the first rate
in the I mean the loans my
committee of initially was able
to pay it back but that's that's
where the scheme to depict with
interest so we're we're we're
cutting that off for happens.
and then share it also expands
the prohibited period that
doesn't address the solicit
issues so we still the privative
period additional you can't
solicit funds but you can't set
them up at the expense part of
the period include candidates
campaign committees and
legislative caucus committees
which what was is it a fairly
new creation that wasn't covered
In but it does also prohibit
candidates even if they don't
solicit them from accepting
donations from lobbyists I think
there's a separate provision on
this making those donations but
this prohibited on the candidate
side from accepting those
donations and and then the the
you know the basic structure of
the bill
perhaps now's a good time to
move the amendment which which
has a set is house bill one
three.
Madam chair representative for
discussion.
The two to five number is two
two five ninety five point one.
In madam chair it's a lot
shorter than than the house bill
one of three because it's just
the changes from house bill one
of three and if you recall house
bill one of three the just the
the reporting periods to more
accurately reflect our actual
election cycle so you would have
the report to a week after the
primary with rather than waiting
a couple months you have a
report to week after the general
election what rather than
waiting until January and if you
accept money during the
prohibited period you would file
a supplemental report at the end
of the prohibited period
disclosing that contribution.
We have a motion to adopt the
amendment made by Representative
Romero seconded by speaker
Martinez any further discussion
of the amendment.
Would you call the roll.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane yes speaker
Martinez.
Yes.
Representative McQueen yes
Representative Nibert.
The Representative read.
Representative green.
Yes Representative Penske yes
madam vice chair of madam chair
yes madam chair you have adopted
amendment Hey.
Madam.
Public.
let's go to the audience those
wishing to speak in opposition
to the bill please raise your
hand.
Those online wishing to speak in
opposition to the bill please
raise your hand.
Those wishing to speak in
support of the bill please raise
your hand.
In the audience those online
wishing to speak support of the
bill please raise your hand.
I see a one hand raise Mason.
Thank Mason.
Madam chair members the
committee my name is Dick Mason
the body elections director for
the league of women voters of
New Mexico the lady stands in
strong support of SB forty two
and I'm glad to see that H. B.
one oh three it was included
since we spoke in support of
that and so I want to thank all
the sponsors for bringing this
legislation forward how does the
government voters of New Mexico
believes that message of
financing political campaigns
and public officers sure the
public's right to know combat
corruption and undue influence
maximize Fisk about fiscal
accountability and transparency
SB forty two checks all those
boxes for the week stands its
ground support of SB at four
forty two energy Judy given two
passed thank you thank you Mr
Mason I don't see any other
hands raise so back to sponsor
any comments before we go to the
committee mentor we're have to
answer questions okay
questions comments from
committee members.
Speaker Martinez when
appropriate and we would do
passes and you she committees of
supercenter forty two as amended
we have a motion for a do pass
do we have a second second
motion made by the speaker
Martinez for do pass on Senate
bill for Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill forty two as amended second
by Representative Romero any
further discussion of the bill.
Questions.
I don't see any so would you
call the roll please thank you
madam chair representative of
Oakland.
Representative Chasey
yeah Representative Lane yes.
Egolf Martinez.
Representative McQueen yes
Representative Nibert.
Representative read.
Representative Rehm yes ma'am
Representative Penske yes.
Madam vice chair yes madam chair
yes.
Madam chair you have a do pass
on Senate Judiciary Committee
sub for Senate bill forty two as
amended.
Very good thank you
Representative the committee all
right we have Senator Padilla.
And thank you for waiting so
patiently.
Thank you madam chair for
hearing us and then invite.
Erin Bond in and instrument
cluster come up with.
Thank you very much madam chair
members of coming up with begin
whatever you'd like the floor is
your senator and Senate bill to
aid in their budget committee
substitutes in the light so you
madam chair yes so it this was a
another one of those deals I
come with every couple years to
create a new office or to drive
some efficiency and within state
government ideally so we we do
have Senate of finance committee
so it's two percent rules
committee since two percent of
the one S. R. two eighty.
And that's before you right now
we also did making amend a small
amendment on the Senate floor
which I'll explain just here
momentarily madam chair members
of the committee I think we are
all very well aware that most
government agencies whether it
be a school district of the
state government city county you
name it are under attack in
these are things that we cannot
see necessarily and so with with
that we've had Los crucis
Albuquerque Rio Rancho just to
name a few the larger ones
Bernalillo county Albuquerque
the city of Rio Rancho and most
recently that we're all aware of
madam chair members of the
committee the regulation
licensing department which
touches so many different
aspects of New Mexico was also
undertaken right before we came
to the legislature so just a
whole host of things that we're
dealing with their so the
legislation before you calls for
the establishment of the office
of cybersecurity.
It does not add any additional
positions or FTEs to the state
budget or anything like that it
re purposes and focuses and
formalizes an office of
cybersecurity administratively
attached to the department of
information technology the
secretary doesn't is here it
would be managed by a Cisco and
that is the acronym for chief
information security officer who
is currently Russia some but
some Bunton who was also our
acting secretary of the
department previously I also
have that is been who's been
devising this of this entire
time Todd Barron who helped
write most of the legislation I
want to thank him for that but
this was a year long were you're
you're a years long work I also
want to give credit for what
we've established here with
Representative setting on a
I have chaired by chaired the
science technology
telecommunications Committee for
the eleven years that I've been
here in the legislature most
recently she's been the vice
chair or chair along with me
there also there was a working
group and I think madam chair
thank you served on that a few
other served on that in the
interim to help us establish
most of what what you're gonna
hear about today but just to
sort of drive it all back to
focus.
What we're doing here is
establishing minimum standards
for any transaction that would
take place with state government
so we have approximately one
hundred and seventy five doors
windows barn doors sliding doors
garage doors that little tiny
window we put in the bathroom
sometimes all of these doors
into and out of state
government.
Whenever you need to conduct the
transaction all we're saying
with legislation to start off
with and and give the depart
this new officers you know some
some objectives and some charges
and that is to establish minimum
standards to get through those
doors windows etcetera make sure
that those doors windows are
closed when exposed to be closed
make sure that they're open
appropriately and only allowing
certain things in and out when
they're supposed to so that's
the first thing legislation does
minimum standards if you're a
state agency like say the land
office the secretary of state or
one of those that interact with
the federal government on a
consistent basis
you already have to adhere to
whole federal homeland security
standards anyway so we did
exempt them out of the
legislation because they already
have significant higher
standards anyway it also the
legislation also establishes a
an advisory committee to advise
the chief information security
officer of professionals inside
a state government outside of
state government on the policies
and procedures that they're
going to be putting together so
that's a sense with legislation
does on the floor of the on the
substitutes that you had in
front of you this amendment was
adopted on the floor unanimously
and essentially what it does is
I inadvertently when we were
writing the legislation we have
the advisory committee advising
a governor in hiring the so so
who is to my left here the chief
information security officer but
we actually had six of the
thirteen positions that this is
a with a point to its of
essentially pointing their own
person that would be hiring and
firing them.
I mean that's what you're doing
whatever it is that they need to
so we exempted that out and gave
the responsibility to throw for
three of these are already in
the act to the chair of the
board of directors of the New
Mexico association of counties
and in the second three to the
chair of the board of directors
of the New Mexico municipal
league so complete independence
total and and good there the
last thing I want to mention to
you before we start going into
anything else you want to talk
about is we did amend out
dollars for this because we
already had dollars in other
parts of house bill two this
actually was sent over from the
house of representative as we
did not touch this at all and so
it's about fifteen point five
million dollars to get
everything rocking and rolling
and I could go over exactly
where everything is but it's
about four different parts of
the budget with that with the so
roll into that's the legislation
I'm not gonna ask the experts
just yet the same thing I think
you I want to go somewhere with
you know yes and we do try to
keep the presentations brief
because we have a lot of
questions awkward so very good
so let's go to the audience
those wishing to speak in
opposition to the bill please
raise your hand.
And those online wishing to
speak in opposition to the bill
please raise your hand.
See one person I think it's J.
O. UNM.
If you don't meet yourself
J. L. U. N. M..
J. L. you need yourself.
Well I think we're going to need
to move on here we are.
Jails are.
Yes.
Thank you madam the chairman
committee members I propose yes
two eighty simply because.
Thanks to.
Our.
Create a secret proceedings for
the for by three committee and
also is cease to
Keep secret any kind of
communications with.
Our public entities our problem
is that that's never defined in
this bill so it's tough to the
secretary stated to provide that
with a public entity is what
information systems are.
What vulnerabilities are there
needs to be detailed
instructions on what those
constitute otherwise that these
just become.
Open interpretation of certainly
by the secretary of state thank
you thank you.
I see no other hands raised
virtually those wishing to speak
in support of the bill please
raise your hand okay.
Thank Catherine.
Thank you madam chair and
members my name's Katherine
Christiana and I am the
registered lobbyists for the New
Mexico counties we stand in
strong support of this
legislation we appreciate the
sponsor bringing it forward I
won't go into detail you have
experts here but cyber security
is something that our board has
selected is a critical priority
and as we advance invest in
broadband in our state
cybersecurity absolutely has to
be part of that conversation
they go together we order
support thank you thank you
anyone else in the audience
wishing to speak in support of
the bill.
Yes Sir.
Chair members the committee my
name Mr Lovelace on the
operations manager for the
office broadband access
expansion and we do a lot of
work on the state education were
at network and the office of
cyber security can be a great
help to us and making sure that
that remain safe and secure
thank you thank you anyone
online wishing to speak in
support of the bill please raise
your hand.
I don't see anyone
back to the sponsor for yeah I
think I would just give a brief
brief response managers all
right with the one comment that
we are in opposition I think
it'll be important for you to
hear from Mr okay we talked
about that very issue okay
members of the committee on the
issue of the this would you
identify yourself I don't know
if we get in transparent general
counsel yes program information
okay on the issue of whether or
not this is going to be a secret
proceedings the the axe
explicitly requires that the
activities of the advisory
committee be subject to it press
into the open meetings act
except for discussion of
sensitive cybersecurity matters
that would expose
vulnerabilities.
Thank you try to know if you
believe me so I thought I'd have
the experts I believe you said
thank you
appreciate that okay back to the
committee questions or comments
on the bill.
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair Senator of
looking at the bill.
The.
Representation.
I'm just wondering if it's broad
enough
We've been I've been somewhat
focused on that issue that's
this gentleman and oak about it
about with morning once we did
that and and I'm not gonna do
that but I'm just wondering if
you're language here is broad
enough because it seems to me
that there could be some
inquires.
That would maybe not expose
something but it would certainly
because a lot of problems for
this
The information technology group
and.
With respect to the type of work
that this group will be doing.
We don't want to risk.
Having a lot of that information
given out as to what we're doing
as a state so I'm just wondering
if you talked about whether or
not the breadth is sufficient or
whether it is to be a little
broader so madam chair and
representative this that is
probably one of the subjects we
tossed back and forth the most
and we had several iterations of
the bill prior to all the
substitutes and all that stuff
too so as you heard from Mr
Barron before subject to the
apron the open meetings act with
a very narrow slice narrow
exemption for the determination
of what is sensitive enough to
to have not exclude someone just
Mr to comment a little bit more
on that but that we hear you
loud and clear and I think this
is something that will probably
take a year to following the
establishment of the office to
get just right so Mister.
Senator Representative we for a
lot of stuff we've worked with a
lot of stakeholders on on this
issue and you know currently
under the upper statute there's
no explicit exemption for cyber
security at all and there's a
concern of going too far in the
direction of not keeping
information that should be
public secret and I think we've
struck a very good medium that
if there's in the judgment of
the security officer that this
information that is being
discussed or that is documented
would reveal or could reveal a a
a a vulnerability and that could
include a link in the chain
type of information we think
that this exception will apply
and the stakeholders including
fog and the ACLU have that this
car about and and will work with
us there's any issues of
implementation if it becomes too
broad or is too narrow.
Madam chair and senator and
others I might encourage as we
work with the governor's office
and and others I I I really do
think we need to broaden your
your bill that was passed
earlier and and really get a
handle on on
The information that should be
released particularly with
respect to information
technology and the underlying
security systems because I know
the courts are dealing with
that.
Corrections is doing with that
there's other agencies that are
finding that there for a.
On the one hand forces the the
revealing of information that
frankly compromises their task
in their duty and so I I would
just the tell you that as you
move forward on this revenues be
brought and we probably need to
left those things be known so
that as we draft of the
legislation and subsequent years
we can capture that thank you
madam chair thank you sent chair
and and Representative and I
will tell you that I was
initially approached to sponsor
that bill and I I Representative
sorry so those to co sponsor on
and I immediately stepped out of
the way and so we need to get
one of our experts and so I'm so
glad that he did that so.
Thank you Representative night
for anyone else wishing to ask
questions or comment on the
senator's bill.
Happy to enter.
The.
The Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate rules
committee substitute for Senate
bill two eighty.
As as amended.
Is there a second second
motion made by Representative.
Two four do pass on Senate
finance committee substitute.
Committee substitute for Senate
bill two eighty as amended
seconded by Representative
neither.
Please call the roll thank you
madam chair Representative
Alcon.
Representative Chasey
Representative lane yes speaker
Martinez.
Representative McQueen.
Representative Nibert yes
Representative read yes
Representative green yes
Representative.
Representative Penske.
Madam vice chair yes.
Madam chair.
Yes.
Madam chair with ten test is you
have a do pass on Senate finance
committee substitute for Senate
rules committee substitute for
Senate bill two eighty as
amended thank you on the line.
Thank.
Will be the for sponsoring okay
very good Senator I know so you
won't have to come back why
don't we move to Senate bill
forty one I think your expertise
here.
Maybe.
Thank you madam chair and and
Committee this brief as humanly
possible and we have a lot more
work to do
just one second before we start
sorry Senator just want everyone
to know that there is dinner in
the room across the way in the
same way we've been doing for
lunch if people would think
about maybe one or two going out
at at a time to get their dinner
if if you're hungry
yet what I'm not going to
referee that but we would like
to at least keep enough people
here so that we have a
reasonable audience for our our
dear Senator okay so you madam
chair just a clarification we're
passing up the Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill forty one okay to make sure
we're on the right field all
right.
So is that correct Senator
Senator
Many.
This bill.
You ready so.
Let's just get ourselves
organized here.
Very good.
Okay okay so you're just major
ones on the right it's of the
two numbers two two five two
three eight that one yes that's
what's been handed out thank you
senator.
And point one so the floor is
yours Senator thank you madam
chair members of the committee
so just rewinding the tape very
briefly in two thousand
seventeen after about a three
year effort I was able to bring
all the way to the finish line
to get a signature on house bill
I'm sorry Senate bill Senate
bill fifty four that year which
was the New Mexico
telecommunications act in that
act we were seeking to
reconfigure regulation in New
Mexico because we had three
tiers of regulation on
telecommunication carriers time
what we did is we were able to
reconfigure them to something
that was more manageable for the
companies were actually in the
in the arena of providing the
services nothing was changed in
that legislation with in terms
in terms of public regulation
Committee oversight we gave the
PRC at the time two years to
implement improbable promulgate
implement the legislation and
they did take one year eleven
months thirty days you know
twenty three hours and fifty
nine minutes to do their work we
we felt like they had really
misinterpreted a whole lot of
information and and went in the
wrong direction so we couple
years effort here coming back
again several years later to
provide further clarification to
the PRC
and so that's really what Senate
bill forty one of the committee
so to from Senate Judiciary does
it regulates equally and fairly
in terms of what this cut these
companies are doing there's one
company in the arena and this
arena at this point it continues
to protect consumers by ensuring
that rates for basic services
are compatible for both urban
and rural areas it provides
objective oversight also within
the realm of the public
regulation commission it
promotes competitive broadband
we do have to do as much as
humanly possible as a
legislature in my opinion that's
what you see over here talking
and working on broadband as much
as I do because we have to make
New Mexico competitive and and a
and attractive and environment
for investment in broadband it.
Creates jobs it'll continue to
create jobs for about the three
or so percent of folks it's
still have wired telephone
service telecommunication
services those lines are
incredibly important madam chair
members of the committee that
might be the only emergency nine
one one service that that a
person has in some parts of New
Mexico it also provides extreme
transparency you know for the
PRC to utilize in terms of data
that they may need to make
decisions that they're making of
proposed legislation that we
have here does not do the
following the legislation does
not automatically relieve any
company from its obligation
provide services and you know
you might hear some of that
today I don't know but I thought
to be important for you to see
New Mexico statute carrier of
last resort which I brought with
me I can quote you know from if
you'd like and all the steps
that have to happen and all the
things would have to happen for
a company to abandon a state a
class or a set of customers and
by the way the company the the
individual it sitting next to me
Leo Baca he is the government
affairs executive for lumen
formally Centrelink formally
they have never abandoned
customers in New Mexico but I
wanted you to know that that is
in statute all the things that
they would have to be on that
there's this discontinuation
statute also with the PRC
there's a New Mexico unfair
trade unfair trade practice act
that applies here and even after
all that scandal then madam
chair company like this would
have to go to the Federal
Communications Commission to
abandon a set of customers so it
is very clearly outlined what
has to happen if they were to
choose to do something like that
the legislation will not
increase regulation on the voice
or broadband provider in New
Mexico the bill specifically
does not apply to the incumbent
rural telecommunications
carriers and I'm gonna talk a
little bit more about that madam
chair and the proposed
legislation is not the regulator
I'm sorry regulate broadband on
the topic of incumbent rural
telecommunications Senator Wirth
while we were in the Senate tax
business and transportation
committee Broughton you know
help us further clarify you know
let's just say for.
Kicks you know looming over here
is providing both the that they
have one line in their providing
residential services but they
may also be providing business
services that does not state
that that that does not deem it
as competitive that's still one
company so we further clarified
that in the be a substitute that
you have before you here so that
actually helps in a very big way
to sure once again that they are
not absolved of any of the
regulatory requirements and
things of that nature so with
that I think I've I've probably
bored you to death I'm happy to
let Mr Baca respon whenever
you're ready for those types of
questions and whatever you like
to prepare if you like go
mentor.
Why don't we go to the audience
those wishing to speak in
opposition to the bill please
raise your hand yes gentleman.
Bring a Mike to you.
Good evening madam chair and
committee but Ms tennis court in
the presence of the State to pay
retirees for the state of New
Mexico I've been to the other
three committees and frustrated
at this point we finished one of
the people from the C. W. have
not been testifying to people to
explain what's actually
happening and district seven
which is what we're part of has
advised or employees that there
is a gray area and they could
face possible termination if
they gave out information as
follows lance about the services
so rather than just going to
take a chance and I was that
position up to twenty twelve I
would not leave we want to
testify we have questions so
that three six questions on that
file or that we have not seen
touched and I'm not sure if
that's normal for you but I have
one question more than anything
else if you look on.
Let me back off on page
thirteen.
Of the actual bill.
This in simple and talks about
competitive we don't understand
is if somebody gets funding.
For broadband or anything
because that's what the bill
talks about funding for
broadband that they shall be
considered competitive well I
know that shop technician but
that's what it's saying the
funding.
Tell it's actually open working
we don't state how could be
competition.
We would like that answered if
possible.
Eight you know there's a time
limit on your present I think
it's and I realize that okay
home.
The other thing is existing
competition through a three
companies nationwide that offer
satellite telephone service with
that qualify immediately as
competition if this bill goes
into effect immediately.
Thank you thank you for your
time thank you appreciate your
coming all right anyone else in
the audience wishing to speak in
opposition.
and you want online wishing to
speak in opposition okay I see
Albert catnap.
Madam you madam chair of
committee members can you hear
me yes.
Okay I'm not I'm not opposed to
the bill I am in support of the
bill
I am the president and CEO of
New Mexico Sir.
And I'm in support of the bill
because lumen who has been a
real partner for New Mexico to
service
has provided us with wave
circuits and has helped us and
we help them also provide
service to some of the areas
that they lack and we also find
voice service to some of the
areas that they lacked so we're
here in support of this bill
because we feel like lumen has
been a real partner for an
insurer and so so that's all I
have thank you madam chair thank
you Mr cat nap Fernando and
Romans.
Fernando.
Thank you madam chair from the
rural on here although we
strongly oppose SB forty one
I'm sorry I'm not amount of
communication workers of America
I am staff CBA is the union that
represents public state workers
and private sector workers with
all due respect to Senator
Padilla C. WA are often
opposition SB forty one and I do
appreciate everything that
Senator Padilla has done for my
sisters and brothers of state of
the New Mexico I have twenty
five years of installation
equipment and copper dial tone
experience high speed internet
lines placing fiber optic
internet residences.
I also have bargained collective
bargaining agreements for some
of our members and out there and
there's a term that they use is
called the fact of competition I
would not use that and one of my
collective bargaining agreements
because in this and in my
opinion this this turn this term
is open to anyone's
interpretation let's get this
real clear SB forty one is not
about broadband this is Bob
copper dial tone that rural
communities still use I believe
that you know then I will agree
with us that president Biden's
visionary focus on broadband
build out H. R. thirty six
eighty four the infrastructure
investment jobs act New Mexico
will receive a minimum of one
hundred million dollars for
broadband expansion to all on
serve underserved residents all
current unserved underserved
will be served by reliable
affordable quality high speed
internet by twenty twenty seven
I don't understand the rush
there's nothing preventing
doctor Newman CenturyLink from
investing now there have been
programs in the past American
rescue plan the real digital
opportunity fund
I I just don't understand why
we're pushing this now because
all people of New Mexico will
have reliable internet service
by twenty twenty seven
and yeah as so I I'm not
understood understand why
there's a big focus to do that
now there's nothing preventing
them from investing now thank
you very much appreciate your
time thank you I by here is
going to take over for a few
minutes so okay
More opposition I carried them
this far away.
Of.
next of Jane E..
Good afternoon.
R. madam chair and members of
the committee my name is Jane E.
all I am a member of the
environmental justice caucus of
the Democratic Party and Los
hard enough institute these are
environmental justice
organizations and we stand in
opposition to Senate bill forty
one okay okay anyone I and and
and and I'm sorry and I'm in
opposition I'm a retired
government for a one off lived
in New Mexico all what Dennis
Conner TE all for non to remind
just said the provisions of for
a Kerry of last resort only
apply if CenturyLink is
providing services in the
community and if you passed
Senate bill forty one there will
be no mechanism at the PRC or
anywhere else to put that that
those provisions and the fact
that step in a court of law.
And all according to the to the
one of the national institutes
of utilities New Mexico if not
one of the states with the true
all provision for carriers last
resort but in any event there
would would be no way to
to carry it out without the
regulatory structure at the
public regulation commission and
in closing I would say.
That CenturyLink has incredible
market power due to its
ownership of the wired network
whether we're talking about
internet or voice over internet
protocol voice or a wireless
telephone all the signals have
to go through the wired network
I echo what for non to romanzo
what is the hurry we need a plan
all right along with C. W. Wei
urged the legislature to adopt a
study group to make a plan for
regulating this important
utility this important service
that your constituents depend
upon thank you thank you anyone
else online wishing to speak in
opposition.
Okay let's go to the audience
those wishing to speak in
support yes Sir and could we get
the money.
Yes.
Good evening madam chair
distinguished committee members
my name is Scott Lopez on a
native New Mexican from up up
law where I live in a graduated
from Pojoaque high school in
UNM.
From a ten year marine corps
veteran and I were for Kelly
table of New Mexico in
Albuquerque.
Kelly table is not from Wall
Street and either my Kelly table
is a thirty year New Mexico
company with more than two
hundred fifty employees across
five offices in New Mexico and
we are a major subcontractor to
local electric utilities and
telecommunications companies
including them in.
I'm here to support SB forty
one.
The telecommunication work
telecommunications world has
changed significantly over the
past several years customers are
cutting the cord on their land
line and switch between
broadband line for both their
internet and voice service
cellphones are now the primary
tool for voice services just be
forty one updates the existing
law to acknowledge this changed
environment and provide a clear
simple path to parity of
regulation and effective
competition I humbly urge this
committee to support SB forty
one and I respectfully thank you
for your consideration.
Thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Chelsea
Canada and I'm the director of
public policy at the New Mexico
chamber of commerce the chamber
supports Senate bill forty one
as you heard the communication
industry has changed
significantly over the years
regular phone service is quickly
being replaced with wireless
service and broadband regulating
one company differently in a
competitive environment can be
harmful to that company SB forty
one proposes changes that will
provide a simple transition for
proper PRC oversight it also
provides a simplified objective
tests for the PRC to determine
effective competition in the
market this bill will help New
Mexico's economic development
efforts by allowing all
providers to compete on a level
playing field and we're will
encourage investment in
broadband The New Mexico chamber
thank senator Pete Padilla for
sponsoring this important piece
of legislation thank you thank
you.
Madam chair committee members
Jerry Scheller presidency of the
rear rancherias or commerce we
stand in firm support of SB
forty one as you know phone
services changed through the
years and is no longer utility
is now a commodity well a lot of
competition the vast number of
competitors out there has really
created a need for a level
playing field in this bill helps
accomplish that efforts
broadband and voice in
particular as well as cellular
service has become the primary
source of communication
throughout the years very few
individuals are using the copper
old fashioned telephone service
and with the expansion of
broadband in in New Mexico it
will also ensure that we have
more adequate services
throughout the state we stand in
support of SB forty one thank
you thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee J. Santiago's
registered lobbyists for the New
Mexico exchange carrier group of
New Mexico state's care group is
ten rural telecommunication
broadband companies and and all
the rural parts of the state of
the definition of a rural our
company is fifty thousand access
lines or less which are
companies of some have five
hundred some of a thousand and
and and the we're of CenturyLink
is is above the fifty thousand
but not by many and as you've
heard the the access lines are
diminishing and people are
turning more towards broadband
and so we agree the that they
should have more parity with the
rural companies and it's not
like we're we're not unregulated
the rural companies are very
well regulated but of the larger
companies have more regulation
we urge your support we thank
the sponsor for bringing this
forward thank you thank you.
Madam chair of committee members
names Charley mark is a
registered lobbyist for
Centrelink lumen
I used to work for this company
for thirty one years with them I
started out as a telephone
installer
and this company has changed
dramatically of when I left
there they had nine hundred
fifty thousand access lines
today they have a hundred and
fifty thousand they lost eighty
five percent of their customer
base what we're talking about is
called pots plain old telephone
service it's a telephone service
you get over a copper line and
so.
The reference is made to
broadband broadband is not a
regulated of product and and
that's not what this is about
this is about getting similar or
of parity with the small
companies in terms of how
they're regulated about allows
us the freedom now to look at
some of the broadband solutions
and expand in that area so I
would urge your support we've
tried to do this for I'm gonna
say the last thirty years
different variations of it this
is a much simplified version so
I thank you for your time thank
you thank you Charlie
Those wishing to speak I'm sorry
Madam chair officer broadband
utter Lovelace operations
manager we assist in support of
SB forty one want to note that
the changes and and the
technologies that are out there
voice over IP and broadband are
substantially different than the
than telephone copper lines and
we just ask that you to pass on
this bill thank you.
Anyone online wishing to speak
in support raise your hand.
Okay
you madam chair I just responded
to items that came up in the air
conditioner thank you very much
I'll be very quick also on the
definition regarding effect
competition it is the term is is
because it is very well to
provide on page three lines
three through seven so I just
want to make sure that you know
there was a comment that is not
effectively to find there so it
is there and then the second
piece on effective competition
from Mr Connery earlier if you
go to page thirteen of lines
really five through thirteen but
specifically really line seven
through thirteen Senator Wirth
as I mentioned earlier was very
helpful and
further defining you know how
effective competition should be
dean did that we have that
outlined properly and then the
bottom line there is that the
PRC must decide if there's
affected competition or not so
this isn't just left to one one
rules thank you.
Page thirteen page start page
thirteen aligns five through
thirteen or the with the worth
Senator Wirth amendment in tax
business and transportation in
the Senate and then one of the
other questions that came up
madam chair and then a major
leaders was effective
competition properly defined and
the response it is it's on that
page three lines three through
seven just one second there some
something beeping this somebody
have a phone or.
okay okay Charlie sorry.
Of thank you.
Sorry about that center I
apologize for you know I think
we're good I just wanted to
clarify for the Majority Leader
that the term effective
competition is defined on page
three line three through seven
and and probably the biggest
change we made was to step
further without any ambiguity of
any kind define what effective
competition meant and so when we
were tax business and
transportation the Senate.
with this bill Senator Wirth is
very helpful and and in terms of
giving additional the guidance
in terms of really lines get
well just rebuilding to
effective competition pursuant
to New Mexico talking is that
shell exist in a wire center
serving areas when voice
services are available to
business customers from two or
more alternative providers not
affiliated with the incumbent
local exchange carrier the
reason that's important is
because in a lot of parts of New
Mexico lumen formerly Centrelink
former there the only way in and
out of that community so a lot
of ways there's really no way
that they're going to be able to
not to have affected competition
because that they're the only
ones on the way and the example
I gave earlier was maybe looming
comes into town and tear down
your your very you know rural
town and they might find through
another company.
Business services and then on
their own they may find
residential services that still
doesn't qualify for effective
competition thank you thank you
my posters gonna take over for a
little bit.
and actually you are on the list
Representative new arraylist
safe and questions okay I just
had a question about
Many of my are and I'm not this
is not my area of expertise to
forgive me on the elimination of
the multi factor test.
Your I'm using Mexico City a
sorry mom it's like a solution
over here
yes senator if you'll just talk
about what the that multi factor
test is and the the nascent the
necessity for eliminating it and
and what the implication is that
the vice chair chair we are
looking for is current FY are
what date do you have on the one
that you're looking at if you
wouldn't mind telling me I'm
looking into to go out this is a
test over a month ago.
It's not it's definitely not on.
It's page
page three on the I think we
found it madam chair if we can
just we'll just to find it for
you yes my experts who
introduced earlier what are you
looking at the one madam chair
that is January.
I'm looking at the regional day
is February fourteenth and it's
on the Senate it is on the
Senate Judiciary Committee
substance to.
So it it hopefully it is on this
is Committee to page three
paragraph for the talks about
eliminating a multi factor test
for determining whether
effective competition is present
so I'm just curious I don't I'm
not familiar with the the first
multi factor test was before.
Limited it so if you could just
described that Wheatley madam
chair we did it was going to be
removed but the language that I
just spoke of regarding on page
thirteen that is the test for
effective competition but I'm
just Mr Buckham expert the COVID
little bit for the.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Leo Baca
and the government affairs for
CenturyLink in New Mexico I'm
also registered lobbyists for
the company I'm a forty one year
employee of going all the way
back to mountain balance when
they invented the phone
the
Miss madam chair a
Representative Romero what what
you're referring to this multi
factor test is existing law that
we're striking with this bill
and the reason we're doing that
is the existing law is very
vague and subjective we've tried
to to make these filings with
the PRC a few times in the past
and what happens is that it just
gets so subjective so vague you
can have I different lawyers in
the room looking at it I ways
and it is a almost impossible
yes to have to get through we've
there's only been two things
that have been determined to be
effectively competitive in
twenty five years one of his
directory assistance the other
one is long distance nothing
else has ever been able to pass
that test because you can go and
all sorts of different
directions on that and we've
just not been able to get there
even though we find fifteen
percent of the market the voice
services market we only serve
fifteen percent of that market
so eighty five percent to serve
by others and yet we haven't
been able to get through that
yes but what we've done is we've
greatly at the as you read on
the FIR it continues.
Is replaced with a simpler
analysis that would require
effective competition
determination if there's two or
more alternate providers and
then you look at the languages
Senator Padilla mentioned at
separately for residential and
business and an affiliate of the
company is not able to be
counted in that so it's a much
more objective yes two or more
providers and also it is is much
simpler for the PRC to make that
determination but again the PRC
has to make that determination.
There.
Madam chair and and madam I
share they continue doing what
they're doing they continue
providing the services they're
required to continue the
services at the same level of
quality customer service all of
those things and Mr by.
That is correct then nothing
changes because if if there if
we cannot pass the objective
test of two or more alternate
providers then if the issue
completely not affiliated then
the commission has to make the
ruling that we did not prove our
case in that particular wire
center serving area so it is by
area around the state so we can
look at urban areas we can look
at rural areas so it would be by
specific area that we go after
that determination.
That we're inviting for.
There is only there are
or if there certainly is.
Nothing else so
chair of that is that.
Tip tax I appreciate that it
took me awhile to figure out all
of this you know this spaghetti
of you know to call it sometimes
actually the company like this
really wants the opposite of
that because they've actually
already established they would
want competition to come in
because that helps improve the
the the capital dollars spent on
maintaining those lines all the
other things that go along with
that like
and it'll make that area a
little more attractive for
expansion in terms of economic
development and things of that
nature which would further bring
them additional customer so
everybody wins in that scenario.
And yet.
And madam chair madam vice chair
federal law requires us to open
our lines to competitors to come
in that competitors are coming
in all the time the PRC is
regularly establishing new
companies as as eligible
telecommunications carriers in
New Mexico and so each time that
is approved there's a new
competitor that comes into the
state there are many competitors
in the state on the voice
service market.
Thank you madam chair.
This is.
Reduces the spaghetti reminded
me of that the old switch
appropriates.
I listen to an audio book that
was so good about the
switchboard operators New World
War one.
And and there's a true story it
was and and they literally had
to take him to the battle front
and help them the generals move
the troops I've it was just a
fascinating story such as that
was in the last six months or so
that I was with that book but I
what does it mean about
disadvantaging smaller carriers
I think somebody may have said
that this was a a flaw of the
legislation madam chair and
Of Madam Majority Leader so I
think which you'll find is that
yeah and that you and I working
along at some years I come with
legislation related to broadband
only some years I come with
things related to the wireless
companies some years I come with
wireline service what have you
You know what we have done a lot
actually at the state level with
reforming the real universal
service fund that we did in two
thousand seventeen and and all
the different things that went
along with that so so the
smaller companies are actually
flourishing in this environment
and what's important to note
that isn't always understood
here is that all of the best the
best major those companies sit
on the back on that was already
built out by a lumen CenturyLink
so they're they're they're
disadvantages I would have to
disagree with that.
And madam chair Senator there I
know there's some smaller
carriers and you're saying that
everyone is flourishing in the
environment is that like sacred
winds from one of the madam
chair that's actually right you
might remember in two thousand
eighteen in two thousand
nineteen I was in one person you
know what kicking contest and we
wound up repairing they were in
the slice of of New Mexico law
that seriously disadvantage them
so as a legislature we decided
to overcooked here's to do that
we lost by nineteen seconds in
the first session I got through
the second one pick them up and
put them in the work in the
right place where they can be
regulated so that they can
flourish so now they're doing
very well that the living
broadband and five different
modalities right now.
madam chair and they're a
supporter of this legislation
I'm sorry thank you madam chair
and senator I I guess I think I
I feel that.
Clearly.
Lumens is no longer the.
Then operate that it once was
right madam chair and and and
major Florida you're absolutely
right that's that's that is by
the I should have said that a
lot earlier actually so you you
said it very well just like when
we had a lot of disadvantages
for the rural telecommunications
goes we came in and fix that and
the one that I just outlined
sacred when we came in and fix
that one as well and all of
those companies are now so you
know you didn't it was a tough
to get all these guys to deserve
these companies to disagree
they're all supporting this
legislation to help regulate
this company properly as well.
Madam chair the last thing is I
I think.
I really like the pots plain old
television total of both sectors
such as cracks me up
that's about all I know how to
really work.
Except I really don't like it
I'm I'm thank you very much Mr
chair.
Thank you anyone else with
questions or.
Comments.
So Senator the way I kind of get
my head around this is your
argument or the lumens argument
is that
over time please your
Your market has diminished
significantly.
So there was a time when you had
significant market and that
justified survive elevated level
of PRC regulations because you
are essentially a monopoly or
you know arguably a monopoly and
therefore that was required
but with the the many options
that we have in the rural
exchanges and all these other
things your market share has
diminished.
And as a result you feel that
it's fairer to be regulated at a
different level than what you
would have been if you were the
monopoly that you had is that a
fair statement Senator and the
of where did I go wrong you
madam chair you your right on
when you heard earlier from Mr
Baca that they currently
chair have fifteen percent of
the voice market what you were
describing in the first party
remarks they actually was the
LFC at eighty five percent of
the market back in those days
and so you know I'm all about
consumer protection if I felt
like this wasn't something that
was you know important to help
this company continue to invest
in New Mexico the way that they
are I would need to be sitting
here with you right now on this
thing they're down to fifteen
percent of the market share and
so we do need to put them into a
regulatory environment that just
like every other company helps
them succeed and provide the
services that they.
Okay thank you other comments or
questions I'm happy to entertain
a motion.
Okay we have a due pass motion
made by Representative ring to
have a second.
Okay so we have a due pass
motion on Senate Judiciary
substitute for Senate bill forty
one made by Representative every
and seconded by Representative
Nighbor would you call the roll
please thank you madam chair
representative up on.
Representative Chasey yes
Representative lane yes.
Speaker Martinez yes
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert.
Yes.
Representative read yes.
Representative green yes.
Representative Penske.
Madam vice chair yes madam chair
yes.
Madam chair with ten test is you
have a do you pass on Senate
Judiciary Committee said for
Senate bill forty one thank you
have a do pass.
Members of the committee you're
welcome where did our own
Representative Chasey co is just
what.
She got read okay so I apologize
I know there's some experts here
you get to see yeah I can give
you can because I know our
experts of them waiting I
apologize.
Sen.
Last four.
What's going.
Well.
Okay hello all right all right
senator and we'll we'll see how
this goes sorry.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
Representative Garcia Harry of
present Senate bill two forty
eight it's a modernization of
the probate court modernizing
Senator.
Provisions are not been updated
since the eighteen hundreds.
it allows pro tem judges to
serve in the same way that
magistrate judges could surface
protein judges for each other
and
it has the support of the county
clerks of the probate judges and
the Supreme Court with that will
stand for questions.
Those in the audience.
Do you want to say from across.
Just one thing madam chair of
what's happening with the
probate judge can not do their
duties in the county he usually
goes District Court in approving
judge you charge thirty dollar
finally the District Court
charged over a hundred thirty
for five and and if you go to
district judge threw District
Court madam chair you'll be wind
up with an attorney probably
could you knock over yourself
and then not only that if you go
to distribute diss for five or
six months and people lost loved
ones the new appropriations
needed now not down the road
with that manager with questions
thank you very much
Representative let's go to the
audience.
Let's go to the audience for
those wishing to speak in
opposition to this bill please
raise your hand.
Those online wishing to speak in
opposition please raise your
hand okay I see someone named
judge Tom has staff.
Isn't isn't isn't what in favor
okay well wait time on you those
in the audience wishing to speak
in favor of the bill please
raise your hand.
Catherine.
Madam chair members Catherine
Kershaw auto with the New Mexico
counties we stand and support
all thirty three county support
this legislation as well as all
thirty three probate judges and
with that we are to support.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is plate
though to some the probate judge
for some again County and we've
been working on this for the
last three years or so but COVID
hit we found that
several of the judges could work
from their current location
because they had to sign
paperwork in the county seat and
that that we found that that you
are leave a was out of
compliance because there county
seat is intent on money yeah I
mean and yet that I'm idea.
And they must traveled seventy
two miles one way to go sign
paperwork and then come back
third county offices are in
Espanola so we've been working
on this.
past that because on time soon
there he's currently out on
medical leave so with his
absence there's nobody around
and what this bill will do is
it'll it'll all pro tem jets
come in and serve from it within
his judicial district cover his
basis for him and with these
changes that'll put us in
alignment with all the other
judges in New Mexico we ask for
your support in this thank you
judge appreciate it judge Tom
pest Act online.
You wish to speak in support.
Yes madam chair thank you I'm
Tom staff I am the chairman of
the New Mexico probate judge
affiliate and I.
On the chief judge's Council
with the judiciary and I want
you to know that not only to the
probate judges support this but
the entire judiciary does
support this also it's just a
way of modernizing the probate
courts.
and to give the opportunity for
in and I am the Guinea pig in
the US I'm out extended leave I
had spinal surgery I'll be out
for a couple months.
And the way the law right now
another probate judge could not
fill in for me anybody that
comes anybody in my community
that the state's a probate has
to go to the District Court or
wait till I get back.
If this bill passes a probate
judge from another jurisdiction
will be able to fill in for me
and keep the the flow of
appropriates going and as you
know a justice delayed is
justice denied well and and what
we're trying to overcome that so
I asked you to please vote in
favor of this bill thank you
thank you judge.
that concludes our public
comment let's go to the
committee.
Anyone with questions from
chair moving to pass the Senate
bill two forty eight.
Well no yes I think we might
knowing our good.
Is there something to no there's
not okay substance okay this is
you don't have like a point
twelve version.
It is as amended by the okay
there's been a motion made by
Representative lane seconded by
whom Nighbor for do pass.
Fund House Bill Senate bill two
forty as amended any other
comments questions to to call
the roll please thank you madam
chair Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey yes.
Representative Lane yes.
Speaker Martinez yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert.
Representative read yes.
Representative green yes ma'am.
Representative Penske.
Madam vice chair.
Madam chair yes madam chair with
ten test is you have a do pass
and Senate bill two thirty eight
as amended thank you gentlemen
thank you madam chair I was
brief yes you were.
You're welcome so we now are on
Center chase Representative
Chasey are you ready to present
oh okay sorry yes perfect okay
thank you which is that for
okay.
Senator o'neill.
Is Senate bill two sixteen.
And basically
With my co sponsor
Representative Chasey Peter
Casey Senate bill two sixteen
introduces adjustments to the
current state law bankruptcy
exemptions including a
significant increase in all of
the exemptions especially of the
homestead and personal property
exemptions that also introduces
new material for cost of living
adjustments proposing that at
each two year in a row relevant
sections of NMSA including
exemptions to be adjusted to
reflect the change in the
committee simmer price index and
so I'm joined today by oil from
Gardner and William ivory and of
wealth and they both can explain
this bill much better than I can
course the center Representative
Chasey is welcome to chime in as
well thank you good evening
madam chair.
Mines will fund garner I'm with
the center online poverty we're
here today because we're trying
to update New Mexico's law this
is a lot that's been in place
for over fifty years and I think
that everyone agrees that people
should be able to pay down their
debts but also before licenses
he's of the same time I know
forty percent of New Mexicans
have that that's in collections
thousands of New Mexicans file
for bankruptcy every year.
in twenty twenty two alone we
know the inflation and the cost
of housing skyrocketed.
Get the value of property that's
been exempted in our bills
hasn't been updated in decades
if at all.
This bill has been seen in this
committee two years ago I think
a lot of you will have a
familiarity with that we made a
lot of adjustments there and
then it went on to the house
floor where it passed
unanimously.
I can get more into the debt and
garnishment questions but for
now I'll turn it over to mistras
talk about bankruptcy.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
Yeah my name's William ivory I'm
up attorney in Santa Fe Senator
practice for thirty five years
and I specialize in representing
debtors and consumer and small
businesses and bankruptcy
foreclosure and debt collection
actions and has will said this
The New Mexico section statute
was enacted in nineteen early
nineteen sixties and has not
been amended other than a few
minor increase in the homestead
exemption and it's in this bill
is long overdue.
And it's just that needs to be
Has to get up to date with the
cost of living that's increased
over the last fifty years
basically that build us three
things it increases the value
monetary limits on personal
property such as cars to reduce
the trading cash exemptions to
about that sticky.
The higher limits based on the
cost of living over the last
fifty years.
The second thing it does is it
specifies what household good is
you know the statue right now is
very big success also good and
there's been a lot of litigation
let's also good I I magistrates
judges tell me that I TV is not
also good at computers not also
good to this bill outlines with
specificity exactly what house
good as including things that.
Artwork in guns and musical
instruments so that should avoid
obligation with the specificity
of the bill in the most
important part of the bill is
increases the homestead
exemption from sixty thousand
for single person two hundred
fifty thousand three hundred
thousand for married couple
this get this we we originally
wanted to build a B. two hundred
thousand four hundred thousand
but we didn't amendment after
consulting in the Goshen with
the banking association who did
what that posted increase that
much so we compromised at a
hundred fifty three hundred
which put puts this close to
neighboring states Arizona and
Colorado just want each one up
to two hundred fifty thousand.
so we're not quite there but the
by a property to Mexico probably
less than in those days so I
think a hundred fifty three
hundred thousand as a fair
compromise and it's much needed
in the state I mean it I would
just I I can't say how many
clients Senator office who want
to file bankruptcy unattended
that live and so security income
but they got way too much equity
in the house if if the file
bankruptcy they lose their house
this bill and able people are
up.
Use bankruptcy code discharged
debts when they're in a tough
situation and keep their house.
I think that's it thank you why
don't we go to the audience to
the extent there is okay have
one the.
I was in the audience wishing to
speak in opposition to the bill
please raise your hand.
Those online wishing to speak in
opposition please raise your
hand.
From those in the audience
wishing to speak in support of
the bill please raise your hand.
Those in the all the those
online wishing to speak New York
of the bill please raise your
hand.
Okay I don't see anyone so a
back to sponsor any other
comments before you go to
committee Representative K. I
don't know if Representative
Chasey would like to add
anything.
As a catcher with food.
Okay question Representative
Eli.
Thank you madam chair so first
page I noticed that.
We're adding in on service of
the garnishment we're adding in
that you have to.
Service on the defendant as well
is that correct.
Madam yes that's correct.
So madam chair
I realize that sometimes you can
initiate a garnishment
proceeding separately but a lot
of times this could be filled
within an that an action brought
to recover whatever.
Cause of action there was is
that correct.
Madam yes that's correct so I'm
just a little concerned if we
say.
The guards and shall be served
on the garnish you madam chair
and the defendant within the
metric district in the manner
provided law for service of a
civil summons.
So I'm concerned to you have it
you know it a defendant who
doesn't show and had a hard time
finding them to serve them
initially and then you had to do
service by publication or some
other method and now to go to
the garnishment process I'd have
to try to serve them again
within the same action so can I
get some maybe some
clarification of on this piece
here yes madam chair
representative so the basic idea
behind this change was that we
had talked to of course not only
debtors who down to the
situations but also thinkers and
employers the right now the
garnishment is served on the
employer or on the bank the
third party that actually holds
the funds that the creditors
going after and that leaves that
third party the bank or the
employer as the one who asked to
try to find some the debtor the
that person actually has is
going to that
this is a thing that will one
try to make it easier for those
third parties that actually hold
those funds I'm into also let
those debtors know instantly
that that there's somebody who's
coming after them and they might
need to make some claims for
exemption.
Madam chair so I yeah I mean I.
I'm not opposed to the defendant
receiving notice I'm just more
concerned about the the
requirement that we do.
Once we tech in the language and
the defender within this
paragraph for now requiring them
to be served like a civil
summons.
and I again when you have a hard
time finding it better.
that's an additional burden I
think on the of the judgement
creditor.
so I think I I have some
concerns about.
Letting it like that you know
it's something like if if you
have a defendant.
well and actually madam chair
and I think about it when when
you use the word the defendant.
You're not talking about it
the judgment debtor I think when
you talk about the defending
your talk about within the
underlying action is that
correct Madam yes that's correct
yeah so madam chair that to me
that makes even less sense than
because.
We're talking about someone
who's already been there named
in the cause of action they've
they've received service of
process in accordance with the
some rules.
And so they would I think.
You know from that point four
you don't have to serve anything
else on them just simply elected
to court.
is effective services sensually
whether it's emotional pleading.
Discovery.
And so I I I guess the more that
I I think through this I'm not
sure that it makes a lot of
sense that the.
That we have to serve them again
in the same action.
And and and then chairman need
to confront some clarification
I'm not from Santo saying I'd I
and and then look at all we want
to so in my understanding is
that the garnish she is the one
who is the debtor of the
defendant is the the party that
that actually would be holding
them the bank counter the
employer.
The madam chair so.
It's been a long time said since
I've I've read the statutes but
I thought the.
I thought the garnish she was
the one who is responding to the
garnishment process which should
be either the employer or the
bank holding the funds.
Because I don't think is there
not a defendant because you're
not you're not suing them you're
simply saying that.
That you're garnishing the
defendant's wages or whatever
the case may be.
You madam chair that's correct
I'm sorry makes the tip my hat
that is correct.
The just to be clear clear to
everybody else the garnish she
is the one that that holds the
property the defendant is the
one who's the better.
And so.
Chair again I just I still have
concern about.
Within the same action required
other services civil summons or
as we would serve Senator
Sammons.
But somehow I I really don't
want to delay this bill in the
process of realizing that I just
I think we're introducing here
and another layer of difficulty
for folks trying to.
What the lawfully on debt owed.
So I don't know if that's
something that maybe we could
look at between on the floor.
page nine.
So I have a question Madam
about.
So this is as I understand these
these new sections either these
are types of either council or
or sources of income that are
exempt from garnishment is that
correct.
Madam chair representative right
yes that is correct okay
so.
The.
Most of these make sense to me
when we get to on page nine
seven care subparagraph F. as in
Frank now retirement payment
pursuant to a stock bonus of
pension.
Profit sharing individual
retirement account new in the.
And then we introduced this
concept and to the extent
reasonably necessary.
I don't really know what that
means.
And it seems like it's.
It's gonna invite litigation as
to what is reasonably necessary
for the support of that person.
Seems like a very subjective
standards and so can I get some
clarification about this
language.
madam chair Representative Lane
this is I think the same way
which said the current statute
and.
I've never
That we're doing this for thirty
five years I've never seen a
case where someone says this
person doesn't need that much
retirement so we're gonna
do except that I suppose a good
be the litigation but I've never
seen this.
Thirty five years of practicing
law in this area so I think
That was going to challenge any
retirement account is.
Only part of its reasonably
necessary the rest can be taken
away.
that was just a within the
believe that was in the current
status right now.
Venture the this concept reserve
administrative.
Thank you didn't hear your
question answered so the concept
if I understood the response the
concept of recently Messrs
argued with an existing statute
I believe so.
Okay.
And.
Madam chair Sir these.
These amounts are.
In better within.
The.
Wellness questions what these
items that are listed under
paragraph six.
Or is there any kind of cap on
these.
Like the homestead exemption.
Personal property exemption
anything like that.
Madam chair representative lane
though there's no cap on
retirement accounts are so
security benefits this is in
line with the federal exemption
statute which doesn't put a cap
on.
The public benefits of security
veterans retirements our motion.
So there's never been a cap on
those those items so enjoy caps
on tangible personal property.
Madam I you know I.
The new these so security those
things make sense to me a profit
sharing our a you can you can
hide a lot of money in there.
And then the next rate setting
that I. R. A..
Profit sharing plan.
Employers specially small
employers can use those and
stuff a lot of money in those
and it and I don't have a
problem with well maybe let me
just this week are we talking
about.
If I take a distribution out of
those.
Is that subject to attachment
for the is it the nature of work
came from exit not subject to
attachment.
Madam madam chair Representative
Lane
Would you take it out every time
it turns in the.
The quick money so.
It would be it would fall under
the cache exemptions there's
some provisions in the.
Bankruptcy code.
To to avoid someone putting all
the money into harmony count
right before they file
bankruptcy there's a fraudulent
conveyance statute.
that you guys expected because
it's awful I don't convey
secretary for the state of New
Mexico where a creditor can
challenge if they think someone
hiding money for the purpose of
avoiding creditors by throwing
money into a.
A retirement account.
Madam chair so I'm not worried
about people making a fraudulent
transfer though at the ninth
hour
what I'm more concerned about is
the judgment debtors got a
substantial amount in a let's
say profit sharing are a.
So if I understood the response.
As soon as I make a distribution
of that to myself then the
judgement creditor could attach
at that point to the
distribution.
Madam chair representative Lente
as correct once it goes into a
bank account it's just a regular
liquid account okay.
Fair enough thank you madam
chair.
Thank you very much madam chair
and thank you senator of and
gentleman and Mr ivory you were
at our interim committee right
to because we did look at this
during the interim so that we
clearly and is just in.
I was shocked to learn that
someone could file for
bankruptcy and their home how
they all they got credit for the
value of their home with sixty
thousand dollars for a single
person that's just astonishing
in today's market so clearly it
needs updating in the thing that
I think is the most brilliant
about this is that you've
indexed it now so it would have
to keep coming back.
Who who look somebody teacher
legislature in thirty years will
have to come back and fix it so
anyway I'm glad that minority
there asked all those questions
because I'm learning more about
the details of the bill thanks
very much thank you
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair and
senator
I happen to be the agent for
service of process for a variety
of companies and this seems to
be an area that I get served a
lot of fun of.
The.
I think the concern on page one
line twenty one
Is a real concern and I I think
you may want to delete that
language as well
The.
There's one there's a couple
provisions
On page eleven that don't have a
value associated with them.
One is line for furniture.
not not too concerned with lines
five through eight or seven.
Or a on a lot of page eleven.
Of which is targeting and the
Electronic equipment some of
that stuff it seems that there
may be a need to put a value
upper limit value on on that
that should be exempted and life
course
Although it probably doesn't
appear to most people that.
There are some people that have
quite extensive book collections
that are.
Can be.
Tremendously valuable.
And so there may need to be
element.
Limit on on value there as well
It just seems with the not
having
limit on those things maybe
people could
More responded that the
Representative madam chair.
there is a limit for the
household goods which actually
the Judiciary Committee someone
curses limit two years ago there
was never a limit the current
statue for also goods without we
put a limit of seventy five
thousand which encompasses all
the fees and.
Okay specified.
web page it was hello all these
are subject to an overall.
Okay you have a certain items as
specified to by our workers
twenty up to twenty five hundred
and
what juries up to five thousand
but then we have
With the line of all the house
or good to seventy five thousand
which was.
Recommendation House Judiciary
Committee two years ago they
want to put a monetary living
out of the bill right now does
not have a limit on up it
doesn't say what the hell so
good is which is what's.
The the.
Well I appreciate that I didn't
I didn't see the the I guess
that is over on page eight
One nine but
and then my last of the COVID.
Is really.
This is a lot more complicated
than our current deal where you
know there's just certain limits
and it's very apparent this
requires a lot more work and and
I guess I my question is how to
those that are going out to
force.
The judgment so to speak.
How are they going to know.
Which things sake can take and
which things they can not take.
To satisfy the judgment.
So Madam chair representative
the idea behind adding there's
there's a lot more detail on
this bill you're absolutely
correct but the basic idea came
type Mr ivory talked with other
advocates in this area.
Was just so much litigation
about what constituted a
household good and in New Mexico
has had one of the most generous
household good exemptions and
even with that that overall cap
on it is will still be quite
generous compared to a lot of
states I'm kind of keeping with
the tradition of New Mexico law
The really it just gets down to
enumerating some of those
exemptions so that
administrative judges would have
some sort of idea of what that
but I also good really is so
this doesn't keep getting
litigated over and over and over
again and going to the public
works over and over and over
again.
But again
it just a lot more complicated
but I think at that page one
line twenty one.
it does not make sense the
service agent there so.
Mr I've Representative madam
chair would you have an
amendment in that way I think
you're just right so the
garnishment shall be served on
the current issue because.
The the
Defendant.
If they're part of the suit
they're going they're going to
know about it anyway if if if
they are not present then you
get the judgment can't find of
so I just suggest it will we can
take that under advisement maybe
between here and for because you
are from Ohio and I would well
you went to Ohio state so.
Magistad I think it's important
that that.
Defended the serve be given a
copy of the callers that may
cause as last known address
without going to formal service
as.
Representative way was concerned
about because I think it's
important because the first time
that defendants ever find out is
one of a sudden they get a
paycheck and it lost twenty five
percent of their.
Check without even knowing
they've been garner so I think
if we send to the last known
address we can say so we.
So we mail to the defendant or
something without having to do a
formal service we can we can
look at that tweet now or.
The.
Thank you the service aspect
complicated in any case thank
you madam chair I I have a
question about service
And maybe my recollections off
consent participated litigation
for awhile the rules on service
were changed at a certain point
I remember so there was personal
service but then there are
alternatives to service if I
remember if you couldn't find
the person there were some
mailing process is that's apply
and magistrates court is that
just to District Court the I'm
I'm missing my memory is on on
this.
Madam chair yes you're right
that the if you can't find the
person you can serve by
You can Sir by certified mail
judges don't prefer that this if
you can't find if they don't
accept the concert by
publication but that the
liberalized a little bit you
know if that she go to
somebody's house I mean the
after the first attempt to
okay they still have to sign for
okay okay I was trying to see
whether or not we are talking
about something that already
been resolved all right well I'm
anyone else wishing to comment
I'm sorry for Representative
Freeman forgot about you.
Madam chair and senator let's go
over to page eight go to a
warranty and so we look at a
person's interested of motor
vehicles a limit of ten thousand
dollars that's a ten year old
vehicle with two hundred
thousand miles on it I think I
think that should be a little
higher the next one down on
seventeen.
The wife is in gauge mint
wedding band you know five
thousand that's probably not a
very good one.
That right go ahead and next
please well here we go.
But then chair representative
reading
That vehicle exemption actually
did one increases to twenty
thousand but the main reason is
ten thousand is because most
people have a vote in the car
we're talking equity we're not
talking okay value of the car so
most we don't have ten thousand
dollars equity card if it's a
joint petition your reserves out
of the about all your cars up to
twenty thousand current statutes
or about one car.
The matter if you have three
cars with four thousand you
could take you could only one
car up to four thousand this
statutes as you can aggregate
all your vehicles up to ten
thousand per per data twenty
thousand on the wedding ring.
That that is the statute.
Our proposed statute
Is a wedding ring plus five
thousand dollars and you do not.
So you that way we could be
worth a million.
Should say that but nobody.
The way we could be in a minute
plus plus five thousand dollars
and madam chair and senator when
we go down to twenty through
through twenty five and then we
go over the top of the page nine
fifteen thousand.
And
Professional trade tools and
that's I agree if you have a
fire sale the seller and they're
going to be very low value but.
That's not much for the guy to
make you know keep his living
going.
Mexico.
Madam chair sent Representative
I agree as I think you should be
hired two but we do want to get
carried away so we thought it's
better than the twenty five
hundred there is now Madam chair
representative if I catch that I
think that's right I think.
The source of advocates we are
we would like all these to be
higher but throughout the last
three years we've been working
with the bankers association as
part of this is been trying to
compromise with them as well so
madam chair I understand
compromise but that one I think
is way too low you know you
wanting to go ahead and go out
and make money you know what
please recover thank you madam
chair thank you very much
Representative and happy to
entertain a motion.
Chair.
a motion made for to pass on
Senate bill to team second.
Seconded by made by
Representative Chasey second by
Representative Romero would you
call the roll thank you madam
chair Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane yes.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen.
Representative Nibert.
Representative read yes
Representative green yes.
Representative Penske.
Madam vice chair.
Yes.
Yes.
Going to vote for them chair yes
madam chair with ninety S. is
you have a do pass on Senate
bill two sixteen as amended
thank you thank you senator.
The finish this agenda is
shocking all right Senator
Cervantes.
Seven.
yes.
For me.
Okay very surprised complete
your agenda me too.
Should you be committee right
now so we should be the
Republican
Your reserve really the other
Republican caucus of the Senate
has a prior engagement that they
do on the rights every here and
so we're letting them have that
opportunity representative of
the be happy to do that.
So we are on Senate bill three
oh eight and we have Senator
vontade thank you madam chair
members the committee so this
could be the first time I think
with this session of this bill
addresses the constitution
revision commission as one of
the three ways by which we can
amend our constitution the state
most of us are very familiar
with the amendment process by
which should be put issues on
the ballot and have the voters
vote on constitutional
amendments another way of the
three is a constitutional
convention that's been done
before but I'm not advocating
for that here this constitution
revision commission is merely
the creation of a commission for
a two year study to really look
at our constitution front to
back and proposed to make
recommendations to us as a state
with regard are are now hundred
plus year old constitution this
is been done twice before it has
been done since the last report
was issued in nineteen ninety
five under governor Johnson.
I like to describe it this way
in my mind those of us that
played sports look I'm looking
at their looks like a lot of you
are probably played some kind of
sports one where the other we
would have never thought of of
the day after the game into not
watching the game film and
trying to figure out who Mr
block and who got the play right
and who'd who didn't do their
job we don't have any mechanism
maybe think about so that we
don't have any mechanism at all
in our state government but
which we really taken evaluation
of the way we do things in a
broad macro scale those we don't
look at other states with a look
of their government operates
we do it in a piecemeal basis so
for example the session we're
looking at maybe paying
legislators maybe we're looking
at extending legislative
sessions to forty five days
maybe we're looking at any
number of different reforms to
stop so called modernize our
legislature but we don't really
have a mechanism by which I I
propose we should be looking at
other states right to see what
works and what doesn't work
what's advisable it's not
advised.
So this this bill simply re
establish the commission has
been created before to make
recommendations to the
legislature about our
constitutional process works
some of this is needed simply
clean up just really antiquated
and unfortunately I wish it
remains in our constitution so
for example the existing
constitution says a notary can
be a woman well okay it's
suggested throughout gender
specific positions and of course
we passed laws that say well
when we say he we mean something
more than he but but some of us
just antiquated language some of
it relates to the establishment
of the constitution at the time
of our statehood and from the
territory.
But this this method that we've
been using which is the
piecemeal method of one
constitutional amendment at a
time when section time it is not
getting the job it's too it's
too much of a well there's not a
better was it it's it's a
piecemeal process and we're
getting a piecemeal results of
the goal of this is to provide a
limited amount of money a two
year study and just learn it
individuals to come together
with and really suggests some
reforms and changes all also
just to that when this was done
back in the bureau want to
mention reading.
It's fascinating to read the
report of the commission back
from the last one ninety five a
they had what they call high
priority and low priority
changes that they recommended to
the constitution and the
important thing is my word of
the use purposefully of
recommendations those are only
recommendations ultimately that
the legislature has to pass a
proposed constitutional
amendment voters have to approve
it so this doesn't change any of
that but what it does do is
allows us to do so in a in a
more comprehensive way rather
than just the section of the
time article at a time of and
and so the the report last
around described it precisely as
that is piecemeal an interesting
many of the issues that we're
talking money with here today
we're recommendations made back
in nineteen ninety five so here
we are almost thirty years later
and still talking about things
like for so for example but we
will give you this some fun
interesting recommendations a
low priority of the last report
was that we limit the
constitutional requirement for
third reading of bills.
Well we have the constitutional
requirement for the reading will
just be honest with one another
we all ignore that right we
waive the rules we ask unanimous
consent we don't do third we
don't do pre pre built three
times we roll the clock to
create an artificial fiction to
meet the requirement that a
certain number of days passed
between introductions and
readings and passage so we do we
do these artificial constructs
to avoid our constitution rather
than really addressing the
constitutional infirmity itself
and I think that's unfortunate.
we were there the last
recommendation was that the that
we amend article I section seven
to allow the governor to
continue this function as
governor while traveling out of
the state that seems to make
sense of the modern era but
maybe when we were a state made
sense that when the governor of
the state that authority had to
transfer to somebody else but it
doesn't make much sense of that
anymore so that I can go through
this and I think you'll find
interesting reading but I think
it's overdue now that we have
learned individuals legal
scholars government experts to
me community were to be your
period and advise us and maybe
how our constitution could be
updated to better our state and
our government will step I have
Mister letter which we all of us
are going to carry with me
struggling to actually serve on
well the last constitution
revision commission along with
staff by professor browdy you
all know Michael Browde he still
so it's ensuring how somethings
don't change very much around
here like Mr Ludwig.
Well Michael Michael Brody but
but some things need to change
madam chair so we'll we'll take
questions thank you.
Very good I don't see any member
of the public's to comment but
I'll go online to see if anyone
online wishes to speak in
opposition to this bill please
raise your hand.
Anyone online wishing to speak
in support of the bill please
iterations.
Thank will go to the committee
Representative McQueen.
How the.
I don't see okay
Representative McQueen thank you
madam chair mentor center
I've been spending a lot of time
thinking about point in
commissions and how they're
selected.
And I've got a bill to the to
run sent floor that takes some
of the game commission
appointments to give them the
Legislative Council
Senator Wirth has a bill to to
switch up the the icy
appointments although they all
stay with the governor.
Madam center thank you have a
bill to switch up the water
trust board that has a bunch of
people they're inherently
executive branch and then give
some of the a large appointments
the public appointments to the
Legislative Council so my first
question is why related to
governor appoints all fifteen
members.
so Madam chair representative
good question one that we do we
debated spent quite a bit of
time with a previously
it seems that the
the only answer I can give you
there is hope and expectation of
the governor would approve the
commission inside and do a good
job of making those appointments
but again I I think I think the
concern about the authority of
this commission is one that I
would really
the have you focus on which is
all the authorities to make
recommendations to the
legislature to be look if you
look at the folks to serve on a
last Ms a very bipartisan group
if you look at the composition
of this has to be equal Democrat
Republican with all the usual
language that we used to not
more than one party nobody party
switching parties is a one of
the other amendments added to
the Senate Judiciary Committee
people can't be gaming that the
party registration but but what
I hear your point and.
I wish I had a better answer
than than the one giving up give
me a straight answer which is we
we we need to make the governor
partner in this process and
that that's the reason why some
of the poems are coming out of
the executive.
Madam chair center I appreciate
the
I would like to feel like a
partner more often
And the call the voting members
are from the governor we.
Legislative body with the point
some advisory members only so
that's I mean that's more
concerned about that
I also a note that the two
members should be appointed by
the speaker to mmhm members of
the appointed by the president
did you consider doing one each
and then the minority leaders
make an appointment.
madam chair you know.
A request sounds like you've
given a lot of thought these
boards and commissions I
appreciate that you're reading
trying to so as to I'm open I'm
open to all those suggestions
everyone of them
the the given the minority
participation role giving
Legislative Council role I'm not
opposed to any those suggestions
the goal here is not to try to
stack the deck in if we start we
start with that notion that the
deck is stacked stacked here I
think we probably already failed
the process interestingly again
if if you were to look at the
composition the last time we can
this was under Carrie Johnson is
the governor but the chairman
was David Townson out of
Alamogordo we had Richard Lawson
who many of you all know
uh Jerry king was a member of
the commission the time it was
identified with the Moriarty don
Salazar you probably know Joseph
Baca don kid don Regan.
A man Sanchez Tom Udall it was
it was a I think a stellar group
of individuals who you expect
we're we're going to take a
scholarly approach to this
process and and if you look at
the report itself I don't see a
partisan
In bed to the report at all it's
it's very much a bipartisan.
product I know it's a different
era in the that may not be true
today.
Okay madam chair center one last
question along those lines
that was interesting that the
point is mainly want to the
governor but then the step the
staff of the Legislative
Council.
a.
The.
I was looking at
some budget issues and the
amount of.
Money the legislature gets
expense compared to the
judiciary and then compared to
the executive is dramatically
different so I I guess I was a
little I have a little
possessive of our limited
Legislative Council the
resources and and now we're
we're staffing a body that's all
pointed by the governor.
So madam chair representative I
guess I would think have you
think about this way which I I
see this commission functioning
not too much unlike our interim
committees where we rely upon
Legislative Council to help
assemble the meetings organize
them broadcast them find
locations and and do those kind
of things in terms of staffing
some of the research and
preparation materials really
there is not another mechanism
in place that we have to do that
and so short of having the
executive branch assemble a team
to do this and hiring people
does it seem logical to me to
have let's have council do this
in much the way they do with any
other interim committee and so I
I I agree with you our budget is
relatively minuscule but but the
expected cost of something like
this yes Representative
relatively small in the overall
budget of the Legislative
Council Service in in the it
shouldn't surprise you that
they're going to schedule
meetings and have some
duplication expenses probably in
some printing expenses in the
end but it shouldn't be an
expensive process.
Madam chair center with with the
M. A. R. Evelyn Legislative
Council for research and
drafting with they would they
would ultimately which which is
probably appropriate that they
would ultimately be drafting
proposals that came out of this
this.
Mission.
Madam chair and reserve I don't
want to presume that and want to
presume that the that the
commission would be and struck
in the drafting of anything I'd
like to believe that's going to
be the result but again I would
want to suggest to you that I've
got a preconception of what the
commission is going to come up
with them they may not come up
with draft drafted language or
constitution minute but you're
right if anybody should have
that expertise and skill and
capability would be Legislative
Council.
Commitment your center to say
shall be drafted but less of
council on committee the.
so roll impairment maybe refuse
the representative Lente you
just set it on on majority vote
no which of the commission
decides to do something like
that then they would be direct
to do so that that's what I
meant when I suggested that I
want to presume with what the
commission I come up with a plan
may not be a majority vote to
get anything that happens.
So madam chair etcetera I for
one am hesitate hesitant to
amend bills and final week of
session
I think if if I was saying but
probably with shuffle the deck
in the thermal differently I do
think that a lot of these
commissions
came commission PRC on in these
appointed bodies.
we we try like hell to get get a
good process in the just
hopefully consent to the
individuals they're pointedly Q.
of good people this is a good
mix to their work real well
together do they take their job
seriously I mean and that's
I I've.
Based on recent experience
that's a hard thing the
legislative.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Sir thank you representative
Representative Romero.
Thank you madam chair welcome
Senator.
I'm I'm really curious on what
we learned in nineteen ninety
five when we had the report I
guess what what are we expecting
out of this and and what did
change constitutionally well
nothing else better to do
tonight it'll let you check out
these three four percent the
this is the report of the
commission
the I have the executive summary
and so your your your your your
your question was Representative
then what were the highlights I
guess since I guess that we're
looking for that we can expect
well so again going back to
ninety five the the highest
priorities are identified with
the in.
That section of the.
Bill and actually let's see so
let me just give you some of the
substantive changes you're gonna
love this
And and you're gonna realize
what we spin our wheels what we
stay fifty that something's
don't be surprised the highest
priority they they made
suggestions in the legislative
branch executive branch
otherwise the highest prior
legislative branch was to prove
of amend the constitution to
allow for adequate compensation
legislators
well you know what an idea.
here we are in and again they
didn't.
Yeah well mention if we had
imagined we'd stuck with us or
at least on this sometime in the
last whatever it's been almost
thirty years so this is really
in my mind is a process you
shouldn't wait every thirty
years and and we were keeping
this the forefront some of these
things might get done with that
that's our first recommendation.
And realize some of this process
might make it easier for us to
something's that we're just
we're lacking the courage to do
ourselves then there's not an
easy way to say that when it
comes on the legislative
compensation on me to take this
on on a side road and and then
lose the support that I might
otherwise have in this committee
by presuming where we're gonna
go with any of that but but
let's face it we just passed in
the Senate a bill with a great
deal of the struggle to
compensate our executive
officers at a higher level that
we have been willing to do it
forever right and even then we
have to amend it take the
governor out so there there
should be maybe other ways to do
some things that that we frankly
we lacked the courage to do I'll
just give you a couple of the
other recommendations one of the
recommendations was to allow the
governor more time to consider
bills passed by the legislature
a third recommendation is one
that I've been proposing quite a
bit this session which is to
create a constitutional process
for a veto override session on
many other states do that they
automatically set aside a period
of time after the governor's
vetoes to come back in and to
evaluate those vetoes for
ultimately reestablishing
Authority
is it is it override process in
all get on my soapbox over there
to act in all the time I've been
here I can I can count on one
hand I think the number of times
with over in the governor's veto
because it all becomes
protection right Republicans
don't vote to override a
Republican governor Democrats
will vote to override a Democrat
governor same thing happens in
Congress that's not what the
founders intended it right the
founders intended the
legislature to have the ultimate
authority over the executive by
that B. two oh right we'll do
it.
and it gets back to my point
forgive me for saying so it's a
matter of encouraging we lacked
the courage to do so plus it's
hard for us to that's hard for
us to a similar selves how do we
bring ourselves into session
we've got to get everybody else
on the signature and get the
petitions all signing it will
file to do all that kind of
business and we just don't do it
is too bad because I think if we
did that we probably have
greater cooperation with the
executive so those are just a
couple of their suggestions of
very well if you want to go
through with you probably find a
pretty fascinating reading.
then chair thank you senator I
think that's I mean that's part
of the reticence that I have for
something like this we're
talking about the make up of it
and then what we can get you
come up with all these great
ideas we have so many different
planning commissions and we plan
plan plan plan have all these
incredible ideas and then
where's the sort of education
point I also was entertained I
the list that you read off of
the former members I would hope
that some we might be able to
participate in the future as
well and I I have the honor of
taking a state constitutional of
course with just as fancy and
would recommend highly recommend
her for something like this and
look forward to sort of thinking
that through and another
recommendation but I am as far
as participation goes and just
sort of how that agenda gets
created I think would be
interesting and I don't know if
Phil once talk about that but
you know what how does this
interplay with our federal
constitution I mean I guess sort
of like the guardrails on what
are we asking them to do at for
what barometer and I guess I
mean the list that you gave
workers substantive and what we
would hope to see change to
allow us to do our work better
but I guess by what sort of
lands and I don't know how that
agenda was crafted back in
ninety five and and is it just
the chair that sort of comes up
with the way in which the two
year timeline is addressed as
that sort of how it goes absent
good grief what is are or what
your thoughts are about that
gets crafted.
a band there Representative my
recollection is that we worked
collaboratively on the
commission after we selected a
chair and that sort of how we
came to to study various
sections of the constitution
professor Barry also assisted us
in that regard so
and and and we took some
guidance from our from our
legislative
From the legislature as well
things that we might inquire
about.
I'm intrigued and but I would
love to see some teeth behind
and maybe take the advice ninety
five commissions will thank you
madam chair of Amanda I have a
question pending but you make a
great observation that I want to
amplify which is the twelve
members of the original
commission two were women of so
we've come a ways in in many
respects there were six advisory
members none of them were women
this staffing was done by
professor Brody of Law School
but also by Ruth Hoffman you all
some of you may know or recall
route and so we we made some
progress will take a moment once
in awhile to at least recognize
that.
Thank you anyone else.
Representative yes madam chair
and senator and Phillip.
I I also I took state kalo that
I took a from professor Brody.
And he D. chair this commission
he was the legal staff he had
for his legal staff so.
I guess I wonder you know if
what did what was recommended
that did happen.
Madam chair.
Madam chair representative I
would I would go back to the
piecemeal amendments of the
constitution that the
Legislative Council Service
assembles from time to time and
honestly I don't.
Recall exactly what we've done
since nineteen ninety five.
May I give you an example of a
may madam chair you know one of
the one of the maybe the
telling.
Case studies for us would be the
and I. donation costs so we have
an and I donation Clause of the
constitution but let's be honest
with the public and with
ourselves we piecemeal that
right and so this last election
cycle we had a valid issue for
the voters to a road that
handed a motion because we've
done so repeatedly over the
years what we call an economic
development we call it nonprofit
so we called a terrible uses we
we can do it anyway one of us it
it's entirely piecemeal process
and erosion of the and a
donation because I'm not saying
we should do but maybe we should
just really reevaluate why we
have it at all or come up with
some fairness to it because it
seems to me.
If you'll forgive me for always
being pretty blunt I hope I'm
always in the Atlantic Ocean
Clause only applies to those who
we don't want to give money to
you know we don't want to give
money to somebody was so we can
do that Senate we should close
but if you know how to work the
system up here there's a way to
pass a constitutional amendment
to get some piecemeal
Sen exception to the adoration
clause and that that seems to be
like it's a constitutional
protection for those who are not
connected and and those who are
connected managed to avoid it so
I should we talk about that we
talk about P. three have not
been a big supporter of P. three
approach to governing thanks
we'll talk about that too
there's there's a lot of things
that I may not agree with but
doesn't mean we should not look
at other states had other states
do with private public
partnership how do other states
do that it wanted to make sure
because we don't even have a
mechanism in place by which we
look at ourselves in the mirror
and look at other states to say
there's a better way to do this.
And so madam chair.
It seems like you've had this
was it a biller codes joint
resolution.
On this topic before which which
is Madam chair representative it
was a bill it was a bill it was
always about okay I was just
wondering if it was in a
different form this time I know.
Ends up coming over late.
Our I have a lot of things.
Myself so.
I I just wondered how.
You know how we can get some
results madam chair thank you
thank you Representative
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair Senator.
One thing that always strikes me
when I read our constitution is
the.
Who.
Numerous issues that seem to be
in the constitution that.
When I view constitutions I I
think of a foundation and I see
a lot of actual bricks you know.
Part of the wall and and and not
just a foundation and and so it
seems like our constitution
could be a lot more.
Focused on you know the the
tobacco items but we we tend to
we tend of well as you mentioned
tack on a lot of a lot of things
that that.
Frankly are just be laws and not
the not engaged in constitution
that's just an observation part
madam chair Senator.
I may madam chair this relates
to what we do is because of the
way because of the structure
we've created for ourselves we
only allow in a thirty day
session the introduction of
legislation by the governor or
budgetary issues or constitution
of so what happens in my
experience of time everybody
puts everything is a
constitutional amendment that's
what bill right and that's how
we avoid that part of the
constitution so seems like we're
always playing games with
ourselves to avoid our
constitutional restrictions
limitations rather confronting
much save maybe in in two
thousand twenty three they don't
belong in the constitution
anymore.
Madam chair and senator I recall
number of years ago we had to.
The constitutional amendment to
change the name of the highway
Department that's to look at us
to fill member the change the
name of the.
Highway department I think it
went from something the
department of transportation's
Britney will.
It's pretty specific better is
probably very controversial and
probably a lot of work to do
some of that should be pretty
simple answer to you that's
right.
Thank you madam chair
Representative semansky thank
you madam chair and thank you
senator I.
You know I I think this idea is
so.
Missing because the constitution
should really be a living a
living document a reflection of
how we have moved forward as a
state
And you know I I was glad you
brought up the anti donation
clause because I personally have
been thinking a lot about how
the anti donation clause which
is present in many other what is
present in many other state
constitutions
most of those other states have
repealed there's or modified
there's to such an extent that
they are not no longer
really enforceable
and yet we have an anti donation
clause with except except except
except except.
Which thank you know I find
that.
People sort of twist themselves
into pretzels fitting into
different exceptions for
different programs and yeah I
think that total re visitation
of that is truly in order
whether it's a legislative
process or or through this.
Revision commission
I I also I share
Representative maclean's I some
of the concerns about the make
up of this because eight I do
worry about.
You know just a total
In the constitution.
Impacts and governs all three
branches but to have all fifteen
coming from appointed by one
branch of government.
Mexico there is I don't I I also
don't want to delay this in any
way so I just wonder if there is
a way to work on whether it's a
floor amendment or
something because I I think.
If you reduce the governor's
appointees to.
Three per congressional
district.
that might ensure that you have
one for each major party and one
from a third party or it or from
an unaffiliated
Party.
And then I I just I just wonder
about including some.
So I'm notation of diversity
whether that be gender diversity
or
Racial ethnic diversity or you
know
some kind of not to that so.
Maybe maybe in the end you end
up with.
Nine from the governor.
Three from each chamber
Thank you for the I did not have
this ammendment so that's.
I think I think that's so two of
the fifteen would be from.
The native community yes.
I'm not sure what you're
referring.
Of this okay I'm sorry.
I saw that you prepare a.
I was like so this is important
and madam chair I think there's
a there's also a floor amendment
and madam chair and senator
resisted was this amendment
adopted well the one I'm not
sure twenty looking other what
there was an amendment the that
the specify the two members of
native American tribal interests
that was adopted on the Senate
floor but I'm I'm trying to look
at what your which is yes yeah
that's it yeah that's a.
It's so we've so so madam chair
center looks like we've inserted
that you can't change your party
affiliation in the preceding two
years at least two of the
fifteen need to be members of.
Tribal community.
Enrolled members of Indian
nations tribes or pueblos is how
this
element Rian actually are now
one of our sales team building
fire the majority mention some.
So I just the senator did as
well.
I just wonder about.
Modifying the make up
Somehow so that maybe it's a
little more evenly split between
all three branches of
government.
Madam chair and senator and I
don't know if you find that.
How you would feel about that at
this late date in this.
Madam chair I see two
alternatives one is all stay
here with you all as late as you
want to do an amended in this
committee or be receptive to
floor amendments as well that
you Representative McQueen or
others may want to propose and I
I wouldn't oppose anything that
we create that level of balance
that that you all feel would
make things more comfortable to
I'm I'm not married at all to
the composition of of this
commission
very merry to this as a as a
potentially big solution for the
reason you point out that a
donation because the classic
example in my part of the state
I have nine colonias in my
district.
often times when you try to go
get money from the state or
capital outlay for the county to
pave a road bill tell you that's
a private road we can't do
anything we can't we can't pave
that road it would be a
violation valuation was as of
the counties responses Mexico
doesn't want to spend the money
and put the effort into paving
the road but I also know that
you put out that if you know how
to work the system up here you
can find a way to get around in
a location close for the
economic development interests
or whatever you want to call it
so I don't mean to get off the
subject too much but I'm I'm
open to any really in any Sarah
recombination you all want to
propose with us tonight or on
the floor and.
Welcome one of you all doing so
on the floor in care in the bill
and and what advice from the
house let me make this
suggestion we have I know
Representative McQueen is
different ideas on the subject
having worked at a few times are
more like a subcommittee of one
now on composition of committees
job assignment for the committee
but I I think it would help I've
if we had appointments that were
not just by the governor
So that there's better
representation from the
Legislature and other branches
perhaps so
And perhaps we could a pass this
bill out with the expectation we
do there may be a floor
amendment that we could work out
with you Senator in advance of
it's not a big surprise
Representative yeah and Mr a lot
of it is of whispering in my ear
to offer to help as well to to
get into his experiences
invaluable which partly why I
really want to push this issue
because I think it's important
have somebody who's done this
before was around who wants to
so Sir so very happy to work
with you and all of a worked
very hard for concurrence with
your amendment together some I
know without even having to
assume they'll be fair okay
Senator up I agree I think this
is really interesting I'd love
kind of looking at forms of
government type issues I think.
And I too want to echo the anti
donation clause and I have that
little bill that I did last year
and very happy to pass but there
was a lot of conversation but
why not me a look at this more
broadly and then there people
want to do more narrowly is so I
think it will be very beneficial
for us to have a really good
conversation over the next
couple years about what's the
value of that clause how could
it be better eliminated or
streamline is such a way that
it's
not so constructive it's it's a
very strange little entity in
our little constitution order
appreciate your work on this
madam chair I just me briefly
responded that I know you asked
a question but without a freeway
for being redundant you know I
don't know we we we anyone does
have the courage to introduce a
consummate to repeal the
animation class because the
world would come down upon us
when what is Cervantes up to by
repealing but perhaps we have a
math math method and the process
and a study to learn a
commission to save as.
A representative of us said
other states have modify this
got rid of it or or.
But it into the modern era so I
I I'm repeating but I suppose
it's just those we have enough
courage politically to do what
we know needs to be done to
maybe just one way to do that
thank you senator happy to
entertain a motion.
We can't we have a due pass on
Senate bill three oh eight made
by Representative is semansky
and seconded by Representative
Romero three oh eight as amended
we do call the roll please thank
you madam chair representative
of the coin.
Representative Chasey.
Yes I have.
well I'm sorry doing what system
the.
You have a question
Representative okay
Representative Chasey I don't
wanna do.
And work on the floor amendment.
Okay.
I think the membership madam
chair.
Yes membership.
Okay let's let's start again on
the motion made by
Representative the Penske and
seconded by Representative now
thank you madam chair
Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert.
Yes I'd like to see the floor
amendment for
the past.
Representative reeve yes.
Representative Rehm this.
Want to see before.
What we.
Representative Penske yes.
Madam vice chair yes the central
structure my bills.
Madam chair yes.
check okay Representative house
with yes Representative.
You
madam chair with eight yeses in
one no you have a do pass on
Senate bill three oh eight as
amended and all all look look
for your bill but I would tell
you that in the chaired today
had a bill come out of the yes
it's true that two or three
already so Representative Rehm
half point of we center because
every region yes I have one too
so we're we have we heard a lot
of bill say Representative
Romero so I appreciate the
reminder.
With.
You've got a uniformed you've
got a uniform law are to.
I'm very excited about those.
