Here.
To
answer.
He's right there.
I want to meet maybe it'd go a
long enough I am here.
I got you okay thank you
Representative Rehm.
Townsend.
I'm here.
Thank.
Here.
Madam chair.
Service we get representative
Armstrong here will be okay okay
we have a quorum.
Representative Lundstrom is to
be promoted.
Thank you madam chair I'm here.
Thank you so much I see us doing
is right there with
Representative Eli and senator
you are first on the agenda.
Thank you madam chair.
This is Senate bill one forty
four and this bill we have an
existing.
Prime of intimidation in our
election code that apply already
flies to voters challengers
watchers election board members
this would expand that to also
apply to election officials are
secretary of state county
clerk's office workers and there
are agents and employees this is
in response to a dramatic uptick
in threats intimidation against
our election officials since the
twenty twenty election on making
sure that we are.
Presenting the folks who do all
the hard work of running our
elections are and with that Mr
white Janice Arnold Jones
hazard.
You're gonna have to make New
Mexico hopes as I need to be at
you when you to forget.
You are co host.
I'm working.
I mean you show is co host on my
screen.
Anybody.
I think we can big I just needed
to be able to have that ability
to.
Senator doing do you have an
expert.
Yes yes madam chair secretary of
state Maggie Toulouse Oliver I
believe is on those images to be
promoted as a panelist all right
let's get her.
If I can find.
She's there.
Did you promoter.
There's welcome.
Thank you.
Okay.
Before we begin.
The secretary of state did you
want to add anything to Senator
doing centered action.
Just after two years you'd think
I'd know how to use meet madam
chair
We don't we all be better off
madam chair at this bill is is
really important in these times
election officials at all levels
of both parties are being
threatened while trying to carry
out the important work of our
democracy this is an extremely
important bill madam chair and
we appreciate the committee
support thank you.
Okay thank you very much.
As most members are aware we
will have some amendments
proposed to this bill by
Representative Eli I'm thinking
that perhaps Representative Eli
it might be good to give an
overview and then we'll take
public comment so that people
don't need to have more public
comment after they have.
It's been introduced.
You madam chair happy to do that
just so everyone knows let me
give you the few number of
residents some confusion about
that it's two two two.
Seven six two point one.
And they'll be in their avi
another much shorter amendment
when we get done with this that
I think is being passed out at
some point to the committee that
I can explain madam chair what's
unusual about this is is that I
don't usually take longer
amendments.
But with the consideration of
the committee if you'll let me
take some time but I I think it
is important for the members
that I go through it so we start
with this is basically
consolidating.
Three different bills.
Senate bill one forty four
Senate bill six and Senate bill
eight.
And let me start with there has
been some criticism that we are
somehow doing something unusual
or something log rolling or
whatever term you want to use
that is not correct
this is a very common
legislative procedure.
We did this last night with the
tax bill.
sent house bill one thirty five.
What and then the Senate is
doing it right now with criminal
justice with Senate bill two to
one.
What happens is of the members
of the public understand what
we're doing.
Is we take different parts of
bills particularly near the end
of the session on a particular
subject matter in this case
Senator Duhigg bill was related
to elections are Senator on
Senator Cervantes bills related
to criminal justice.
Representative Chandler is built
the tax bill last night was
related to taxed we take kind of
the desperate packages bills
that are out there and put them
in one bill for a variety of
purposes one so that members can
see everything that's going on.
and second to avoid duplication
and contradictions.
So in this instance what we did
was we went through first we
went through Senate bill six.
And for my colleagues on the
other side of the aisle it it
just they wanted to know what we
pulled out a Senate bill six and
we didn't and I just easier at
this point to just go through
the bill and show you what we
did and did not do and that way
you'll have it but I did find.
My colleagues from the other
side of the aisle what we pulled
out of Senate bill eight and the
reason for that is Senate bill
six has been in our chamber when
a state for about a week it has
been for one committee so some
members have seen it Senate bill
eight never came over still
sitting on the floor of the
Senate so I thought it made
sense to try and get a list
together and Senator Duhigg
graciously agreed to put a list
together of what we pulled out a
Senate delay and I provided that
to my colleagues on the other
side of the aisle
it is important to know that
there are no new provisions in
these amendments I'm not saying
there wasn't any some amendments
will talk about that but they
all come from either Senate bill
one four four Senate bill six or
Senate bill eight and with that
madam chair would like to do is
and as I would say quickly but
that would be an absolute
falsehood because it is it is a
up a hundred and something pages
but I will chair members of the
committee that is a lot shorter
than Senate bill six which is
what we're gonna be looking at
about a hundred pages shorter
what money encouraging men.
Was in doing when working on
this amendment.
Was to do those things that were
necessary not necessarily
aspiration of those things that
were really we we felt were
necessary for the upcoming
election recognizing their
future legislative sessions and
their future fixes so they'll be
people on all sides of the aisle
that are going to be
disappointed we didn't have more
in here
and for my friends on the other
side of the aisle I've been
alerted them that they'll be
things that are out of Senate
belated they may not like
but that's part of the
legislative process so with that
madam chair would like to do is
I'm going to just.
Go through each section and I've
I've made notes and so please
bear with me as I do this and
what I will try to do is I will
refer to the bill.
That we work off of the section
that came out.
And what we did and if we made
any changes and I'm hopeful that
I can cover this in a way that
makes some sense so for example
also refer you to page numbers
and I'm referring to the page
numbers of the amendment and I
can go through it and madam
chair before I get started does
that make some sense in terms of
what I'm doing I just yes I'm
thinking about right now all
it's probably.
A reasonable time to take public
comment without knowing the
specifics because then people
can say.
This is what I specifically hope
to see in there or this is what
I specifically hope not to see
but we will do a minute H. and I
will let the
the testimony today in the
interest of time folks we're
we're running.
We're we don't even have forty
eight hours left in the session
so it will be fifteen minutes
for each side so let me start
with people who think they would
do not like this bill or the
proposed amendments and then I
will go to the other side the
comments will be limited to a
minute thank you.
Let's get this
So.
Right.
This town some.
I would just.
I would ask you to reconsider.
A bill that this this important.
It has had.
hundred sixty page amendment in
the last couple hours.
Combining a one bill that has
never been across to the house.
That that languishes in the
Santa.
And we're gonna take fifteen
minutes of public comment on the
side that seems so.
That seems pretty shallow
We end up with more people
wishing to speak Representative
I've never gone more than twenty
this session because of the
thirty day session so we'll see
what
I'll take that into
consideration so first I have
Seiji Paris's Harding County
clerk you'll have a minute go
ahead.
C. G. Harrison please go ahead.
I don't see that anymore they
said did that person move off
the screen to.
I don't see here at the top okay
all right on the next I have
this Jon Bon.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is John block I'm a native New
Mexican and I live in Alamogordo
and I've host Senate bill one
forty four and a the a hundred
sixty five page amendment to it
the amendment not only changes
the purported title of the bill
but it installs radical sections
no legislation that allow for
widespread ballot harvesting
installation of unsecured ballot
drop boxes automatic voter
registration among other
unacceptable provisions this
bill turns New Mexico's
elections into a free for all
for cheating and makes New
Mexico the wild west of voter
fraud I dare ask every single
member of this committee if they
have read line by line every
single page of the bill and it's
amendments that they are and if
they're comfortable in ramming
it through in a fifteen minute
cycle where do you people have
any time to talk about the bill
so lowering the confidence of
our elections what this does and
it really is voter suppression
especially the most vulnerable
communities please oppose Senate
bill one forty four thank you.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee of Carla Sonntag
with the New Mexico business
coalition we have an average of
two hundred and thirty thousand
New Mexicans and I can tell you
that none of them support what
was in Senate bill eight.
We have had seventy six thousand
seventy six thousand emails go
to senators opposing Senate bill
eight and what I want to talk to
you about more than what is in
this bill is what you are doing
to the people in New Mexico they
have not had a right to see this
you put it up without any notice
and you expect us to go through
a hundred and sixty five pages
and comment to you well I can
tell you we don't like it we
didn't like it and we're not
going to like it because you're
combining them you're also
putting these amendments into a
bill one forty four that was
largely passed bipartisan you
have not seen Senate bill eight
I would urge you to vote no just
because of the process of this
thank you.
Gail hills.
Thank you me yes go ahead.
Hi you madam chair and members
of the committee my name is
Abigail hills and I am a student
at UNM any resident of
Albuquerque and I just want to
echo the sentiments of those who
are just went before me that
this is a very large bill they
added one hundred and sixty
three pages but you know just
this morning and on the website
yesterday only had two pages and
it isn't on article and unfair
to constituents to not allow us
enough time to read through
everything that this bill will
encompass and the changes that
it will in town I just believe
that it is not the right time to
pass this bill so I ask all of
you members of the committee to
vote no on Senate bill one forty
four.
Robin I do have less the rubble
you please provide your last the
would you testify.
Representative.
C..
I don't.
Yet don't take is that the order
meet meet yourself.
Okay.
The state administration.
You madam chair and committee my
name is Sarah Smith and I am a
registered Democrat in Los
crucis I'm representing the New
Mexico freedoms Alliance which
is a non partisan grassroots
coalition around the state.
We have serious concerns about
this bill I personally am very
concerned about allowing sixteen
year olds vote my mother teens
myself teens are not mature
enough to independently way
issues in order to vote here's a
quote from the university of
Rochester Medical Center
researchers found that adult and
teen brains work differently
adults think with the prefrontal
cortex the brain's rational part
this is the part that response
to situations with good judgment
and awareness of long term
consequences teams process
information with the a dollar
this is the emotional part of
the brain in a teen's brain the
connections between the
emotional part of the brain and
the decision making center are
still developing please oppose
this bill and do not allow
sixteen and seventeen year olds
the right to vote thank you.
Jones.
Now we can.
Total Jones I live in
Albuquerque.
Session to SB one forty four and
the agency in two two two seven
six two point one beginning with
the article four section fifteen
of the New Mexico constitution.
Adding bills like this this
meant we're not supposed to be
deceived and that's what you're
doing and always rankles me but
we part of the session and that
happens I call your attention to
section two one dash to bash the
page nine what the bill does not
outright ask for sixteen year
olds to vote the language is
very constant needs to be fixed.
The penalty of perjury costs I
am opposed to challenges
watchers and observers under the
absolute control contract
credentialing of the clicks you
might as well say the clerks
what I'm opposed to the
secretary of state and county
clerk servicing receiving
requests from third party
organizations seeking to improve
our elections
and madam chair I hope you'll
let me finish for thirty
seconds.
Okay I am.
Posted.
Absentee voter list I am opposed
to the use of the last for the
social security number rather
than on the out of class I am
opposed to the lack of
safeguards in restoring our.
But I am especially concerned
about section six page six on
the amendment adding new
material to one dash one dash
twenty seven this section you
Stokes the spirit and standards
of New Mexico state inspection
of public records act thank you
madam chair.
Thank you
Sure
And madam chair members of
Canadian chilly on ICQ by
registered lobbyist for Planned
Parenthood votes New Mexico I I
am just gonna expressed concerns
which is what I believe your
requests Madam chair for this
site to for the the new language
first of all I just want to
express appreciation for
combining the bills I think we
need to look inclusively I what
expands people's access to
voting I do have concerns about
the third party provision for
absentee ballot notification and
want to make sure that that's
protected and I also just want
the committee to note that
making an election day a holiday
is a burden for parents at
particularly of young ones
closing down our schools makes
it harder to vote so I want to
I'm hoping that the Sanchez will
talk about both of those
provisions and let us know where
we stand thank you madam chair.
Care.
A person.
Yes my name is Gary person
president of New Mexico I am in
opposition of this bill for two
factors one is you yesterday had
two pages of this bill today we
have a hundred and sixty six I
believe and how can we have time
to go through this bill and
making rash judgment when it's
being forced down our throat
without us being able to do
process it I'm in do not like
the fact that we do not have.
Third party controls on this and
that third party people can
collect our data and sell it as
need be I oppose this bill thank
you for your time.
Thank you Justin Allen.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Justin
Allen with America votes I'm
asking this committee to pass
Senate bill one forty four
because this bill will make
voting rights work cesspool to
individuals returning to their
communities after incarceration
by providing opportunity for
civic engagement.
Upon release we're validating
their belong in society
restoring the voices of those
who would likely never been
heard.
Voting rights is critical to
reducing recidivism and
encouraging individuals have a
stake in democracy that affects
their lives.
It should be a component
appropriations appropriate
integration is treatable
supervision being placed on
probation or parole signifies
that we are deemed fit to live
work and pay taxes in our
community therefore denying
Committee members select for is
taxation without representation.
Did I am right to vote which
serves no purpose for law
enforcement rehabilitation
disenfranchisement only
reinforces second class
citizenship and the belief that
democracy is exclusive.
I'm asking this committee to
pass Senate bill one forty point
make boarding work to school to
returning citizens thank you.
Elaine summer health that that
would and incidentally that was
a common favor of the bill in
the Senate in opposition is item
Summerhill.
Thank you madam chair.
I stand in opposition to this
bill there are sections which I
could support however given the
lack of time to go over the bill
and read it.
And be able to see what can and
cannot be supported it's being
crammed down our throats.
Real they said still with me and
for that reason.
And the extent of the amendment
I oppose this bill thank you.
Thank you David this.
Thank you madam chair a
committee members I stand in
opposition to a amending also
bill one forty four but I
recommend that that they'll be
kept as this I'm not sure look
at the correct version but I
think the number is a two two
two one six one I want to thank
us regional version was a two
page bill Representative noted
that as this we keep SB six S.
as in SB eight as as I think
it's support for us to get a
chance to review the sub bills
before they get the capacity in
the spirit of transparency I
cannot find a copyist so I have
not had the opportunity to
review this at all which I think
is so totally unfair I think we
need to this says on the screen
committee.
This.
I'm sorry.
Somebody's just not on mute
please proceed I'm sorry okay
just to finish up really quick
elect to make sure that the
month of your gets across is
that I want to keep the Senate
bill one forty four else's
ritually pregnant and not to
include this members because as
other folks to mention we
haven't had a chance to really
review the so I think that's
only fair for the citizens to
have a chance to do that thank
you madam chair.
Which is.
Hello this I am just with James
warrants out of Bernalillo
county and I am in opposition of
this bill you all are being
notified that passing this bill
is once again an act of treason
you will be held responsible
majority of groups in favor have
invested interest to keep their
nonprofit success Rowe going.
This does your competency and it
shows your legion.
Role in H..
Start the clock again please on
the next person.
Ryan H. go ahead.
You hear me yes we should.
Thank you I'm sure.
Since Ryanair from Bernalillo
county speaking or strong
opposition to the SP one forty
four.
It.
Is readily apparent that it's
inappropriate.
Two presents N. eight thousand
seeing percent increase in.
Verbiage.
Over twenty four hour period.
So that it's in organic can make
you responsible it smacks of
kind of what we've done the last
two years without of states are
into dis.
In the majority rule in the
Santa Fe to.
Report themselves as some sort
of an guardian policy and it's
disgusting sixteen rules should
be buying bitcoin you should be
voting.
Thank you.
Your last name when you
testified.
Okay.
Yes we can go ahead you madam
chair and members the committee
my name is Lisa Martinez many of
Mexican and executive director
of New Mexico Alliance for life
and I find it interesting in
regards to the bill the Planned
Parenthood and other left
leaning organizations actually
want the third party access to
remain in the west you not to
talk about testimony of others a
with your own it has to do with
the third party access of the
bill so can I repeat myself
again since like any other can
be being on the planet I haven't
had the opportunity to read
through the hundred sixty five
page bill it's simply not
humanly possible to do it for
that reason alone I think it
needs to be immediately tabled
other sections I could support
like the native American voting
rights section and tribal
communities rights in a
standalone separate bill
regardless of patching up in
amending bills at the last
minute has been the way you guys
do things or have done things in
the past previously done them
New Mexicans is spoken out loud
and clear against SB eight which
is why it stalled out and died
in the Senate and now we're
trying to cherry pick what we
want in a hundred sixty five
page bill that no one can
possibly read on I think the
people of New Mexico want to
know this is that what members
of the.
Tracy delarosa.
Go ahead Tracy DELROSSO.
My name is Tracy telemedicine
I'm a citizen in Travis county
and a member of the concerned
citizens for New Mexico and I
stand in opposition of Senate
bill one forty four this weekend
I had a conversation with
senator Harold hope I doubt co
sponsor of
bill eight state states Senate
bill eight and he wasn't even
aware that the perjury was
removed the court the crime of
perjury had been removed from
voter fraud he didn't even know
what he's co sponsor stop this
bill you can't vote on this
table it thank you.
What would occur.
Go ahead.
Quickly would occur.
We're gonna go to the next
person are you cheating.
Go ahead.
Hello.
Mr chair.
Yes chairman thank you for.
For this I'm posed to Senate
bill one forty four
with on top of of most of the
comments of already been made
allowing giving prisoners that
are.
expelling convicts the right to
vote right.
I mean that says you're the one
part that I was able to get to
because this bills are going
through so fast.
They want to give a.
Prior to the inmates released
from custody so they're
basically giving them they're
they're not even going through a
rehabilitation.
They're just giving the right to
vote to anybody that walks are
present I don't think that's
right on top of all the other
things being commented on here
and I don't think it's right
that you're limiting people's
speech thank you.
I am going to I got some time
here I have five more minutes
I see it from the Carter would
be sure to let her talk any
Hoagland.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I hope you can
hear me okay I'm I'm in when
curry county clerk online
speaking on behalf of my office
not the New Mexico particularly
it is they've not had time to
review this ammendment and I
take a stance on it but I do
stand in opposition of the
proposed amendments to Senate
bill one forty four I'll just
stop there I want to liberate
much but I will say that I
invite each of you to you know
visit your clerk's office to
visit my office get a better
understanding of how we serve
the public in our voters thank
you.
Okay
Robert would you please state
your name when you speak.
Can you hear me this time yes
okay thank you hi it's rob
hunter the the the time that you
guys review and this is totally
inadequate I'd like to say that
first of all this is a large
bill the Senate spent many days
listening to testimony and many
provisions that are and SB eight
were taken out this is clearly a
voter fraud bill and I want
everyone to understand that all
the provisions in this bill have
been used to commit fraud in
other states that we have that
perfect evidence of that if you
go look at the documentary two
thousand meals it shows how this
ballot box Dropbox will be used
to commit fraud this is not
protect the people of New Mexico
the voter rights or anything
similar that it dilutes their
votes and it gives the
Special interest the right to
override the voters of New
Mexico as well this is a
dangerous bills and it needs to
be put away and and the
committee needs to understand
what this bill does and the
provisions of it how they will
work and no one has had time to
do that on this committee this
bill needs to be tabled
immediately.
Syncing gal.
Hello.
Yeah thank you of your chair and
committee members and
concerted citizen they've
Albuquerque I'm speaking for
thousands of concerned citizens
here
yeah I'm I'm gonna put this
strongly opposing the S. B.
about forty four it is amazing
that the C. one pay your bill
what to pay your bill twenty to
one hundred signify paid a bill
in the last minute this is a
very very as a call on the
amendment added to this bill
right now it's ready for you
next in order and then with
community.
destroyed our both induction and
and that is what our secret
voting rights so I don't want
you never too much was built
nobody had time to read of those
one hundred sixty five pages
building the laws for a half
hour time how long time is very
I'm just to go to put in the
time not to pay your bill into
up to a hundred to five pages
Bill so I'm strongly against
this bill and all the committee
members you all need to
reconsider you're not alone
on the bill at all you should be
table that we need to of their
different session to look at
each part each problem of this
bill it is too many problems in
this bill so thank you and again
I'm strongly.
Thank you Whitney Whitaker.
Thank you madam chair
Representative thank you for
allowing me to speak again I was
kicked out of the zoom rural New
Mexico for yes my name is when
you would I am the Lincoln
County clerk thinking County
stands in opposition to Senate
bill four one forty four as
amended.
This is a simple two page bill
and which please note the clerks
affiliate voted to support this
is prior to any amendments.
I cannot stand by or nor support
please do not passed Senate bill
one forty four as amended I
thank you for your time.
Thank you.
The last one will be mandate
park.
Mandate alright go ahead.
Did we lose Sir.
Let me give one more person an
opportunity and then what will
see is Bridget Harrington.
Hello my name is Bridget hearing
ten and I am a voter and a
resident Albuquerque I oppose SB
one forty four I learned about
this less than an hour ago I'll
hold a fifty hour a week job and
I'm taking time from my job to
be here because it's critical
less than twelve hours notice is
not adequate time for the public
to digest the content what I do
realize what I've read is that
this bill overrides SP six and
SP eight the provisions that
were struck from those bills
were added it added into this
and buried in pages that nobody
has time to read.
I'm the parent of a college
student in eighteen has been
established as the age of
majority for a reason sixteen
and seventeen year olds are not
mature enough to be given the
privilege of the vote if this
committee team sixteen and
seventeen year olds mature
enough to vote then we should
also insist that they follow
thousands of empty adult jobs in
this state first and help
rebuild our economy it's my
belief that when you break the
law you show disregard for
society felon should be required
to prove rehabilitation and we
are in the right to vote not be
automatically given those
rights.
And finally absentee ballots
should be used for their
original purpose which is to
allow active military and the
elderly to vote third parties
especially from those out of
state have no business being
allowed to send ballots I oppose
SB one forty four.
Thank you at this point we will
and the testimony by those in
opposition it go to those in
favor.
So please put your hands down if
you're opposed if you start
talking and you're still a post
where we'll just yeah we have to
share at the time so those in
favor please raise your hands
now.
Get a chance those people in
opposition please take your
hands down.
And I did add extra time close
to twenty five minutes.
Okay let's start with the.
Those in favor of.
Sally.
Go ahead please.
Hey sorry can you hear me now
yes thank you thank you madam
chair representative my name is
les les Salomon as an advocate
for a more inclusive democracy I
was in favor of the original
Senate bill eight including
allowing sixteen seventeen year
olds to vote restoring rights to
people returning from
incarceration backend automatic
voter registration making
election
a state holiday and giving extra
time for mail in ballots to be
counted in addition to all the
other provisions I can't see the
amendment so I don't know which
of those made it into this bill
but if this is in fact a
combination of SB six eight and
one forty four and I'm strongly
in favor and I encourage you to
support it for the voting rights
of all citizens and for access
thank you.
Cash.
Go ahead.
Thank you there wasn't a poll
today I thought I would speak
because I am definitely in favor
I have had a chance to review
each of these bills and I
support this bill that combines
the attributes of them I
especially like the measures
increasing access to voting in
the state I personally like the
absentee voting provision and
the rest restoration of voting
rights to people coming out of
incarceration all citizens need
to be part of the process where
Alexion's affect all of our
lives even people who are
incarcerated and as people are
released from incarceration it
only makes sense that the have a
voice and they're folks that
understand some of the issues we
actually talk about and about
the laws that are being passed
that it are going on about
criminal justice system and
about prisons and we need their
voices and they need to have
their voices heard as well thank
you.
Next George law.
Hello can you hear me yes we
can.
Yes I just want a all laws
repugnant to the constitution
are automatically nall and void.
We don't serve our servants.
For we are the masters and you
are our servants.
And this is an act of treason.
Read also meant it when you
start the clock over again
please.
Ready Asselin.
This is running when I am with
the league of women voters
representing them we have many
members who have been following
these bills throughout the
process of their.
Very well done they've been very
well that'd not everybody can
follow all of these I do
understand that but you can't
criticize the lack of ability to
comment on something that you
didn't take a chance to comment
on in the first place for study
in the first place.
Of the provisions for the
security provisions for
efficiency in the elections and
the provisions for giving rise
to the challenge of the
provisions for making it easier
for sentences about are
extremely important we're
strongly in favor of this bill
and as amended.
Yes.
Please introduce yourself when
you speak.
This is erection mamodo and
I I am speaking in favor of the
bill I wish that the final
version had the at the voting
age provisions in the back and
HB are still in it but I do
still but support the bill in
its final form going to agree
that the the process has all
three of these bills have been
thoroughly vetted and multiple
committees and twenty million
it's in there and I support them
thank you thank you.
Janet Carter.
Go ahead Janet.
Who.
Senator Johnson.
Actually madam chair members of
the committee my name is here as
a representative of your thank
you for that kind of price
action.
I'm sorry.
We have members that are New
Mexico and we stand and support
one forty four we support this
bill for the Senator least
expensive Makhosi but we feel
it's not complete without the
provision allowing sixteen year
olds vote in local elections.
As young people are not immune
to the impacts of policy just
because of our age and feeling
deeply in our daily lives
whether as students or workers
as the members of the community
in your voices that deserve your
record many adults complain that
user and educated apathetic or
immature but I would argue the
opposite.
More access than any generation
before us information on the
local and global scale and
understand the transfer case to
connect communities if you
really genuinely take the time
to talk to a sixteen year old
about the change they want to
see in the world and communities
it's often astute and as
insightful as for the apathy
that starts when seeking is
being made that concern us in
the future that we have on
supers consistently makes feel
powerless how can we expect this
page to that will be turned
eighteen
we deserve to see ourselves
represented in local government
and school boards and to have
the importance of our engagement
in the democratic process
reinforced instead of shut down
so thank you to the sponsors for
bringing this bill forward and I
do hope that you will consider
re adding sixteen though yes the
one forty four thank.
Then came with thirty.
Go ahead.
Thank you it's my action fired
you madam chair of the committee
so I'm with the Sierra Club
we're going to chapters
representing over thirty five
thousand members and supporters
throughout the state and we
support SB one for four there
are significant components in SB
eight which are members and
supporters have been following
and provisions like restoring
voting rights to former
incarcerated citizens expanding
protections for native voters
and creating a permanent
volontaire voluntary absentee
list to name a few are important
for ensuring eligible voters
have as few hurdles and barriers
as possible to cast their ballot
and vote and voting rights is an
environmental issue this
committee has an opportunity to
pass a bill that will allow for
more equitable opportunities for
New Mexicans to make their
voices heard you heard we urge
the committee to please pass SB
one for four and the amendments
that ensure access to the polls
and a voice in our democracy
thank you.
The county clerk.
Hi this is Lindsay Bachman are
you referring to me madam chair
yes that's okay my name is
Elizabeth and I'm the chief
deputy clerk actually if you
it it just comes out this Dona
Ana County clerk on my screen so
perfect madam chair members of
the committee on commenting on
behalf of myself and not as a
representative of that
successfully at I'd like to
focus my comments on provisions
that I hope will move forward as
an election administrator I am
supportive of many things are
included in Senate bill six
because I believe many of its
components approach support
order access and voter
confidence in our electoral
process
prior to the suggested amendment
SB one four four makes necessary
changes to the list of election
workers protected from
intimidation so that's awesome
and of course we would love to
see formerly incarcerated
individuals in our community
convicted of a felony be able to
realize their right to re
register after that so please
pick those comments in the
consideration thank you.
Thank you Virginia G..
Hi I'm Virginia Davenport
Albuquerque said Sen
I just want to speak in favor of
SB one forty four particularly
hope to see the restoration of
voting rights for those
convicted of felonies to be in
there I think it's extremely
important for those who have
served their time to be able to
engage civically to help prevent
recidivism.
I also would hope to see the
sixteen seventeen year old
building in there as well I
think engaging with young people
and allowing them to be part of
the civic process especially in
a smaller local scale is
important and allows them to.
Help create change I do not
think it would be an issue of
their mental capacity
considering we need a bill for
intimidation of election
officials for that it's a great
team thank you thank you.
Francisco.
A hello please support SB one
forty four to ensure our
innovative communities have
access to vote the twenty twenty
election showed just how hard it
is to vote is a native American
growing up and registering
voters and the Navajo Nation I
learned first hand experience
and the twenty twenty we saw a
one percent decrease from the
two thousand sixteen and the
twenty twenty election and in
some native American precincts
we sell as much as twenty
percent.
Americans have the
constitutional right to vote
native American voters who have
done their time have the
constitutional right to vote and
further more young people across
the state are registering voters
they're holding leaders
accountable some have even been
advocating in this legislative
session they deserve to
strengthen their bones voice by
voting Austronesian and at
please support as B. one forty
four.
Isabella Baker.
Thank you madam chair my name is
a solid Baker I live in Valencia
County and I'm a co founder you
places in action I stand in
strong support today of this and
I'm and bill it's important that
the legislature said with New
Mexicans in our right to accept
ability of boating and continue
to cater to the need for
expansion of voting rights and I
appreciate the work and quest to
try and make this happen this
legislative session I do
strongly believe that sixteen
year old have more than and the
right to vote in local elections
and to participate in our
democracy and young folks are
functioning members of our
society especially as workers
were taxed and that should be
included an added in this bill
as well I am asking the
committee to consider that as
well so yes this ammendment
today thank you.
Programs weight.
Please go ahead.
Are you having any trouble.
I'm gonna go to the next person
and they will try to come back
Jacob Vigil.
Good afternoon madam chairman
and members of the committee I'm
Jacob Vigil M. with New Mexico
voices for children we strongly
supported SB eight and all of
its provisions of New Mexico has
been a model for running fair
and secure elections in twenty
twenty to this can't be taken
for granted with the voting
under threat like never before
crossed the country so we
believe with this bill you have
the opportunity to upgrade our
state's election practices and
protect the freedom to vote for
New Mexico's diverse
populations so that we can be
among the most secure accessible
and equitable
Voting systems in the country as
advocates for children and
families we affirm the
importance of voting is a
fundamental right so we believe
we have the opportunity with
this bill to make our state's
democracy more inclusive and
representative at our of our
state's people at a time in the
franchise's under threat all
over this country harkening back
to Jim crow air before voting
rights are fully enshrined so we
urge you strongly to
support.
SB one forty four.
Today thank you very much.
Wasco.
Go ahead.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Judy Wasco
and I'm representing the New
Mexico coalition of sexual
assault programs we were in
support Senate bill eight and
urge you to support the
amendments that up hold the
protections that were in that
bill in particular the fully
intact native American voting
rights act the restoration of
rights for formerly incarcerated
individuals and the permanent
absentee ballot list because of
the direct positive impact this
will have on the communities
that we serve including
communities of color indigenous
communities people with
disabilities and so many others
we support this amendment thank
you.
Park.
Your means yes.
Okay my name is Mandy park on
the Roosevelt County clerk and
I'm speaking on behalf of myself
not the entire clerks affiliate
we were in favor of the original
Senate bill one forty four with
the just the two pages that in.
Only address intimidation of
election officials is very
important to
Protect our election workers
I am not in support of the
committee substitute.
Thank you for your time thank
you call Stokes.
Go ahead Paul.
Hello madam chair thank you the.
My name is Paul Stokes.
And I come from position that
every qualified voter should be
able to vote then it follows
that voting should be as easy as
possible without jeopardizing
the security of the vote.
Multiple provisions in this bill
will make New Mexico a leader in
expanding the right to vote.
Skeptics will say that the
provisions of this bill make
voter fraud too easy they don't
understand or don't acknowledge
the difficulty of conducting
voter fraud at a level that
would be significant.
We have been conducting post
election audits for years now
and there's been no evidence of
voter fraud at a level that
would make any difference so
please pass this bill it's
important for the country thank
you.
Thank you.
Khloe Jake.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members the committee my name is
Chloe take I'm here this state
and in need of votes support for
Senate bill one forty four
we're pleased that the native
American voting rights act is
among the provisions of Senate
bill eight that are being
included in this ammendment NM
navorro will do a number of
things to address the inequities
in access to the ballot box that
native Americans have
historically faced we would.
Hope that it would be at
inclusive of back and EVR also
as well as voting for sixteen
year olds but we do appreciate
that this is a step in the right
direction and we look forward to
supporting this bill thank you.
Marker.
Go ahead.
Yes hello my name's it in I was
in favor of this bill.
But listen to some of the people
on here talk about work is been
added to this bill none of us
got to read it.
Well I'm just not in favor of it
anymore.
And I just want to say that New
Mexico is ranked third in voter
fraud in the US we spent fifty
two million dollars on the menu
voting and that was put in by
Diane to Ryan.
Who had within the last
Republican administration and
she was kicked out with sixty
four council brought.
And if the Democrats still
support in many voting machines
and the this just isn't right it
is an invasion as treason.
The
did you already speak.
Thank you so much for letting me
speak the of the a new but never
showed up the first time I was
on a great great okay thank you
so much reading committee my
name is Janet Carter I'm I'm a
resident the Santa Fe thank you
for
for letting me speaking thank
you to all the committee for
hearing this I just I'm strongly
in support of of legislation
that that helps protect and make
people's right to vote and make
it easier to vote especially
those marginalized communities
to say that we don't need
absentee ballots in in in a lot
of cases is simply not true many
people or older like myself
maybe they can't go out maybe
they can't get around an
absentee ballots even though
there don't have a excuse such
as working or aren't really
disabled can be a big help and
so expanding absent making sure
absentee ballot access is
expanded and making sure people
have access to all of our
communities is so very important
for this I strongly support this
bill and I as I did that once
before and thank you for your
time thank you all right so
tell.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Roy Soto I'm a registered
lobbyist for Microsoft
corporation and as a business
and as an employer we have
Microsoft deeply or believe
deeply that maintaining a
healthy and stable democracy
backed by the rule of law is
essential to free market to our
free market system in American
society we support all efforts
to protect the freedom to vote
for all Americans and make our
elections safe secure and
transparent we support S. big of
one forty four is amended
because it would of modernized
New Mexico system of automatic
voter registration and
strengthen opportunities for all
New Mexico voters including
working Roland native voters to
register cast a ballot election
day we are early voting or
absentee.
So much.
We do we do about we lost you
sorry on the only last us.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee family
my SS chair of the Courts
affiliate in Los Alamos county
clerk.
We have an affiliate did support
center Bestwood Senate bill six
which incorporated feedback from
clerks across the state from
rural and urban counties and
included needed measures that
would assist us in our ability
to continue to serve our
communities securely and
transparently while supporting
our voters.
To engage with our democratic
process it was a collaborative
effort on the part of the both
lawmakers and others and
election administrators we also
supported Senate bill one forty
four without amendments but
unfortunately we have an
affiliate have not had an
opportunity to discuss combining
Senate bill one forty four with
just be with Senate bill eight
or six.
To discuss what works best for
us as the administrators of the
election process.
I'm not been afforded that time
to give us adequate attention
for discussion that is so
greatly needed.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you let's just over.
Go ahead Linda.
That we are.
Can you hear me yes we can I'm
sorry this is one of our on the
Bernalillo county clerk and I
was just going to lower my hand
because they only Maestas said
exactly what I wanted to say you
know I just need to ask when we
worked so hard for Senate bill
six and percent bill one forty
four to at the last minute see
how this brought together in a
mumbo jumbo like yes however
even with this I would still
support this legislation yes
because there's so much in it
that would really help the
county clerk in the job that
they need to do in their
counties and elections I would
strongly urge in the future as
you all come together to discuss
this that perhaps you could
include some of the clerk in
your discussions because we work
behind the scenes and actually
know what's happening at these
elections sites so I would.
Hopefully support yes thank you.
Thank you so much we'll conclude
our public comment for today.
Before I go to the committee on
to make a few comments myself
and let's go ahead and take the
public comment screened out.
And madam chair if I might need
you have a second hi there
couple things of like say in
turn it over to the secretary of
state she didn't have it right
we'll do that as well let me get
my.
What what I want to say is that.
Is does it you know we've kind
of gotten to know each other a
little bit over.
Zero the platform but if we have
a committee meeting here at the
capitol and I'm presiding House
Judiciary I tried to make it
safe space to speak your mind so
I don't allow comments from our
members to attack Sanchez or
their witnesses I don't allow
the sponsors are there witnesses
to attack the committee members
and I don't allow inflammatory
Imputation of terrible motives
like treason to
any of our members or sponsors
so there were a couple of times
today that I cut some people off
for that reason I think we had
at least a full time because we
had from in opposition with the
those in favor and and vice
versa so I I do want to say that
Senate Bill it had six hours of
public comment was unfettered
there were hours and hours of
public comment on Senate bill
six so I think there are some
elements of both of those bills
here I just want to say that I
can understand our frustration
with.
How
fast at the end and I have to
say that in my twenty five years
as a legislator it's been
frustrating to be to have so
little time to do our jobs.
This happens at the end of the
session it happens every time
and I wish we didn't have it
that way I wish we had a little
more time to do our jobs I wish
we had staff in the interim but
this is what we have so is as
frustrated as it can be I assure
you it somewhat frustrating for
us as well what we have here on
the other hand is a chairman
absolutely brilliant attorneys
who are our analyst for this
committee for it we have major
the list we have major analysts
and we have committed.
So they're all working overtime
to make sure that we get the
best information we can have and
without going to go back to the
sponsor now and let him respond
a little to public comment
before I go to committee members
for questions we've course we
have to have him talk for awhile
because we would need to
consider his amendments
madam chair thank you yeah what
if it's okay what I would like
to do is in a minute turn it
over to the secretary of state
she like to make a few comments
and then what I would like to do
if it's okay with the chairs go
through the bill which will take
some time the amendment rather
and that's the first thing I
want to point out is on the
screen the we got during public
comment it said committee
substitute this is not a
committee substitute and that's
important it's an amount and for
the members of the public that
we're talking it is important as
the chair has just sat there is
no new material in here this is
material that legislature's seen
this is Senator this is portions
of Senate bill six Senate bill
eight and of course one forty
forces nothing new here the
sixteen year old provision that
provoked so much committee is
out the third party provisions
that were in Senate bill six are
out and the penalty for perjury
is in it's just in a different
place and there are other
changes but I thought I would
highlight that but madam chair
if it's okay with you I know the
the Senator John is just a
little bit late actually she
joins on time I'm the one that
forgot to announce that she
wasn't hit ten people.
and so she's here now and she
could say a few words that would
be great.
Thank you thank you madam chair
thank you Representative Eli and
I'm to be clear eight you know I
could have said a lot more at
the very beginning but didn't
think it was appropriate and
told the amendment had been
introduced to speak to the
amendment I'm I want to echo
what let me start out by saying
first of all.
I have been I didn't realize
madam chair I've actually been
Working with the legislature's
just slightly longer than you
have been an actual legislator
asked over twenty six years and
I agree with everything you said
madam chair about how things
come together really quickly at
the very end and sometimes they
look very different
that that this process of of
getting to this point where we
are here today has been the same
for me I'm a little bit of
whiplash and I do just want to
first start out by sharing the
at comments by a lot of the
county clerks who expressed
You know that there were a lot
of pieces Senate bill six in
particular madam chair was the
result of a lot of very hard
work
by both sides of the political
aisle for many months
that came together you know in a
bill that was a compromise and
you know I feel like the very
net definition of compromises
that you know you have things in
there that maybe you don't love
but you can live with right on
both sides and I felt like that
was the case unfortunately that
the reality of the legislative
process is is has created a path
to where we are here now and so
while I would have preferred to
pass Senate bill eight Senate
bill six and Senate bill one
forty for each on their own
volition and on their own merits
I understand that this is the
place that we are now and I do
think at the sponsor at Senator
Duhigg and Representative Eli
four and working to try to find
the best pieces I and and the
pieces that have.
As a significant amount of
consensus I'm here madam chair
as the expert to just help
answer any questions to help the
sponsor of both the bill and the
amendment with any clarifying
question you know what to
provide any clarifying
information as it pertains to
the secretary of state's office
I can answer certain technical
questions getting down to the
level of County Cork but as you
know madam chair at senator and
representative we also have
several county clerks that are
here that can answer those
questions even more specifically
if needed and so with that madam
chair thank you very much
senator and representative on
and look forward to a robust
discussion of the bill thank
you.
You have the floor thank you
madam chair somewhat higher
would discontinue that like to
go through the amendment that
age Senator DJ do have just have
to leave she is our serving and
Senate judiciary as well and so
they're bills coming up this is
that as everybody knows this is
that time of year when members
are running back and forth
between committee when she comes
back and I want to speak for her
I believe this is a friendly
amendment and she will want to
talk to some of this as well but
I would like madam chair yes I
start to talk about this because
I'm not an election next for I
would I'm looking on the same at
the secretary of state who is an
election expert and as I start
to talk about it you should like
to say something just to have a
put her finger up and I will
quickly turn to her because I
think she can find some real
information so let me see if I
can go through this kind of
section by section and go
through it as quickly as I can
and then if I missed anything
madam secretary if I missed
something just put your finger
up and please stop me and I'll
try to watch as I'm doing this
is that is the amendment for
discussion purposes thank you.
All right with that section one
is right out of order this
Senate bill six the definition
of real time synchronicity
synchronization Senate Bill
archery section two and by the
way I'm looking at page three of
the amendment.
Our section two is also right
out of sight Senate bill six
requiring election related
organizations to register will
further advance our section
three is that a set Senate bill
six this is cleanup language
I don't see so far I don't see
the secretary finger up so I
must be doing OK section for is
out of Senate bill eight and
that is the transition to
electronic nominating petitions
are.
now moving on to page six
section five is out of Senate
bill six it allows the courts
more flexibility.
section six also on page four of
six is out of Senate bill six
and insurers are one of election
code is silent this is something
one of the audience members
mentioned
but it's really to make things
consistent the when the election
code is silent on disclosure
April plus
section seven then is also out
of Senate bill six find for the
secretary of state to protect
information that will keep
election secure.
Going on that page seven section
eight is again out of Senate
bill six insurers of the forms
are consistent and are issued
and approved or approved by the
secretary of state.
Section nine is also out of
Senate bill six make sure that
the secretary of state receives
a service of process in all
election related challenges
which is important for the
continuity of the office and for
the state.
Section ten is also out of
Senate bill six claim number
requirements and restrictions of
election board members madam
secretary my doing okay.
Okay
section eleven which is on page
ten is that is Senate bill six
clarifies the requirements for
Alexion's board members.
on page eleven is section twelve
also out of Senate bill six
this is compensation for
messenger.
Section thirteen on the
following pages out of Senate
bill six insurers and messengers
can collect ballots from drop
boxes and applies the same
criteria messengers as watchers
and challengers which is frankly
just clean up and make sense.
Section seven I'm sorry section
fourteen on page thirteen is
that a Senate bill six this is
training for Rogers and
challengers section fifty is a
clean up of the voter
convenience centers that is out
of Senate bill six.
Sorry Madam.
let's see hang on just a second
I think it was sixteen just
Department
page seventeen
section sixteen is out of Senate
bill eight this is the cleanup
for the native American voting
rights act was referred to in
public comment.
Section seventeen on that same
page after Senate bill six
addresses elections at large
candidates and this is important
for Los Alamos which is why it
has to be in here now.
Section eighteen which is out of
Senate bill six this is the
cleanup of the voter rolls
consistent with procedures for
cancelling voter registration.
What is that I'm sorry that is
paid.
Twenty.
Yes by the way as as everyone is
lamenting the fact that this
ammendment is a long if we
didn't do this amendment we be
doing this bill and then when we
moved to Senate bill six would
be doing a bill that's a hundred
pages longer than the cement is
pointing it out okay section
nineteen is out of Senate bill
six is green up to protect and
secure voter information.
Our page twenty three section
twenty this is from actually
both Senate bill six and sent
away this is granted
clarification procedures for
same day registration and by the
way this is important because
this wasn't Senate bill six but
it wasn't Senate bill eight
includes the uses of student ID
which is current with the in
lawsuit and take it out we
central said that aren't section
twenty one and is that a Senate
bill six is deals with
timeliness the clerks for
processing voter registration
and allows them to open the book
sooner that just makes sense and
we we we all know we've had that
problem
I yes ma'am and now you go to
page twenty seven section chair
can we slow down just a little
bit where we can yes bank notes
yeah madam chair and I'm happy
to do that I I do I just I feel
that taking the committee's time
on all this but I know what's
important and I'm happy to slow
down as much as particularly
the committee committee members
with oneself if I'm going too
fast please slow me down.
Madam chair representative
Townsend Here right can I
proceed with sections how would
you go back to section eighteen
on page twenty and county where
that came from and one thing I
would like to ask you it's not
proper right now when you say it
comes out of the does that mean
it's identical or it's just have
the same topic.
I believe I've got the secretary
on a new program called.
Yes and madam chair and
representative yes this is all
to my knowledge at with maybe
eight some very much exceptions
which I would be happy to note
identical language from just be
sent.
I actually to my knowledge
excuse me I I misspoke all the
language that is in this bill
that it that came from SB six as
identical to SB six Mr chair
madam chair and representative.
So madam chair and
representative.
What I did not know was that
when I booked this room that it
was a place where all students
are starting next step off so
you're going to CVS is correct
as they come in so all right so
I.
Chair for Representative
Townsend purposes going back to
section eighteen which is on
page twenty that is from Senate
bill six and that is the cleanup
of the voter rolls consistent
with the procedures for
cancelling voter registration.
That.
Madam chair representative
Townsend is that respond to your
concerns.
If you just go from there and
just slow down in the
presentation and.
Yes Sir I'm happy to do that
thank you madam chair and
representative all right page
twenty two.
Section nineteen is out of
Senate bill six.
And this is again a clean up to
protect and shift your voter
information.
We go to page twenty three.
Section twenty now this is a
little different because this
comes from both Senate bill six
and Senate bill eight.
So this is a clean up.
And clarification of procedures
for same day registration.
And this is a change because
this is what I pointed out
Senate bill six took out
existing language.
that would have allowed student
ideas to be used for
registration purposes that was
in current law for some reason
Senate bill six to get out
Senate bill eight hundred in we
just plug it back in so that is
different at least on the Senate
bill six.
What's.
What was that that is section
twenty on page twenty three
starting on page twenty three.
Then.
We go to page twenty five.
Section twenty one.
This is out of the Senate bill
six this deals with the
timeliness of parks processing
were registration and allows
them to open the book Center so
that they'll have you know this
speeds up the whole process of
getting to a conclusion.
That's the whole idea.
All right.
Our.
Now we go to page twenty seven.
And this is now section twenty
two.
This is Adam Senate bill six.
This clarifies the voter
registration.
Requires full social security
numbers and allows voters to
provided through out the
appellate process.
I keep seeing the secretaries
had not exotic I'm doing okay
all right
page twenty eight.
Section twenty three you'll see
it down there the bottom.
This comes out just a Senate
bill eight this is what was
discussed in public comment this
is restoration of rights for
formerly incarcerated in.
Same thing here you will if you
look at section twenty four
which is on the following page
it is again the restoration of
rights this is the same issue.
I'm just slowing down to make
sure.
That everybody's kind of caught
up with me.
All right page thirty one.
Section twenty five.
Is out of Senate bill six.
The cleanup of the border
registration what it is.
Following page same thing page
thirty two Senate bill six
section twenty six.
This is a clean up to ensure
that they're getting complete
and accurate information of data
transmitted from committee.
By the way might my editorial
comment as I do think the courts
did an excellent job in the
secretary of state I mean I
think for both parties this
really does clean things up and
I do understand whether clerks
are nervous about it but we
really try to include those
provisions that are important to
them.
Section twenty seven this is on
page thirty three this is the
Senate bill six and allows for
electronic poll book of books.
The following page page thirty
four section twenty eighths is
Senate bill eight and allows
voters to sign up automatically
and receive their mail ballots.
Section twenty nine is that a
Senate bill six it's on page
thirty six and it's a clean up
again of mail ballots ballot
applications.
Yes madam secretary
madam chair and representative I
just want to mention there are
many of these provisions in SB
six that calm from.
The temporary provision that was
implemented in the special
session in the summer of twenty
twenty just before this is one
of those so we are ready at had
this particular provision and
some of the others I implemented
already but this is the first to
grab my attention to mention to
you madam chair and members of
the committee.
After that twenty twenty at
actually after the twenty twenty
one special congressional
election the sunset so we're
hearing forget policy at thank
you thank you madam chair
representative no and madam
chair and secretary I appreciate
that because there are a number
of things were it's it's now.
Right in true at least for you
know one cycle so now we go to
page thirty eight.
Section thirty this is Senate
bill six.
This is the time line for ballot
applications to reduce late
ballots and correct against the
postal service you know the
issues that they've had and also
requires notice to register
voting addresses if the mail
ballot is requested at a
different mailing address.
Madam secretary.
Madam chair members another
twenty twenty carry over.
I like that so we'll just what
we'll do madam chair and
secretary is is you'll be like
another carryover okay so sorry
all right page forty then
section thirty one is from
Senate bill six this clarifies
the hours of early voting on
eight consecutive hours between
the time as seven AM and nine PM
I just find some flexibility.
That we go to page forty three
section thirty two this is again
from Senate bill six cleanup
language the right of action to
ballots to register.
I said that wrong I think I did
Senator on yes I did madam
secretary Mr chair at madam
chair and representative sorry
keep referring to you madam
chair is Mr chair I'm just
looking at Daymon madam chair
this is just clarifying what
information will be provided in
our register.
Right.
Sometimes I have trouble reading
my own notes all right so page
forty five section thirty three
this is from Senate bill six
this is cleanup language of mail
ballot envelopes.
Eight forty six and madam chair
representative cans and I I hope
I'm going slow enough the
section thirty four is on.
Section thirty three where did
it come from section thirty
three came from Senate bill six.
I'm sorry madam chair Madam
chair madam secretary.
That is also madam chair
representative eight twenty
twenty here you.
But to be clear madam chair and
Representative Townsend came
from Senate bill six.
Carry over but from Senate bill
six all right so now page forty
six section thirty four.
This is again from Senate bill
six.
this is notices to accompany
mail ballots methods to return
so it's telling you know we want
transparency we want information
providers to have it that's what
this is about.
Following page page forty seven.
Again from Senate bill six this
is cleanup of mailing envelopes
and drop boxes there once just a
minute.
I thought in here.
There was some language that we
had if I may I may be wrong.
but the only language we
would've added it is at one
point I did I did insist on some
language you just made it clear
to voters as to why they were
able to who would be able to
return the ballots and I it's
somewhere in here all provide
but what all was this it's not a
question of changing laws much
as it is providing voters with
information in real time as to
what the law is rather than
referring to a statute as I'm
always here J. by the fact that
sometimes require notice and we
tell them go look up a statute
and no no voter citizens going
to do that I guess lawyers might
all right so then we've got.
Yes madam secretary madam chair
madam secretary Madam chair
representative that that notice
that you're talking about miss
madam chair and representative
is in section thirty three and
it just clarifies what
constitutes an immediate family
member for purposes of
delivering a ballot and
preventing.
What we hit what we commonly
referred to as ballot her
staying.
Chair representative so madam
chair and this is specifically
for Representative Townsend I'm
trying to catch those things
that would otherwise have down
in Senate bill six so you're
gonna see some minor exceptions
so I want to make sure I
captured that all right so now I
believe we are at section thirty
six on page forty nine.
This is again from Senate bill
six the sections apply the same
process this body approved and
Senate bill for from the twenty
twenty special mail ballots
verification ensuring procedures
so it's what the madam secretary
has been talking about the tried
and true method from home.
make sure it is missing section
thirty seven and Senate bill six
again from this is service on
page fifty two.
This is from Senate Bill sex
this is clarifying the
definitions of immediate family.
Section thirty eight on the
following page which is page
fifty three is from Senate Bill
sex this is also from the
experience that we had twenty
twenty from Senate Bill for
verifying verification are Sir
requiring verification I'm
setting hours for action to
border work requiring insurers
W. present overnight for
security purposes.
An integrity election R. section
thirty nine on page fifty six.
It's from Senate bill six
ensuring that replacement
ballots aren't subject to the
application of lunch.
Section forty.
Which is on page fifty eight.
This is from Senate bill six
this is clarifying language what
it is.
On that same page section forty
one of the bottom this is from
Senate bill six this is cleanup
language for mail ballot
precincts.
Would you please just turn the
page number if yes I'm sorry
that is on a couple pages I I
can't scroll fast enough just
because I'm.
I and I again I'm sorry if I'm
going too fast I'm happy to slow
down because I think you know
it's important because you know
that for the purpose of the
public as well that people know
that this is languages party out
there what it over and over
again you're going to see this
on Senate bill six Senate bill
six Senate bill six and once in
awhile Senator late.
So all right.
So we're on page fifty eight.
Section forty one.
Is from Senate bill six it is
cleanup language for mail ballot
precincts.
there is one thing I want to
mention before I go to section
forty two just so people know
why this was so important.
Representative night word and I
just let the just today and act
got a bill across the finish
line in the Senate it took out a
provision in what we thought was
a uniform act relating to notary
publics along bills something
that been presented to us and
was put in there we suddenly
started getting calls from
course going what did you do to
us and of course we thought was
uniform bill it was not it was
plugged in there and so now
we're being careful we're making
sure that we go through this
legislation as carefully as this
to make sure we've done it right
recognizing the people work very
hard on this we still have to do
our job all right so this is
paid sixty now or in section
forty two this is Senate bill
six that it's from this is
clarifying the have exception
for documentary ID's for
federally qualified electors.
A lot of gobbledygook for the
Alexion Gurage yes madam
secretary.
Madam chair madam secretary
Madam chair representative your
contact.
I'm sorry what.
This that have a well it covers.
You.
You know for.
Montoya voters Madam chair
representative.
For them so.
Here.
Okay seriously tell us what what
the acronyms are for all.
Madam secretary madam chair
madam secretary tell us what the
acronym you madam chair is the
federal law pertaining to you
uniformed overseas and military
voters and their rights and and
abilities under the law it is
madam chair is literally you
will see a VA I just cannot
read.
So that's what it is you will
cover.
All right now we go to page
sixty one.
Is.
What's that.
Terry is there still have.
Madam chair absolutely there's
still have about.
I
think there's a lot of them.
So all right now we go to page
sixty one.
Section forty three.
This is from Senate bill six
this is clarification for
timeliness for you all have a in
that again you know you know
formed overseas except for.
Okay yes.
Yes I'm so it might be easier if
I just take off my mask that way
people can hear me sorry I'm so
used to wearing it all right now
we go to.
there is section forty four.
Which is on page sixty two.
This is from Senate bill six
this is cleanup.
Period.
As you'll see it's literally
like things like changing
canvassing board County campus
all right section forty five
then is also on page sixty two
from Senate bill six.
This is cleanup from are safe at
home voters this is the
confidential substitute address
program and madam chair madam
secretary she may want to talk
about this you may not just to
explain to the public that's
what this is.
Sure Representative briefly
madam chair representative so we
have a confidential substitute
address program here in New
Mexico managers you know which
we refer to as safe at home this
is the program that allows
victims of domestic violence and
stalking and their media family
members to have a confidential
address so that they can not be
re victimized by the offenders
who committed those acts and
this we have a provision in the
election code that allow for
these voters to these
individuals to vote while
keeping their address save so we
do have some cleanup language
madam chair and representative
and the staff from SB six and
the subs in this amendments that
addresses of those those matters
to allow madam chair or not just
the confidential address program
participant but also any members
of the household that are
otherwise eligible to go to
participate as well and have
their address kept secret madam
chair and representative so that
helps madam chair because
members of the committee because
you'll see that in the next
section explains itself in
section forty six page sixty
three it is again from Senate
bill six and this is a cleanup
of the confidential address
program that the secretary just
described.
So now we go to forty seven
which is on page sixty five so
section forty seven again this
is from Senate bill six this is
a cleanup.
Page sixty six and the next page
section forty eight is again
from Senate bill six this is
reducing the signature
requirements for the PC and for
judicial candidates for those of
you who are done any work for
getting signatures for judicial
candidates know how possible it
is so this is a clean that up
section in this one section
forty nine which is literally
starts last line on page sixty
eight easy to miss from Senate
bill six this is cleanup.
Next page page sixty nine.
Section fifty.
This is from Senate bill six
again clarifying language.
Section fifty one which is just
below that on page sixty nine is
from Senate Bill section is
clarification cleanup on filling
vacancies.
And I'm just pausing to make
sure but is catching up page
seventy them.
Section fifty two this is from
Senate bill six this is where
paper clarification cleanup.
Just make sure I'm not missing
any sections section fifty three
then.
Is from Senate bill six to one
liner it is clean up Senator
that section fifty four that
just follows that we're on page
seventy two.
This is the PRC cleanup because
we don't have an elected PRC
anymore and clarification
petition requirements.
All right page fifty five then.
That is on page seventy four.
This is from Senate bill six
this allows the secretary of
state to amend a proclamation.
My personal favorite is coming
up.
Just fifty six from Senate bill
six this gets rid of pre primary
convention.
For those of you keeping track
all right.
Next page and we're gonna do a
lot of this.
Eight seventy five section fifty
seven is from Senate bill six
again pre primary convention
changes because we're getting
rid of.
Same with the following page.
Section thirty nine on page
seventy six pre primary
convention it is from Senate
bill six.
Next page is seventy seven
you're gonna see a lot of this
this is cleanup from Senate bill
six this is again pre primary
convention cleanup as we're
getting rid of those.
Page seventy eight.
Section sixty one from Senate
bill six again pre primary
conventions and then see changes
to the nominating petitions and
I I mean we recognizing that.
The legislative legislature
didn't do the work on this I
just wanna give a shout out to
both I'll just continue to do
this is secretary of state and
the county clerk's for their
hard work is this amazing I'm an
old county commissioner and so I
love that stuff all right page
seventy nine.
Is page is section sixty two.
Now this we we do a number of
these of our member right this
is from Senate bill six again
and this is cleanup and this
relates to write in candidates.
That's paid seventy nine section
sixty two.
yes sixty three then there's a
real short one this is on page
eighty one.
And again this is our from
Senate bill six and this is
talking about pre primary
convention stats deleted.
And then the following section
section sixty four which is
right below it on page eighty
one is also from Senate bill six
this is the number of signatures
for
Pete the PC and for judicial
elections.
And you know I I do want to say
this I I we have not always seen
eye to eye but I think it's also
important to note of the good
hard work of senator Daniel Ivey
Soto on this and so you know as
I'm going through it I just you
know it is an impressive piece
of legislation so.
all right we go to the next page
page H. G. eighty two section
sixty five this is from Senate
bill six is cleanup for writing
candidates for from that for
which you'll see number that.
The following two pages later on
page eighty four section sixty
six.
This one no I did not
this is again from Senate bill
six this is clean of the voting
systems and certification and
approval.
Same page page eighty four
Senate bill six is the claim
about ballot marketing marking
marking the marketing.
And
eighty five.
Section sixty eight.
Senate bill six four more days
for ballot preparation.
Section sixty nine then is on
page eighty seven.
This is from Senate bill six
this is interesting enough of
the order of the ballot and I
actually talked to Senator Ivy
Soto about this is was
interesting to me and we'll see
some of that as well in the
following sections if you look
at page eighty eight section
seventy
this is from Senate bill six
this is the ballot for order.
We'll see that goes on what
they're doing is they're moving
the district attorney around and
I think some of those.
Now we go to seventy one which
is on page ninety three.
This is from Senate bill six is
a statewide voter notification
before statewide elections.
Following two pages later on
page ninety five is sections
seventy two and then at yeah.
Is that anytime you want to stop
the stop okay Madam chair
representative.
Go through the chair it would be
happy to stop.
Representative Ely that please
go through the during thank you
okay madam chair if you just ask
him to slow down a little bit
where we can all keep track I
wouldn't have to stop yes so
that's all I'm asking you
whether through several pages
really fast there because there
were new sections so.
Anyway.
Do it back Representative what I
was gonna say chair was Senator
do have walked in I was gonna
say all right under section
three.
We are.
So I'm waiting for that here
Representative Townsend a make
sure he's up to date we are on
page ninety five section seven
thank now Representative Nibert
is asking that you go back to AD
what what the eighty eight
Yes I'm happy to do it hang on
the second.
R. page eighty eight and that is
section seventy.
Okay this is Senate bill six
this is valid for.
and madam secretary has or
handout madam chair I would call
on her.
Madam chair and representative
so to clarify a week we already
have
this section and an existing law
for ballot order how we
determined that order this is
Nina ladies several pages are
mainly from that to remove
public regulation commission
again and also
To ensure that.
At district attorney and.
County clerk and county
treasurer as appropriate are in
in the correct spot
and we also do some
clarification madam chair and
representative on non district
did not judicial offices this is
just creating a uniform way
before we even get to the I'm
the ballot creation process
everybody knows in advance how
the how I'm obviously how how
folks are going to be listed on
the ballot and just based on
both real life issues that
county clerks and our office
have experienced in the last
couple of years as well as we
did have some some challenges in
the Supreme Court I'm madam
chair and representative I hope
that clarifies that.
Madam chair if I can and again
madam chair I want to be careful
I want to not go too fast I was
going to go to page ninety three
which is the next section which
is section seventy one if I
could chair inquire for me to
Representative Townsend
representative Nibert you I can
start there again if not I'm
happy to go back.
I'll be fine okay so now I'm
ninety three.
And this is section seventy one
from Senate bill six this is
statewide voter notification
before statewide election.
Page ninety five.
This is section seventy two this
is also from Senate bill six
this is inspections of
electronic voting machines are
public.
So there to be a research.
On that same page is this state
as we are.
I'm sorry sorry madam chair and
representative just to clarify
prior to every election.
There's something that we call
logic and accuracy test it's the
task that each and every
tabulator goes through to ensure
that it is counting accurately.
And that it is zeroed out before
it goes it's at sent out to a
polling location so it's not
just inspection it's it's this
whole process this logic and
accuracy test process to clarify
it has been open to the public
but to clarify that it's open to
the public to make that crystal
clear and to even create some
additional security measures
there madam chair.
All right on page ninety by them
saying Hey.
Let's see here all on all right
so we got this is from Senate
bill six.
Let's see clarification of state
election bond.
this car prices to
Who's going to be paying for
this but it's coming out of the
fund.
All right page seventy four I'm
sorry that page seventy four
page ninety seven.
On section seventy four this is
from Senate bill eight.
Our drop box right drop box
language and setting
requirements and restrictions.
Page ninety eight them.
This is from Senate bill six
this is ensuring county
commissions canticle this is
this is the part I didn't like
because I will county
commissioner Campos Alexion
funds into their general fund
and seven thousand dollars.
Page ninety nine.
Senate bill six.
This is allowing voters to get
your ballots to the polling
process right through the
process.
Transaction I'm sorry section
seventy six okay.
Thank you.
So on page one hundred.
On page one hundred this is
section seventy seven.
Clarification of existing
jurors.
Hi this is from Senate six.
Section seventy eight then
begins on page one of one.
R. this is also from Senate bill
six.
This is providing a standard
record retention retention
policy production records.
Page one of the three then
section seventy nine.
This is just be.
One six this is from Senate bill
six.
This is creating uniformed
canvassing process.
Just waiting then on the
following page page one of four
section eighty also from Senate
bill six creates board to deal
with canvassing process.
This is this is my nose this too
long story I I the section
eighty one on page one of four I
just referred to as the bolt
cutters section this is what
happens afterwards Act county
commissioner when I was county
commissioner I kidded that the
bureau election should have as
their symbol a bolt cutter it
and appreciate when I said that
the public meeting that's from
Senate bill six.
Section eighty two that is on
the following page.
This is from Senate bill six is
clarifying the process and
requirements for ballot
impoundment.
Page one of six the following
page.
This is section eighty three
also from Senate bill six post
election audit for every
election instead of just the
general prime in regular local
elections to.
And I see the secretary is not
in her head.
All you.
Page one eleven.
Section eighty four from Senate
bills less you'll have an.
I'm sorry.
Let's get to one eleven okay.
Okay.
I'm not clear are we ready
should we conspiracy anybody
tell me.
Let me wait a second co chair
ownership.
Madam chair should I proceed
right.
I was just trying to get some
quiet in the outer office all of
their yeah we're doing that too
all right we're on page one
eleven.
This is Senate bill six this is
section eighty four I'm sorry
section eighty four from Senate
bill one of six and this is
clean hello.
On the following page page one
twelve section eighty five also
from Senate bill six.
Automatic recounts in very small
actions and set up central for
five votes.
Representative Eli when you say
it's cleanup it means we're not
really changing the process as
it presently exists right you're
just fixing the statute okay I'm
sitting here with both a Senator
Duhigg and the secretary nodding
your heads up and down so I'm
comfortable in saying that is
correct and Senator Duhigg is
herself a former clerk city
clerk.
Correct it is amazing madam
chair members the committee that
I have been tested.
One of the least qualified of
the three of us to do.
So I do the short straw all
right so now we're on to page
one thirteen this is section
eighty six.
This is also our Senate bill six
this is clarifying when a
special election for Congress
won't happen because of
insufficient time.
Following page then as.
Section eighty seven on page one
fourteen.
Also from Senate bill six is a
claim about primary primary
presidential.
Right and I said that madam
secretary correctly of.
All right next page.
Section eighty eight on page one
thirteen is from Senate bill six
more trying to approve
referendum of petitions.
Secretary of state by the
secretary of state correct thank
you.
Next page we've got two sections
section eighty nine and ninety
are both from Senate bill six.
Section eighty nine were first
referendum petitions section
ninety immense definition and
campaign reporting act cleanup
language relating to pre primary
convention we have a limited.
Section ninety two.
Hi this is on page one twenty
one.
Is Senate bill six under section
ninety one is also reasonable
six this is campaign finance
reporting clean off.
This.
Section ninety two then.
Begins on page one twenty five
at the top this is from Senate
Bill sexis is cleanup prohibited
purity fundraising to clarify
what is and is not allowed.
So the rules are clear.
Page one twenty eight then is
section ninety three is from
Senate bill six senators claim.
Section ninety four.
Is on page one twenty nine it is
from Senate bill six it is also
clean.
Section ninety five is from page
on page one thirty is from
Senate bill six.
Addressing thank drop boxes.
And then same page section
ninety.
Okay interesting section ninety
seven.
We have a title because we're
missing the ninety six so there
is a tie for about now actually
you know what I think it is I
think ninety six is probably the
existing language and of one
forty four thank you senator so
we do have it so ninety seven is
also on page one thirty this is
Senate bill six is this claim
about penalties for obstructing
polling places an extra.
Ninety eight then.
Section ninety eight is on page
one thirty two.
So this is the alcohol
provisions some polling places
are near bars there are three
different parameters for
different activities which is
just impractical so it's to
clean this up this in subsequent
sections offer now we go to our
section ninety nine.
which is on page one thirty two
this is from Senate bill six
these and subsequent sections
are from our our country the
native American voting rights
act state that they take some
provisions from existing law on
strengthening clarify others.
page one or one and I'm sorry
page one thirty three section
one oh one from Senate bill
eight this is the native
American voting rights act.
And and the next couple of
sections so.
So from here from section one oh
one.
All the way through.
To section.
on page one thirty eight these
are all the different provisions
of the native American rights
study now.
All the way to page one thirty
eight okay just to make sure
everyone's following.
You're literally almost done.
because.
Okay sec so we start page one
thirty nine and this is now
section one honest proclamation
for local elections in terms of
office from Senate bill six.
Section one ten.
Is on page one forty one.
This is again from Senate bill
six allowing ten signatures for
local offices instead of signing
a proper statement or paying
fifty dollars this is kind of a
the old I was county
commissioner to have this
happen.
Section one eleven than this on
page one forty two it is from
Senate Bill sexist writing
candidates.
Section one twelve on page one
forty three is from Senate bill
six.
Reaching the timeline for
placing candidates names on the
ballot by seven days.
For local elections for local
elections correct thank you
correct.
And then H. one forty four
section one thirteen this is
from Senate bill six.
R. when local elections in
Greece.
Same page one forty four section
one fourteen again from Senate
bill six cleaning of special
election.
Section one fifteen on page one
forty six.
Is from Senate bill six this is
clarifying language in
restricting political activity I
this this is again on page one
forty six secs fifteen.
Next page page one forty seven
section one sixteen Senate bill
six is cleanup of local language
when terms start.
Next page page one forty eight
this is section one seventeen
from Senate bill six is.
Section one eighteen.
On page one forty nine.
As from Senate bill six cleanup.
then you'll see one nineteen of
the appropriations for
elections.
That's also from some of those
yeah these are I I'm sorry so
one nineteen one twenty or for
Senate bill six qualification
Porcher tickets all from our.
Senate bill six.
A section one twenty one then on
page one fifty
this is from Senate bill six
clarification certification pay
bumps for parks you know who
really are underpaid to give a
shout out to the clerk's.
Section one twenty two on page
one fifty again this is from
Senate bill six pay bumps for
sure K. W. parks.
Section one twenty three.
This is from Senate bill six
allowing the charity to help the
secretary state takeover rules.
Section one twenty four.
Senate bill six removing the
file for both.
This page I'm sorry that page.
Our one fifty four.
Section one twenty fours on page
one fifty four.
Hey.
One thirty five David is section
one twenty five from Senate bill
six this allows courts to use
their funds for rejection and
archiving subject to audit.
One fifty six section one twenty
six this is from section bill
eight not six this is sending
election day and school holidays
to help courts with polling
sites.
And to clarify what's not in
here is the state holiday for
election day so this would just
be a school holiday because most
point prices are school.
And then
Section yeah and that's you'll
see that on page one fifty
seven.
And then also just below one
fifty seven paragraph Act you'll
see one twenty seven section one
twenty seven which is from
Senate delay this is rights
restoration.
Section one twenty eight on page
one fifty nine is from Senate
bill six this is cleanup for the
confidential substitute address
program.
Section one twenty nine.
This is all right we should
really go back to section one
twenty okay I'm sorry go ahead
no I'm joking it's it's
literally just put it in like a
title.
The section.
That's apparently of pork chops
so that are so section one
twenty nine and
we just see here if you'll see
this is from Senate bill six
this adds that section six.
And then section one thirty
which is on page one sixty.
This again from Senate bill six
is the cleanup of the
confidential subsidy program.
Page one sixty one.
Section one thirty one again
from Senate bill six is is
cleanup of confidential
substitute address programs.
Page one sixty two then is
section one thirty two same
thing.
Setting aside the cleanup of
confidential program.
And then section one thirty
three on page one sixty three
this is expanding the voter
convenience center locations
from twenty twenty one to two of
twenty twenty two and twenty
twenty three and the rest are
conforming changes although we
will have another amendment on
that I believe.
And then that believe it or not.
So I hope madam chair that helps
I do think there is a second
amendment but it is a simple
wanted changing effective date
we could talk about that later.
Is one of our I'm sorry there's
one other I'm gonna let.
Talk about that.
Thank you madam chair I I
believe you all should have this
and it's two two two seven nine
three point one.
And this was this was another
section that was in Senate bill
eight that that should also be
in that amendment I and it
provides for automatic update of
registrants Act addresses at the
NMED so when you go to the NMED
you're changing your address
your voter registration would
get changed at the same time you
get a notice saying mail to you
saying Hey did you want to
change your registration address
if you don't let us now
otherwise it that's just another
way to keep our our voter rolls
clean.
Is this.
Seven nine three point one.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Yes Sir one thing that might be.
would certainly help us is if he
could go through back through
the bill and show us what was in
H. B. six they took out.
What date yes.
SB six SB six I said HB I'm
sorry.
It might be easier to say what's
it because
I think that may be.
Madam chair not.
Madam chair not to be too dense
here but it isn't that exactly
what Representative Ely is just
done for the last hour no
section by section saying was
where it came from and and what
the purpose was if each one Mr
section.
Mr speaker if I may there are
many of these that.
my team has tell me.
Came from SB six for example but
I asked if they are identical
and they're all telling me
that's not true they're not
identical and then I've heard
the same thing on SB eight so
and then I have this language
about is cleaned up and I'm I'm
just.
You know we're trying to
comprehend hundred sixty pages
of Bill.
Six o'clock at night.
And I just think we need to go
slow and figure that I don't
know what's in it and I don't
think anybody else that.
Miss madam chair at if there's
any specific sections that we
went through the our leader
Townsend has questions about
what kind of clean up it is or
what the objectives are you
happy to address those of you
can.
Also point which one.
Know any other way to do it the
Senators and just go by page by
page inside this six said this
is what eight said this is what
one forty four says today and
try to bring them together for
we know what the heck we're
talking about okay I actually
agree with the speaker that we.
We look at what's one forty four
is and then we've gone through
what the amendments are and
I think that
If I'm not mistaken the only we
were talking about cleaning up.
There were very few changes from
six it was the section within
six in you may have made.
A word change or something is
that my understanding that
correctly.
Then.
Answering I'm asking the sponsor
that question okay okay.
Representative Eli you madam
chair I will say this and I I I
think I told this to either.
Representative Townsend the
watershed districts stoppage out
we did not include that it just
got too complicated was too long
and it was a whole section on
voter study that that frankly
the secretary state can do good
need to be in the statute we
took that out but it was not you
know we talk about pages tonight
instead of looking and I just
want to emphasize this instead
of looking at two hundred forty
six.
Which is what we would have to
do tonight if we done Senate
bill six and that doesn't count
Senate bill eight instead of
doing that we are streamline
this to put into a hundred and
fifty or so pages have done some
very streamlined to me but it
certainly is better than what we
would have had if we had done
the hard work of going through.
Madam chair and I.
Representative Townsend.
You know we had.
We want to think that you gave
me a lot of confidence and just
think going forward was.
We had twenty eight.
Sharks that signed on and
supported this all and and
today.
We had a half a dozen that
probably even knew about it and
had a chance to speak.
Then I heard
Representative Ely state I think
I heard him say that this wasn't
done by.
Legislative Council so my
question is who did it.
And why would I why should I
have confidence in it if
Legislative Council didn't do.
Madam chair representative
saying about Legislative Council
our.
What happened was hang on what
happened once what is that I got
presented this two hundred forty
seven page bill we could go.
And I a portrait of what senator
do Hank.
And you know we literally and
I've spent some time with
secretary state as well and we
literally are Senator Duhigg and
I went through this thing line
by line and I madam chair and.
Representative I will gently
remind you that we had a
discussion on the floor that we
have an independent obligation
as legislators cannot simply
pass along with other people as
good a work is they've done we
have a separate frankly
fiduciary obligation of the
state to look at and figure it
out and rather than try to.
Get through a bill that's two
hundred forty six pages long we
remove those things that we were
not necessary at this point and
that's what we've taken out and
I told you what I remember
taking out there may be other
things I'm sure there are what I
tried to do and with.
With remove those things that
weren't necessary for the
upcoming election and to kick
that can down the road to
further legislative bodies when
I am no longer here and you will
be able to do this without me.
View Representative Townsend but
I I do want to move on and
What I would what I would like
to do at this time it is have
I'd like to have the second for
discussion purposes and then
we'll take questions from the
committee members on the
amendments.
We we do that with the second
amendment please help I'm sorry.
Present the second amendment
sure yes chair just for
discussion purposes sure so all
the second amendment does is put
a section that was in SB eight
it was an importantly left out
that makes it so that when
someone goes to the ability to
renew their license are get a
license there already registered
to vote so this is not automatic
voter this is not a BR this is
not back in may be our it's just
so that when you change your
address at the NMED your vote it
automatically updates your
registered address to fund your
voter registration and then you
get a notice saying did you want
to do this so you have to the
voter will have an opportunity
to stay now if if they did not
intend for that address change
also change their registered
address on the registration.
So the way to keep our voting
rules claim that.
and and make sure the people are
are voting where where they live
as they did as they intend to
but it's not a B. R..
And that number is seven nine
three point one right.
He yes okay.
Good.
All right so let's go to the
committee for questions on the
The amendment.
It just to be clear I'm not
going to the
Representative community
entities.
Right place okay for some reason
I thought it was in the wrong
Representative Nibert go ahead.
Can you hear me.
Myself and then said yes yes we
can.
I couldn't hear you.
I yes to our.
Yes we question you said we're
going to go wait for the
amendment that's the hundred and
sixty five page amendment.
All right okay so we can but the
other amendment aside for now
Yes.
Want to start the.
Question name on the amendment
which is really I guess real for
the.
So what so.
Is that what you want to do yes
Yes let's let's talk about the
amended that Representative Ely
Senator do eight and the
secretary of state have just
gone through with us.
Okay.
Sure.
My first issue I'm very
concerned about the issue that.
The representative mentioned at
the very beginning and that's
the issue what what role you.
I believe the contrary to here
is the view of it the.
This is.
Crossing the line the first
bill.
House bill or Senate bill one
forty four.
Was a bill that.
Has a word election and that but
it's really a.
Criminal defense bill.
It does not involve the election
process it involves criminal
activity.
Thank you and stay.
What you're worker again Mr
person working at the polls
secretary of state the clerk of
federal.
So the only the only.
Commonality between health
Senate Bill.
One forty four and the
amendment.
Yes.
The word Alexion.
Because the amendment.
The very like the amendment.
Does not deal with any offenses
and penalties in the election
code.
It deals with the procedures
for
of an election and.
I think
we're skirting the line pretty
closely if not crossing that
line
because the amendment is not
germane to the subject of the
legislation expressed number
title of the original at the in
house building Senate bill one
forty four.
the subject matter in the
amendment does not embrace the.
Details of the original bill.
And our constitution is pretty
clear that the subject of every
bill shall be clearly expressed
in title and bill embracing more
than one subject shall be passed
except for general probation
bills.
And our to bring quarters has
dealt with this on occasion and
the whole intent is to prevent
searches shows log rolling
legislation and to give general
notice to all our citizens and
all concerned of the character
of the proposed legislation am
this amendment.
Goes.
So well beyond the
very few pages of the original
bill Senate bill one forty for
the I believe it crosses a line
the ads as we just maybe an hour
or more going through numerous a
mandatory sections that are
outside the scope of the
original bill.
It does not give General Motors
to all concerned service center
character and the of the
proposed legislation and for
that reason I'm very concerned
about that issue.
What's also striking is that
there would be no issue of log
rolling if an amendment were
made to Senate bill six which is
also what our agenda for today
and.
If the amendment have been to
Senate bill six the no question.
Regarding the issue of
logrolling.
The time that we spent going
through the bill it would have
been much greater because we
would have known exactly what
language was added to what
language was taken out
that particular piece of
legislation that would have been
very clear not only to the
committee members what would
have been clear I believe to the
public as well and so
I'm a little concerned about
that issue.
And so madam chair I'm I'm a
little bit puzzled about why.
The representative.
Wanted to basically potential of
log rolling this way it was on
his mind because that's how we
started out.
But did not consider just simply
amending Senate bill six which
is before this committee Madam
chair representative.
Is there any explanation as to
why you would risk.
Having.
This piece of legislation
boarded by a court if you could
have easily just amended Senate
bill six.
And madam chair.
So Madam chair representative
Nibert.
So one forty four I actually
made a very specific choice in
doing one forty four to keep
that in the election code not to
go to the criminal code we we
could have created a specific
crime against election officials
the way we have against our
health care workers and
sports referee is and we.
And and we've done that before
through our criminal code this
was a specific choice to keep it
in the election code and key and
and deal with it there because
this is an election issue not it
is more of an election issue
than it is a criminal is one
that only comes into play when
it's about the
You're free exercise of elector
franchise in the administration
of elections and so.
To say essentially to say.
That because we dealt with the
offenses and penalties in the
election code the rest of the
election code or any other
election issues wouldn't would
be logrolling then that would be
true for SB six as well because
SB six in our.
What if you look at the be the
first amendment on page one
thirty section ninety five this
is language directly from SB six
that deals with when folks
create big drop boxes and you
see the existing one and that's
in the offenses and penalties
per part of the election code
And then you can see that
language at the bottom there
about us the.
If you do those big drop boxes
that's as essentially going to
be unlawful possession of
absentee ballot which is a
fourth degree felony so so
frankly if if just dealing with
the offenses and penalties into
the election code means we can't
talk about anything else than
that law growing issue applies
to sex just as much as it would
here.
And and I am I am and madam
chair I'm new at this process
but in the limited experiences
I've had so far as a policy
maker.
I really like seeing things in a
comprehensive way I like seeing
changes in context and see and
when we have all these different
bills making all these different
changes it is really difficult
for not only policymakers but
the public to understand what it
is we're actually doing so to
the extent that we can take a
comprehensive and coordinated
approach to these issues that is
increasing transparency on I
would also know and I think
representative Ely said this
early in the hearing that this
same approach is being taken
with at least two other bills
this session the tax bill on and
to be the the omnibus tax bill
on the omnibus crime package so
this is in the exact same thing
and and I think I remember madam
chair mentioning that this
actually happens all the time
especially in the short sessions
but I I think there are a lot of
really good policy reasons to
take a comprehensive approach
rather than a piecemeal one and
and this and log rolling is an
issue here the issue on six two.
And and just thank you madam
chair representative Nibert I'm
sure this will come up on the
floor and I will have a we will
have a long discussion about the
sharia I am comfortable this is
not log rolling and we're gonna
be fine but I appreciate the
concerns I really do but I'm I'm
comfortable with this.
Madam chair and senator a.
Please that you are.
In favor of increasing
transparency but this is the
epitome of non transparency.
If this had been an amendment to
to to Senate bill six.
I thank you be a lot more
transparent because people were
used to to that piece of
legislation that's been pending
and it would have been an
amendment to a number of
sections of the Hampel sections
if I recall our discussion with
or or the overview by the
representative but what we have
yes a wholesale.
Change into a relatively
Short and easy bill to
understand but certainly
comp it makes it a lot more
complicated and certainly makes
it one and that is difficult to
grasp as a as we all experience
during the early went the
overview of that process so I
don't think that this process is
all that clear transparent even
to myself who has been through.
Senate bill six R. for some time
and so you know you can say this
came from Senate bill six but I
can tell you there's probably
several dozen
changes that were made to the
provisions.
That it appear in Senate bill
six from the language that is
now in this proposed amendment
and so you know we're gonna have
a at some point will be going
over each one of those different
changes but the I don't I don't
by the our.
But the idea this is a.
Transparent process
in this application.
I assure you I think everybody
here of.
As use those words and wants to
accomplish that but the it's
very difficult to.
To see that in this process.
Madam madam chair and.
The.
Representative.
Hi I am aware and.
I think that the beta build it's
not up on the agenda yet but but
we're going to have to talk
about Senate bill six as we go
through this and I hope you'll
give me some we waited do so
because I think it's pertinent
to this amendment as this from
the numerous provisions that.
Have been extracted from that
bill and incorporated in the
amendment
but Madam chair representative
Senate bill six years we heard
any testimony receive the
greater claims are from the
clerk to fill it the county
clerk's from around the state
and they have substantial input
respect substantial time over
the course of months not days
months I think in in drafting
and working with the in this
case senator Daniel Ivey Soto
and putting together that
particular piece of legislation
what we about Bo was taken apart
recall twenty seven or twenty
eight county clerks had
reflected there are agreement or
their approval of that
particular piece of legislation
so it was not only better by the
very people who are.
Deal with that particular piece
of legislation but there are
substantial time and effort was
put into that I also believe
that maybe this secretary of.
Was all over and can correct me
but I believe that her office
was also substantially involved
in that process and if I recall
but testimony correctly.
Prior committee of the the
secretary of state's office was
also are favorable to the
adoption of Senate bill six.
Madam chair representative and.
Madam secretary there are is
that.
Miss Mister represent you in
that case Sir or am I speaking
actor where there you were in
favor of.
The adoption of Senate bill six
madam chair and representative
thank right I can tell you that
she was part of it it doesn't
matter to me we have a separate
obligations.
As you now.
I mean I and I heard this from
leader Townsend.
Are you know groups can go out I
competent qualified groups going
after they spend months years
legislation come to us we do not
overstep that's just a fact.
Even independent obligation.
To look at it and do what we
think is best for the citizens
of New Mexico taking import from
these groups that is exactly
what we did.
And so yes madam secretary was
there of course was there they
did great work and as you can
see we use most of it but for
reasons that have nothing to do
with clerks we were provide that
and consolidate with other ideas
also better also things that
people look at to put into
practice and to a bill one
comprehensive peace legislation
that is our job that's what
we're supposed to be doing we're
not a rubber stamp.
So I hope that answers
Representative question madam
chair.
Madam chair representative you
know I of all people rubber
stamp anything
You and I work together too long
to to our I just simply state
that we go through this process
just simply that carry out the
the whims and wishes of this
group or that group are we try
to look at things critically we
try to make sure things are done
properly and that the language
on the paper accomplishes be
intended are the intentions of
those who are
whose ideas are Representative
all those words so so you know I
I think that you're correct we
don't rubber stamp things but
the process we are here
and the procedures that I'm
getting to reserve there was a
lot of betting.
and my concern with the some of
the parts of
What we're seeing in this
ammendment.
And some of the changes to the
words that came from from Senate
bill six the changes that have
been may
do not.
Reflect some of that betting
process and in fact the I would
I would stay we're gonna see
some of them that are actually.
First to the common
understanding and and a common
collective wisdom of not only
the clerks but others who had
had a hand and drafting certain
ballot security measures that
they felt were important to to
include in and Senate bill six
but I believe have been altered
or taken out of.
The amendment you're bringing
before us today and that that is
a concerned because I know a lot
of time and effort was put in
to.
The detail.
Trying to make sure that number
one are voters have easy access
to a doctor that all qualified
electors.
Easy access and the ability to
cast their ballots in the manner
that they choose and that thank
you be sure that their vote
counts the same as any other
qualified electors vote but.
That we have in place
procedures that ensure the
integrity of that ballot insure
the integrity of the process and
ensure that.
Everyone's vote is properly
counted and that we don't we
don't simply of.
Do things.
Which.
May lend themselves to some some
processes that may upset the
security so instead of spending
a lot of time trying to.
Some of the big let's just look
at some of the
areas that the may be made
difference to our section so
madam chair yeah I mean I
just ask server point of order
question.
I'm we've got we have
amendments.
At least one that has been moved
for discussion
we've had a lot of COVID on
process not much comment on.
Substance I would move adoption
of the amendment as well as a
claim of language on MCD so that
for the sake of those watching
at home and for the sake of the
comments of the committee.
We are debating and discussing
the amended bill the it seems
like just from a process
perspective.
We should amend it and then you
have the conversations that we
all know what we're looking at.
Okay.
We also.
So we have a a motion to adopt
the I'm logged amendment and the
short is that correct Mr speaker
yes yes your.
The two oh two numbers have been
shared
and then we have a second for
representative Armstrong so
If I interrupt Senator I'm sorry
I looking at this there was one
other very very small amendment
that is needed but I wonder if
we should just address right now
since.
In the amount it's amendment to
the first amendment.
On the on the very last page.
Section one thirty nine page one
sixty five.
Under subsection eight there are
affected dates for the different
provisions we just need to take
out thirty six.
R. so that because that's that's
dealing with that was some
ballot handling stuff that that
we don't want to mess up in the
middle of the process so that
that should that should be
implemented later.
Sixty five.
Section one thirty nine
effective date Hey.
I'm sorry I would make the
effective date may eighteenth
that's what we want to before
the process began I'm sorry and
the the the secretary of state
can can comment on this the
secretary state explained this
to us.
I'm madam chair thank you and
Representative the purpose of
this would at an able less to be
able to do the verification of
the social security and
signature at.
For the primary election madam
chair what is suppose to right
now madam secretary.
I'm madam chair my understanding
is that section eight I will
just straight thirty six.
One two.
Correct manage and the comma.
Yes.
You will have sections for
seventeen to twenty twenty three
twenty four.
Seventy four ninety two ninety
nine through one away and so on.
Yes madam chair okay.
We can get that fixed.
Thank you that last page.
Madam chair I would lose my I
would amend my motion to conform
with what we just heard from the
secretary state.
Senator.
I'm sure our analysts are
keeping track of that okay and
I'm still good on a second okay
very good.
Right.
So I'm.
Let's take a vote on adopting
the amendment and then we can
figure out.
We can go to for the discussion.
The amendment on page one sixty
five.
No.
We restate the amendment this is
some our.
I'm sure so this is a motion to
adopt.
Amendment the the the the the
long amendment the two two two
seven six two point one.
As well as the short amendment
dealing with the cleanup MCD.
Our records that is two two two
seven nine three point one with
the modification to longer
amendment that the secretary of
state and Senator Duhigg just
described.
Sure sounds to me like.
That motion is to adopt this
funded sixty five page remember.
That's.
I would object to any vote on
that because we have not had the
opportunity to discuss the
amendment other than what I've
stated for about the five or
seven minutes.
And madam chair I I would have
to agree wholeheartedly.
I mean we haven't.
SB eight hasn't even been in the
house as a committee.
But it has had.
Six hours of public discussion
it hasn't been in the house but
there were only a few sections
here and they were clearly
explained by the sponsor and
our member representative Ely.
Madam chair if we're going to
rely on their.
Chamber and what in the world
are we doing here.
The same thing we're doing with
our crime bills right now.
So they're putting them all in
one Senate Bill so.
Maybe then she just for the sake
of of Representative arms and
I've heard I I I I am not moving
they do pass on the amended bill
what I'm doing is moving the
adoption of the amendments so
that we can have further
conversation about an amended
bill each it seems to me to be a
more logical process.
That's that's that's what I'm
saying.
Madam.
What.
Amendment.
That's fine hi I just want the
opportunity to debate.
The merits of the amendment to
debate the.
merits of the changes that are
before us and I think you're.
Several those would be doing our
constituents of the service that
we did not have the ability to
voice our concerns with respect
to
The the amendments that are
being proposed in front of us so
that that there were only.
Voting on or if we're only
voting on the amendments to the
amendment but not adopting the
amendments to the bill
pursued without my objection in.
Women are I have a problem.
I think the we're not voting on
the amended bill but we're
voting to adopt the amendment to
the bill.
So madam chair does that mean
that.
If you the option occurs that we
have we have an amended bill and
then we'll we'll debate the bill
as amended and then we will vote
ultimately as to whether it does
pass or not pass or gets tabled
at the conclusion of that that's
correct.
Okay.
I'm fine with that process as
long as I get for better thank
you madam chair thank you well
the court please call the roll
on the job to the amendments.
Representative Alcon yes.
Representative Armstrong.
Representative Chandler yes.
Representative Cook.
No.
Mr speaker yes.
Representative Eli yes.
Representative Lewis yes.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative night
Representative Rehm no ma'am no
ma'am.
Representative Townsend.
No ma'am.
Thank.
Yes.
Madam chair representative
Armstrong
I'm the amendment yes I vote
yes.
Madam chair yes.
Well nineteen for the amendments
are adopted.
Thank you very much we're back
on debate of the amended bill
and Representative Nibert is off
the floor.
Thank you madam chair
I'm gonna have to.
I have.
To to I have a lot of pieces of
paper for me so I'm going to try
to find it as quickly as I can
but the first.
They are like to discuss your
state inspection one dash to
dash twenty five and.
In the amendment that take your
section is.
On page.
So.
After section fourteen.
Thank you your it would be
between section fourteen and
section fifteen of the amendment
which is on pages thirteen and
fourteen and I would just note.
That provision that is M.
section.
Your is in Senate bill six was
taken out and that particular
provision provided
Representative the challenger
watcher or observer shall be
allowed to see the presence of a
signature and the last four
digits of a social security
number on the official mailing
envelope containing the ballot.
yeah and then there's some some
additional.
Asians at work the latest as
well in that section and.
The the problem at the.
The security measure that we're
concerned where you are with
respect to the the mail them
balance of the mail ballot.
It goes through a process and
that process is subject to to
challenge and the the
challengers from from all
parties and the watchers from
other organizations should be
able to
see an observer those ballots as
their.
Either being accepted for voting
for reflect that they do not
contain the information required
and are put in another staff for
potential rejection for
potential
Yes calling up the voter and
tell them to come out and ensure
the ballot so that is not in in
section fourteen or or section
fifteen of the amendment
amendment and so for that
I have a concern because those
were provisions that I think all
the clerks spot were important
may
the next one is when you want
Representative Ely just X.
Representative Senator doing its
claim that.
I guess I could ask the question
why was that a minute Madam
chair representative or senator.
Sure so madam chair
representative Nibert
so I am guessing that you're
looking to SB six right now
probably on page nineteen that
language ones
look look at the line right
above that what language that
was added.
It says and actually start on
the bottom page eighteen line
twenty five these are things
challengers watchers observers
are not allowed to do our
existing law says not be allowed
to view a voter's full date of
birth or any portion of the
voters social security number
and then it inserted completely
contradictory language saying.
You can see the last four digits
of their social security number.
That is the at irreconcilable
conflict within our our election
code to do that so that's where
that was removed.
So we resolve the conflict madam
chair and senator would you be
available changing the output
into them.
At and madam chair
representative I would have to
to see how that was being
resolved
And since on the floor sponsor
on this Madam chair
representative Nibert I'm not a
I'm not adverse of that troubles
you to bring your floor
amendment we could we could work
on that together and I'm I'm
open to it I'm not committing
but I'm open to.
One of the things that that the.
Have been troubling to me.
Are just.
I'll just tell you my
perspective of.
I have been the attorney.
And Dona Ana County for the
Republican Party in prior
elections before I became a
member of the house and one of
one of the things that happened
during the voting during a
couple Alexion's yes that that
challengers from both parties
We're placed in one certified
the room about.
Twenty five.
Well probably fifty feet or more
from where the election workers
were handle waiting those
absentee ballots that was absent
the board.
And.
The the.
Concern was the challengers
could not.
Or four here the process that
was occurring at the other end
of the room.
And it took us
Many many hours and threats of
of going to a judge to try to
get that the issue of resolved
but it didn't get resolved I
mean it happened the next
election and and so what we want
I think we wanted to do and and
SB six was to make sure that
there was clear instructions of
obviously
we.
We can get there with that
contradictory language but
to to make sure that those
challengers madam chair and
representative all right could
you and I talked about this a
little bit I I if we could have
something tailored to the
doesn't make things more
confusing and make it worse if
you can give me some language on
that we can work with that as it
hits the floor I'll be happy to
work with you but we want to be
careful not to make that even
more fraught with confusion and
potential litigation and more
conflict so that's I'm not I'm
not adverse to them but I want
to be careful thank
for
your it would look very similar
to what's on page nineteen of SB
six Representative the.
Obviously interject aware
contradictory language so we can
we can do that the.
The the next provision.
Or I think I have a couple.
On page fourteen and fifteen of
the amendment.
So the board of county
commissioners shall establish
border convenience centers
through the use of consolidated
precincts for boating and a
statewide election now my
question is can I also use them
and non statewide elections the
local elections are things of
the.
May may occur work that just
established by members probably.
And other.
Other governmental entities that
are not the.
A statewide election madam chair
I think the secretary has an
answer that question.
The secretary.
Madam chair and thank you
Madam chair representative for
the question and I believe we
pull that portion of SB six over
as well I'm that makes that
language sorry consistent.
We.
Sure I mean that's in the
cement.
And madam chair that is
Representative yes this is this
is language directly from SB six
and any I I I I think the answer
would probably be yes this this
is just establishing the voter
convenience centers as as the
norm rather than than the
precinct level approach but
because and to the extent
especially that most of the
municipalities in New Mexico are
now I'm local elections under
the local election acts towards
the county clerks who are
administering them they're gonna
be using the same BCC's.
Madam chair representative
senator
over on page twenty eight of
your of amendment.
Evidence basically page twenty
of SB six.
Section one point one dash four
dash one point one of our
current statutes
We have a provision there are
the cold for the deletion of
electors who receive them out of
state driver's license which
would be in my mind evidence of
their change of residence and
the amendment of there's not
that provision or maybe you put
it somewhere else maybe it's
rewarded but could you talk
about the removal of the
deletion of electors to receive
out of state licenses and
whether or not that should be.
Something that the secretary of
state should sure
your.
Certainly and madam chair
representative so that
originally was that was there
must be six grew out of a Senate
judiciary hearing last year
where there was a provision for
for that would have made New
Mexico the most restrictive
state in the nation for kicking
people off the roll voter rolls
by saying that if you just have
an ID somewhere else or it has a
very broad language that still
is remaining in SB six which is
why we took that out about that
if you do anything that that
this that might mean you want to
live somewhere else we can start
the process of kicking off the
voter rolls and I think and and
this is the this is maybe
perhaps just a policy difference
that we have but I think I think
that is a bad approach and there
are system where student goes to
school armed because he went to
work for college but they have
really officially currently
change their residents they're
just gone during the school year
and they go get a new driver's
license so they can drive
legally during the school year
where they are that's going to
start a process of kicking them
off the voter rolls or if
someone does anything any has
who have taken.
Other action as reasonably
recognize to establish residents
and other state what does that
mean that is such a broad
language and who is studying
though determinations on those
standards for that I think this
was dressed this language came
out and and and the rural
concerns that I had voiced last
year about the provision in
general and we kind of got to
this compromise language that
you see here in six but it's
still not done it's so bad
language the only part of the
compromises that then instead of
automatically kicking them off
the rules it was going through
the process that's it that's
provided for in our one for
twenty eight.
But but otherwise we have plenty
of protective things in place
already to keep our voter rolls
clean and we're already getting
and and the secretary of state
can correct me if I'm wrong but
when people's addresses are
changing and these things that I
guess might fall under this
otherwise establish presence in
the state Eric is already
kicking in and sending out
notifications and clean and
getting the rules cleanup so
there's no need for us to have
this vague and and and and
really increased like the most
restrictive in the country
language in here otherwise it's
it's it's a problem in search of
a solution.
Madam chair and senator it only
started the process and I
understand it it's a three year
process it's it's it's one of
those items that that flag that
but it starts a process that
takes substantial time and I
believe a number of mailings in
order to confirm that that
person has indeed changed their
residency and are no longer a
resident of the state it's not
it's not like.
You register get a driver's
license and taxes and all the
sudden you don't have the right
to vote in Roswell New Mexico as
you indicated students that go
to Texas tech maybe it starts a
process of investigation and
sending out cards the state Hey
are you intending to be a Texas
roster or do you wish to
continue to be a New Mexico
resident for students that's the
probably up.
Pretty easy answer they they
either one of both taxes are
they want to vote in the in
their home town where they grew
up it's it's a process it's not
it's not the an automatic
situation but it was automatic
in terms of starting the process
and I don't see that provision
in the a member I think that's
important because as you'll find
out if you send out constituent
letters you'll get a whole staff
back of people that don't aware
we have in your a district to
pay a set amount first class
mail
Representative I think you have
a policy disagreement here and
the sponsor explained why it was
out it's not it wasn't forgotten
it was just that's their
preference so and by something
went with us talk about it
happen automatically that's how
that language first was last
year that and in response to
raising those concerns they did
build in the going through that
process that you just described
Representative but also we
already have a process that
covers the stir Eric we don't
need we don't even.
We don't need to do this.
Madam chair and senator so so if
my son registered to vote in
order to get the driver's
license and taxes there is a
provision that automatically
start that process that we just
talked about.
And and and madam chair I think
the secretary of state
contestants.
Madam chair representative so
Texas is a new I drive into the
year program so moving forward
we would get a notice from at
through through our air act of
listening and stayed at thank
you you know your son
theoretically had applied for a
driver's license in Texas so the
county clerk would notify your
son that we are aware that he's
applied for a driver's license
in Texas and he when he asked if
he wants to continue his voter
registration here in New Mexico
as a result of that and he can
either you know choose to stay
registered to vote and and
continue voting in the state or
say no thank you and and I'm
sure your son.
Particularly I know my son would
be very responsive to that
letter
Hey obviously that's not to
speak for everybody Mr at madam
chair and representative but
that that's how that process
works.
Thank you all right I do think.
There are many states that may
not be part of that process so
if we.
Who want to capture some of that
I think having that information
I'm having that process store
would help clean up our voter
voter rolls and and securing
driver's licenses from out of
state.
At least is an issue of evidence
that they have changed
that the residents you should
start that process
also section one.
More for.
Dash forty seven which is
driver's license voter
registration in the statute.
I just note that and and Senate
bill six there were provisions
dealing with with those issues
and those have all been removed
from the the members have a lot.
Madam chair representative.
Madam chair representative now
no there there here in the
amendment on page thirty two.
Thirty two.
Yes.
Your amendment doesn't go in the
order of the statute okay State
It's.
Yes Representative or or are
there some differences so with
respect your the amendment and
what works.
What was.
Senate bill six do you recall
the.
Madam chair and and senator.
Yes Madam chair representative I
think this is exactly the same
as it was in single sex.
So.
Multiple signatures and some of
those items would be looked up.
The the.
Securing of signatures the
images of the voter signature
from multiple databases would
still be secure
And madam chair representative
okay I know you're talking about
now yeah there was before there
was a provision that would start
building up
a database for eventually for
signature verification
and but our understanding is but
frankly that's that's something
we can do next year that
database is not going to get
built if they're not gonna be
able to start collecting that
stuff.
On it right now so personally I
think it's a great idea I love
the idea of developing the
status but it just didn't seem
like something that was
essential to to get through
right now because it's gonna
take so long and a half.
You know when we debated some of
these election bills and in the
past and have talked about
you know mail out ballots for
instance.
The only way that it works if I
recall the testimony before
state government committee at
the time was that the Colorado
situation work because they have
invested tremendous sums of
money in our signature
recognition software that
collected signatures of people
over time and those ballots
could be run through that.
Program and and it would check
out our signatures that are.
Signatures that did not
reasonably match thus the
software and it apparently is
very expensive and we decided
not to go down that route in New
Mexico at that time but the.
You know starting to collect
that data now
seems to make sense because I
think that if we look at if we
look at the all the states I
think over half of them.
Have verification signature
software somewhere in their
process and you know building
that database.
maybe import but if you're gonna
sponsor that legislation next
year that would be great
Thank you Representative it does
look like secretary of state I
would like to offer quick
response to that.
And and and that and madam chair
thank you Representative you are
totally on the same page about
this and in fact I've said many
times before I am I I really
feel like signature verification
and that process is the gold
standard and we should do that
moving forward when I was
specifically asked about this
provision in Senate bill six or
at least in terms of what should
be moved into this R. if I was
OK with what got moved into this
ammendment what I will tell you
is that my concern was that we
created.
The signature database we did
not create any protections for
that signature database so that
was a huge concern and then of
course we were not moving to
immediately employed that
signature database so you know I
cannot speak for the G. Sanchez
here but I certainly help I know
and senator do head at will be
around and the next session I
and I would certainly be happy
to work with her or whichever
sponsor to not only create that
database but also to create
those protections and to start
employing that signature
verification process moving
forward.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you madam secretary.
Over on page twenty nine of the
amendment.
That deals with the
Registration and we took or the
the amendment takes out the
cancellation of registration of
the
Voters who have been convicted
of a felony and you called it
the forget the words that you're
that you called it something
We.
Representative registration
rights following conviction or
something and M. actually as I
read your amendment it looks to
me like the voter's
registration.
Nothing happens to the voters
registration upon conviction of
a felony and in fact they
continue to be a registered
voter the only cabbie ought to
pay if I read the the language
right I can't participate in the
actual voting while they are
incarcerated I reading that
wrong madam chair and
representative or senator.
And Madam chair representative
you're not reading it wrong
there's two different there's
two there's various ways to go
about felon re enfranchisement
one is to say as and and I think
the simplest way is how we're
doing it here which is just to
say if you are in cost it like
if you are in jail or prison you
can't vote.
If you're not in jail prison you
can vote.
I there are within one of the
sobs of SB eight are there was a
different approach that was
taken US of potentially
cancelling people's
registrations and requiring them
to re register upon release I
think this is the approach taken
in this ammendment is is the
simpler approach and and the
state for one and making sure
that folks
who are entitled to vote can't
and if they're not they're in
custody and they can't it's just
a simplification.
What what Madam chairman and
senator what would people who
are incarcerated with a be able
to request and receive an
absentee ballot.
Madam chair representative now
and and this would still require
the the department of
corrections to be communicating
with the secretary of state so
that they're aware of of.
Who is incarcerated
and and so so exactly so that
things like that don't happen.
Representative Nibert we still
have you.
You do my battery just went
dead.
I.
I have been blacked out from my
computer it is it is so this day
but yes thank you please
continue representative Nibert
take your time if you to catch
your breath and get resettled
well what what what we find out
where I was at
what's.
You're moving across the
borders.
Or
and this is really just a policy
thank you Mr on page.
Thirty four I read the amendment
is created allowing the creation
of a permanent absentee voter
list which would allow
someone to place their name on
an absentee list and every
election the clerk would
automatically send out an
absentee ballot to that electors
up is that an actor we.
Madam chair representative yes
that's that's directly from SBA.
Okay.
Yes the.
Yeah section twenty nine on page
thirty six of the bill of.
The provisions that are in the
amendment are substantially
different than than what I
recall in and asked to search
them and if I read your
amendment correctly I came away
with the idea that the the.
Third party organizations could
send out the applications for
absentee ballots which is
something that was.
Not allowed in SB six.
Am I reading that correctly.
Madam chair representative yes
it's it's a policy decision and
one also be it's actually not
actually I'm gonna correct
myself.
What was in SB six was arguably
unconstitutional.
so there is that concern I but
also and and because I know that
there were some real issues that
the some real better confusion
issues that came up in the last
election cycle with our third
party sending out applications
for absentee ballots and and I
also believe that the secretary
of state has sufficient
rulemaking authority to put rigs
in place that will prevent back
going forward so I think that we
can fix that problem without
adopting in arguably
unconstitutional election
professions.
Madam chair and and senator I
don't see how requiring an
official form from the secretary
of state or accounting clerk is
thank constitutional are you I
mean other parties consent that
whatever communications but the
only one that's accepted is the
official form that's not a
constitutional issue.
Not anyone from exercising the
right of free speech statements
about whatever they want but the
county clerk and the the
secretary of state accepting a
required form as she does in
many areas and I might add the
financial disclosure statement
you and I have to fill out.
Which is a pet peeve is as the
secretary of state those
it doesn't make
unconstitutional it doesn't make
it unconstitutional it it just
requires a special specific form
to be filled out to secure that
about so we may disagree or we
may agree to disagree on that
one of.
Representative if I may at
because I think there might just
be a little confusion here what
you just described is actually
what is provided for in this
ammendment just requiring that
it be the official forms what
was SB six was saying that third
parties couldn't send those
official forms to other people
that's where the car that's for
the free speech constitutional
the issue comes at so that's the
distinction.
All right.
Madam chair and senator I am.
For I am missing something there
for saying that the person has
to fill out the form submitted
to them by by the county clerk I
don't see that as being a
constitutional argument.
And and and Madam chair
representative perhaps.
Perhaps we'll just have to agree
to disagree on this one I.
One of.
That
was two places we have that and
just be section and so we just
disagree on that.
Research
should.
All.
Once.
On that page.
Forty nine of the amendment
This is a section regarding
receipt of mail ballots by the
clerk.
And this is one of the.
Concerns of the we.
Really struggle with the.
The amendment you know I read it
correctly of in SB six we have a
a.
Provisions that.
Call for.
Audit of I believe it was two
percent of the mail them ballots
are as they are as a county
clerk makes a determination that
this mail in ballot should be in
the do count I'll call up to do
to help staff two percent of
those ballots would be subject
to water.
To determine whether or not the
clerk was making a property
termination of
Putting it in the right staff
and if there was an error
detected then they would go
through the the the whole staff
and basically it was it was
there to just insure and let the
public know that there was that
process those ballots are
counted and I don't see that
provision on the.
Pages.
Yes forty nine through a doctor
page fifty.
Yes fifty two of of your
And I guess my question is do
you not think that the we ought
to have some procedure to ensure
that the ballots that are
counted that it goes through
some sort of audit to make sure
that.
The one person handling those
are putting them in the right
staff.
Madam chair representative I
think that we already have a
verification process in place to
ensure that and and and and we
already we trust our county
clerks to do their jobs and do
their jobs appropriately in
every other area so it's a
little odd to me that there was
a car about for that one but
apart from that just as a as a
policy issue there's here's the
real life impact of that audit
provision especially on larger
counties
it would be incredibly increased
workload and and the probably
delay election results and so
frankly I don't see I I know our
county clerks are some of the
hardest working people in our
state and I respect them and
their expertise and I and I
trust their ability to do their
job especially with all of the
protections that we have built
in already I just all I thought
that this was as an unnecessary
are extra burdensome later to
put on there that serve no real
purpose didn't really it didn't
do anything to really make our
elections more secure or two
budget voters it seemed it and.
And I did I don't remember the
good reason for it and I think
it could also do a lot of harm
and really unnecessarily
increase the burden on folks who
are already working incredibly
hard to administer elections.
Madam chair and senator
we don't trust the county clerk
to the child all the ballots we
have an election board that that
oversees that process all this
was doing was ensuring that.
Okay be sure that we have a
process in place to ensure that
the county clerk was.
Properly accepting those ballots
for county and because that that
process really isn't subject to
much scrutiny and so that audit
process was one that the the was
there just like the election
board was there to provide that
assurance to the public at those
ballots were being handled
appropriately and so you know
we.
I'm I'm I trust.
My County clerk implicitly but I
also know that my County clerk
should appreciate having these
checks and balances in place to
protect her reputation to
protect the integrity of her
office and that's what I see the
election we're doing and that's
what I saw was the benefit of
having that the audit process
with respect to the the mail the
ballots that come in through the
I think in the and the thing we
don't column absentee ballots a
more we call mail mail ballots
but.
The handling of those mail
ballots and and I think that
that
That security measure if you
want to call it that it is an
important measure we may
disagree on principle there but
it was it was one that the
county clerk's I believe the
were in favor of because it
protects your protected them to
to assure the public that they
were properly handling of those
ballots
Well I'll move on
There were a number of other
changes from from Senate Bill
legislation in this particular
section of being section thirty
eight of of your amendment and I
will go and all those but the
public should know that there
are significant changes and
section thirty six of the
amendment
Over on
This is not easy trying to line
things up
one item that I think was in
SB six that may not be on the
amendment as I see it
They mailed ballots
I think we have a provision that
the appreciate the official
mailing envelope if it didn't
contain the required information
yeah yeah the.
He rejected subject to your I
believe but.
On page fifty four I think that
provision was removed and I I
just I my question is what do
you do with respect to
Mail ballots to come back.
And the official mailing
envelope does not contain the
required information on.
Madam chair representative could
you point me to where in SB six
you're looking not because I I
thought that we did all that
stuff in in the in okay it's
page seventy three of us be
searched at the top demographics
for.
And on here is it so I believe
page that the for.
To the extent that I can
line them up.
It looks like it's it's deleted
from on page fifty four from
that one two three and four to
top of page.
Yes thank you madam chair
Representative okay at not
because it was duplicate to if
you look at the provision in SB
six right about that of our
existing law.
I was already a basis that it
didn't require the recall have
contain the required voter
identification.
It's that we don't need to then
say it they did it doesn't
require the documentarian it's
the same thing it was just
unnecessary language that was
already dressed in our existing
law.
Madam chair and and the center I
thought those were two separate
things that appeared on the
envelope.
I I did not see them as being
Billwould.
If you're you're saying that
that that is captured in
paragraph three.
So the documentary
identification information is
part of the required voter
identifications are.
We need we may need some
clarification you might want to
have of the secretary of.
Discussed a little bit because
required documentary.
ideas for voters to a register
by mail and have to provide I do
under federal law aware of the
required.
Identification would be
somewhere else the signature the
last four numbers of the social
security number or in previous
renditions date of birth what
whatever was required.
So I I we were under the
impression those were not there
that they were separate and
distinct things of one deals
with I guess federal
requirements all and madam chair
representative I I would defer
to the secretary of state on
that.
So Madam chair representative we
still the requirement to provide
documentary ID is a federal
requirement that is still
contained and we and I've just
been looking for it I know for a
fact that I spoke in here Mr
chair representative that what
we clarified was
that you know because what ends
up happening is folks to we have
two issues one is that we get
ballots back without and the ID
and so those go into the care
process that you're referring to
and madam chair representative
and then we have the process
whereby if you prefer if you
find the documentary ID but you
put it inside with the ballot
incentive in the outer envelope
thank you know unfortunately
we're gonna just have to open
that up and and see both your ID
invalid at the same time so we
can get your ballots but Mr
madam chair gosh darn it I keep
doing that I know for a fact
that those provisions are still
in here madam chair we can so
with those folks through the the
notice and cure process just
like any other mail ballot that
does not work that does not have
the required information and to
just clarifying miss.
Representative we do have that
here process and here that is
currently over language from
twenty twenty and that has given
the better the chance secure
there about Madam chair
representative
madam chair and you madam
secretary.
That is fine but it's not part
of the challenge process what
what you just referenced and
that other is part of the
challenge process that that that
stuff doesn't appear that ballot
for that mail in ballot could be
challenged and then you you go
through your other processes and
and you took it out of the the
the challenge process so I don't
know you may want to look at
that because the I think the if
those are indeed two separate
things I would say we need to be
able to to challenge that ballot
on either the deficiency or one
of the other and and do that
I'm down to I think the last of
my notes on page ninety five of
the amendment.
Section seventy two of the
amendment.
Talk about a.
I think madam secretary talked
about logic and accuracy test
and I do like the the provision
that allows the public.
To see some of that process but
my question is.
Because a lot of issues have
been raised could you.
Madam chair and madam secretary
could you talk a little bit
about the security measures
that.
Each voting machine has not only
your testing procedures but but
tell the public because I think
this is a good opportunity
whether those machines are
connected to the internet and
within the rules or when the
tape is wrong on the machine at
the close of the election.
Of that tape then is transferred
into a computer that is or is
not connected to the internet
the kind of talk about that
process because I think those
are important security measures
thank you so much Madam chair
representative I'm happy to
speak brief that but hopefully
clearly and and that so as you
mentioned initially madam chair
representative.
You're sort of an easy process
of ensuring the accuracy of
tabulators and starts really
originally with the
certification of voting machines
and that whole public process to
make sure that we are only
certifying for use tabulators
that comply with New Mexico law
prior to each election each
county clerk will conduct this
logic and accuracy test and that
basically we have a at yes act a
ballots we know what the outcome
is supposed to be if we run all
those ballots through the
machine and we make sure that
that is accurate that it zeroed
out that it's sealed with AT and
numbered seal and then it's
deployed with the thorough chain
of custody to the polling
location city your question
about okay so then it's executed
in terms of use in the polling
location which is of course
every time it's opened and
closed can be open to view by
challengers watchers and the
public count can be noted at the
end of the night on election
night when those machines are
closed in those results are
printed we have multiple sets of
the tapes one that's posted
externally on the polling
location and at least two other
sites that are distributed to
the county clerk and the
secretary of state for
independent auditing those
results are at produced from a
memory card they are handled
over to the county clerk's
office and as you mentioned
representatives are tabulators
are required by law and are
literally never connected to the
internet and that is intentional
it would be much quicker to
convey those results by the
internet but they could be
hacked or tampered with so they
are hand delivered by a
certified messenger to the
county clerk county clerk then
uploads those results into a
completely air gapped computer
does not that also does not
touch the internet to have an
accurate.
Unhackable.
Relation of the elect of those
machine results then they get
read into our election night
reporting system so again
separately in order to have
those results displayed on the
internet so we are what we have
these multiple records the
printed record the then record
that's put on the air gapped
computer and then the election
night results in all three of
those to be able to compare
against each other during the
post election campus and the
audit to ensure the accuracy of
the results.
Madam chairman and madam
secretary I I I appreciate your
explaining that as we get a lot
of questions on that and I think
it's important for the public to
to be aware of those procedures
one other question.
Since we can have a program that
we mail out ballots
list.
Are the computers that have
those mail out ballots
databases and and and things
four of those committee
computers connected to the
internet and are the are any of
the mail ballot servers
connected to the internet or two
other servers that would then be
connected to the internet.
Madam chair representative.
in the sense that so course our
statewide centralized
registration database is is on a
protected network server and
really the only systems that are
able to share in that are the
county clerks and the secretary
of state's office we haven't
highly secure and protected and
then as you mentioned we do use
vendors for ballot on demand
services that create thank thank
I have but by mail mailings and
things like that and they what
we do is we send data to those
and they also send data back
saying okay like this ballot has
been issue right there also on
secure servers so we do a lot
you know to there's too much to
explain it you know the the
privative required for this
committee but we have an
extensive a complete election
security programs which deal
specifically with protecting all
of these servers and these
networks from being you know
infiltrated or tampered with the
outside and of course we work
closely with our our federal
partners like DHS to ensure that
they're protected as well Madam
chair representative.
And you mentioned the balance on
the men and is there any
Yes.
Part of the testing processes
make sure those are.
The software and those machines
are accurately counted the
ballots and that there's not
the.
Of some.
Programming thing that that does
weird things but the does that
those machines are not
connected.
To where things can be.
Messages can be sent to change
that during the voting process
to are they.
It it is a secure network madam
chair and representative so we
do literally everything possible
employed all the tools and
resources that we have at our
disposal to prevent those
systems from being tampered with
from the outside from being
hacked so to speak so you know
of course we have to use the
internet for central database to
communicate with thirty three
county parks and their ballot on
demand systems we would be able
to do it otherwise but we do you
use no virtual networks add
multi factor authentication the
I I I keep running on with all
of the you know the up at super
security thing that we do to
protect those madam chair
representative.
You
madam chair are probably taking
up way too much time but I do
have one last question and then
all.
We'll have somebody else take
over but
I understand that some of the
larger counties.
Do you use what's called an ICC
tabulator which has Google
scanners and those are connected
to a server and are those I see
see.
Tabulators connected to the
internet are they stand alone.
Very good question Madam chair
representative those that is a
closed system as well as a
standalone system so those
scanners are connected to the
computers used for June of two
different and unification
Education sorry well with the
session early education and
again the the results on those
that are treated their air
gapped and they're treated
exactly the same as the results
from the tabulators that are out
in the world on election day
Madam chair representative.
Madam chair again
I really wish that we have
before us and amendment to
Just be six I think it would
have been a lot easier to go
through it but I guess it is
what it is but
I am concerned with some of
those ballots to charity
measures that we've discussed
that are not present in the
amendment and the I I would hope
that maybe time sure but I would
hope that maybe we can get to
get some of those measures to
address people we go the house
for about thank you madam chair
and thank you Representative
thank you madam secretary of
thank you senator.
Mr speaker.
Chairman of the do passes
omitted.
For to pass.
And the second from
Representative Armstrong yes
thank you very much a motion by
the speaker second from
representative Armstrong.
The clerk to call the roll.
Representative Alcon.
Yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Chandler yes.
Representative Cook no.
Mr speaker yes.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Lewis.
Yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert.
No ma'am.
Representative rain.
No ma'am and I have my hand way
up in the air to do some
question we're going to go ahead
without Representative right
we've got to get to the other
built into the floor.
Madam chair of again
that I think that we had this
discussion on the floor the
other night about the committee
that you can't you can't
yes actually we could
Representative I don't want to
move the previous question we
could but I don't want to do it
I think we've had a thorough
discussion on the bill in front
of us today.
Do you want to vote
Representative every.
No ma'am I well I'm one of the
no but under protest yes all
righty that's fine.
Representative Townsend.
I share convention.
Yes.
Madam chair yes.
Nine nine two three we have a to
pass on Senate bill one forty
four as amended twice.
Okay thank you very much
everybody we've spent several
hours on this and I want to let
Senator Brandt in what has we're
going to do Senate bill thirty
four and
I'm waiting yes you are
attendee list.
Is not in there.
His.
Is I'm sure I'm happy if you if
you would allow for me to start
the presentation on thirty four
we think you've been in touch
with Senator Brandt Mr speaker
so go ahead and we'll see if we
can get him real quickly thank
you madam chair
Senate bill thirty four relates
to the a new crime that would be
created a threat.
Use a firearm.
and I am prepared an amendment
which I will move for purposes
of discussion the two oh two
number is triple to.
Seven nine two point one triple
two seven eight nine two point
one.
it is in the Here file on
today's date in the Senate bill
thirty four folder.
And I understand from Senate
from communications Senator
Brandt I am offering this other
areas you are madam chair he's
in the attendees he's there I
believe as the person R. S.
Craig.
We did thank you.
Three hours I said I want here.
Thank you for three hours to
okay here with you the whole
time Madam legatus okay well
welcome to House Judiciary and
you know we have your other
bills to I think it should take
five minutes but let's do the
tough when in the state where we
where we end up okay I'm the
opposite ma'am but I will yield
to you I like to do the easy
things first.
I'm gonna say that for dessert.
I am.
Remember to say madam chair so
the ma'am but that was my
military background so.
Madam chair and senator Brandt
I took the liberty of starting
well we were we need to address
would you able to hear what I
was saying Sir yes I was
speaker I appreciate it's a
start on on that
I have work with you as well as
the governor's office with this
ammendment
the the bill as it sits right.
simply
Makes a shooting threat to any
public building
as amended in the Senate
Judiciary a misdemeanor
and then it was amended six or
seven times on the Senate floor
and so we've done some work
today to try to clean some of
these things up and
I think that you're going to be
bringing the amendment speaker
golf Madam chair Senator yes and
I I've just moved it for
purposes of discussion the two
oh two numbers
Triple two seven nine two point
one and madam chair Senator with
your.
Indulgence I'd be happy to walk
the members of the committee to
the elements.
Of the proposed amendment the be
great thank you Representative
thank you so
And madam chair with this bill
does is it
and deletes the misdemeanor we
were just discussing and what it
does is in section one.
we.
Bring in all the overall manager
this contains the contents of
house bill sixty eight.
House bill sixty nine and house
bill seventy nine.
In the form they were when they
passed the house of
representatives.
So section one removes the
statute of limitations for the
prosecution of second degree
murder.
In the form that it was a way it
passed the house section two of
the bill creates the crime of
criminal threats.
For members of this committee
will remember that discussion we
had when Senate Bill your house
bill.
Sixty eight I came through.
Section four of the bill.
Deals with the penalties for
felony possession of a firearm
the commission of a serious
violent felony or rather just
your spouse talent instead of
possession of firearm making it
a second degree felony I defined
second sorry defined serious
violent felon in the way we done
when this came through the
committee earlier in the session
this in section five we have the
new
read the change in the penalties
for aggravated fleeing a law
enforcement officer.
Six is the
modification of the sentence for
temps.
To commit second degree so for
the attempted murder and second
degree
section seven is the increased
firearms penalties
after the use of firearms in
various
crime section eight is at
sentencing enhancement for the
situations where one possesses
brand issues or discharges a
firearm in the commission of
other crimes and so this has the
same sentencing again with
judicial discretion about degree
to which it said this would be
enhanced and then section line
is the
section where we talk about
station ninety ten is the
chop shop.
Bill as is section eleven so
that's the contents of the
metric needs these bills were
all familiar trucks from
extensive hearings in this
committee earlier and I.
I'm happy to answer any
questions and at again I'll tell
status with Senator Brandt here
and in the panelists questions
you it's my understanding that
this is a friendly but.
I'm sure with the speaker of
thank you madam chair and I have
had the opportunity to look
through it and talk with the
governor's office about it I do
consider from the doctor.
So we've actually discussed the
amendment are there questions on
the amendment from committee
members.
Representative Eli.
Hi Representative I would
just went up I was gonna move
adoption you can do that they
could still and calm
Representative on that action.
Okay is there a second I'll
second the second representative
Armstrong and elegant
representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair of.
I was trying to get my computer
back up and running now that
it's plugged in and I'm a of
some types of.
On the amendment
good.
Mr speaker or or maybe the
Senator tell me again which of
it looks like this is the wrong
number bill that collected a lot
of.
The other bills that we've
saying so just real quickly tell
me which which which built best
incorporates.
Sure thank you madam chair
representative divert this
incorporates house built sixty
eight.
Sixty nine.
And seventy nine in the exact
forms they were in when they
went to final passage on the
floor of the house.
Okay.
And that the it's a matter
shared so that is chop chop.
That is second degree murder
statute of limitations and
sentencing.
And that is the other crimes
that I described criminal threat
aggravated fleeing a law
enforcement officer at secretary
they were in sixty eight Rep
Melanie possession of firearm
secretary it's very similar to
what Senate judiciary as done as
Senate bill two twenty one same
kind of approach.
And madam chair and
representative or or Mr speaker
senator or whoever cares to
answer
Incorporating these the.
I know that we were
substantially involved in the
gun our profession issues that
some of these bills contained in
and were removed I just wanna
make sure that none of the can
language has re appear in any of
the bills that
we have have substantial debate.
The coach's should over about
four weeks we're some of the
Sanchez.
Representative Nibert you are
correct then is that none of
that has been has reappeared
here as I said as I mentioned we
took the bills as they were when
they passed the house and
compiled the in this image that.
Okay
We're trying to get the there
are analyst to to look at those
real quickly here and the I
appreciate your advising me of
of the.
Mr house bill sixty eight house
bill sixty nine house bill
seventy nine as they left the
house and went to the Senate are
all incorporated now and Senate
bill thirty four.
And chair representative Nibert
that is correct.
Madam chair and Mr speaker or or
Senator or there any other
changes of that were made of the
bill contained anything else
that respondents sixty eight
sixty nine of seventy nine and
chair representative it is not
okay chair representative madam
chair he looked in the is not.
Madam chair and Mr speaker Sir
thank you for verifying that
that's all the questions.
Thank you Representative Nibert
Other further questions
Representative Armstrong
charges going over would do
pastor second if we already have
a due pass motion.
We already had one we still of
the motion for adoption on the
table that I may also.
We have it we have adopted okay
well at the top eight let's call
the roll on a job to the
amendment.
Is that what you call the roll
to adopt the amendment please.
Representative Akan yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Chandler yes.
Representative Cook.
Mr speaker yes.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Lewis yes.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative nightmare.
Yes.
Representative Rehm.
Yes.
Representative Townsend.
By share.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Yes.
Vote of eleven to zero we have
adopted amendment.
Okay.
Representative Armstrong right
now all of the past as amended.
Senate Bill.
As amended and I have
Representative read for
discussion.
Nobody.
Streambanks.
Representative right.
I'm sorry ma'am I was trying to
get my.
But no fluff here so
let's see madam chair and I'm
not sure who's of presenting but
let's go to page five and we'll
see.
Representative reviews muted
yourself.
Let me see if I can keep it
words not muted there okay thank
you and appreciate that so madam
chair and I'm not sure who's
answering but let's go to page
five we look at number seven
we're says real property then we
need a number eight and number
eight.
Which I've tried to fix with
them in the past is if you have
one of these kids out on a movie
set.
And he's got a gun.
He's now in violation of that
statute.
So the this is from Legislative
Council wide prepared and
provided to Representative Dixon
my proposed a bill for House
Judiciary in the language they
came up with is number eight.
Participating in a film comma.
Television or other performance
where it is lawful to possess a
firearm period and I would move
that as an amendment to this
amendment to this bill as
amended.
You madam chair we have another
amendment offered from
Representative ring with the
second from representative
Nibert I'm sorry I was not
processing.
Okay discussion of the proposed.
So madam chair by could.
Go ahead Senator thank you madam
chair and I'm I'm trying to.
Process the amendment completely
section three as I read it is
mostly current law
Representative Rehm I think what
you're actually concerned with
is in current law and this is
talking with the exemptions and
I I believe that seven should
cover what you're concerned
about on the movie sets because
under seven it has legal
guardian and I think or and the
person is being supervised by a
legal guardian wouldn't pay
minor acting on a film set have
a legal guardian there.
Madam chair and senator no I
don't think all the time you
know I don't think that they
have their guardian present.
they're going to participate in
a movie scene and whether the
parent is there or not could be
an issue.
Madam chair and and
Representative Rehm all right
the only thing I would say that
is if this year you describe is
in fact a violation then it's
already movies are happening all
over the state of New Mexico
figuring out a way not to be in
violation because you're talking
about adding an exemption to the
exemptions that are already in
the law.
Well and and you know if you are
a minor.
Madam chair representative
remained if you are are you away
from your parents doing work
there is going to be someone
there who has legal
responsibility for you.
That's part of the releases the
side as a parent I mean you've
got to have somebody there.
and because the this is not new
language Madam chair
representative Rehm
And also.
If you are shooting a movie.
With a prop economic.
You are likely also covered
under a one because you're
participating in a lawful
activity.
I just I don't something is
necessary madam chair.
Representative me.
Madam chair and Mr speaker when
I took this up to Legislative
Council they agreed that
the this exclusion wasn't in the
bill now you know.
We figure out how many attorneys
we have a monthly committee and
figure out the different
positions.
But
I just think that you know if
you're gonna fix this we ought
to fix it all the way through.
More or.
Seven.
Madam chair.
Your Representative.
The it should have the
exceptions and the one of the
the speaker point about is is
programs.
M.
who may be on a movie set it's
quite likely that that person's
parent grandparent or legal
guardian is not there nor would
they be supervised by such
persons and so since movies all
our
something that is.
Being done today it certainly of
we should many western here it
seems to me that are poor if the
law is that a minor cannot
process a loaded or unloaded
handgun except as provided the
address that you're that we
ought to find that exception
where we know miners maybe have
a lame hopefully and I'm loaded.
I am not engaged in any of the
activities that that amendment
could also be up in the number
one
Hunter safety course or thank
you and safety course or
participate in unlawful shooting
activity or an actor on a movie
set.
I mean you could do it elsewhere
but.
I don't think that these
exceptions would cover
instances where the minor's
parent guardian or
What's the other term
grandparent
is not present at the at the
movie set up a time.
Minor was halfway a.
My comments madam chair.
Chair I I think we want for
clarity secondly approach the
bills.
miglior hurts anything.
So I would consider friendly
because it on heard it but it's
the pleasure of the committee
let's go to our the brain trust
here I'd like to check with our
analysts Senator they're usually
the ones who tell us whether
we're making the state or not.
So I'm wondering if I anybody
there is.
All the okay great thank you.
I believe that there is an
industry standard or trying to
create an industry standard to
keep guns real guns this will be
set so I don't know how if that
would.
The non conforming to that
attempt.
Madam chair if I may also.
Chair representative ringer
muted again.
Madam chair and and
this also participating in a
film television set or other
performance so if there's some
other performance and outside of
the movie industry you may want
to include it that's why I had
Legislative Council right that.
Madam I don't see anything I
move to table.
Just a moment and we'll column
is and which is why index she's
the one who prepared the
committee analysis but she
probably doesn't have that.
All of these amendments to go
ahead and thank.
Thank you madam chair I I I will
tell you I have not research
this question
it does seem to me though I
think ill Lisa made a good
point.
regarding of course but not real
guns dummy guns whatever they
call them that would be
automatically exempt.
So I in order to really give you
a good answer I'd have to you
know really take a look at what
laws are already in effect
regarding firearms on movie sets
that said
whether this would actually be
prosecuted.
is another issue
I do think that it could be
under participating in a lawful
shooting activity again haven't
researched it.
Regarding the context of movies
it could be a case law in front
of a judge could interpret that
that raised that way.
Actually I think Representative
Rehm that you don't want to do
this on the fly if you want to
have the analyst research that
for you and prepare for in that
that I think that's a better
idea.
Madam chair I had Legislative
Council prepare this and so they
came up with the proper language
the waffle shooting activity I
think Alec Baldwin showed us
that you don't do shooting
technically on the set
but this includes loaded and
unloaded firearms but the
industry has been using loaded
and unloaded apparently of
firearms and all I'm trying to
do is make sure that we don't
get a kid convicted of something
that he doesn't need to be we're
trying to punish errant behavior
not.
Trying to build a career in a
movie theater but
You know what.
My thought is that.
If you said to the council
service I want this written this
way then that's fine they'll do
it but I'm I'm suggesting to you
that the analysts look a little
further because they don't just
say okay I'll do what you're
asking me to so I'm I'm not
gonna vote for your amendment
because I don't think it's bins
are only that it but if you want
to move adoption will have the
other members way and.
Madam chair my direction to of
Legislative Council was does
this does any of these
exceptions include a movie
theater or you know what other
performance and that's why they
drafted it in that manner and it
was their determination and that
and in agreement with me I
didn't tell them I want you to
have this
but you know if you want to
table it I mean.
I'm I'm trying to keep kids out
of jail.
You know potentially for trying
to do something that ought to be
lawful but whatever the will of
the committee is but if you want
to drive we can you don't want
to well well let it fall
wherever it falls.
This column does you are you
finished talking to us yeah I I
could add one more thing madam
chair and a Representative Rehm.
The mentioned loaded and
unloaded and to that point this
bill does not discern between
loaded and unloaded so that that
raises a whole other issue
if that's if that's the intent
of the bill does not address
that it only addresses
possession of a handgun
unlawfully unlawful possession
of a handgun it does not
distinguish spring loaded or
unloaded consists of a person
knowingly having a handgun in
the person's possession or
transporting it so with we can't
in a loaded and unloaded that
raises other issues just that I
want to point that out.
Thank you madam chair.
Okay Representative Eli to
table.
Second.
Western to table by
Representative Eli second for
representative Armstrong the
clerk to call the roll please.
Representative Alcon yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Chandler yes.
Representative Cook now.
Mr speaker yes.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Lewis yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert.
No ma'am.
Representative Rehm no ma'am.
Representative Townsend.
Thank.
Yes.
Madam chair yes.
By a vote of nine to three the
amendment is table.
Where are we do we have a motion
to for it to pass the bill yet.
I'll make the motion.
So what.
What it goes to.
Memory there.
Representative Armstrong lives a
do pass.
On Senate bill thirty four as
amended Representative Ely do
you want a second thought.
Madam chair.
Madam chair dot I have more
questions to go ahead.
Madam chair so let's go to page
six in about the middle of the
page it says be thank no found
in possession of a firearm shall
be guilty of a third degree.
felony.
My house bill twenty eight.
What makes this up third degree
felony with up to five years
and that was courts and
corrections indoors and so I
think we ought to include that.
To help other discussion.
Are you to addressing me yes
Sir.
Madam chair no I think we ought
included yes so will the
committee if they don't want
included well I guess we just go
on but I think that's probably
the.
But you know one area that we
could get the senators to agree
with you and I both know we're
gonna have a problem with
section see over there the next
paragraph.
Well.
Right now I don't see any other
anyone else interested in that
yes if I just throw we put your
hand up if you're interested
including.
Anybody.
Okay we'll move on to the next
one okay these are all the
hairstyle I or hello I think you
can improve the bill so we'll
just keep going on it.
Chair mass Representative ring
because it is we are about forty
five minutes past the time.
Where we wanted to start the
floor I'm happy to visit
with Representative green as it
goes to the floor to see if
there might be other affirmative
obviously when we did these
bills are for before
Representative remote for these
four minutes.
That would be something to
consider as well I'm happy to
have a conversation I've already
spoken Representative re my
phone external times this
evening about additional.
Representative we we can would
consider.
Madam chair and Mr speaker yes I
would consider it when we go to
the biggest problem of this bill
and I'll outline and and then
this is all been outlined before
I propose no floor amendment for
it I just went ahead and let it
go and here is the biggest
problem with this so let's go to
page fourteen brandishing or
discarding of farms.
So the current law is that your
first offense is three years and
your second offense is five
years so when we go to paragraph
Hey on there it says and if you
do it in the in a drug deal or
if we or it's an aggravated
burglary and the best example of
an aggravated burglary that I
can give you is a home invasion
it's only one year so rather
than tough on crime were
lowering the penalty.
Are you go to section see there
it says okay if you discharge
the firearm as five years I
agree with that that's a that's
a good inclusion go to page
fifteen and in paragraph do you
see that the original penalty
was five years but now for a
second offense we're only going
to make it three years.
So I think you got a put back
the original penalty and the
lead paragraph eight on
fourteen.
So that
then you know if you discharge
it you're gonna get five years I
think that that's a big
improvement there I'm really
worried about
that one because it actually
reduces the penalty.
One.
Madam chair.
Representative.
I'm looking at a and.
I have a chance to look at this
a little bit more since we
talked about this in and your
leadership office and and I
think a is only dealing with the
new crime of possession not
brandishing
so I don't think a applies to
be.
so it just says possessed in
relation to a drug transaction
so my understanding of that is
if I'm carrying a firearm and
ideal drugs the person may never
even see the firearm but I have
in my possession that's when a
would apply if I get that wrong
Mr speaker please correct me.
And then be applies when you're
actually brandished a firearm I
do think that there are some
issues and do and I would like
to look at the a little bit more
because I'm still a little bit
confused on that but I think
possibly a.
Is just dealing with possession
has nothing to do with the
brandishing and so they're
saying if you're possessing a
firearm.
When you are dealing drugs with
the show that firearm or not
that it's a additional one year
penalty that I am I getting that
right Mr speaker.
I prefer with regard to a test.
Right I come through.
You did Mr okay thank you I
appreciate.
The it does say a separate
offence resulting in the
subsequent.
Finding a fact where the court
with possession brandishing
or discharge of a firearm and it
does look like that's being
lowered from five to three and
so I'm I'm not sure exactly why
the original bill was doing
that.
Les I'm reading that wrong.
Madam chair because we're
changing it there from a.
What that's doing is it's it's
imposing that three year penalty
on your first offense right so
what they're doing is they're
taking out second or subsequent
and they're safer separatist and
so this could be an additional
three years enhancement
when is your first defense as an
additional finding in a
prosecution.
I see that now that's correct
that's a second or subsequent
and so the three years would be.
Would be available just a second
or subsequent finding.
Yeah exactly so the three year
enhancement madam chair Senator
is available on your first
offense when there is a separate
finding that this occurred all
year for students.
Thank you Mr speaker I
appreciate the.
Representative Rehm you're on
mute.
Madam chair I'll go ahead and
move along when you get into the
chop shop over here one of the
things that I've pointed out and
Finally had a conversation with
the lobbyist who understood to
get a page eighteen and you go
to number G. E. as highway or
street light what I have tried
to point out is it doesn't cover
I mean street sign highway or
street side you need to add
street white the overhead light
you've got a.
Eighty foot hole I guess and
I've seen individuals out there
after a collision cutting them
up.
Yeah anyway you can decide to
fix some not fix them whatever
you want to do I guess.
Thank you madam chair.
Okay I think we're ready for the
roll call vote.
The clerk please call the roll.
Representative Alcon.
Yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Chandler no one
and like to explain my vote.
Representative Cook yes.
Mr speaker yes.
Representative the line yes.
Representative Lewis yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert.
Representative Rehm no ma'am and
I'll explain my vote.
Representative Townsend.
No ma'am.
I
know and I expect Representative
Townsend explanations also more
what I would have said.
Madam chair.
Yes.
Eight five we have to do passed
as amended on Senate bill thirty
four.
Representative Lane the vote to
have first it was Representative
Chandler.
Madam chair thank you I voted
against a number of the bills
that are included in this
package although I did some but
on balance I I feel that none of
the none of this legislation
will have any material effect on
crime and it will have an
adverse effect on many
individuals in the state and for
that reason I voted against it.
Thank you and
who else wants to explain his
phone.
Representative re madam chair
like I pointed out I don't think
this is ready for prime time in
a way that's you know I think we
need to do a little more work
and that's my comment thank you.
And was there anyone else.
Okay I believe the vice chair
madam chair no she just said
that Representative will speak
for her got it okay which she
did eloquently.
All right let's try to do
Senator grants one fifty eight
it is really easy right Senator
a yes madam chair and I
appreciate that it really just
prohibits organ transplant
discrimination against people
based solely on physical or
mental disability could you pass
madam chair I can't.
With the motion from
Representative Egolf for a do
pass a second by Representative
Armstrong is there discussion.
All right the clerk to call the
roll.
You can go by activation.
We can't we don't we.
Will.
Representative Alcon yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Chandler yes.
Representative Cook yes.
Mr speaker.
Yes.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Lewis.
Yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert yes.
Representative Rehm yes ma'am.
Representative Townsend yes
ma'am.
By check have Anna.
Yes.
Madam chair yes.
Thirteen two zero we have a due
pass on Senate bill one fifty
eight is amended.
Thank you madam chair thank you
very much Senator thanks for
spending sometime with us a lot
more time if you're meant to and
see how fast that was that was
it was enjoyable thank you okay
we're adjourned.
Right.
Order me.
With one.
Can
you.
