Representative Reeve here.
Leaders Sapansy.
Madam Vice Chair.
Madam Chair.
Here
We have a quorum, so just a
couple things before we start on
the first item, the how the tax
bill, House Bill 198 has been
removed from this committee and
it's just gonna go straight to
the tax committee.
And um we are also pulling House
Memorial 7 at the request of the
sponsors.
And with that, I will hand the
gavel over to my vice chair. I'm
I'm going to be co-presenting
with Representative Garrett.
Thank you, Madam Chair. um,
thank you, um, everyone for
being here today. We're gonna
start with
House Bill 12
Uh, you have the floor.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
everybody, um, today
Representative Chandler and
myself are here to present the
amendments that changes to House
Bill 12 extreme risk firearm
protection order, our expert
witnesses are Detective Matthew
Tinney from Albuquerque Police
Department and assistant
attorney General Jennifer
Vickery.
Um
The extreme risk firearm
protection Order Act, which I
can also just say Urbo became
law in New Mexico in 2020.
The law created a court process
to temporarily prevent a person
in crisis, I want to emphasize
it's, it's a bill to address
someone in crisis from accessing
firearms and harming themselves
or others. House Bill 12 in
response to the actual use of
the Urkel statutes, makes
changes that have primarily been
uh requested by members of law
enforcement who have actually
used the bill over the past.
4.5 years since the bill was
passed, uh, the Department of
Public Safety and the Department
of Justice have initiated
training, so 100, probably over
1000 law enforcement people have
been trained in this, in
addition to any of their crisis
intervention training, and so as
law enforcement has become more
aware of how to use this and how
to apply it.
More of these herbal petitions
have been filed, uh, in 2024, 96
were filed, 74 were granted.
They're, they're not, they go
before a judge, they're not
automatically granted. 14 were
denied and 2 were dismissed, and
those 96 petitions from 2024
occurred in 15 different
counties, uh, the information of
all the forms, how to file, when
to file, what to ask the firearm
relinquishment.
Set for or all on the New
Mexico, uh New Mexico
courts.gov, uh.
Website.
And um
As the law enforcement officers,
as I've said, as they've
implemented it as courts have
sometimes disagreed on who can
implement it, uh, we have these
changes and with that, a
representative Chandler will
explain those changes. Thank
you, Madam Chair, committee
members, really, there are just
two changes to the current Ebo
law, there's been a little bit
of a split in the circuits in
this district or between the
district courts as to whether or
not a law
enforcement officer.
Can be a.
Reporting party.
And what this bill does is
cclarifies what I think was the
original tent of the law, which
is that a law enforcer, an
officer can be a reporting party
thereby uh initiating the
process without the need to rely
on another person.
You know, bringing the issues
forward. The other um change
that we're making is eliminating
the 48 hours.
by which the um person who
receives the order may is
required to relinquish the
firearms and this is done is
being done.
For a couple of reasons. One is
we're very concerned about the
safety of the officer having
possibly noticed, you know, the
person having noticed that the
the guns are gonna be removed
from them, so we want to make it
as immediate as possible. I
would note that these two
changes were uh recommended
through a task force report, um,
that was compiled and I think it
was filed about a year ago, so
it's been looked at, these are
two, requests that are in line
with.
The report
They are also in line with
requests that we have received
from certain law enforcement
agencies within the within the
state and um the attorney
General's office, so.
I think there's a fear.
consensus that these changes um
improve enforcement of this very
important law. It's a law that
saves people's lives and um with
Madam Chair, I think we're
available for questions
or we want our present detective
Tinny and assistant AG.
Sure, Madam Chair and
Representatives, my name is Matt
Tinney. I'm a sergeant for the
Albuquerque Police Department's
Crisis intervention unit.
We successfully use this bill
compassionately in our area to
really help folks and I am
appreciative of you guys
listening to the changes.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee.
Uh, my name is Jennifer Vickery.
I'm an assistant attorney
General with the New Mexico
Department of Justice. One of my
jobs is to train law enforcement
officers across the state on
Earthpo petitions and when they
should, you know, how the
process of going through to
train, uh, to train officers on
how to use these. Um, I
appreciate your time, um, and
attention to this matter because
I do think that these changes
will help clarify the law, um,
as was discussed, will help, uh,
kind of clear up a little bit of
a circuit split.
That we've got going on which I
think will make the law clearer
and more approachable across the
state. Thank you.
OK, thank you to the sponsors.
Uh, thanks to Matt and Jennifer.
We'll go to the audience now,
we'll start with those in
opposition.
Um, we're gonna give 10 minutes,
um, for those in the room, uh,
to each side, um, and we'll do 5
minutes online for folks, um, if
you can keep it to one minute,
um, we're asking for folks to
not repeat any comments if you
can comment in the comments. So
we will start with opposition to
House Bill 12.
Good day, Madam Chair,
representatives of the New
Mexico Judiciary Committee. My
name is Jacob Smith Sandoval
with the government to Change
Project and I as a healthcare
professional for over a decade
with bedside care.
And I emphatically request you
vote no on HB 12 on
constitutional grounds of
wrongful search and seizure,
being a survivor of defamation
regarding mental health
stability, that wasn't that I
was in fact that they stated I
was in fact having a mental
crisis when I was not, and this
being a provider who is also an
instructor at the University of
New Mexico.
I must emphatically say that you
must vote no. The Attorney
General's office is here today,
and it was so nice to have your
conversation earlier this
morning. They still will not
investigate these crimes.
I have tried to turn over
evidence and Torres will not
take it.
By voting yes for this bill, you
are giving them tools to be able
to harass people repeatedly
through calling.
Healthcare crisises to people's
houses. This is not appropriate,
and this is unlawful. Thank you,
sir. It's your time.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee for the record, Dan
Reed with National Rifle
Association. We're here in
strong opposition to House Bill
12. Well, we oppose the
underlying URO or red flag law,
because you're talking about a
deprivation of constitutional
rights, not based on a criminal
conviction or mental
adjudication, but based on
third-party allegations and now
we're, we're expediting that
process which could be
compounded where you're having
the interaction, it's not an
investigation, there's no
cooperation of the evidence.
It's based on that experience.
And uh this could be abused.
It's going to be an easier
system uh for law enforcement.
So maybe instead of using the
traditional system that's in law
now, they could just go to that
and not have to go gather these
affidavits. Additionally, with
the surrender proportion with
getting rid of the 48 hours. How
do you actually comply with
this? Because if this order goes
into effect and effective
immediately, you need to
surrender these firearms. The
moment you're issued that order,
you're in violation. You could
be subject to criminal penalties
with that one in opposition.
Thank you.
Anyone else in the room in
opposition, right, we'll go
online.
Anyone with their hands raised
in opposition.
And if folks will state their
name for the record.
Anyone online?
Yeah, OK. Good afternoon, madam
chair Chair. Can you hear me?
Yes, go right ahead.
This is Larry Sontag on behalf
of the New Mexico Business
Coalition. I won't repeat um
what's already been said in
opposition to House Bill 12. We
oppose this bill because it
deprives people of their rights
and personal property.
Which would be subjected to
invasive searches based solely
on one party's assessment that
they might commit a crime in the
future or be in some type of
crisis. This is a deeply
troubling concept as we cannot
justify imprisoning or punishing
somebody based on speculation
about what they might do.
Additionally, New Mexico's
extreme risk protection order
has not been a significant
benefit to uh people and this is
just making the
situation worse. For these
reasons and others that have
been stated, we ask you to vote
no on House Bill 12. Thank you.
Thank you, Larry. Uh, anyone
else?
Madam Chair, we have David
Venus. OK.
Yes, I'm at the chair committee.
My name is uh David Venus uh
Albuquerque resident, and that's
why I briefly state that I'm in
opposition uh for a reason
started gonna be stated, uh, by
other folks who are also in
opposition, so uh thank you for
taking my book.
Thank you, David. Um, next,
Madam Chair, we have Anthony
Segura.
Go ahead, Anthony.
Hi, my name is Zachri Sbu. I'm
with the New Mexico Shooting
Sports Association. I'm in
opposition of this bill House
Bill 12. It's the erosion of due
process. Hospital 12 lowers the
legal threshold for gun
confiscation orders, making it
easier to seize firearms
individuals without sufficient
evidence or opportunity for
proper legal defense.
This is weaponizing the
government, expansion of red
flag laws due to assault on our
constitutional rights.
Thank you.
Thank you, Anthony.
Anyone else online?
That it? OK, thank you. We'll
now go to uh.
Those in favor of House Bill 12,
again, 10 minutes for those in
the room and 5 minutes if you'll
raise your hand for those online
in favor.
Um, we'll go down the line.
Everyone will have one minute to
speak, um, please, no repeating
and.
Um
Star Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Carolyn
Wynn with New Mexico State
Police. This is a preventative
tool for law enforcement with
the goal of assisting the
individual and providing
resources and ensuring the
crisis is addressed.
As a chairperson for the Urbo
task force, these amendments
align with, with, with the
request made by this task force
and will allow officers to
effectively keep our community
safe. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I'm Meredith Main,
and I'm speaking on behalf of
the women voters of New Mexico
and the American Association of
University Women, and I want to
thank the sponsors and the
attorney General and law
enforcement and all those who
worked on this bill, um,
there's, it's been very well
vetted, I think that it's
absolutely critical, lives will
be saved, um, because of these
provisions and the 48 hour
relinquishment is very
important.
Uh, part of that as well as
having more reporting parties,
still takes a court order. It's
not going to be taking away
anybody's arms, um, unless there
is, uh, you know, determination
that there is a threat to self
or others, so I urge you all to
pass that, um, the amendment and
um make this law stronger. Thank
you.
Chairwoman Romero, members of
the committee, and thank you to
the sponsors. My name is Kathy
Mosley.
I'm a retired public health
nurse in District 31. I'm
speaking on behalf of moms
demand action indivisible
Albuquerque, um, Professor
Cleary, this is her picture.
One of my favorite graduate
professors were shot and killed
in 1991 at the University of
Iowa during one of the earliest
mass shootings, school mass
shootings in the country that
left 6 dead and 1 paralyzed.
He student shooter died by
suicide. Shooters often display
warning signs, and this student
did.
I volunteered to be mom's demand
actions local extreme risk
protection order lead because I
believe this policy could have
saved him.
And all he killed and wounded.
I've had the privilege of doing
community awareness trainings
with Detective Maxwell in the
Crisis Intervention unit and one
of the first questions asked by
very.
Thank you
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, um, my
name is Sue Brown, and I'm a
retired, um, New Mexico
physician, and I stand in strong
support of this bill.
Um
I think you've already heard why
um this amendment is is
important and to me, it is also
the first step in the
intervention intervention by
removing the firearm immediately
at a time of crisis. This gives
a really a wake-up call to the
um the person with the gun that
um that maybe it's time to get
some services for their
depression.
It also is a bill that has um
other um advantages or um
positive uh possible positive
outcomes for our community.
Uh, for example, um.
Um
The
uh people that are suicidal with
firearms often end up um in
domestic.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee. I'm Janet Williams
speaking on behalf of the
National Organization for Women,
and we strongly support this
bill. We believe that the
changes will strengthen it to
save lives. Thank you.
Thank you, Janet.
Chair and honorable members of
the committee, uh, good
afternoon. My name is Wesley
Klum. I'm a senior at Bosky
School here in Albuquerque. I
live in House District 31, um,
as a student, I should be
focused on learning, not
worrying whether my school is
going to be the next tragic
headline. House Bill 12 is a
life saving measure that
strengthens the extreme risk
protection order, giving law
enforcement the ability to act
on credible threats before
tragedy strikes. Right now,
people warning signs are missed.
People in crisis keep access to
firearms even when they pose a
clear threat.
This bill closes that gap,
ensuring guns are surrendered
immediately when an extreme risk
protection order is issued for
students like me, the benefits
aren't just theoretical.
We wonder if our peer struggles
could be result in the next
school tragedy. We wonder how we
can help our school be
safeguarded against these
events. One of the things we
know can help is this bill.
Some of, some will ask to give
the current process time to
solidify. But with the issues we
know right now, tomorrow is
already too late. Passing House
Bill 12 is about prevention,
responsibility, and saving
lives. So let's act now. Thank
you.
Now a touristtapiwaha that is a
a koo ah Alexis.
Dotaquitaskiripani
Tatuchikaku Rio Rancho asked
district 23.
My name is Alexis Jimenez, um,
as you heard, I live in Rio
Rancho.
I am a volunteer with Moms
Demand Action for Gun Sense in
America.
Less than 2 years ago, a man in
my neighborhood shot and killed
his housemate.
Only an hour before, police had
been summoned to the home on a
domestic violence call.
The housemaid said she feared
for her life and that there were
guns in the house. The man said
he was gonna kill her, and if
they didn't get her, uh, if they
didn't get her out and
acknowledged that there were
guns in the house.
The police left.
With the changes in this bill
have saved her life?
Of course we can't tell for
sure, but I, I wish they could
have tried, uh, Mom's demand
action does stand in support of
this bill. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Pam
Campbell. I live in Santa Fe.
And I'm speaking on behalf of
Moms Demand Action and the
National Organization for Women.
I strongly urge you to pass HB
12 to strengthen the existing
URO law.
It will save lives and improve.
Community
Safety, thank you.
you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Anne Maxwell, New
Mexicans to Prevent Gun
Violence, and we've been pushing
for these changes for several
years now, and we're in strong
support. Thank you.
Thank you, Anne.
Thank you all for organizing.
We'll go online, um, we have
about 5 minutes for folks.
Please state your name for the
record. Mahena.
Hi, my apologies. I logged on on
a different Zoom. My name is
Teresa Garcia.
Go ahead, Teresa.
Good afternoon. My name is
Teresa Garcia, the chair of the
domestic Violence and Sexual
Assault Commission for the city
of Albuquerque to voice our
strong support for HB 12, the
extreme risk Or protection bill.
This is not about the 2nd
Amendment. It does not remove
guns from responsible gun owners
who do not cause harm. This bill
is about saving lives from those
that do. New Mexico consistently
ranks among the highest in the
nation for domestic violence
homicide in 2022, nearly half of
all homicides in our state were
linked to domestic violence with
firearms being the leading
cause. Our current system
and this bill relies on
offenders to voluntary turn in
their guns, a fatal loophole,
survivors cannot afford delays,
bureaucratic setbacks, or
political hesitation.
Furthermore, officers must have
the authority to immediately
confiscate firearms, firearms
from abusers under protection
orders to be included in this
bill, just as Sandia Pueblo has
already implemented. The Supreme
Court's ruling 8 to 1 in the
Rahimi case of firms that
removing guns from abusers is
constitutional and a necessary
right for public safety. We all
stand in support of this.
Bill and I urge you to please
act now pass HB 12, New Mexico
cannot afford another
preventable tragedy from those
causing harm. Thank you.
Next, Gabriel Dietrich.
Uh, good afternoon, Madam Chair
and members of the committee. My
name is Gabrielle Dietrich, and
I am the executive director of
NAI New Mexico. We know that
when a firearm is present in a
home that an individual
attempting suicide is more
likely to die by suicide, and
therefore we are in strong
support of this bill. Thank you
very much. Thank you, Gabrielle.
Elaine Miller
Hi, my name is Elaine Miller. I
support the change from
relinquishment within 48 hours
to immediate relinquishment on
service of the order. New Mexico
law is an outlier in this regard
of the 19 states with ERO laws
only 4 do not require a
immediate relinquishment. 3
require relinquishment within 24
hours, only New Mexico allows 48
hours. Updating the law may
encourage more petition requests
and there thereby save more
lives.
We ask that you support this
bill. Thank you.
Anyone else online and support.
Singan, thank you to the
advocates for organizing that.
Thank you for your brief
statements, really appreciate
that. We'll go back to the
sponsors, any other comments
before we go to the committee.
ready for questions, Madam
Chair.
Thank you. Um, we have, uh,
Representative Martinez. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair, for
bringing this.
Every once in a while we get a
bill that just rips us in.
I'm torn
Between
The need to
to offer this protection also.
Born by the fact that this is.
Possibly take guns away from.
And then it shows up at my
house. I'm upset that day.
Do I lose my, do I lose my
weapon.
Um
My other problem and I've had
long conversations.
With officers that have been put
in this situation, um, have
asked me, please.
Allow us to be the responder.
But I also worry about the fact
that this.
body also stripped.
Qualified immunity from those
same officers.
Can you answer me, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair
How
This
Plays into the qualified
immunity question.
Madam Chair and uh
representative.
I, I guess I don't understand
the relevance and the bill that
you have before you simply
speaks to whether or not.
Police officer can be
Reporting party
And the 48 hour rule, so I'm not
sure how we're getting now into
qualified immunity
Madam Chair.
Madam chair
Um
So let me give you a scenarios.
Somebody shows up at my house.
Uh
Makes my guns. I go, should not.
There was not
A valid reason that officer did
their best to make a judgment.
Cole walked away with my.
my rifles, my guns, and I see
that.
Officer
Because of the
He
Lack of qualified immunity.
They can be sued personally.
Now, judges,
have qualified immunity.
State employees have qualified
immunity. I just want to make
sure that the cup is not gonna
be.
Held liable whether they decide
at that moment.
I'm gonna, I'm gonna
Why to get these, these guns
taken away or I'm not going to.
Madam Chair, representative, if
your question is whether or not
that police officer, if he files
a petition and a truthful way
and gets a court order because
remember, Madam Chair and
Representative.
police officer must first go to
a court to get the order and
assuming it is a factual and
honest report.
He will be defended by.
His employer, probably through
the insurance pool or whatever
insurance to support those
employees of.
The city or the county, Madam
Chair representative. Thank you,
Madam Chair and Madam Chair, I
appreciate the response.
So the
Qualified immunity.
Would not play into this.
In any way.
The question is.
Whether or not he will be
provided a defense and can be.
defended, the answer is yes.
In my view, he will be provided
a defense and will be defended.
Thank you Madam Chair, thank
you, Madam Chair, for those,
those answers.
Thank you, Representative. Um,
we'll go to Representative Hall.
Madam Chair, Madam chair.
Expert witnesses. I've got a few
questions. I wasn't here.
Or the passing of the original
bill, and I'm going to try not
to
Go back in history on that, so
bear with me, ma'am. Um,
When, when we look at
taking
Firearms
My first question is,
When we see is this reported to
Knicks?
Yes
Madam Chair
So in being reported to Knicks.
Does it act in the same way that
our domestic violence laws.
Currently do with our next
reporting.
Uh, Madam Chair Representatives,
it does not, the Knicks index
told us that this one is
specifically only put in for a
year.
They put it um from the the time
stamp versus on while the
restraining order laws they have
indefinite until the the courts
reported.
That's just what I got from the
Knicks folks themselves.
So this one is more
It gets erased quicker.
Madam Chair, so one of the
concerns is obviously when you
seize.
Firearms
Or going the fact you're seizing
the firearm, um.
That under the next system for
domestic violence, obviously you
have to get that expunged even
if you weren't found.
Guilty
In a domestic violence, which is
a criminal penalty, and this is
a civil penalty.
Correct?
So we proceed.
Proceeding
So along those lines then, since
it's a civil proceeding, if you
show up and
Let's say I'm the the
Person in
distress or, or whatever the
proper tumor would be. I don't
wanna use bad guy, but
And you say I need your guns,
and I say no.
What can you do about it?
Sure, Madam representative, so
if someone does.
Luckily, knock on wood, I hope
this is real. We've never had
that encounter, but if someone
was to to.
Refuse to relinquish firearms
and they said that they own,
they own them, we would have to
present it to the judge again to
look for a warrant to retrieve
them, or we could summons them
for the violation of the order.
Madam Chair, so if you've
Now you have to summon them. Now
you're up against, we're we're
going back.
Uh, to a time
You, you're not in possession of
them, so you're going into a
time gap.
Here
Because it's civil.
So you guys cannot just go into
the house and seize them correct
without, without a legal
warrant. That's right.
One moment I'm sorry, um.
So also, given the fact
Um
That the police officer now
becomes a petitioner.
How does the respondent get a
chance to face their accuser,
unlike criminal.
Issues this being a civil where
the police officer has now taken
the role of the petitioner.
um, without going into too much
detail into the original law,
there is a hearing, a post
retrieval.
Relinquishment Harry that has to
be scheduled within 10 days.
That's all I have for now,
right, Madam Chair. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative. We'll
go to Representative Ree.
Thank you, Madam Vice Chair,
Madam Chair.
Um, experts, is it Sergeant Ty
Tierney.
Tiny, tinny, I'm sorry about
that.
And I got Jennifer.
Victory, thank you from the
Department of Justice.
I wanted to focus, uh, Madam
Chair, Madam Vice Chair, Madam
Chair on um, I don't have an
issue with the peace officer
part actually.
Kind of like that, I mean, I'm,
I've never loved this pill, as
you know, um, I'm not going back
into all that, um, but the
reasons why I I like the idea of
the peace officer being able to
be a reporting party, that part
doesn't bother me so much, um,
but it's it's the 48 hours I
want to discuss a little bit
about the language, um, on the
page 4 to 5.
Um
Madam Vice Chair, Madam Chair,
um.
From how it originally was and
then speaking to you outside of
our office, I think just a
little bit ago, it seemed that
the judge, it, it, it states a
law enforcement agency or
federal firearms licensee, this
is when we're taking guns within
48 hours.
A me or of.
Of service of the order, um.
And it looks like or it looked
like or sooner as at the
discretion of the court, so it
appears that
When this law went into effect
and talking to your experts
previously. You didn't have to
wait 48 hours. The judge could
actually, and it sounded like in
the circumstances that were
described to me that the judge
was actually ordering the
retrieval of the weapons
immediately.
Um, and now this.
This changes it.
To be
Immediately for sure, Madam
Chair, or vice chair, madam
chair.
Yeah, um, uh, yes, madam Chair
and Representative, the default
now is immediately, but you
know, as I'm sure you noted, or
as directed by the court, so it,
it could potentially be.
A longer period of time, Madam
Chair and representative.
OK, thank you. And and I guess
that's what's confusing to me is
that it doesn't seem to really
it said 48 hours, but it still
had the discretion of the court.
The court could still take the
guns, or apparently is taking
the guns in most cases, so I, I
just don't see the reason at
this point to change this
section.
I understand the concerns that
everybody else has, um, at a
vice chair and uh Madam Chair,
but it's still the way you have
it worded or as directed by the
court, the court could
still order it.
To be
You know, later.
Am I reading Madam Chair and
representative, I think you're
reading it right.
So, does that make sense why I
don't understand why we're
trying to change it, if you can
explain what this really changes
if it really, I, I, I, I guess I
will preface it by saying I love
that the judge has the
discretion in this because what
I think um representative
Martinez is trying to say is the
judges have absolute immunity.
They don't have qualified
meaning, they have absolute
immunity.
police officers qualified
immunity, so they could be sued,
um, personally, um, yeah, maybe
risk management will defend
them, maybe it will go into
their livelihood and it takes
that pressure off the police
officer from having to decide at
that moment, um, I'm gonna take
these guns. I'm not gonna take
these guns. I'm gonna get sued
by somebody if I don't take
them, I'm gonna get sued by
somebody if I do take them, at
least you have a judge now
making that decision and they're
completely protected and the
officer then is completely.
protected, um, but just the
wording of it doesn't seem to
really change anything that was
in effect before in in my
opinion, reading how you have it
if you could just explain a
little bit madam chair and
representative, I think it does
change the emphasis in that, as
I said earlier, Madam Chair, the
default is immediate, so that's,
that's the preferred, I would
say unless there's good cause
shown as directed by the court,
so the default, the emphasis is
on right.
way where prior to the default
was 48 hours and the court is
looking at that and saying, oh,
the statutory provision is 48
hours, and I would point out I
haven't thought about quite a
qualified immunity in a while,
so I need to go study up again.
But my recollection is, Madam
Chair and representatives, if
you're following the law.
Then your cover, your, your, you
will receive that qualified
immunity. So here we are clearly
stated in the law immediately.
You're following the law, the
officers following the law. He
has authority to immediately
retrieve the weapons. I think
that's a stronger coverage,
Madam Chair, for the.
officer who's implementing this
law, then one that might be
viewed as a little more
discretionary, Madam Chair
representative.
Oh, thank you, um, Madam Vice
Chair, Madam Chair, um.
I guess I, I don't see just.
Legally how it's a default. It
to me it just seems like you
have two options. Um, it seems
like.
You can either take them right
away or if the judge directs it
to be longer, it can be longer,
just like previously you would
either wait 48 hours or if the
judge said we're gonna take him
sooner, you take him sooner. And
I guess that's a problem I'm
having with the way the sections
worded is it it doesn't seem.
Like a default, it just seems
like the way the statute's
worded and the two options you
have, um, so that's my concern
about it is I don't think it's
really changing anything, um,
and.
I don't know, I'll I'll move on
from that, um.
Can you, um, experts, ma'am vice
chair, um, madam chair and
experts give um me some examples
of
I, I understand the law
enforcement's concerns and
everybody's coming forward and
saying, you know, why we need to
take these guns earlier, but
has, has there been some
incidences that have occurred
across the state, um, census law
was passed like is there been a
couple, has there been, you
know, 20 different things that
have happened is really nothing
happened, um, just confusion in
the law. Um, I'm trying to kind
of understand why now why we're
doing this now.
Madam Chan representatives, I'm
sure we could both probably talk
on this. I know I get a lot of
calls throughout the state with
questions on it. Um, a lot of
times what happens is a family
member or a hospitals reaching
out to local law enforcement.
They say that how they read the
law says they're not allowed to
do it.
And so we've been deferring it
to New Mexico State police who
who was kind of having to put
more efforts into it.
And I think a lot of the changes
in this is from that division
that came.
That was brought forward really
in that committee. Is there ever
seen across and say everyone's
reading it a little bit
differently.
And so this, the changes of this
was kind of streamline it so
we're all on the same page.
And so, um, madam, vice chair,
madam chair and experts, so in
my, in my reading this right
though to where they're
basically.
I just want to make sure and
representatives with, with that,
I mean, I can't speak for
judges, but they could I guess
make up any options they wanted
in their order.
OK, so the availability to
immediately seize a firearms.
Under even your changes and the
previous spill.
Would be available to the.
judged.
I only speaking in Berne County,
our judges do it immediately,
but we're only bringing stuff
that we feel this is immediate.
Sure. And I would and I do hope
that since this is such a and
and we talked about this in the
past, it's a big thing to take
somebody's guns away and to
accuse them, um, I'm glad to see
that some of these are being
denied and that this is, you
know, some are being filed. I
don't think in my jurisdiction,
um, Madam Chair, these are
being.
child hardly at all, um.
I've often seen and I wonder if
you've seen this that when these
type of situations come up in
order to even kind of avoid the
red flag thing, um, I've seen
offices actually, um.
Just file charges and get search
warrants and go in and handle it
that way. Have, have you seen it
being handled that way over
since this law has been passed,
um.
So
Madam Chair representatives, if
there are charges that look at
our guidance is you need to
follow criminal stuff and if
it's evidence.
Personally, in the you know I
work in, we tried gel diversion.
So if someone was like I would
need to get this gun, but I'm
gonna charge this person because
they're having a behavioral
health crisis. I don't think
that's the best way to treat
somebody on a medical thing. So
I would advise the officers not
to do that. I.
And, and to look for the earth
because other otherwise you have
someone that's having a crisis,
maybe at the forest, loss of
job, and now they're looking at
pending charges.
that just adds a level of crisis
to it while this law allows us
to, it doesn't go on their
criminal record. It, it just
lets some kind of, you have one
year of relief, you know, you
have one year to work on
yourself, work on your family,
and then it goes away.
Um
But I, I'm sure some agencies
and we at Albuquerque, we did
used to go the criminal route,
but
I really advise against it.
Madam chair and expert, I think
I've seen that so I'm like if
you have, oh, we have a drunk
intoxicated person with a
firearm, they go in and arrest
them for negligent use and then
take the firearm that way, you
know, I've seen that happen. I
understand what you're you're
saying, um, not putting them in
the criminal realm, um.
I just find that in my
jurisdiction, I haven't seen
many of these files, I've seen a
lot of the D, the DVs where
they're taking the firearms
away, um, through the civil
process, um, but not so much the
use of the statute, but not so
much I don't believe, uh, Madam
Chair expert that they're um.
They're, I think they're they're
nervous about the statute,
they're nervous to get sued and
what could happen, um, you know,
if they take someone's guns away
or in the the lack of qualified
immunity.
qualified immunity is huge
issue, um.
So I'm not seeing the statute
used at all, but I guess the
bottom line point for me is I
don't see this section.
Again, I don't mind the peace
officer part of it all, at all,
that, that I actually like
better, um, but the way this is
worded to me seems exactly the
same as what it is, um.
Judge has discretion, he can
take them immediately, he can
take them with him 48 hours
under this change judge can take
him, um, the cops can take him
immediately or the court could
direct it to be later, so.
For that reason, it just doesn't
seem to be accomplishing
anything for me except the
police officer thing, which I
think makes the process probably
a lot easier. I would, I, I'm
guessing, Madam Chair and um
experts just they don't
understand how to pursue
something like this, and this is
an easier thing to have law
enforcement do. Maybe you could
answer that or why were why we
are um clarifying that the peace
officer is the um reporting can
be a reporting part.
A reporting party, is that the
question. Uh, did you want to
answer that? I can talk a little
bit about that, thank you, Madam
Chair and and representative.
Um, so we're actually seeing a
circuit split, um, on that exact
issue right now, um, the second,
which is Albuquerque, Bernaino,
um, the judges there are already
allowing law enforcement to file
petitions, but here in the first
in Santa Fe, um, a district
court judge said a law
enforcement officer wasn't
listed as a reporting party and
so denied the petition outright.
Um, so we're seeing confusion
in the judicial system where
some judges are reading who can
be a reporting party as
inclusive or exclusive, um, so
this legislation helps clarify
that and will provide, I think
even.
Um
Uh, decision on that across the
state.
OK, thank you for that
explanation, that answered. I,
again, I don't have any issue
with that part, it's just the
other part that I have an issue
with, um, but with that, thank
you, uh, madam chair for
answering my questions and thank
you, Madam Vice Chair.
Thank you representative. We'll
go to Representative Hochman v.
Hill.
very much about a vice chair and
thank you, Madam Chair, and to
the sponsors for bringing this
bill. Um, I appreciate the uh
conversation that we've had and
and Madam vice chair, for me,
um, would really kind of help me
put all this into context, and I
hope help others put into
context is not to relitigate the
past, not to relitigate the
original URO bill that we uh put
into the force of life, I
believe in 2019, but to focus
specifically on what the fixes
are in this bill and what it is
we
needed to do to make it more
workable and make it be a better
fit to the community for which
this piece of legislation serves
so Madame vice chair, uh,
sponsors, could you please just
focus exactly on what the
problem was and what the fix is
so that we know exactly what
we're voting on and why this
makes it easier for this bill to
be workable.
Um
Madam Chair and Madam Whip.
They're, there was a task force
report.
That
Kind of convened a lot of the
stakeholders and they identified
some issues relating to EO.
One was the fact that the the
districts were split in terms of
who qualified as a reporting
party.
And there are districts that say
police officers or police
officers may be reporting
parties in our districts who say
otherwise and to clarify that
and.
Officers felt strongly that it
was important for them to be
reporting parties because
they're on the ground, they're
often, they often know the
individual, they have the um
information that is sufficient
to
put together um a petition that
establishes the basis, um, it
was important that they'd be
able to do so. Family, some
members are sometimes reluctant
for a variety of reasons. 1 may
be they're afraid.
Um, 1 may be they want to
remain.
As a support system for the
individual, and if that person
if if that person feels like
they betrayed them or you know
whatever by reporting them that
can break down the relationship
and sometimes that person has
very few relationships upon
which they can rely. So there
were, there are kind of two
reasons why it's helpful to have
a police officer clearly
established as a reporting
party. Um, the, the second one
was there also was concern that
there are jurisdiction.
that would adhere to what the
previous um provision.
was as a default position, which
was 48 hour rule.
So the 48 hour rule would be um
the person does not have to
relinquish the firearm um for 48
hours after receipt of the
orders, so they know they have
to return it and there's a
concern there that a person who
might have been thinking about
doing it, um, some dangerous or
others would use that 48 hours
to achieve that, that end, um,
so that they wanted to be able
to just take the guns
immediately as more clearly in
the statute, and I appreciate.
Representative Reeves's approach
and if it says the same thing, I
don't know why we would care
whether we change the wording or
not, so, um, from our
perspective, Madam Chair, the
default is clearer by saying
immediately, and I think a judge
would say, oh, the default is
immediately because we have it
in the statute, and that is what
we would prefer unless there's
some, um, you know, compelling
reason to do otherwise. Um,
thank you, Madam Chair and thank
yous representative.
Thank you very much, Madam I
share that exactly answers my
question, I appreciate it.
Thank you representative, we're
going to, uh, Representative
Chavez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Madam Vice Chair. I
actually have the exact same
question that Andy did is
highlighted here where it
changes the language of sooner
at the discretion of the court,
which is already there. I agree
with the police officer.
Like she said, so I don't want
to repeat myself.
Um, you answered that question.
I guess I would just like
clarification on the bill
because it also says search
warrant for guns and ammunition.
So a lot of people keep their
ammunition. Um, I know I keep
mine in a safe.
Some people keep it in drawers.
How?
Do you operate or how does that
go, especially if it's
immediate, knowing that the
individual has ammunition in
their house. How does it work as
far as a warrant, and is it open
ended? Where do you stop?
For the search.
Madam Chair, represent, could
you point to the provision that
you're referring to?
In in the in the bill
itself.
And represented if it's if it's
current law we're trying to keep
the debate on the changes made
if if that's what your question
is
is for the current law, but it's
regarding the ammunition and
since this is.
Immediate, I, it goes kind of
together. I'm just like, and I
know he was.
About to explain, so I just had
a.
time
Um
Sure.
Madam Chair representatives, I
apologize if I'm.
Saying it right when I say that
represented as I'm not 100% sure
what I'm supposed to say, but
when, when we go, yeah, I think,
you know, there, there's a big
misunderstanding where people
think it's a warrant. When we
get it, a judge issues the order
saying that you can't have it
and we go to someone's house and
say, hey, look, a judge said you
can't have it, and we work with
that person on how they want to
surrender the firearms for that
holding period.
So that that's one, and we can
only go off of the knowledge
that we have from our own
investigation or investigation
from our reporting.
So if that person is only
concerned about a firearm, and
they didn't mention ammunition.
It may not list ammunition.
And then if we were to let's
say, had to get a search
warrant, you have to be very
specific on what you're looking
for. And you have to identify
where it could be hidden and
the, the judge in your warrant
would dictate where and how you
can look for the, the items.
I don't know if that explained
it.
I, I believe our assistant
attorney, if I could add to that
as well, the search warrant
would come after the petition,
the initial petition in order.
So the, the search warrant would
come if they're not complying
with the initial either the
temporary or the full order. So
this isn't, we're not uh from my
understanding that we're not.
Doing them simultaneously, it's
only if they're refusing to
comply with the relinquishment
portion.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Madam Vice Chair. Um, that
helps in the explanation of
that. Um, I guess being that I
am a victim of gun violence
myself, um, I did have that
question on. I understand the
police, we stated already, I
don't wanna.
I'll repeat myself, but
How many cases have been missed
or or would have been caught if
we did say that this truly was.
A fix that we're trying to do
with changing that second part
of the language instead of
sooner at discretion.
And changing that to the media.
So, um, Madam Chair
representative, I'm not sure I
understand the question, but if
it's the question is.
How many things could we not?
How many things did we miss?
Um, Madam Chair, it's pretty.
To count what you don't know.
So
Yeah, I think that, you know,
I'm trying, I'm not trying to be
disrespectful, but um, I, I
think the question.
It's not a fair one.
I'm sorry
people are signaling me. I'm not
sure why.
Yeah, no, let me reword the
question, I guess.
sing.
That we, Madam Chair, that we
needed to fix the language, um,
to make it immediate versus 48
hours, even though there's
language in there.
Discretion sooner directed by
the court. I'm just asking, has
there been cases since the law
went into effect that a crime
was committed.
Between the 48 hours of maybe a
judge holding discretion and
giving the 48 hours versus
immediate. Has there been?
OK, OK, so ma'am to rip and I
think all answer is.
Has there been an occasion where
48 hours to relinquish was
allowed, and in that 48 hours,
something bad happened, harm to
yourself or others, something
like that.
OK, I'll ask our expert.
Madam Chan representatives, I
may not be the best person on
this one cause we've never had
an order that said 48 hours.
Ours has always said, uh,
imminent. I'm not sure if uh
turn of Vicky knows.
And I don't have personal
knowledge.
Thank you, and that was my
understanding, and so that's why
the questioning of that
language. So thank you for
answering my question. Thank
you.
Uh, seeing any.
No further questions, um, we'll
go to a vote.
Do you have any extra comment?
Uh, just a point about qualified
immunity. We have a, there are
two kinds of qualified ones
under federal law.
One's under state law.
And I, I assumed the federal law
because that's where I used to
practice in, but under state
law.
When we passed the Civil Rights
Act, we explicitly said um law
enforcement officers cannot be
sued, only their employers,
their municipal governments or.
county governments or state or
governments can be sued. So just
to clarify, so in effect,
Me, that's like absolute
immunity because even though
they may have done something
that was improper, it's the.
They are improper behavior is
imputed, Madam Chair and
Representative to uh their
employer.
Madam Chair, um, well, do we
have a motion for money?
Madam chair, I
We have a motion for a do pass
on has 12 by representative
Spansky, seconded by Speaker
Martinez.
Go ahead and call the roll.
Representative Ibiza.
Yes.
Representative Chavez.
No.
Representative Hall.
No
Representative Hochman B. Hill.
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
No.
Speaker Martinez? Yes.
Representative McQueen. Yes.
Representative Ree.
No.
Leader Sapansky, yes.
Madam Vice Chair, yes.
Madam Chair, yes.
We have 74 or against, and we
have a do pass.
You a do pass on House Bill 12,
uh, thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair and committee.
We could quietly leave for those
that were or um.
We're just here on House Bill
12. We're gonna be hearing House
Bill 198 next.
I.
What am I cooing?
Are we?
See.
So I understand Representative
Dao was on the way, OK.
Um
So do you,
I'm sorry, no, it's OK. Do we
think reptile is gonna be here
because uh otherwise we could
get.
Representative Hoffman.
Everyone
We have our presenter here,
Representative Dao. You would
like to come up.
We are on.
House Bill 209, Sunshine Portal
Fund.
Creation links.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, um.
As many of you know, we have
been creating more and more
funds, which has been an awesome
way to support our communities
and to implement projects that
are viable and can be
sustainable over time. Um, I,
uh, over the last couple of
years, noticed it succeeded like
over 150 funds. I think we're
over 160 funds, and you can go
to the Sunshine Portal and
you're able to see the title of
the fund and the fund balance.
Uh, so when the icemaker broke
down at the local senior meal
site in my community, I thought,
oh, I can look up this fund. I
can look up a fund and find
funds that would do something
like that for my community.
Well, you can't because the
purpose of the fund is not
listed on that sunshine portal.
How many of you guys remember, I
think several of you were here
when we passed the Kiki Savera
fund, I think Representative
McQueen, you were here when we
passed the Kiki Savera fund is
this?
Working, I'm sorry. OK. All
right, um, and the Kiki Sawara
fund is under aging and long
term services, and they provide
a small appropriations as
needed, uh, for critical
services for seniors.
But
The fun doesn't that, if you go
to the sunshine portal, it
doesn't tell you that. So I
called Aging and Long Term
Services and said, is this an
appropriate use of the kiki
Saedra fun. I remember vaguely
us passing this bill, and they
said, yes, that's exactly what
it's for. And they were able to
replace the icemaker at the
senior meal site, and it was
just a, you know, small amount,
didn't take an RFP or anything.
But it was something that the
community couldn't otherwise
fund. So this bill adds the
purpose of the act.
To the Sunshine Portal. And with
that, I'll stand for questions.
Wait, sorry. Let's go to the
audience. Anyone in the audience
wishing to oppose this bill.
I don't see anyone, anyone
online wishing to oppose the
bind anyone raising their hand.
Uh, anyone in the audience
wishing to speak in support of
the bill.
Mr. Espinoza
You could keep it to about a
minute or so.
Um, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Jason Espinoza
registered lobbyist with the New
Mexico Foundation for Open
Government, do stand in strong
support of the legislation,
anything that increases access
to information, and I really
think if we're incentivizing
people to look at the sunshine
Portal. Let's put the links on
there so they don't then have to
go look at compilation
commission and other things, put
it in one place makes sense to
us to increase access. Thank
you.
OK. Anyone else in the audience
wishing to speak in support.
Don't see anyone, anyone online
wishing to speak in support.
I don't see any hands up.
Any other remarks before I go to
the committee representative.
Thank you, ma'am Chair. Uh,
ma'am Cha represent, I think you
touched on it in your
presentation, but could you
explain what you hope to
accomplish this.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representative. What
I'm hoping to accomplish is more
transparency and openness in the
purpose of the funds so that
folks out there, be it a
nonprofit, a municipality, a
political subdivision, or a
community advocate can look for
resources that we've provided
and, and be able to find them in
a more um centralized location.
Cha represent out um.
So
To me, the Sunshine Portal is uh
a resource to allow people
Uh, to know what's going on in
government.
Um, if they're looking for funds
for a project.
Um, I think the list of funds.
That we've created as a state.
Is
Dramatically underinclusive.
That there are all sorts of
Programs that
Where we haven't set up a fund.
State money, federal money,
foundation money, things like
that.
Um
So I guess I would have some
concern that if, if the purpose
is
They give people tool not to
know what's going on in
government, but
The people who are looking for
resources.
That directing them to the
sunshine portal.
Might not be the best solution.
Any thoughts about that?
Madam Chair and Representative,
I, I agree with what you're
saying and the way that it's
done right now is maybe you are.
I can take my past before I
retired from early childhood. I
knew that I could look for early
childhood funding in a certain
few places, and so I would get
myself added to the RFP list
from what was CYFD and is now
ECECD and I'd be on the RFP
list. That's traditionally how
people do it, and you have to
know the niche and there isn't
an easy way to look for it. Um,
this is a place where you have
centralized information, and I
would say it's a start. I don't
think it goes far enough, but I
think it's a simple start.
OK, uh, thank you, ma'am Cha
represent out.
I don't think you're um
I don't think your bill
has really a downside, um.
Uh, I'm just, I think the upside
is limited.
Thank you, ma'am.
Anyone else with questions,
comments, pain, emotion.
moved for a motion for Du pass,
madams here.
Second,
Like it.
So I do pass motion on House
Bill 209.
Made by Representative Hall,
seconded by Representative Reeb,
which you call the roll, please.
Representative Abita, yes.
Representative Chavez, yes.
Representative Hull. Yes.
Representative Hoffman v. Hill,
yes.
Representative Martinez.
Yes.
Speaker Martinez, yes.
Representative McQueen. Yes.
Representative Ree.
Yes.
Leader Sapansky.
Madam Vice Chair.
Madam Chair
Yes
Yeah, but do pass.
Thank you very much.
So I do not see representative
Herndon or Ferrari in the
audience, so in the interim,
let's um
Hear from Hoffman,
Representative Hoffman v. Hill,
maybe I could get somebody to
try to track down.
The other presenters.
How we might be getting to them
in a little bit.
Just
All right, the floor is yours,
madam.
whip
Thank you, Madam Chair. I can
already feel that the speaker
and and a Representative Hall
plotting.
Plotting to uh haze me here in
some respect, but uh, we're here
to discuss House Bill 147 to my
right is uh the Honorable Jane
Levy. She is a district court
judge with the 2nd judicial
District Children's Court. Uh,
the bill is very simple, um.
I
The, the committee, I'm sure
understands the strain that our
court system has been under for
quite some time, especially in
the children's court, um, we
have many, many cases, many of
you know that I've been
volunteering, well not
volunteering, but I'm signed up
as a contract attorney with the
2nd Judicial District Children's
Court for mental Behavioral
Health court, um, we need about
15 more of me, and we need 3
more days of dockets and uh
twice as many judges just to get
through the dockets and the
cases that we have going in.
that judicial district and so
that is the purpose for the bill
is to create another spot in
children's court and um with
that I will um give over to to
my expert if she wants to say a
few more words.
Thank you very much. um, uh,
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, we, uh, in Bernallio
County, we have had a new judge
in my division, uh, in 1998. So,
um, 1998 was a long time ago.
Um, I certainly had a lot more
collagen in my skin in 1998 and
since then, Berlio County has
increased its population by
150,000 people, but we haven't
had a new judge at this point,
we've been assigned on average
2400.
33 cases uh and fiscal year
2024, and that is on top of the
remaining cases that were
sitting there from the previous
year. So, um, in domestic
violence division, we have over
3650 cases that are filed or
reopened, uh, and fiscal year 24
and those need to be heard right
away. So, um, justice delayed
can be people not being removed
from their home, uh, not getting
custody of their kids, not
having reintegration. So we
request the 31st.
Uh, and that one being assigned
to the family division.
Madam Chair, we stand for
questions.
So let's go to the audience, um,
anyone in the audience wishing
to speak in opposition to this
bill.
I don't see anyone, anyone
online wishing don't see anyone,
anyone in the audience wishing
to speak in support of the bill,
please stand up, you can have a
mic.
And please try to limit your
comments to about a minute.
Good afternoon. My name is Amber
Macias Mayo. I am a family law
attorney. I practiced throughout
the state. I am here in support
of House Bill 147, for the
reasons stated by Judge Levy to
provide some more information. I
want to tell you that we are
talking about 10,000, almost
10,000 cases that were new or
reopened last year in 2024 and
family law alone. Now, family
law is pretty broad, and you
understand what all that
encompasses. That does not
account for the approximate 3600
cases.
poured over from the year
before. How is this practically
uh being applied and how does
this affect us, children.
We are dealing with a ton of
issues that involve children,
children needing therapy,
children needing protection from
a parent or a care provider.
Children needing child support,
um, maybe when a 12 year old has
to wait 6 months to 8 months for
a hearing to have a matter
resolved that doesn't feel so
bad, but when it's a one year
old who has to wait 6 months to
8 months to determine whether
they're going to see one either
both of the parents, that is a
problem. It is not the judge's
fault. They are doing the best
they can to get us in, but we
are looking at 6 months, 8
months sometimes before hearings
are heard, and that is with us
trying very hard to resolve
these matters outside of court.
Again, we support this measure.
It has been nearly 20 years
since a new judge has been added
to the DM docket in the 2nd, I
believe the exact number is 17.
We have 4 judges doing the best
they can. We need a 5th to
assist, again, um, a lot of the
time family law is looked at as
bottom of the barrel and not as
important. I urge you all to
how important family life is, it
is the basis for the majority of
issues that end up in all the
other courts. Please give us
what we need.
OK. Good afternoon, uh, Madam
Chair, Tiffany Oliver Lee. I
have practiced family law in the
state of New Mexico for 20
years.
Um, a normal practitioner,
practicing family law, and I
apologize for my voice. Um, we
have somewhere between 50 to
maybe 70 cases apiece. If a, if
a family law practitioner has
100 cases, that's considered
pretty beyond the pale. We're
talking about judges who have
2500 cases apiece. And when
members of our community have um
any interaction with the courts,
most often it is an interaction
with family court. And so,
These are divorce cases,
domestic violence cases. When a
case is filed, there is no
direction as to where the
children will be, who they will
be spending time with, um,
where, where, how holidays will
be shared. And so these are
pretty emergent issues if
there's domestic violence, if
there's somebody who um needs to
be removed from a marital
residence, um, all of these
issues are the issues that are
before these judges, and 4 of
them just can't manage. They are
drinking.
water out of a fire hydrant, so
we urge you to pass this bill.
It is desperately needed, and
we've needed it for years. If we
could have 3 additional judges,
we would love that, but one is,
is we will certainly take it, it
would be much appreciated. Thank
you.
Good afternoon, Madam Chairwoman
and distinguished members of the
committee. My name is Serena
Valley. I am a family law
attorney practicing in the state
of New Mexico. Um, I mirror the
sentiments of Miss Miss CS Mayo
and Miss Oliver Lee. I would
also add that um many times
these issues are time sensitive
and when these issues are
referred to hearing officers,
there is an objections period
and um that just further delays
the, um, I'm sorry, for the
delays resolution.
in these matters that are super
important and so we're asking
you to pass House Bill 147.
Thank you.
Thank you. My name is Mackenzie
Saint Dennis. I've been attorney
for 17 years. I joined in all
the comments, but I just want to
add that I have a special needs
son, and so I tend to have a lot
of clients that I work with that
have special needs, and it is
The waiting list, as I'm sure a
lot of you know, to get services
is just
Already astronomical. And when
you're having to wait for a
court order to even give you
permission to get on a waiting
list. It can put kids that are
already behind um where their
peers are even further behind,
and we really need these orders
to be passed. Um, I can't stress
enough how much.
The judge is really intervene in
family issues and not just
divorce issues, but family
issues, and the kids are always
at the center of these. Thank
you.
anyone else in the audience.
wishing to speak in support.
Not see any anyone online
wishing to speak in support, OK.
I limit it to up to 5,
Teresa Garcia.
Good afternoon. My name is
Teresa Garcia, and I serve as
the chair for the domestic
violence and sexual assault
commission for the city of
Albuquerque. I'm here today in
strong support of House Bill
147, which would increase the
additional judgeship in the
second judicial district court.
This is not just an investment
in our judicial system. It is an
investment in justice, safety,
and accountability for survivors
of domestic violence and sexual
assault to include their their
children. The second judicial is
overwhelmed handling some of the
most complex and sensitive
cases, including DVSA, and
protective order for survivors
that are in immediate danger.
Delays in hearings put lives at
risk. Survivors cannot wait
weeks or months for protection
and justice. This additional
judgeship is critical to
insurance timely access to court
resources, reducing case
backlogs, and increasing
efficiency in handling life
altering cases. I urge you, I
urge our legislators to pass HB
147 to ensure a judicial system
is equipped to serve and protect
the most vulnerable in our
community, survivors and
children deserve timely justice
and not delayed justice. Thank
you for your time.
Thank you, Bridget.
Mm
Bridget
Good afternoon. Can you hear me?
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
and members of the commission. I
echo all of my colleagues'
sentiments in urging the um this
committee to pass House Bill
147. I am often appointed by the
judges in the 2nd judicial to
serve as a settlement
facilitator for people without
attorneys, primarily Spanish
speakers who don't have um
access to the court, so I know
that the judges are already
working as hard as they can to
be as creative as possible to
resolve cases in a timely manner
and what would really, really
help with this is if we had an
additional judge to hear.
cases. Thank you so much. I
appreciate the committee's time.
A Motoya
I'm like, looks like you're
muted.
Um
Tom
Montoya
It looks like
OK, so uh thank you, um, members
of Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, thank you for the
opportunity to address you. I
have been practicing family law,
domestic relations, and the
second judicial district Burn
Leo County for 44 years, uh,
even before the creation of the
divisionalized family court when
that family court was
established in 1984, we had
three judges 40 years.
Later
We have now.
Sport
Um
Uh, probably the uh only
involvement that most people
have without court system is in
family court. It's hard to find
someone a relative or friend who
hasn't had an experience there.
I'm um at people who only are
are fighting over money or
property, maybe they can wait,
but children can't. They simply
can't, and we need the judges,
uh, many more.
judges that has been pointed out
to address these issues and
quickly. Thank you for your time
and attention.
Thank you. All right.
Back to our presenter,
representative, anything else
before I go to committee?
No, madam Chair, I believe we're
ready for questions.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you.
whip
Bringing this forward.
So
I just have some quick
questions.
Um, out of curiosity.
The Bill
Just a generic position.
But it seems like it's gonna be
in family court. How is that
determination made, we give the
position.
Then the chief judge makes that
determination or
They all worked out
Without a known
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, um, I will give you
my layman's answer on how I
believe the system works and my
expert can correct me if I, if
it's inaccurate, but I believe
the administrative office of the
courts creates an extra position
and that then goes down to the
uh judicial selection committee
who will put out a call for
applications. They will then go
through those applications, pick
those they feel are the most um.
Mm
applicable, uh, worthy of
decision and then that uh those
lists of names will go up to the
governor who will then uh pick
the candidate and I'm my expert
can correct me if I have any
inaccuracies there.
Madam Chair and Representative
Martinez, if that's not
inaccurate other than to say
that it it also goes through the
chief judge.
Me and who, um, I have strong
armed into making sure it is an
absolutely a family court
position.
Thank you, ma'am, Chair. um,
thank you. It's a good thing you
have.
Community, so
I think we have immunity too, so
representative of Beta I just, I
just had 11 more question real
quick.
Can you explain to me how
How the need is determined as if
by caseload, is it by
population.
I'm not quite sure how that is
determined.
Madam Chair Representative
Martinez.
Really, it's just by, by
constitutional, by statute. So
the only way that we get new
judges is by coming through here
and saying that we are in dire
need and and getting a new
judge. Um, so when we get to the
point where we really cannot set
hearings timely, then you see
our bright and shining faces.
Thank you for that's what's not
triggered.
By, madam Chair.
Madame Jar represented Martinez.
It's not triggered by anything
other than um need and then
establishing um that we need to
come to you.
Interesting. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, um.
Your Honor, and Madam.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Abeta.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative Hoffman v.
Hill, and thank you, Judge
Lovey. It's good to see both of
you and thank you for bringing
this to our attention. My
question was,
Similar to Representative
Martinez's first question, just
assurances about the position
being with the family court, and
I believe that's answered. And
uh thank you.
A Speaker Martinez. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you. Thank
you, Your Honor. Um, it seems
like you need 3 or 4 more. Where
are you just asking for one?
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative Martinez, there
was a workload study that said
that we probably needed 2 more
judges, but we are asking for
one more judge to try and uh
take reduce our caseloads and
make it so that we're much
faster.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um
So why not ask for two judges?
Madam Chair and Representative
Martinez.
Mostly because I think we're
going to try and make this work
with one judge. We realize that
it is a, the full funding for a
judge position plus staff, uh,
is a big ask. And we also are in
a building that is only so big.
And so we need to have space to
have hearings as well. Um, so,
and there are other divisions
that are also somewhat
overwhelmed with cases.
I mean, the budget wouldn't be
an issue. This is what 300,000
or so, so times 2, maybe maybe.
Maybe 7 cause I think it's
$3,678,800,000.
Is the issue space?
Madam Chair Representative
Martinez, to be honest, if
you'll give me two judges, I'll
take them for sure. Um, it
really would make a huge
difference, but we, it is an
issue of space in that we are in
a building that was built in
2000
No, and yeah, it was built in
2000 and we don't have a lot of
space. We don't have sufficient
hearing rooms and we don't have
necessarily safe hearing rooms.
So there are some concerns
regarding that, but, um, I
would, I would build portables
if I needed to. Thank you, Madam
Chair. I think that's part of
the problem I'm having here and
I'm gonna vote for this, but,
you know, I'm, I'm pretty tired
of nickel and dimming the
judiciary. That's why thank you
for all of your work on
competency and your work on
public safety and the work we're
going to do together in this
committee.
nickel and diming the judiciary.
And I'm gonna ask you guys to be
aggressive.
You're in an independent branch
of government, ask for what you
need, because here's a problem,
we are re-victimizing these
victims over and over and over
again, victims of domestic
violence.
Get kicked off to some outside
arbitrator because the court's
too full, too busy.
Victims of DV kids who witness
DV.
Re-victimized every single time.
And it's kind of frustrating for
us to be.
I mean, I kind of want to amend
this right now and that too.
Is this in the budget, Madam
Chair.
And
uh, Madam Chair Speaker, uh, it
is not currently in the budget,
OK. So that's some work that's
gonna have to happen over the
next few weeks, but it is.
I mean, I'm sorry, but to give
you one and try to make it work.
So are you going to re-victimize
a bunch of DV victims because
more than likely you're not
gonna be able to make it work
with one.
I don't mean to be so flippant,
but as you could tell,
We have a
Multibillion dollar budget.
And you're asking for one
position.
I would ask for 2. We can work
on the budget side. I don't know
how you deal with the space
side.
Honestly, we all, we have that
problem in this building
ourselves.
Uh, I guess it was poor planning
back when they built that court
in 2000.
Um
Water under the bridge, not
really our purview, I guess, uh,
but
I think you should ask for what
you need and not nickel and dime
this thing because um it is
those uh those victims of
domestic violence.
Who depend on your court.
To do right by them.
And to Nickel and dime their
pain.
Nickel and dime.
You're suffering
In a time of
Bounty
It's a real disservice to those
same people that you all are
trying to help.
Uh, I'll support this, but I
would, I would urge you to
Go to 2. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, if I may, uh
Speaker Martinez, if you want to
perhaps make an oral motion to
amend the bill to and we would
accept that. I would love to but
I also don't wanna impose on the
space issues that were mentioned
earlier, so.
Um, you know, if, if you guys
wanna
Um
Well, I don't think we want to
roll it just given the time
constraints, but um, you know,
this goes to HAFC next.
This could be something that
could be amended in HFC should
this committee move forward.
Very good.
OK, um, Representative Hall.
Madam Chair, Representative
Justice, just real quick last
year in one of our interim
committees, we heard a report
about kids sleeping in hallways
and CYFD and
A lot of these other issues with
this.
pardon my ignorance, but with
this help alleviate that or move
towards alleviating that.
Man.
Madam Chair and Representative
Hall, no, because when, that's
CYFD and we really wouldn't have
any dimini in or control over
that.
Thank you. That, that's all I
had. Thank you, man.
Any other member?
I'm happy to entertain
Representative Hall.
Make a motion for a due pass.
Oh, OK. We have a motion for a
due pass on House Bill 147 made
by Representative Hall, seconded
by Representative A Beta.
Representative Abita, yes.
Representative Chavez.
Yes.
Representative Hall. Yes.
Representative Hoffman v. Hill.
Yes.
Representative Martinez? Yes.
Speaker Martinez? Yes.
Representative McQueen, yes.
Representative Reap, yes.
Leader Sapansky, yes.
Madam Vice Chair,
Madam Chair, yes.
Yeah, but do pass.
Pass
Thank you.
Man,
you.
Our last item.
On the agenda is House Bill 216
community-based domestic
violence programs, and we have.
So Representative Herndon and
Representative Ferrari.
All right, representatives
Herndon and Ferrari on the floor
is yours.
Thank you, ma'am
Um
Chair, it's a pleasure to be
here with you. I'm
Representative Pamela Herndon.
I'm here with my co-sponsors
representative, uh.
It's been a long day, Madam
Chair.
She just ran in. Joanne Ferrari.
So, madam, um, Madam Chair, what
is before you right now is uh
House Bill 216, and we seek an
appropriation of $10 million for
the crime victims reparation
fund for distribution to current
community uh based domestic
violence programs to help.
Uh, support survivors of
domestic violence. We have with
us two witnesses, 2 experts
rather, who will share with you
information and why we're
seeking this amount of money.
I'll have each one of them
introduce themselves now.
Adam to our members of the
committee.
Garcia, I'm
After officer of the New Mexico
Coalition Against domestic
violence, who represents our
state's 32 domestic violence
programs.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair.
Members of the committee, Frank
Zubia director for the New
Mexico Crime Victims Reparation
Commission.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Members of the committee, our
organization is, we have two
primary missions in our
organization. We're the agency
that provides.
OK.
We're the agency that provides
uh.
direct victim compensation to
victims of.
Crime
Last year, a fiscal year 24, our
agency assisted more than 45
victims of crime across the
state. In addition, we also
Sorry
Every
Pull it back.
Sorry, I apologize.
Um, Madam Chair, members of the
commission, I mean,
members of the committee, we, we
assisted 4500 victims of violent
crime in the state. But in
addition, we have a second
primary mission and that is to
fund service organizations
across the state. We currently
fund 192 programs.
Across the state, those
organizations consist of victim
advocates in various um
disciplines of victim advocates
at law enforcement
organizations, prosecution
officers,
child advocacy centers, domestic
violence centers, uh.
Rape crisis centers, saints, you
name it, any agency that
provides direct victim services
to victims of crime, our agency
funds.
Um, I want to give you a
particular number historically
our state was dependent on
federal funding in 2018, we
received about $21 million a
little bit over $21 million from
the federal government that was
direct victims of Crime Act
funding. I keep going in and
out. Can you all hear me? OK.
Thank you.
Um
Currently in fiscal year 2024,
we're down to $5 million.
So that's a 76% decrease in
federal funding.
Um, I've gone before, uh, budget
hearings, and your colleagues
keep saying, Mr. Zubia, why do
you keep coming?
To our committee asking for more
money. Unfortunately, we keep
getting non-reoccurring funding.
So we're having to come.
to the budget and, and, and
request additional funding. Um,
I wanted to defer to our expert
when it comes to the need with
regards to the services to
domestic violence service.
across the state.
You, uh, Madam Chair, members of
the committee, so I represent
the 32 domestic violence
programs across the state who
are exclusive community-based
nonprofit providers or domestic
and intimate partner violence
services, um, historically, the
intimate partner violence
funding sits with and currently
sits with the Children, Youth
and Families department. We are
requesting that the domestic
violence funding be diversified,
um, as the other funds that
support sexual violence is
diversified between the uh crime
victims reparation Commission,
Department of Health.
And CYFD, um, our children's
advocacy centers and child abuse
funding is diversified.
We're, we're seeking to
diversify our funding because we
have not seen an increase in
over 5 years to do what that
means is if you look at um an
IPA request to look at the CYFD
funding that we have received,
um, we, any slight increase that
was received in fiscal year
2022, which was an 18.6%
increase was offset by the crime
victims Reparation Commissions,
um, Volca victim assistance
funding cuts. So we were
flatlined during that time, I
was uh.
For full transparency, I was the
bureau chief at the Crime
Victims Reparation Commission at
that time and that funding was
used to offset, so our domestic
violence providers continue to
do the work.
At what I would call a deficit
in funding. If you look at the
LFC budget and the governor's
budget, um, currently they're of
the $52 million that was listed
in the um fiscal impact report.
Domestic violence services
receives 11.171, and that's
directly for survivor services.
So we receive $11.1 million from
CYFD and yet we get to see an
increase. What we do know is
that um our domestic bonds
providers are seeing a 45%
increase in the number of
shelter nights and uh shelter
nights being provided a 52.6%
increase in alternative 3%
increase in crisis calls, so
almost 20,000 survive.
drivers of intimate partner
violence are being served
annually on our crisis hotline,
which we know is not enough.
Um, we also know that 74.4% of
our children who are
experiencing intimate partner
violence are receiving
additional services on behalf of
our providers who have been
doing so, um, without any
additional funding, so they're
continuing to do the work.
And our providers are losing
them because they're able to
make more money at McDonald's or
Target or other other places
like that, and I know that
that's often we're told that not
to bring up salaries, right,
but.
Our our mental health system, we
cannot compete with managed
healthcare, you can go and work
for Presbyterian and make
$80,000 a year as a clinician,
but our providers are only able
to offer maybe $45,000 a year
without benefits packages, and
so $10 million investment would
draft services that we provide.
We have 686 beds available in
our 32 shelters. Only 2
indigenous shelters within the
stadium in Mexico. We have 23
tribes, Pueblos, and nations.
and we only have 2 indigenous
shelters within the state of New
Mexico. A $10 million investment
would allow us to secure, um,
and stabilize our programs in an
extremely meaningful way. In
addition, we know statistically
that we spend about 16 $26
million a year in healthcare
costs just in New Mexico alone
related to intimate partner
violence. We can talk about
statistics about using um
community based services and the
work that we do decreases the
amount of individuals um needing
need.
those healthcare services, so an
investment in our domestic
violence programs is an
investment in reduction in
crime, reduction in healthcare,
increased productivity in the
workplace um domestic violence
impacts everything that we do
and we can talk about how, um,
this is an investment in our
future and as Speaker Martinez
said, we are, we have a surplus
like we never had, and it would
be an opportunity for New Mexico
to say we value our, our, our
citizens and to me this is a a
value base for us to say we
would.
the leading state in providing
more funding from the state than
federal funding. We would be
leading uh once again, um, to
say that we invest in intimate
partner violence and our
children in New Mexico.
Anything to add representatives
before I go to the public.
Is there anything else?
Yes, madam Chair and committee
members, um, I think this is so
important, um.
Because
Our homeless shelter even in Las
Cruces is um very much stressed
by having so many people and
families, and I also think that
this will help with um.
Um, adverse childhood
experiences if the family can go
someplace and start on their
journey to being um free from
domestic violence that this is
so important for even our kids
to be able to learn and thrive
and um I appreciate your.
Concerned to help do this. Thank
you.
Thank you. Um,
Let's go to the audience, anyone
in the audience wishing to speak
in opposition, opposition to the
bill.
I don't see anyone, anyone
online wishing to speak in
opposition, please raise your
hand.
Hey
Anyone in the audience wishing
to speak in support of the bill.
And if you could keep it to
about a minute or so I'd
appreciate it.
Hello, my name is Jane McCree. I
am CEO of Esperanza Shelter
right here in Santa Fe. We
provide life saving and life
changing services for all who
experience domestic violence.
This funding is critical.
Without this funding in our
state, New Mexicans and their
children will die.
Or will be impacted.
This is your opportunity to
invest funds in our families to
provide scientific
evidence-based services to avoid
imprisonment to in to avoid
hospitalization and medical
bills, uh, personal, uh, injury
and disability. This is a way
for New Mexico to come from the
bottom of the pile to the top
and really make a meaningful
investment in our agencies that
are struggling so hard to
provide services.
s that are desperately needed
throughout our state. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name's Alexandria
Taylor. I'm the executive
director of the New Mexico
Coalition of sexual assault
programs and we support the um
representatives proposal because
we are a partner coalition to
the domestic violence coalition.
We represent the state's sexual
assault programs and sexual
assault nurse examiner and
children's advocacy centers in
the state, um, 6 of our sexual
assault programs are also dual
programs and domestic.
Silent shelters, and we just
know that we can't, um, choose
by victimization who deserves
support and we need, we know
that sexual assault survivors
and domestic violence survivors
deserve to have the full
resources that are needed for
their healing, their safety.
Um, and they
So we appreciate your support.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
committee members. My name is
Veronica Gutierrez. I'm the
executive director of COP, the
Center of Protective
Environment.
Of a dual agency, um, of
domestic violence and sexual
assault, as you know, domestic
violence and sexual violence is
a public health crisis in New
Mexico. And as one of those
program providers who is doing
all of the footwork for the last
25 years.
I would like to please, um,
For you guys to consider passing
House Bill 216, please invest
those $10 million to be able to
sustain these critical services.
We provide shelter, we provide
counseling, we provide
children's program. We have an
offender treatment program,
without these fundings for the
survivors, um, they're gonna
face heightened, uh, risks, so I
These highly encourage that you
think about this and help us and
support us. Thank you.
Thank you. All right, online.
I see, uh, 3 hands up, wishing
to speak in support.
Teresa Garcia. Thank you so much
for allowing me to be in this
space again. My name is Teresa
Garcia, and I serve as the chair
for the domestic violence and
sexual assault commission for
the city of Albuquerque,
representative of 7 to 10
providers to include sexual
assault programs that need their
own funding. I'm here today to
advocate for the urgent and
critical need to fully fund 10
million for domestic violence
programs across the state of New
Mexico. This is not just about
numbers, it's about lives. For
too long, these programs, life
saving resources for survivors
and their children have been
severely underfunded.
Meanwhile, New Mexico ranks the
highest in domestic violence
homicides, yet our programs
continue to struggle to keep
their doors open to continue
facing and continue facing um
federal cuts such as VOCA, which
which they experienced last year
in 2024 amounting to 700
million, which is a 40% cut. We
hear legislators say yes, we
support survivors, but when it
comes time to move the funding
forward to include capital
outlay, um, and federal cuts
looming, we must ensure that
these programs do not rely on
unstable federal funds or risk
c lo s ing their doors entirely.
The 10 million appropriation is
essential to provide services
for survivors and prevents
survivors losing access to
emergency shelter, advocacy and
legal support, crisis hotlines
going unanswered, advocates and
services will not have a living
wage or may lose their jobs.
Families are left without food,
safety, or shelter options. This
is a matter of life and death.
New Mexico has the money. What
we need is a political will, and
I urge you and our legislators
to keep your word. Fund these
programs fully without delay.
Because failing to fund them is
failing to serve the people, um,
it's feeling the people that
they serve. Thank you so much
for your time.
Thank you and last hand up is.
Oh, sorry, there are two hands,
Amy Kendrick.
Hendrick
Hi, my name is Amy Kendrick and
I'm the executive director of
Albuquerque's only domestic
violence shelter.
I support House Bill 216, 32% of
the providers offering services
to those affected by domestic
violence cannot fill a central
positions due to funding
shortfalls. 75% report
significant financial gaps in
the past 3 years, threatening
service delivery. Access to
domestic violence services saves
lives. Research consistently
shows that access to shelter,
prices intervention, abuse
intervention, and other forms of
support significantly reduce the
likelihood of future
violence and help survivors live
violence-free lives. Thank you.
Thank you and the last person.
is named Admin.
So
Was that me?
OK, Nate Dean, oh, Nate, yeah,
hi Dane.
Uh, Madam Chair, I believe,
Madam Vice Chair, my name is Nan
and members of the committee. My
name is Nat Dean and the
interest of time, I stand in
support of House Bill 216,
community-based domestic
violence resources. I am a
traumatic brain injury survivor,
but not from intimate partner
violence or domestic violence,
but I have been a survivor of
domestic violence and intimate
partner violence. You've heard
from me in the in you hear from
me during the session and you've
heard from some very
skilled uh individuals. I think
that you have good information
and I think that we can make
good decisions together,
collaboratively. Thank you very
much, Madam Chair, Madam Vice
Chair and members of the
committee.
Thank you now.
Unless there are any additional
comments, we'll go to the
committee.
No additional would like to go
to the committee.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh,
Madam Chair representatives.
Um
So just, I mean, it's a short
bill paragraph.
Um
All these programs are done by
the reparation commission.
Is that correct?
Madam Chair Representative
McQueen.
That is correct. We, um,
Historically our organization
was created to.
compensation to victims of
crime, but in addition, we are
administering agency for both.
Federal and state appropriate.
OK, so, um,
We should revisit your name at
some point, but um,
Uh, what's your current budget?
Currently, um, well, it, it
fluctuates, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative McQueen, it
fluctuates. So every year,
historically we've received
significantly less federal
money. Currently it's about $12
million.
Um, some chair expert, uh,
So this, this is, this almost
doubles that.
Uh, and my concern is
It's
First of all, it's, it's not
easy to spend $10 million in a
year.
And secondly, you only have a
year to spend it.
And thirdly,
If you successfully spend it
this year.
And potentially all those
programs shut down next year
because it's not recurring.
So I personally don't have any
problem funding these services.
This doesn't seem to me like
it's a good vehicle to do that
because it doesn't provide
Doesn't allow you to ramp up. It
doesn't provide.
Continuity
It seems to me there must be a
better way.
Right.
uh, Madam Chair.
Representative McQueen, I'm
gonna defer to Ms. Garcia. Madam
Chair, uh, Representative
McQueen, so this would be an
additional appropriation for the
existing 32 domestic violence
shelter programs who are in
negative funding. So currently
the Children, Youth and Families
Department and ministers 11,
about 11. 1. $11.17 million to
these 32 programs.
75% of them have received
funding cuts over the last 3 to
5 years. We have done an
analysis and the $10 million
would be distributed by the
Crime Victims Preparation
Commission instead of or in
addition to um.
The Children, Youth and Families
department.
The 32 programs have the
capacity and need to spend that
funding, they are, we have done
an analysis on the amount of um
staff that need to be hired to
adequately meet the 47% increase
in shelter nights that are being
provided in addition to ensuring
that they can um hire more
crisis counselors, um, and, and
mental health therapists as
well, which they're not able to
hire because the funding is not
in place, and so this would be
to support an existing need that
we've done an analysis that
needs to.
happen. um, the crime victims
reparation commission has
administered, um, funding to all
of all of these organizations in
some way, shape or form already
receive funding from CVRC Crime
Victims Preparation Commission
in Voca victim assistance
funding, stop violence against
women funding, um, whether it
could be state sexual assault
funding and some of our dual
providers do as well, in
addition to some of the state
gap funding that was received,
so, um, what's unique about the
crime victims Reparation
Commission is.
They have the capacity through
their grants department to
administer these funds, um, and
get them out the door before
July 1st. This is a vehicle
bill.
For us to hopefully get into
house appropriations to get
recurring funding, that that is
the hope because we did not
receive any requests in, um, the
House appropriation for
additional funding through CYFD
this year.
Did that answer your question?
Madame Chair Representative
McQueen,
uh, it sounds like you can use
the money, you can spend the
money, that's good, and you're
working on.
Plan to get to be recurring.
Um
This is sort of
part of the disconnect between
policy committees and budget.
Thank you, ma'am. I think we got
our answer.
I, I think we got our answer,
thank you, um.
Representative Representative
Chavez had to leave to go
testify Representative Ree and
then representative of Beta. Um,
thank you, Madam Chair, um.
Miss Garcia, can you explain,
um, I know CBRC and I've I've
I've dealt with CBRC as a
prosecutor and how that works
with crime victims. So in my
understanding correctly that
there's one big CBRC and then I
guess I was never aware it's
divided into.
Different subdivisions.
I understand that right, Madam
Chair.
Madam Chair, uh, Representative
Reed, that is correct. The ravis
reparation commission has
basically two departments, the
victim compensation department,
and then their grants
department.
OK, so the one I'm used to, the
one where somebody's murdered
and it covers a funeral, um, or
counseling or whatever for
domestic violence victim in a
court case that's from.
Which department?
Madam Chair Representative Reed,
sorry, that is our compensation.
So our agency has two primary
missions. One is to provide
direct assistance.
Financial assistance to victims
of violent crime, but in
addition, we are the agency that
administers federal and state
appropriation to service
organizations across the state.
OK, so it's all kind of
together, but it just I I see
what you're saying, so I know
that fun was kind of running low
anyway, just for services, uh,
Madam Chair, representatives and
experts, um, just for, for
victims in general to cover
those type of costs for crime
victims. Um, so I know the type
of situation they're in, um, I
wasn't aware that you were
having these issues with the
domestic violence program, so I
assume, um, Madam chair, um,
Miss Garcia said, yeah, there's
32 programs across the state,
and.
Chair Representative Reed, yes,
there are 32, um, domestic
primary domestic violence, uh,
programs across the state,
including our indigenous
providers as well, um, and some
of them as uh my colleague, uh
Alexandria Taylor mentioned our
dual or try providers who
provide services to sexual
violence or child abuse as well.
OK, wonderful. And so that's
rural areas also, Madam Chair
Representative Reeve, yes,
absolutely, and.
You know, the ultimate goal
would be for us to stabilize our
32 existing programs and then
continue to expand because Madam
Chair Representative, there are
areas of the state that
survivors have to travel upwards
of 90 miles or further to
access.
As I mentioned earlier,
We only have 2 of our indigenous
um areas that have a shelter,
both of them are only 5 beds,
and so, um, there is a
significant need that our sister
coalition, the coalition to Stop
Violence Against Native Women,
um, we are addressing um.
Just massive shortfalls in
accessibility, and so this is,
this is to stabilize, this is
crisis moment for our providers.
Thank you and Madam Chair, Ms.
Garcia, is one of those 32
programs, um, the Hartley House
in Clovis, Madam Chair,
Representative Reeve, yes, I was
actually on the phone with uh
the executive director today
talking about the extensive
needs um in the Clovis Portalis
area as well.
Yeah, and, and thank you for
that, Madam Chair, um, and
expert, I worked with the
Hartley House. I mean, every
fundraiser we did for our office
went to the Hartley House
because they just don't have.
Hardly any beds or you know, we
had, we did a play area for him,
so I see the need in our area. I
think that's maybe the only one
in that whole area, um, and it
just doesn't serve us very many
people at all, so, um, thank you
for helping my local area, and I
just wanted to see if this
program or this money would
assist my representative Abeta.
Thank you, Madam Char. Thank
you, Representative and
representative and the witnesses
for being here. I appreciate the
this presentation, especially
because I'm coming off of a
couple of years of practicing in
the domestic violence courts for
individuals who I where I had to
travel 90+ miles to get to the
courthouse to assist them. Um,
one of the things that I heard
you speak to earlier was about
the reduction of reoffense rates
through your offender
intervention program.
Can you tell me a little bit
more about that and how you
would use this.
This funding for that. Thank
you.
Uh, Madam Chair, uh,
representative Abeda, so the
domestic violence coalition and
its 32 member programs works
with our 17 abuse intervention
programs and our member programs
and the domestic violence
movement here in New Mexico,
we're actually a national leader
in um the abuse intervention
work that happens, we actually,
um, facilitate national work
groups and national calls, and
our providers view abuse
intervention services as a
survivor service. Many of our
survivors are asking for the
violence in their homes.
Just stop, not necessarily to
leave abusive relationships and
to increase safety planning
within their homes and so what
we know, um, between the various
studies that occur nationally is
when you collectively have abuse
intervention services,
comprehensive survivor services
as well as a coordinated the
judicial system is adequately
resourced and funded, the law
enforcement is adequately
resourced and funded when our
local rape crisis centers and
our sexual assault nurse
examiners.
when our communities are
meaningfully and adequately
funded and supported, and
survivors have access to these
resources, we can see reductions
in violence within homes and
repeat uh extreme violence and
repeat violence upwards of
depending upon the studies 40 to
60%, um, for individuals who
intervention programs, um, or or
survivors make choices to leave
those relationships during those
times as well. So we see
improved um survivors.
safety, improved survivor
choice, and offender account uh
Madam Chair Representative
Abita, did I answer the totality
of your question?
Madam Chair, Representative, uh.
partially. What I'm getting to
is are there services for the
offenders. And what does that
look like? And I'm asking
because a lot of these
communities, rural communities
and families especially, they do
not have the resources or
ability to relocate overnight or
to even come to urban areas
because of the high cost of
living and just the, the fees
associated with uprooting your
entire family. So what I'm
looking for is.
What type of services do you
provide to offenders, and I know
in in a lot of places, uh family
unification is at the core of of
a lot of policy, but you're,
you've mentioned a little bit
about the education, but it
sounds like it's only for the
victims. Um, Madam Chair,
Representative Abeda, we have 17
abuse intervention programs in
the state of New Mexico, who are
currently funded through the
domestic violence offender
treatment fund, um, as you all
are aware, Madam Chair
Representative.
He finds fines and fees removed
that, so there is no longer any
additional funding going into
the offender treatment fund last
week, that fund goes into the
um.
Uh, bank account for lack of a
better term, representative of
beta.
Of the Children, Youth and
Families Department who
administers that fund to support
those um abuse intervention
programs statewide, uh, those
abuse intervention programs
provide 52 week mandatory um or
or mandatory and or um self
enrolled abuse intervention
services to those who cause harm
in our communities. Many of them
in New Mexico is incredibly um
unique in that many of them sit
in our domestic violence service
providers as well.
you have Survivor and and those
who cause harm receiving
services, um.
Different services, but services
at the same time, I believe, uh,
Madam Chair Representative, um,
it's 4 or 6 who are independent,
um, and then the remaining are
part of our dual programs.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. And my
final question is, are, uh,
tribal courts aware of the
services and do they uh do they
have the option of referring
your services as like a
mandatory counseling, and I, and
I'm coming from a place of
looking at domestic violence,
petitions where it says there's
an option on there for
counseling for both parties have
tribal courts utilized your
services. Thank you. Uh, Madam
Chair Representative Abeta,
actually, um, as part of our
abuse intervention.
services, um, we work frequently
with and have weekly monthly
calls with all of the 17
providers, several of which are
very specific to our tribal
communities. Um, I can't tell
you off the top of my head how
many of them, but for example, 8
northern, uh 8 northern Indian
pueblos who serves the 8
Northern, they frequently sit
and participate in our abuse
intervention task forces to talk
about best practices and
participate um in the standards
that we um are revising and
working on right now, both.
Both for abuse and survivor
services, and so, um, our tribal
communities are aware of that,
we work very, both of our sister
coalitions, our sexual assault
coalition, um, with all of our
um providers uh on our tribal
communities as well to and and
they do much of that work, our
sister coalition with our
indigenous communities, we're
actually partnering with them on
our coordinated response
targeting McKinley County at
this point to replicate um
coordinated community versus Tao
and Donana.
Our goal was and then um start
replicating that right now we
have 19 communities who want to
replicate that coordinated
response that provides those
holistic services, um, not only
in, um, but in all of our
communities, including our
indigenous communities. Thank
you. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative.
Um, anyone else?
represent a fall.
Madam Chair and
um
The 10 million you're asking
for, it will stay within your
program.
And it is, it is, uh.
Handled by whom?
Specifically, so.
It's not
Going outside of the 30.
2 or 4:32.
It's not going off and being
spun off to other programs. I'm
from the Farmington area and
unfortunately, I know our
Our center is
I booked all the time.
So
I'm just concerned. I just would
like to know that the money will
definitely stay within those
those parameters of the program
and then who is actually
managing it, Madam Chair, thank
you.
Madam Chair Representative Hall.
Um
Once it's earmarked specifically
for domestic violence services,
we would our RFP process would
be just for services or or uh
service providers across the
state that provide those direct
services. So I hope that
answered your question. I
I want to kind of go back to
Representative McQueen's.
and I
Can, can I do that? I just, I,
I, I want to make sure that he's
understanding how our funding
works with regards to the
federal government. When the
federal government appropriate.
money to our organization. They
It's, it's 3 years.
Oh well
Thank you.
Madam Cherry Ross, thank you.
To entertain.
OK, we have a motion.
Oh
Sure, I, I mean, I think we have
enough people to vote.
you
A second.
OK. We have a motion for a due
pass made by Representative
Reeb, seconded by Representative
Martinez.
Will you call the roll?
Representative Avita? Yes.
Representative Chavez.
Representative Hull.
Yes
Representative Hochman v. Hill,
yes.
Representative Martinez.
Yes.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen. Yes.
Representative Ree.
Yes.
Leader Sainsky, yes.
Madam Vice Chair.
Madam Chair, yes.
have a do pass.
You have a due pass. Good luck
and appropriations. Thank you,
madam.
I
I don't see any further business
on the agenda.
Obviously we're meeting on
Friday at the usual time and
we're eating.
On Saturday at 10 o'clock.
Um
We're gonna be focusing on some
crime bills going forward on
planning on having a discussion
of the competency bureau on
Friday, so I hope all of you can
make it cause I think that's an
important one that has
bipartisan support, so that's
exciting. So thank you very
much. We are adjourned.
00, OK, yeah, but competency
will be OK.
