this House Judiciary Committee
meeting is called to order,
would you call them all? Yes,
thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative of Beta.
Representative Chavis.
Representative Hall here.
Representative Hochman V. Hill.
Representative Martinez.
He.
speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen.
Representative Ree.
Leader Sapansky.
Here
Madam Vice Chair.
Madam Chair, Madam Chair, you
have a corn.
The first item on our agenda is
House Bill 5 Office of Child
Advocate.
And representative beta is here
to chairwoman. Thank you
committee members. I'm also
accompanied today Miss Samant.
Um, it, and yes, you are such a
wonderful soft spoken person,
but we really do need to hear
you for this. My apologies,
Madam Chair and committee.
I'm joined today by my expert
witness, Ms. Samont, and we, how
would you like us to handle
that, Madam Chair?
Um, my suggestion is first, give
us a brief overview of the bill,
if you were planning on doing
that and I see they're
relatively small changes, so
then you can share that with us
and we'll go to the committee
and we'll talk about the
amendments and then we'll talk
some more about the bill, OK,
beautiful. Thank you, madam.
Sure.
Um, again, that good morning
committee. I'm so honored to
carry this bill on behalf of the
New Mexican children who are in
CYFD custody who need a voice.
New Mexico needs an independent
impartial means to gather,
investigate and proactively
address the well-being of
children in state custody. And
that's exactly what this bill
does. It establishes an
impartial office titled The
Office of the Child Advocate,
where children who are in
custody, their families have an
impartial space to call to make
concerns and actually see some
level of investigation and
solutions implemented.
I like to also give a little bit
of time to my expert witness and
respect the time of the
committee. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Enforcement agencies.
Um, can you just stop for one
second? It looks like our
Our our um closed caption wasn't
working when you were speaking.
We think it might have something
to do with your mic. Is that?
Right? Because obviously it's
picking up my now it's now it's
fine. It's my fault.
My apologies.
Um, do you want me to back up?
Would that be helpful.
OK, my apologies, everyone, um,
the CYFD Office of Constituent
Affairs only looks into
allegations of harassment,
discrimination, or retaliation
by a CYFD employee or into
grievances by parents or
resource parents.
We see the office of the Child
Advocate in HB 5 as a solution.
The bill would create an
independent office of the Child
Advocate to improve
accountability when the
government takes legal or
physical custody of children and
will work to promote the safety
of young people who are in our
the structure of the office and
process for selecting the head
of the office set forth in HB 5
are specifically designed to
ensure that it is not beholden
to any other individual agency
or department and free to carry
out its mandate without
influence or favor. First,
While the agency would be part
of the Department of Justice for
administrative purposes. The
bill makes clear that the office
would have autonomy over any
decisions it would make.
Second, candidates for the head
of the office would be selected
by a nine-person state child
advocate selection Committee,
whose members would be selected
by individuals in the state
legislature, the governor, the
attorney general, and, um,
recommendations from individuals
with lived experience.
The committee would and the new
I should add, and the New Mexico
Supreme Court Chief Justice. The
committee would forward its
recommendations for qualified
individuals to the governor and
attorney general.
Third, HB 5 calls for
specialized training to ensure
staff are equipped to carry out
the office's mission and
ensuring staff have no conflicts
of interest with CYFD or any
entity that provides services
pursuant to CYFD funding.
Second, I'd also like to add the
uh HB 5 has provisions to
empower the agency to promote
accountability. Broadly
speaking, the office is
responsible for reviewing CYFD's
provision of services and
working with stakeholders to
improve such services, services,
monitoring the development and
implementation of federal,
state, and local laws,
regulations and policies
concerning child and family
welfare, making recommendations
to the department if
appropriate.
Obtaining testimony in cases of
child fatalities while the child
was in state custody.
Hearing complaints about CYFD or
any of the service providers to
whom the agency refers families
in need, deciding whether to
investigate complaints itself or
to refer complaints to the
Department of Justice for
investigation.
Keeping complainants informed of
the status of a complaint,
namely, and which basically
translates to whether the
complaint is being investigated
by the OCA or has been referred
to the DOJ whether the
investigation has been
completed.
In cases where the OCA retains
the complaint.
Um, it'll actually, uh, connect
with the child who is involved
in the, in the complaint, um,
speak to them, uh, and if this
would be any child in the
custody of the state receiving
services under the supervision
or of or under investigation by
CYO. The OCA would also be
responsible for investigating
and attempting to resolve
complaints by or on behalf of
children in state custody,
receiving services, pursuing um
to CYFD supervision or children
whose parents
or guardians are under
investigation.
The OCA will be responsible for
determining whether CYFT
violated a child's
constitutional rights or acted
with reckless disregard to a
child's health and safety or
engaged in a pattern of conduct,
uh, or repeated incidents of
violating laws related to child
and family law.
welfare.
Finally, the OCA would be
responsible for referring cases
where it does find such
violations to have occurred to
the office of the uh to the
Department of Justice.
HB 5 is also designed to enhance
transparency with the
department, uh.
OCA would provide reports on
requests, but also annually to
the legislative finance
committee about its work.
His findings with respect to
overall CYFD provision of
services. The treatment of and
conditions surrounding children
placed in state care. The number
and demographics of children
removed.
By CYFD returned to their
families, placed in juvenile
justice facilities or of
children who run away while in
in a CYFD placement were later
found or whether they remain
missing.
And finally, the reports would
include findings on the
implementation of the Indian
Child Welfare Act and the
state's Indian family uh
Protection Act.
The HB5 is also designed to
create an office to mitigate
risk of harm to children, first
by making sure our services are
adequate and responsive to a
child's and family's needs.
Second, by moving away from a
system where the primary method
for investigation and
accountability of the department
is too expensive and often
confidential settlement
agreements. And finally, by
requiring the department to
provide copies of all reports to
relate, related to actual
physical.
injury to a child in custody for
a child at significant risk of
custody, as well as recording,
requiring that within 72 hours,
the department provide notice of
the fatality or near fatality of
a child in custody or under
supervision, um,
As well as notifying with the
So the OCA within 72 hours if a
child within its custody has
been
Represented anything further
before I go to.
Um
audience. Do you want to talk a
little bit about first the
amendment.
Sure, thank you, Madam Chair.
Would someone move the
discussion. OK, very good. And
the number I have is 41.3.
Yes, ma'am, sure, that's
correct. Great.
So the amendment and I'd first
like to thank minority Whitmar
brought this concern to my
attention and what the first one
does is on page 3.
Excuse me, 96 we're striking the
commas.
And what this does is it ensures
that this takes effect and it
also cleans up the language on
number 2, we, what we've cleaned
up here is that the committee
must meet on July 1st, it will
be.
Thank you, ma'am.
Thank you. So let's go to the
audience, those wishing to speak
in opposition.
These line up behind the
gentleman with the microphone
and um please try to limit your
comments to about a minute.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. I'm
Teresa Casados, the cabinet
secretary at CYFD.
She welcomes accountability,
oversight, and partnership in
improving our efforts to better
serve New Mexico's most
vulnerable children and youth.
However, as drafted HP 5 will
not contribute to this goal.
They mentioned immunity,
however, we still believe that
linking the Office of Child
Advocate Administratively to the
Attorney General's office will
lead to jurisdictional disputes
and potential conflict of
interest. The Attorney General's
office represents the state in
litigation, including cases
involving CYFD.
Additionally, any complaint
related to personnel misconduct
must follow state personnel
guidelines for investigation and
due process. Since personnel
investigations are confidential.
The bill's requirement to notify
the complainants of the
investigation's outcome would
violate a CYFD employee's right
to privacy and personnel
matters.
Kevinness settlement requires
CYFD to maintain a grievance
process and track specific data
metrics, both of which are
already in place.
Additionally, in August 2023,
CYFD established the Office of
Performance and Accountability
to enhance quality assurance,
data collection, and continuous
improvements through data-driven
decision making. The state does
not need HB 5 to do this. Thank
you secretary.
Any anyone else wishing to speak
in opposition who is in the
room.
I don't see anyone that was
wishing to speak in opposition
online, please raise your hand.
Opposition online.
OK, I don't see any hands
raised, um, those in the room
wishing to speak in support,
please line up and we're gonna
limit it to about 5 people, 1
minute each.
OK.
Good morning. My name is Sarah
Cracker. I'm a youth attorney
and advocate for children in
CYFD custody, as well as a
guardian ad litem.
I stand in strong support of
this bill. Um, I want to know
that if the office is only
administratively attached to the
Attorney General's office. That
does not create the conflict
that was just presented. I also
want to note that I hear from
families.
All the time. I heard from two
respondent parents last week
alone from a grandmother
yesterday.
who are devastated by what they
feel is an abuses of power by
the agency over the intrusion
into their families' lives. We
need this office so deeply, so
it's so important for families
to have a voice to be heard and
for their concerns to be
addressed in a way that is
outside the agency currently,
they only recourse is to go to
someone internal to the agency
to complain about the agency
itself.
Thank you so much. I stand in
strong support.
Hi, my name is Stella Maor
Duran. I'm a resource parent.
They're trying not to be
emotional because um I want you
guys to hear something that my
girls, which is all of ours
because we took them.
said on the thirty-eighth day
that I had her.
It will be this little girl has
at least 4 different
personalities.
That
On this, when I received this, I
gave this to RPPW.
We
I have fought for a year and 6
months to get her help.
And
On the 16th of January.
I made a report that the girls
had told me about a bio
grandmother was doing to them.
That they want her to go with.
I made the report on the 16th.
On the 15th
The 16th, I took the girls to
school. I let the little one
know.
That no one would hurt her ever
again.
With CYFD did.
Theresa, knowing this,
Everyone, Vanessa, everyone
there.
They took the kids from the
school.
They didn't tell me, they didn't
take their clothes, they didn't
take their favorite blanket,
their favorite book to read,
nothing, just took the girls
from school and gave them to the
person I made the report on.
And this is why this is so
important. I've served under
youth commission of Civil Rights
in 1989.
I, I can't do this. I, I can't
keep on watching this. I have
dedicated my life now to change
this system, and we need to do
this because these kids in the
system are all of ours. Thank
you, ma'am. All of ours. Thank
you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
secretary. Madam, my name is
Marilyn Beck. I'm the founder
and executive director of Mexico
Child First. I'm a former foster
parent.
The concept of the office of the
Children's Advocate. Is it a
citizen aggrieved by an
official's action or inaction
should be able to state his
grievance to an influential
functionary empowered to
investigate and express
conclusions.
The Office of the child advocate
would act as an independent,
impartial and fair, credible and
confidential public official
with authority and
responsibility to receive,
investigate, or informally
address complaints about
government actions or when
appropriate, make findings and
recommendations and published
reports.
Ombuds or the Office of the
Child Advocate is a public
official whose role it is is to
be problem solvers and
watchdogs, not guard dogs, not
attack dogs.
states have recognized 46 states
have recognized that an ombuds
or an office of the child
advocate can help protect the
rights of vulnerable
populations. This is especially
true for those involved with the
child protection system. The
child protection system
compromises the complex
arrangements of agency systems
and stakeholders. Thank you.
Um
Go online, wishing to speak and
support, raise your hand and
Yeah, I don't see any hands
raised, um.
Back to the sponsor, anything
you wish to add before I go to
the committee.
Yes, madam Chair, we'd both like
to finish with something.
To clarify a few points or or
elevate a few points in the
bill. Um, first of all, uh, the
independence of this, uh,
of the OCA is absolutely
essential, while
administratively housed in the
Department of Justice, um, we
don't see any conflicts
occurring to the extent that the
Attorney General is tasked with
representing state agencies, we
have an existing well
functioning system for
addressing those scenarios,
specifically, um, we, we appoint
individuals, counsel outside the
office to serve as special
commissions, as Assistant
Attorney General.
should there be a need. Um, and
that's the process that has
worked so far in the past and
would apply here as well.
Um, with respect to, um,
confidentiality concerns, uh, as
a general matter, the only,
there's no change to existing,
um, confidentiality statutes,
other than being able to provide
the Attorney General's office
with records if in fact the uh
agency will be um pursuing a
complaint or a prosecution, um,
with respect to employee, uh,
confidentiality, any grievances
against employees is a totally
separate process. The OCA.
is responsible only for
grievances or complaints about
the nature of services, the
conditions in which a child is
being kept, um, and the, and so
on and so forth. So, um, that's
a uh unrelated process, um, and
I'll stop there.
Madam Chair.
I first want to thank the spons,
my co-sponsors on this bill.
It's so important, um, as you
know, I've been a caretaker for
2 children that were removed by
social services, and I've had
them for almost 4 years, and the
advocacy that my husband and I
have fought for all those 4
years has led up to this bill.
And I know it's needed. My
husband and I are both law
trained and even we have had our
own struggle advocating for
these children, and I can't
begin to imagine the struggle
across the state.
And this office is giving our
kids who are in custody and
their families a stronger voice
and to actually bring solutions
that are going to get
implemented. And with that,
Madam Chair and committee, I ask
for your support on this. Thank
you.
Thank you. Um
Maybe we could dispose of the
amendment first and then we can
talk about the entire bill.
of um
OK. You have a motion in a
second, any opposition to
adopting the amendment.
OK, um, that you have an amended
bill.
Um, all right, we wish we had a
start here. Representative Reeb.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair,
Representative, I'll be very
quick, um, it's more of a
statement.
Thank you for bringing this
bill, um, and your co-sponsors
for bringing this bill. I think
this is so well needed. I've
been waiting for us to finally,
you know, get this done and so
we need to be protecting our
most vulnerable children, um,
things just are not going well,
and I, I love this idea and I
really just wanted to express my
gratitude for finally standing
up for kids. Thank you. Thank
you, ma'am sure. Thank you, uh,
Representative Hall.
Madam Chair, Representative
expert, first of all, I want to
thank Madam Chair.
Roasting this in Espanola
earlier this year, we heard from
Miss Crea some.
Some very compelling testimony
and this has been the
Something that uh
I think it's bothered a lot of
people. It's affected all of our
families and extended form or
another.
Just the world we live in, so
thank you for doing this.
I do have a couple of quick
questions.
Um
Funding
It is the general fund is that.
Is it totally separate of the
1.1 or whatever it is, a billion
dollars, we have to CYFD and
then uh the separate.
One that was created to oversee.
TYFD because of the collective.
I remember my terminology.
Was not working this where's the
funding? I'm just, I'm more
curious. I'm supporting this
bill, but I am curious about the
funding part, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, Representatives,
thank you for that question. Um,
to the extent that the OCA would
be housed in the Department of
Justice, um, at costs would be
covered by the Department of
Justice budget.
And last, last question, when,
and you've addressed this, but I
just want to go over it again
when you talk about autonomy for
an arms budsman.
Type
Position
Um
That's, that is obviously
The
I read the bill. Is it clear
enough in the bill that that's
the case, Madam Chair, just so.
There's not an issue that was
brought up earlier. That's my
only concern, manager.
Madam Chair, uh,
representatives, um, yes, uh,
it's, it's clear that the OCA is
the entity that has the
authority to make decisions
about what to do when it
There's no mention
or the Attorney general in that
particular provision. And it's
very clear that the DOJ's
involvement only happens if the
OCA decides to refer a
complaint.
Last question, Madam Chair.
Well
The complaints can they come
from?
Do they have to come from the
people that directly involved or
can they come from extended
family or people who witnessed
this, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, representatives,
thank you for that. um, no,
there's no limitation on who can
submit a complaint. So it could
be a child, it could be a
resource parent, it could be a
family member, it could be um an
individual who's observed the
treatment.
Thank you, that's all I have,
man.
you, um, Representative Sapansy.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative for.
Bringing this bill forward, um,
an expert, your explanation was
fantastic, um, I just, I, I just
had wanted to make a couple
points, um.
You know, the, the need for this
bill, um,
Transcends administrations. Um,
this, we first started talking
about this legislation.
Uh
After the death of Omari Varela,
frankly.
Uh, which was 11 years ago.
Um
Um, but
Our first idea was let's set up
an independent legislative
oversight committee with
subpoena power.
Which didn't, which didn't
really fly at the time, um, and
it evolved, uh, after a few
other high profile deaths, um.
And um, I obviously have not had
enough coffee.
I apologize.
But, um, but I, uh,
It evolved uh through the
leadership of Representative
Candy Sweetzer.
Um, to become
Uh, the, the office of the child
advocate and so I'm curious,
Madam Chair, if you can tell me
how many other states have this.
And, you know, how many, how
many states are left that do not
have some kind of independent
child advocate or independent on
bud.
Madam Chair, um, Representative,
thank you for that, um,
specifically with respect to
independent, um, uh,
Post Office of Children
Advocates, so one that is not
housed within the child welfare
agency. Um, so first of all,
there are 47 states that have,
um uh offices like this. As of
December 2024, um, uh, more than
half of those have specifically
chosen to house it outside.
Thank you for that and um, you
know, we had a group of very
dedicated reps who for many
years were.
Working on multiple iterations
of this legislation, um, and we
got to speak to a number of the
individuals that serve in these
roles around the country.
Um, and one of the things that
they told us was the
independence was critical.
Um, and in fact, some of the
offices had started as uh
offices that were attached to
the CYFD CYFD equivalent agency
in other states.
Um, and eventually, because of
the trust and the value that
they earned over time, they were
moved out into and became an
independent office. Um, I think
we are so far behind that we
need to start with the
independent office, um, in terms
of this kind of oversight. Um,
so I'm really pleased that you
have found this, um.
That you have developed the bill
in this way, there's certainly
been many iterations of this
legislation over the years, and
I think, um, to see it coming so
far.
is a huge win, uh, a testament
to the leadership of everyone
who's worked on it this year,
um, and I really hope this year
is the year we get it over the
finish line. Thank you.
Have represented Martinez and
then the speaker.
Madam Chair, um.
and I appreciate you, uh,
Sitting down with me
Discussing that change.
Um
I just have, I have a, I think
it's a great idea.
Anything that we can do to
Better
What word did I
I, I just have some structural
question.
Is it gonna be, Madam Chair
Representative.
One
Advocate
One attorney or is it going to
be a staff?
How is that gonna be set up?
Chair, representatives, um,
thank you for that clarification
question. Um, it's going to be
one person at the head who will
be the child advocate, but, um,
they have the authority to hire
staff and specifically what the
bill calls for is to ensure that
the staff are adequately trained
and have experience in um
applicable laws Thank you Madam
Chair. Thank you,
Representative, um.
On page 4.
I'm just wondering if it's gonna
be housed.
With the DOJ.
Why
Why the Attorney General would
have
Member on the nominating.
We're talking about trying to
keep them.
Separate from everything.
It just seems to me that
depending on who the Attorney
general is at that time.
They want to get their own
person in there.
It just seems um
I wouldn't call it a conflict of
interest.
Just seems
You know, putting your thumb on
the scale.
Um
Have you thought about removing
That appointment and giving it
to somebody else.
Madam Chair Representative.
Madam Chair Representatives, um,
so I think, uh, I, I unders I
appreciate your concern, um, the
reality is that this is one
member out of 9, you know,
they're not gonna have, uh,
there's no such weighted voting
power or anything like that. I
think the, the concept at least
was to give an equal voice to
different uh branches of state
government and agency as well as
impacted communities. Um, so
that's, that's the thinking
behind that.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative
Assistant Attorney General.
That just
struck me as I was rereading the
the bill.
But
I just needed to bring that up
for my.
For my own welfare.
Um
Madam Chair Representative, do
OK
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
uh, so there are no additional
costs at this time, um, because
the cost would be taken out of
the existing DOJ budget, so.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Represented by I understand
that, but
What's the budget gonna be?
This is gonna be a separate.
Administratively attached.
Uh, office.
Do you have an idea of what the
budget is gonna be for that
office.
Um, Madam Chair,
representatives, so I, I can
tell you that the costs would be
for those of, uh, the hiring the
child advocate and the staff
that they need to carry out
their um.
Carry out their mission. Um, we,
LFC and pride at least analysis
of prior years estimated the
cost um of a similar entity to
be 650,000 annually, which would
involve and which would allow
the office to hire roughly 5
full-time employees, as well as,
um, uh, include, uh, other
support systems.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So, so.
Is that 5 FTEs including the
advocate.
Or in addition to the.
That would be sorry, Madam Chair
Representative, that would be
including. And, and also, to be
fair, that is, um, a projection
based on prior conceptions of
the office as a new office, we
would obviously need to sit down
and, and, um, hear from the, the
child, the newly appointed child
advocate, what they're expected
budget would be based on their
conception of how best to carry
out the office's mandate.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative.
The advocate is it required that
they be an attorney.
Madam Chair Representatives, uh,
we do ask for um.
Legal experience and background,
um, as well as familiarity with,
um, lived experience, but
Having a a law degree, I believe
is not required, but let me, let
me confirm that one moment.
Yeah, no.
Uh, JD is not required.
Madam Cha. Thank you
representative again.
I want to thank you for working
with me on that change.
That you brought this bill for.
Thank you man.
Speaker.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
Representative Ibiza and expert,
thank you for your work on this
and to echo the the leader's
points earlier. This is a long
time coming, um.
I think I was in my first year
as a member
when the Omarirela
tragedy happened.
Um
And in fact, some Facebook posts
cause everything lives forever,
I guess, uh, some Facebook post
I posted at the time.
Um, really casting blame on the
system.
And we had a a republic there
right and so now we've got a
democratic governor. I think
that.
These are issues that
Um
Go above and beyond partisanship
and partisan politics.
Um, I think both parties have
been responsible.
Um
You know, going back many
governors.
Back
Um, or what's been happening and
I think part of the issue, Madam
Chair, is.
These issues have only gotten
more complex.
Us
And neglect
Um
Cases have grown more complex.
This is not.
I don't think this is the CYFD
that.
Uh, you know, Mrs. King had
envisioned, um, given the issues
that we're dealing with.
40 plus years ago, um, yeah,
here we are.
Oh man, I'm sure I've got, I've
got a couple of questions here
that I wanted to ask, um,
Representative Madam Chair, can
you explain why it's so
important for somebody.
On the nominating committee.
To
Have um expertise in the Indian
child welfare Act.
Why is that so important in
this, in this legislation.
Chair representatives, thank you
for that question, um, so both
the Indian Child Welfare Act as
well as the state analog, um, if
a place requirements on CYFD on
a range of issues. So part of
the mandate, um, of the Office
of the Child Advocate to the
extent that it's required to,
it, it's, it would be obligated
to look into and ensure that um
CYFD is complying with laws and
regulations would be to ensure.
compliance. So, for instance,
among um among other provisions
of ICWA, um, and I, uh, and IFA
is to do an active inquiry,
courts are required to do an
active inquiry on the record,
um, affirmatively asking and
inquiring whether a child um is
in fact native. And they would
actually have to make that fine.
That's one type of
That certainly
Individuals had complaints that
this wasn't happening, the
office would be empowered to, to
look into that. And I, you know,
I do want to emphasize the
office is also empowered to
reach resolutions of any issues
that it finds without referring
it to the Department of Justice,
right? So it can then engage
whether with the courts or with
CYFD to ensure that they're
living up to their obligations.
The other piece of ICWA is that
agencies are required to provide
active efforts to provide
remedial and other services, uh,
that would be addressing the
family's concerns before um
coming to the point of
termination procedures. And so
if a family is receiving
services, if a child is
receiving services, but they
aren't actually needing that
standard. This is the place
where those family members or
that child or that child's
guardian ad litem could go and
ask for almost immediate
intervention
representative, where do folks
now, if in fact they feel like
Um
ICA wasn't followed.
Um, Madam Chair Representatives,
I, I think at this point,
individuals rely heavily on
their counsel and raising the
issues with the court. um, they
can, of course, file complaints
with uh the agency or the
entities within CYFD as well.
So in a way, uh, this is going
to create some efficiency,
particularly for people who may
not be, uh,
You know, well versed in
The legal intricacies of raising
a complaint, right? This is
almost like a consumer
protection hotline where you're
gonna call and say hey.
I don't think I was followed.
Madam Chair representatives, I,
I think that's exactly right. It
allows um more prompt and and
just create an efficiency, but
certainly, um, rather than at
the end of many months or at the
end of the provision of
services, this will allow for
intervention and correction, so
that the child and family's
needs are being met during the
pendency of an investigation or,
or uh during the pendency of
custody of the child.
And Madam Chair, representative
and expert, I think one of the
reasons for me, this is so
important having the bill is
because.
Um
New Mexico is home to.
Many
tribes
Um, sovereign nations and, um,
you know, I don't know
specifically the percentage of
Native American children in the
system, but I would assume it's
probably pretty high. And so,
uh,
Not only
Ensuring that our state agency
is following federal law.
That's obviously super
important.
But perhaps even more important
is ensuring that these kids
Stay within their community
because that's really the
purpose of the.
Um, Indian Child Welfare Act of
1978.
Um, so that I think that's a,
that's a.
It's a very good idea.
To have that embedded as part of
this nominating committee. Uh, I
had a question on staffing, but
I think Martinez asked it, um, I
guess I'll just double down on
it a little bit. Is that enough
staff to cover statewide?
Madam Chair Representatives, um,
again, just to clarify the, the
figure that I cited was one that
LFC had provided in the past.
Um, but again, whether that
would be enough or not would be
something that the child
advocate, whoever is um selected
for that position would
determine as they determine, you
know, what kind of structure and
programming and um grievance and
Madam Chair, we speaker
Martinez, thank you so much for
Asking that important that our
advocates know that area of law
and why it impacts the citizens
of New Mexico who have that
unique status and fall under
that statute. I want to share
with you that at the end of
2004, 2024, there were 209 um
American Indian native American
children in state custody.
And that accounts for about 10%.
Thank you for sharing that.
That's
Sobering
Um
Manche be that an expert, um,
See what MD plays um a pretty
large role in our juvenile
justice system, is that, is that
right?
Fair representatives. Yes, a lot
of children, um, who do end up
in uh CYFD custody or provision
services. There is often, um,
overlap and, and involvement
with the juvenile justice
system.
Madam, um.
When the child is um charged
with a crime.
And they end up in the, I guess
the home or juvenile detention
center.
Uh, in my hometown, I, I
understand it's maybe operated
by the county, but CYFD have a
role within
The
Uh, the detention center in
terms of providing.
And you may not know the answer.
I'm, I'm, it's fine if you
don't. We can figure it out.
Madam Chair representatives, I,
I, I, I, I apologize for not
having the answer's yeah, no, I
get it,
uh, my understanding is that
there is a role.
for the department.
Um, and the question I'm getting
at is having this office of
child advocate also provides a
resource for children that are
in the juvenile justice system
for their families.
To ensure that the services that
are owed to them are in fact
being provided. Um, and I think
that that's
Uh, you know, as, as we talk
about juvenile justice reform
this session and then, you know,
I'm sure the next few sessions,
this is a critical component,
um, in, in my humble opinion, I
don't think we can fix.
Um
Juvenile justice issues.
Without really addressing.
A lot of the underlying factors
including the role of the state
with regard to children that are
in its custody.
Um, and you know that this, this
is as as leader Supansy
commented earlier.
This is something that has been
Weighing heavily and a lot of us
for many years.
Because ultimately we are.
Our children's keepers and and
it's up to us, right? and.
Uh, we, as a legislature.
have done tremendous work.
Democrats and Republicans have
come together to do pretty
incredible stuff, um, including
having a one of a kind.
Early childhood development
system that is fully rated mixed
delivery through private and
public entities, um, you know,
prioritizing children's
languages and cultures and
cultural uh relevant and
appropriate.
Instruction and development
opportunities.
Uh, but there's this sliver of
children.
We're not reaching and these are
the sliver of children that
maybe have parents that are
struggling with drug addiction.
Uh, maybe have families who
Uh
You know, are trapped in a
cycle.
Of addiction and poverty and
crime.
Uh, and it is up to the state
through an agency like CYFD.
Who embrace and nurture and
raise these children.
And I think the agency is trying
its best.
And I think the men and women
working in the agency.
First
They are working their hearts
out.
Long hours.
You know, probably not nearly
enough pay as they deserve.
Uh, seeing some very
traumatizing things for them as
well.
Uh, I see this as another tool.
Help those good people.
Do their jobs, better do their
jobs, um, and it's the least we
could do.
Because ultimately for every
child that we lose.
to gun violence, drug addiction,
to abuse, to neglect.
Shame on us.
We have this bill and we have, I
think, 4 others today.
That are dealing with different
parts of the agency.
And I would uh invite all of us
to look at all of those bills
closely.
And to support these reforms
because in fact, our children
are depending on us.
And if it's not us, then who?
And if it's not now, then when,
right?
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you Representative for bringing
this important bill forward and
thank you expert.
Um,
yes, Representa Romero. I would
just like to move a do pass on,
um, House Bill 5 as amended.
OK, we have a motion for a due
pass made by Representative
Romero, seconded by
Representative Sapanski.
Let's call the roll.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Abeta. Yes.
Representative Chavis. Yes.
Representative Hall. Yes.
Representative Hochman V. Hill.
Representative Martinez.
Yes.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen,
Representative Reeb, yes.
Leader Sapansky, yes, Madam Vice
Chair.
Madam Chair, yes, Madam Chair,
you have a due pass on House
Bill 5 as amended.
Thank you, Representative. Thank
you Madam Chair. Thank you.
OK.
Next we have House Bill 203
Representative Sapanski will,
will, um, present the bill on
behalf of Representative Dixon.
Right
Hello Representative, yes. Good
morning, Madam Chair and
members, um, I'm presenting
House Bill 203, uh, the sponsors
representative Dixon is a stuck
in another committee, uh, and so
House Bill 203, uh.
Basically.
uh, mandates that CYFD must use
state issued devices, um, and
sets out records retention
requirements, um, and this is
uh.
And
In part because um, these
records need to be retained
after staff are terminated or uh
leave employment at CYFD.
Um, the data collection is
critical due to its role in
investigations of abuse and
neglect. I have with me, um,
expert Sarah Kraka, um, she may
wish to make a brief statement
as well.
And we also have an amendment,
Madam Chair.
We'll hear your statement and
we'll um talk a little bit about
amendment and move forward.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Sarah
Kreka, and I'm an advocate and
an attorney on behalf of
children in foster care and have
been representing foster youth
since 2001. I've also um
represented the wrongful death
estate of James Dunkley Cruz and
other injured and children who
died as a result of CYFD
negligence.
This bill is extremely
important. It amends the
Children, Youth and Families
Department Act, if passed, it
mandates that employees of the
department rely only on their
state issued electronic devices
for work-related communication.
This is because we learned, um,
not just in my lawsuit, but in
other lawsuits that employees
testified under oath, they do
rely on their personal um
devices when discussing.
Official matters. This bill
would require the backup and
retention of electronic records
related to the departmental
duties stored in those phones,
um.
The reason this is so critical
is that under current practice
at CYFD when an employee resigns
or has their employment
terminated, their electronic
devices are wiped in factory
reset without backup. Um, we
learned this, um, through sworn
testimony of multiple employees.
I've confirmed it with current
employees, it is the continued
practice. Uh, I understand there
is, and I've researched this
because I could not believe my
ears when I heard it in the
testimony that there is a
statewide, of course, data.
detention policy that CYFD does
not follow. Um, requiring
passing this bill will ensure
enhanced accountability because
These are investigators. These
are the workers on the front
line who are not at an office
desk. They are storing evidence
in their phones of abuse. They
are storing their notes. These
are critical, not just to the
investigation phase, but also if
a child comes into custody, each
and every one of those cases is
open litigation. It's an open
lawsuit. So it is the state
versus the parents. With without
this bill, CYFD's current
practice is mass spoliation.
on a daily basis. So not only
are we going to minimize the
risk of exposure to the agency
if they do um come up to
ethical, moral and legal
standards and start backing up
these devices, we are going to
ensure that the services
provision to the family is
improved. Um, these families
deserve to have their critical
information.
Stored. Um, we have in the
amendments addressed some of the
concerns that we can go over.
Um, I also can talk about more
directly exfoliation that
happened in the Dunkley lawsuit,
which really resulted in
increased um value to the
estate, but cost to the state of
New Mexico tax taxpayers because
The, um, workers in that case.
I knew there was going to be a
lawsuit.
Not only didn't save the the
phone, but within the
4 days of the child's death had
factory reset, the phone and the
laptop of the primary
investigator, also impeding a
criminal investigation. So this
is a critical bill. It is a big
ask and
Our children are worth it, Cha
Chandler.
Thank you. Um,
So does someone want to move uh.
Discussion of the amendment,
which is
2 4.2, last three digits.
OK, we have a motion.
To discuss the amendment,
Representative Paul on the
amendment.
OK, why don't we go back to the
sponsor designee
to just visit a little bit with
us about the amendment.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, the
amendment addresses a conflict
that came out of the uh
requiring a retention period
that differs from the seven-year
period for personnel records,
um, and it also strikes
requirements for local
territorial and tribal retention
and protection laws, um, and
requires that CYFD back up the
retained electronic records
daily, monthly and annually.
OK, thank you. Any, we're on the
amendment. Any questions about
the amendment?
I don't see any, but I have 4 or
5 or 6, so we can.
We can consider the amendment
any objection to the amendment.
I see no objection. You have an
amended.
All right, now we're back on the
bill as amended, um,
representative.
Anything else?
Thank you, Madam Chair. We'd
stand for questions, OK,
Representative Hall, you had
your hand up earlier.
Pardon me?
Oh yeah, oh, my bad, my bad.
Yeah, yeah, no, you, you
disrupted my thought. Yeah,
that's right. It's all your
fault
All right, let's go to the
audience, those wishing to speak
in opposition to the bill as
amended, please line up behind
the gentleman with the
microphone and please limit your
remarks to about a minute.
Yes, sir. Good morning, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
I'm Joseph Bottos, the chief
information officer.
For CYFD currently. Couple of
items to address real quick. We
are working with Dua on a mobile
management device policy and
process in which all phones are
being backed up. We are
currently doing backups
incrementally daily.
Weekly, monthly, and annually.
So some of the concerns we're
already taken care of. We're in
the process of replacing the
current child welfare system
known as FAS, with a new
federally compliant CWA system
that will use applications of
mobile devices issued by the
agency to take pictures,
recording video, any items
necessary to load directly into
the record, thus removing the
need to use devices, items or
applications outside of a
singular system at this point in
time.
I am open for any conversations,
discussions pertaining to the
application and the project that
we are currently working on, and
I'm open to any insight you're
willing to give me at this time.
And chair members of the
committee. Um, my name is Raja
Sied. I'm, I'm currently the
chief information security
officer for the state of New
Mexico. So we do have some
concerns with the bill, and
thank you for some of the
amendments, uh, to be
facilitated, but uh the concern
is the protection of that
information, how
Are we gonna do the protection
and uh just like the speaker
ahead of me indicated um
translating and capturing the
voicemail messages or the cell
phone calls, things of that
nature.
We need time to look into the
nuances and operationalizing
that so
We would encourage.
If we can do a study to
understand the risks and the
nuances associated with it
before we can put that into
production and
Being where I am attached with
the Department of Information
Technology. This has broader
implication, um, since COVID.
We have to uh
cloud-based environment. So how
much we can tailor something
specific to CYFT and for other
agency, those needs to be
assessed before we make it
mandatory for all agencies.
Thank you, Rash.
Secretary
Um, Madam Chair members of the
committee, um, I absolutely
believe in transparency in state
government. I think it's
critically important, but as
they've mentioned before me,
CYFD does have a retention
policy that we're adhering to.
This goes above and beyond that,
and it begs lots of questions.
One, there's no appropriation
for this, and I think the cost
would be significant to the
department to implement this. It
comes at a time when we're
implementing, as they said, our
new CWIS project, and then it
would be put on top of that and
we're not even sure.
what Siwis is going to be
backing up and how that's gonna
look. I would recommend and I
spoke briefly last night with
the sponsor of this bill, to
look at a task force to see how
does this affect all of state
government. If I send you a text
message, do you now fall under
the requirements of that 7 year
and is your message have to be
backed up along with mine, so
there are a lot of questions,
there are a lot of agencies that
we work with on a daily basis,
and I'm not exactly sure what
this does to their retention
policies. So I think
that this is a great idea.
We want to make sure that we're
transparent and we're keeping
the records that need to be
kept, but I think there are a
lot of issues that still need to
be worked out before we can
implement this bill. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam chair members.
I am here to represent the New
Mexico State Personnel Office
and Director Li, the state
personnel office's opposition to
House Bill 203 is rooted in our
state employees' rights and due
process protections. This bill
will allow the termination of
classified employees for the
failure to comply with the
proposed provisions of the bill.
Terminated classified employees
are able to appeal their
termination pursuant to this
person act in the state, um,
personnel board rules.
These rules state that the
primary purpose of discipline is
to correct performance of and uh
to follow acceptable standards.
The protections further state
that progressive discipline, um,
can range from a reminder to an
oral written reprimand to a
suspension, to motion, or
dismissal.
The spe rule also requires the
agencies utilize alternative
methods to resolve conflicts or
improve employee performance or
behavior whenever appropriate.
House Bill 203 does not align
with the state's preference for
progressive discipline, uh, and,
uh, and to be used before
terminating public servants.
As such, Spo stands in
opposition to House Bill 203.
Hey, let's go online. Those
wishing raise your hand.
Opposition, raise your hand.
I don't see any hands raised.
Let's go to the audience. Those
wishing to speak in support,
please line up behind this
gentleman.
No more than 5 people, um, 1 up
to one minute each.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Jason Espinoza,
registered lobbyist with New
Mexico Child First Network. We
strongly support House Bill 203
because it ensures
accountability, transparency and
the protection of vital vital
records within CYFD.
Gaps in record retention and
communication practices have put
vulnerable children and families
at risk.
This bill established
establishes clear safeguards
requiring state-issued devices,
secure data backups, and
long-term record retention.
These measures will strengthen
child welfare oversight and
protect families, we urge you to
support the bill. Thank you.
Thank you.
Hi again, I'm Stella Matamoris
Duran, resource parent. Um, as
far as transparency, there is
none in CYFD none. I have given
so many documents that should be
private, and they don't receive
them or I have to walk them
literally in to the office, um,
to this day.
They've had medical reports for
the kids. Remember I had him a
year and 6 months, and I to this
day have not gotten those
reports.
The, the primary does not have
them. We had to go to back doors
to get.
Information on these girls to
get them help.
So I'm for this bill. Thank you.
Thank you. Um, let's go online.
Um, those wishing to speak in
support, please raise your hand.
I don't see any hands raised.
Back to the sponsor.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. I
would just add that, um, we
certainly appreciate the
secretaries, uh, efforts to uh
put it in place this new C was
project, the new data system.
It, however, remains very
important to put this into
statute so that this kind of
records retention policy remains
through the administrative
transitions that will occur in
the future, um, and I just
wanted to add that we don't feel
the.
the legislation is drafted would
prevent a spo and managers from
following SO policy, um, because
it's simply uh allowing for the
possibility that this would
constitute grounds not requiring
it. Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank, thank you. Um.
We have an amended bill, um,
Representative Hall, uh, you had
your hand up earlier, didn't
you?
OK, go ahead.
Madam Chair.
Leader Sapansky and Ms. Kreka,
um.
When we look at
This is there.
When we're talking about
retaining records of stuff
that's been done on cellular
devices.
Has this point of the cellular
device has not been property of
the state of New Mexico or that
particular agency.
Madam Chair
Madam Chair, Representative
Paul, they are state issued
devices.
And we're reducing the amount of
time the records are being kept
from 20.
4 years down to 7.
There a reason we're not keeping
them for 10 years?
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, Representative
Hall, my understanding from
Representative Dixon, the
primary sponsor on this bill, is
that that number was a result of
her conversations with um I
can't speak, I wasn't in on that
conversation. She just conveyed
that to me, Madam Chair.
Um
Coming from a
My former occupation where we
were told we had to have.
One phone for work.
In one phone for personal use
because that phone for work was
Forever
Um
I personally think this is a
good idea. I don't, how does
this affect our does IPRA?
apply to the material kept on
this or not because they're
juveniles, madam Chair.
Madam Chair, Representative
Hall, um, that's an excellent
question. IPRA only applies to
publicly available information,
the sensitive documents and
photos, um, would not be,
however,
In my opinion, the
decision making, anything that
goes to agency decision making.
So text between uh investigator
and their supervisor about
whether or not to take a child
into custody or return the child
home, I believe, um, would not.
Necessarily be Iable, but
definitely discoverable, um, as
long as there's no identifying
information.
You know, the regular IPA rules
would apply. Adam Chair.
Madam Chair, I just feel that.
You know, I, I don't want it to
be overintering. I'm not a huge
fan of IPRA, but when it comes
to these children, if as long as
some stuff is discoverable.
That would be my
My focus because these kids.
Um, as we've heard now for
months.
We see it on the television and
everywhere else.
They're the real victims in
this. So when we look at
retaining records and having
devices.
And I understand the
implications that the uh the man
from the state IT department
said it's, it's a big deal.
Properly retain these records
and do it properly.
It's worth doing it and doing it
right, how we do it because this
should be completely documented
all the time in the records, in
my opinion should be kept for 10
years, which is also would be
compliant with how our criminal
statutes read, I believe.
So that's all I have, Madam
Chair, thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Martinez.
Thank you Madam chair, um.
Why, why, why are we doing this?
The just
Because of the retention.
I'm, I'm trying to, I'm trying
to understand.
Why we need to do.
Representative Martinez, thank
you. So,
Just to boil down every single
child is taken into custody has
an open lawsuit. It's the state
versus their parents. And the
rules of civil procedure require
any litigant to not spoliate
evidence. What that means is not
destroy with intent or even just
no intent, negligently destroy
or fail to safekeep evidence in
a lawsuit that's relevant to the
lawsuit. So,
Just to comply with the rules of
civil procedure and the
Children's Court rules on
sharing information between
parties that includes the
parents. The parents have a
right to know what evidence was
gathered against them. Um, so
just day to day maintenance of
the information and evidence in
the open lawsuits of the over
2000 children in custody. This
is just basic practice. It's, it
brings the agency up to moral
standards in Mex.
Mexico legal standards and to
comply with due process under
the United States Constitution,
Madam Chair.
Man
Anyone else?
OK, I'm happy to entertain
emotion.
I'd like to move a due path on
House Bill 203 as amended.
Hey, we have a motion for do
pass made by Representative
Romero, seconded by
Representative Abeta.
Um, would you call the role,
please? Yes. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Representative Abita.
Yes.
Representative Chavis. Yes.
Representative Hall, yes.
Representative Hochman Vi Hill.
Representative Martinez, yes.
Speaker Martinez, yes.
Representative McQueen.
Representative Reeb, yes.
Leader Sapansky.
Madam Vice Chair, yes.
Madam Chair, yes, Madam Chair,
you have a due pass on House
Bill 203 as amended.
Is, um.
House Bill 205 CYFD nominate we
have.
Um
Representative Dixon or oh there
you are.
didn't see you.
OK
Looks like we have a committee
sub that's being handed out.
Just give us a second, right?
Representative, we're ready.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
first time in front of
judiciary, so take it easy on me
or just this year? No.
I don't run, didn't you have
that meat processing bill
maybe, maybe, and I don't
remember that, but you better
hurry up before we comes back.
OK, yes, for sure. Thank you,
Madam Chair. With me is Rachel
Garcia, uh, she's, uh, with the
LFC.
And um do you want me to move
the amendment first or?
Subs, yes, excuse me.
OK, is uh the number on the
bottom is 230739.4.
OK.
And Madam Chair, members of the
committee.
Um, the committee sub, the, the,
the real changes and it removes
the language that notes CYFD to
receive a copy of each plan of
care upon creation. This will
mean COIFD will only receive a
copy if a family.
Excuse me, disengages and is
referred to CYFD and this is
what the plan of safe care.
Um, clarifies the healthcare
authority must ensure the
completion of the federal
reporting requirements related
to state implementation of plans
of safe care. CYFD will no
longer receive a copy of each
plan.
members of the council must have
Iqua and Ira.
Ira
Wow, that's a tough one. What is
it?
Oh yes, the Indian Family
Protection Act expertise.
Um, that's those are the main
changes, Madam Chair, and, uh,
ultimately, do you want me to
explain the whole
thing right now.
Um, I'm not sure what the whole
let's do this. Let's go to the
audience, um, and we'll take,
you know, public comment and
then we can come back to you
represent if you want to
supplement your comments and
then we'll have a discussion
with the committee. How's that?
Thank you. Sure. OK. Those
wishing to speak in opposition.
To the bill slash committee sub
please step forward um behind
the gentleman with the
microphone.
All right. Um, those online
wishing to speak in opposition,
please raise your hand.
Don't see any hands raised. All
right, those um in the audience
wishing to speak in sport,
please, um, step forward, um.
Beyond the gentleman with the
mic, and I'm gonna limit it to
up to 5 people, 1 minute each.
Uh, good morning, chair, members
of the committee, Mikea Bezzini,
policy manager with both
futures, um, both Futures has a
long history of working
alongside individuals with lived
experience in the areas of
substance use and pregnancy. We
work to center their voices and
expertise in shaping policy and
advocacy efforts through these
stories, we are committed to
analyzing legislation of CAA and
plans of safe care through a
healthcare focus lens, ensuring
that responses to substance use
during pregnancy, prioritize
care, support, and
evidence-based practices over
punishment, we seek to shift
away.
From carceral approaches that
criminalize pregnant people who
use substances instead
advocating for policies that
empower them to access
comprehensive treatment, harm
reduction services, and family
centered care. We recognize the
national epidemic of substance
use and believe in resourcing
expanding community programs
like UNM's Malaro program, which
provides integrated prenatal
care, substance use treatment
and behavior health support. Um,
please support HB 205.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members. My name is Marilyn
Beck. I'm the founder and
executive director of New Mexico
Child First Network dedicated to
improving the lives of children
in foster care and empowering
those who serve them. We stand
in strong support of this bill.
It is evidence-based, it's best
practice. And as we look at the
family first preservation
Services Act that that this bill
codifies. I just want to show a
map. There are 44 um 46 other
states, tribes, pueblos, and
nations, um, including
indigenous nations that have
actually passed their plans.
So it is time for us to pass our
plan, um, and get that money so
that we can really support these
preservation and family Services
Acts. Thank you.
Thank you, um, anyone else in
the audience wishing to speak in
support.
I don't see anyone, those online
wishing to speak and support.
I don't see any hands raised, so
let's go back to the
representative if you wanna
supplement your comments, that
would be great. Thank you, Madam
Chair and committee members, uh,
this is about transparency,
accountability and oversight
for.
Uh, Children, Youth and
HB 205 including the sub is a
bipartisan led reform package
backed by legislative finance
committee recommendations,
including codifying the federal
Family First Prevention Services
Act improvement plans of safe
care for substance exposed
newborns.
Require statewide implementation
of a multi-level response,
streamline responsibilities of
this.
Substitute care advisory counsel
and establish a nominating
committee for the CYFD secretary
position. With that, we stand
for questions and, and my expert
is here to help answer any of
the technical questions. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Great. Thank
you.
Um, members.
Questions, comments, uh
reprimaro.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative, for
bringing this bill forward, um.
So critical as we try to create
these safe access points for,
you know, perinatal prenatal
care for those that are in this
situation. Um, I'm just curious
how this relates and um sort of
dovetails with the current
practices and someone is in this
situation.
Um, and give, and then gives
birth. What is the process?
There's no handoff in this bill
as far as what happens um with
that you just describe how
together.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
so, um, in 2023, LFC did a
program evaluation of, of care,
the states implementation and
sort of what we found were big
gaps in the system, so it used
to be that substance exposure
alone could be evidence of abuse
and neglect. We moved away from
that, but we didn't really
families, so some of the things
the evaluation found were things
like follow up to
the first. So what this bill is
doing related to care.
Uh, is a combination of things.
One, it's clarifying in statute
that the healthcare authority is
the lead agency on Kara. So
trying to clarify who is on deck
first and has responsibility. 2
would require an universal
screening using um Spert, which
is an evidence-based verbal
screening prenatally to try to
allow for the creation of plans
of safe care but we provide some
pretty explicit and specific
expectations for the healthcare
authority about what
care coordination needs to look
like. Language like active
efforts using a model, um,
that's included in a child
welfare clearing house to really
support the family to, then the
bill um makes changes to uh the
section of statue that, um.
Clarifies what happens when a
family, uh, when a plan of care
is not followed right now, the
law just says CYFD shall be
notified. What this bill
clarifies is that it is the
healthcare authority's
responsibility, following that
care coordination to notify CYFD
and then it is prescriptive
about what CID should do in
response specifically conducting
a family assessment in every
case for that family to identify
potential risk, make referrals
to services and then proceed to
an investigation if.
The family assessment identified
specific services that are
critically held. So it tries to
sort of map out across the
spectrum, all of the gaps that
we identified in the program
evaluation in 2023.
And so, Madam Chair, uh,
representative. So in the sense
that.
Um, a pregnant person would fly
with the entire, you know, 9
month program we'll say.
Um, then,
At that point.
A a baby is born and, and
there's a subsequent plan of
care that dovetails with that
process having.
Gotten to that place, um.
What is, again, like, what is
the situation thereafter that.
That this plan puts into place
for what comes that
thereafter, vice chair, um, what
this bill would do is say HDA is
responsible for providing pretty
intensive care coordination. Um,
so the bill says language like
active efforts to help make
contact with the family, get
them connected to services, help
them to access services and that
kind of thing, um, and it's
pretty prescriptive about it
uses specific evidence-based
language, that might be a
program.
something like high Fidelity
wraparound service services, so
that's the very first thing that
they puts in place, a lot more
specificity about who's
responsible, HCA uh is what this
bill will say, um, and then what
that thank you, madam, thank
you.
Thank you. Anyone else with uh
questions or comments, um,
Representative Sapansy. Um,
Madam Chair and Representative
leader Armstrong, expert. I just
want a quick question. I saw
this bill in uh house
government. Were there any
changes to the plan of care
portion.
Uh, in this substitute as
compared to what we looked at in
that committee.
Madam Chair floor leader, there
were a couple of changes, um,
one not related to plan of safe
care that you pointed out, for
example, about the date and not
backdating, so we kind of clean
that up a little bit. The most
substantive changes were also in
response to feedback um from
folks like the hospital
association who pointed out it
was still a little bit unclear
if the MCO was responsible or if
HCA was ultimately responsible.
So we did a little bit of
reorganization to clarify, HD is
responsible for all children.
regardless of insurance status
and the agency is ultimately
responsible for um uh care
coordination. Those were the
biggest changes and then some
other small things like adding
perinatal um to prenatal, um,
uh, requiring healthcare
authority explicitly to do
training and clarifying it is
their responsibility as lead
agency. So a few OK. Thank you,
Madam Chair. That's all I had.
don't see anyone else with.
Questions?
I'm happy
to entertain emotion on the mini
sub.
right?
So we have a motion for a do not
pass on House Bill 205, but a do
pass on House Judiciary
Committee substitute for 205
made by Speaker Martinez and
seconded by Representative
Chavez, which you call the role.
Yes, thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Abita. Yes.
Representative Chap. Yes.
Representative Hall.
Representative Hoffman V. Hill.
Representative Martinez, yes.
Speaker Martinez, yes.
Representative McQueen.
Representative Reed, yes.
Leader Sapansky.
Yes, Madam Vice Chair, yes.
Madam Chair, yes, Madam Chair,
you have a do not pass on House
Bill 205, buddy do pass on House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill 205.
Thank you, Representative. Thank
you.
on our eyes, I don't uh agenda
is, um, how.
Um judiciary house joint
resolution 5 CYFD commission.
Eleanor Chavez.
morning representative.
Morning, Madam Chair, members of
the committee.
Um, how joint resolution 5.
Proposes to amend the New Mexico
Constitution, um.
And basically what it would do
is create a commission that
would be responsible for the
oversight and governance of
CYFD, um, a commission of 5
members would be created.
Appointed by the respective
leadership in the House and in
the Senate and one appointee
would be appointed by the
governor. The commission would
be responsible for hiring an
executive director with
experience in child welfare.
Um
Madam Chair, committee members,
when I presented this bill in
Health and Human Services or
this House resolution and in
Health and Human Services.
The night before there had been
a um
News story about CYFD and about
children staying in offices and
the harm that's come to them.
Um, since that time, I
understand that that.
Possibly most of the children
have been removed from the
offices, and I hope that that is
a uh ongoing uh event that we
don't continue to have kids in
the offices.
But I think it also the the
resolution also speaks to the
need for us as a state to look
at what CYFD needs and change
the structure of how we've been
doing things, um, appointing a
secretary hasn't worked. I'll
recognize the fact that that's
that the current secretary has
done some hard work, but since
I've been here, um, since 2023,
we've had two secretaries, so
there's been constant turnover
at the executive level, um, and
again, we, we need to.
to do things differently,
continuing to do the same thing
isn't.
Um
Helping our kids isn't
protecting our kids. With me, I
have two very distinguished, um,
expert witnesses, uh, with many,
many, many years of um expertise
in child welfare and social
work. And I'm going to ask each
of them to introduce themselves
and speak a little bit more in
depth about why this.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, my name is
Alvin Seli. I served as a
professor Emeritus now at New
Mexico State University, where I
taught for 33 years. Um, I've
been in the field of child
welfare for now over 50 years,
most of it in my home state of
New Mexico.
I
Uh, for 6 years I directed the
Primacy planning.
A training the for CYFD I
reviewed 1500.
Plus cases of child abuse and
neglect.
Um,
received over 50 grants and
contracts, many of them federal.
Um, my wife and I are proud
adoptive parents, and we were
foster parents in our younger
days.
And I actually did work very
closely with Mrs. Alice King.
When we were designing the
child.
CYFD back then. I'm the one that
actually asked her if we could
insert the word families and she
said yes, so that's my history
in the state, um, Madam Chair,
members of the community.
If the current governance and
structure of CYFD was working,
then we would not be here on
this beautiful Saturday morning.
I CYFD commission.
Are is the solution that we
think will address some of the
most critical issues.
Um, just quickly, a bit of
history.
Um, in the 1990s, New Mexico was
doing child welfare correctly.
We had federal officials
visiting us, um, sending other
states here to look at what we
were doing correctly.
Unfortunately, we were not able
to sustain that.
Because we, every time an
administration comes in, the
secretary, the leadership, and
when you replace the secretary,
it's usually 11 to 13 people
that are replaced at the top
levels. So you get that
turnover. So even though we were
doing things correctly in the
1990s, we were front loading the
system. We are working with
families to prevent.
Abuse and neglect.
We weren't able to sustain it
because of the structure being
part of the cabinet and the
governor would always appoint
their own person when they came
in.
Um,
so we, this, with this joint
resolution does is it goes to
the people of New Mexico to
address 3 critical factors that
are necessary for successful
child welfare, and I would add
juvenile justice as well.
First of all, his leadership.
You need to have a sustained
leadership and that is qualified
and that this joint resolution
provides for that. Second, you
need to have a qualified
workforce. And as I've heard you
all and others presenting this
morning, doing child welfare is
very complex. It's probably the
most difficult job in state
government. So you're asking
social workers and to be a
social worker in New Mexico, you
have to be licensed and to do.
social work in New Mexico under
the social work Practice Act,
you have to be a licensed social
worker.
So to do uh to provide the
workforce, you need to have it
qualified as well, and that
would also include foster
parents, kinship, and all those
that make up the service system
to children and families.
Third in the final is you need
to have an organizational
culture and the senator will
speak to that in a minute.
That cultivates.
Evidence-based practice
encourages that and has a
transparency that um.
is critical to providing
services in this very complex
arena.
So this bill would help or this
resolution would help to address
all of those quality leadership.
A workforce that is qualified in
an organizational culture that
can support ongoing quality
child welfare services.
Thank you. Thank you, Senator,
good morning, Madam Chairman,
members of the committee, it's
great to see you all here again.
Um, I'm, I'm here because uh I
last year I was the sponsor of
this uh
of last year's version of this
resolution and uh I'm eager to
see it reach fruition this year.
Uh, the
My history with this is that
prior to becoming a state
senator, I've worked as a social
worker in the state for over 40
years. Many of those years were
spent in child welfare.
Uh, not always with CYFD because
CYFD didn't get started until
the tail end of my career.
But I did serve as the
protective services division
director for CYFD, uh, in the
first months of the Richardson
administration, and it was
during that time in 2003.
That the state's child welfare
department had reached the point
where it was able to
successfully um convince the
federal court judge who was over
who had been overseeing the
department for 20 years at that
point.
Earlier, I've been part of the
group that brought the original
suit. I wound up on the other
side of it in 2003 when we
signed the agreement that the,
that the monitors said,
And the judge accepted that we
had reached the point where the
case load sizes were down, the
number of kids who were
languishing in foster care was
down sufficiently. The um
professionalism of the
department had reached the point
where we had licensed social
workers handling all child
welfare cases.
All of those factors were part
of why we had the consent decree
released. No sooner was the
consent decree released, the
judge signed off, said,
congratulations after 20 years,
you reached this point.
You're doing a good job, and
then we started backtracking and
the backslide has continued, and
it continues, I think, for what
exactly is the reason that we
want to address with this
resolution.
It's the department finds itself
not, and I just want to be
clear, this is in no way a
reflection of the current
administration. They are working
incredibly hard to try to
rectify a ship that's been
sinking for 20 years.
It's been 22 years since that
consent decree was lifted.
And, and during those 2 that was
as long as the consent decree
was in place in the first place,
but during those 22 years, the
ship is sinking and it's sinking
for, for, for two reasons that,
that affect each other. One,
there's been consistent changes
in leadership and direction.
So they'll start with permanency
planning, family preservation,
um, uh, differential treatment
of, of, of people who aren't
meeting the threshold of abuse,
uh, of their children but still
need services, but it keeps
going back and forth and, and
the net effect is it's becoming
increasingly difficult to
attract professionals to work in
the department.
So that today, instead of having
100% of the child welfare staff
working with kids, licensed
social workers, it's less than
10%.
And when you have
situation
It becomes very difficult to
convince others to come in and
work there. They're, they're,
they're swimming upstream
against a very bad image that
the department has created, not
this administration, but over 20
years, the cumulative effect of
that has been
How, why would I want to work
for a department that's so
difficult to work in, and that
does such a poor job. And that
image issue is one of the things
that we would hope to change
with this, make it more
attractive for professionals to
come work for it.
Um, I would just say a few last
things about the timing of this.
Um,
This wouldn't go into effect
unless it's a constitutional
amendment. So it wouldn't go
into effect, couldn't be voted
on by the voters now until 2026.
It would take effect after this
administration is completed. So
this is in no way an attempt at
changing anything that's being
done now. And in fact, there
have been some strides that,
that we would hope that, that
could be preserved in any new
administration. But what it
would do would be to make sure
that there isn't that constant
fluctuation every time there's a
change in administration or in
the later stages of an
administration, how difficult it
is to attract anybody because
you know you're only gonna be
there for a couple of years, and
then the governor's gone.
And you may not be able to, to
continue. And that is what we're
trying to do is provide
consistency.
And I would add transparency
because a commission, unlike a
cabinet meets in public.
The commission meetings would be
held in public with the press
present with the public able to
come and attend, they could hear
the decisions, the discussion,
and, and, and the outcome of
those discussions in the form of
policy changes, and it would all
be done in the open.
And that's, I think, one of the
best ways of re-establishing the
integrity of this department in
the public's eyes. That would be
the best, one of the best ways
of attracting new
professionalism within the
department, which is badly
needed and which is going to be
very difficult under a system in
which the, the partisan politics
affect the leadership, and that
is what we're trying to get away
from this commission would,
would provide consistency across
changes in administration.
Thank you. Thank you. Um, let's
go to the audience now.
Those wishing to speak in
opposition, please, uh, line up
behind the gentleman.
With the microphone and.
Please try to limit your
comments to about a minute.
We're going to limit it to about
5 people.
Um,
good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, I'm
Carrie Armijo, secretary of the
Healthcare Authority. And I'm
here today to respectfully
oppose House joint resolution 5
for 3 reasons. First, I think
the resolution will create a
diluted and confusing decision
making structure at CYFD.
And that it will ultimately
result in unclear accountability
when it comes to making life or
death decisions for New Mexico's
most vulnerable children. There
are many executive agencies
that, including mine, that work
closely with CYFD every day, and
we require the ability to make,
uh, to work closely with the
secretary to collaborate and
make decisions, pulling the
agency out of the executive
branch will impede our
collaboration and partnership.
Second, I think it's very likely
that the resolution will
destabilize CYFD exacerbating
many of the problems.
that the agency is trying to
fix. As soon as this resolution
passes, the secretary's
authority will be diminished and
the CYFD workforce will begin
bracing itself for the impact of
another major change.
And finally, as a party to the
Keviness settlement agreement, I
am compelled to restate the very
serious concerns that have been
raised.
About the resolution by the
co-neutrals for national experts
in child welfare and who have
expressed publicly and in
meetings with myself and
Secretary Casados that they
believe this approach will not
solve any problems, and that it
is likely to make things worse.
So far in committee, this this
feedback from the conneutrals
has not received extensive
debate, but I hope to hear it
discussed today. For these
reasons, the healthcare opposes
HJR 5. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Gina De Blasi,
secretary designate for the
Department of Health.
And um health policy advisor in
the governor's office, um, I
stand in opposition today, um,
particularly related to the
concern that I feel like CYFD
will be isolated. Um, the amount
of collaboration that happens on
a daily basis cross agency with
CYFD, the Department of Health,
Healthcare Authority, the Indian
Affairs department and early
childhood and education
department, these conversations
and supports happen daily.
sometimes multiple times a day,
we meet formally at least
weekly, and then we also work
together to problem solve with
the governor, the level of
cabinet support that's necessary
for CYFT I cannot understate. So
for that reason, I stand in
opposition today. Thank you so
much.
Madam Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
members of the committee. I'm
here to speak in strong
opposition of HJR 5. I'm here as
a foster parent who adopted my
foster children. Simply put,
CYFD saved the lives of my
children without the trained,
educated, and dedicated
professionals of CYFD, they
would not have survived. Please
do not let the vulnerable
children, um, be in the hands of
a political commission, do not
the fate of CYFD who have saved
thousands of lives, be in the
hands of voters.
who do not understand the
complexities of child welfare.
will be basing their vote on
negative stories and not the
success stories like that of my
children.
Thank you.
Did you give us your name,
ma'am? I'm sorry, Lisa Hamilton.
OK, thank you.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Henry
Valdez. Um, I work for the
state, but I am going to speak
to you as, as Henry. I want to
talk to you about Leland Valdez,
um, my little cousin.
Who was beaten to death in in
2011 by his mother's boyfriend,
my cousin had called CYFD at the
time in 2011, numerous times to
look into it.
Speaking from experience in the
tragedy that my family went
through.
This, there's lots of reform um
for CYFD this legislation and
this body will have to reconcile
that at some point.
But speaking as a as a a member
of the Valdez family.
This resolution is not it.
This will only make things
harder for the frontline
workers, so only disrupt
funding, so only disrupt the
ability to reduce cases, the
only disrupt the ability to
hire.
So for that reason, um, I
strongly encourage that that
does not pass. Thank you.
Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
member of the committees Teresa
Casados with CYFD.
I just wanna express how
damaging HJR 5 would be to our
child welfare system. I think we
heard from other secretaries
this morning about the
collaboration and the
coordination that happens every
single day. And without that,
this job would be impossible.
Child welfare is not just CYFD,
it's the coordination of the
state agency. It's the work that
this body does to ensure that we
have what is needed to work with
the children every single day,
and even the co-neutrals weighed
in. We saw
the letter that they wrote
saying how other states that
have done this have gone back to
it. This is not the answer. I'm
not here to say that our system
is working and it's perfect. It
is not, but taking it and
separating it and siloing it
does not make it better. It
doesn't ensure that your
secretary will stay longer. It
doesn't ensure that those
individuals will stay longer. I
ask again that we work together
to build a strong child welfare
in this state and do it under
the executive branch.
with the assistance of the other
agencies that work together with
us every day to make this
successful. That's what our
family deserve. Thank you.
All right, um, let's go online,
those wishing to speak in
opposition.
Please raise your hand.
I don't see any hands raised.
All right, let's go to the
audience. Let's um those wishing
to speak in support, please line
up um behind this gentleman, no
more than 5, up to a minute
each.
Hi again, you know, I'm a foster
parent as well and um
You know, I am not here to say
that all CYFD workers are not
good, or not trying. There are a
very few that are.
But all the people that are here
and testifying, it is not true.
They're covering their selves.
It's not about
What the kids need or how to
protect our children.
It's about how to protect their
selves right now from lawsuits
that are being filed from social
workers leaving. I got a call
from a social worker right now,
not with CYFD but someone else.
She is doing the job of CYFD
this morning because they didn't
do it with a Native American
child.
And that is a serious case right
now in front of us.
They are, I don't like calling
people liars, but they don't
tell the truth.
And they have got to be
accountable for this.
Thank you. Thank you, ma'am.
Anyone else
Anyone online wishing to speak
in support.
Please raise your hand.
I don't see anyone with a hand
raised, um, back to sponsor
briefly, I.
Absolutely, we're ready for
questions, madam. OK, um,
members' questions, uh,
Representative Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you.
Representative and senator, it's
great to see you again.
See the day where you
And I'd be sitting here.
Um, I, I, I just have a few
questions.
And this comes from the
perspective of somebody who
worked for a commission and then
worked for a cabinet level
agency.
Um
Why is it that you're creating a
commission in the Constitution
that
Seems a little drastic to me.
Madam Chair, uh, representing
Martinez.
It may sound drastic. I'm not
sure that it's that drastic. We
have other examples of
commissions like the public
regulation commission, for
example, and in years past, we
even had a Department of Public
Welfare Commission.
The schools were under
commission. I understand there's
a bill now to look at moving
head out of the cabinet into a
commission.
Um, what it does, first of all,
I need to clarify, I'm not aware
of any other state that has done
what we're doing.
Um, they, we checked with the
NCL.
The other states that have
commissions or similar to what
you heard in the first bill this
this morning, it's oversight and
um but to actually have
The requirements in the
Constitution.
That the commission have certain
requirements experience.
And qualifications in the
executive director would also
have that.
Um, that's the only way that I
know and I I'm sitting in a room
full of attorneys, so I'm very
aware of that, but that, uh, you
can ensure that we, if when we
or if we can achieve the success
we had in the 1990s that were
able to sustain it and not fall
back and have
Children and families
safety not protected.
And, and just, I find my dad uh
representative, Madam Chairman
Representative Martinez.
Whenever you make a change in
the, in the, in the cabinet
system of government, it would
have to be reflected in the
Constitution. When Jerry Apodaca
created the cabinet system of
government in this state. Prior
to that, we had many, many
commissions, and he, he's the
one that brought it all under
the governor. It was
strengthened under Richardson,
who did away with the State
Board of Education, but they had
to go to, they had to go to the
voters with the constitutional
amendment to get that passed, if
you, if you remember.
That was all done in the
Constitution. Otherwise, every
governor could change it around.
They could rearrange state
government any way they wanted.
And so, to provide some kind of
consistency and to help the
legislature with its, with its
own uh efforts at budgeting and
so on. You could, you could
imagine the chaos that would be
uh created if, if the
legislature had to appropriate
money to moving targets that
could change from, from year to
year because the structure was
changing radically. That's why
we go to the Constitution with
this, just because that's the
only way we've done it in the
past.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator. Um.
I'm not sure that all the
cabinet agencies are
Created by a constitutional
amendment. I know Department of
Veteran Services.
Madam Chairman and
Representative, you're
absolutely right. It's the
structure of saying all
departments report to the
governor. This would be one that
didn't like the public when we,
when we changed the public
regulatory commission.
It, it moved it out from being,
you know, it, it became separate
and it was done with the
constitutional amendment.
Madam Chair
Representative Senator
Um
You're, you're, there was
comment about
Um, eliminating a political
position
Uh, but we're doing is we're
creating 5.
Each with their own.
Ideas, their own goal, their own
agenda.
Um
I worked for a commission like
that, and it is difficult.
It was difficult to serve
veterans.
Because we had
5 veterans
Telling us
Their agenda and it was very
difficult to, to accomplish
anything.
I think something as important
as
Um
The government agency taking
care of our most vulnerable
people.
Having 5 different bosses is is
not gonna be easy, it creates.
Uh, additional levels of
bureaucracy.
Um
I'm not sure uh I don't think
there's anyone in this entire
room.
That doesn't think we need to do
a better job.
It's obvious. All you have to do
is pick up a newspaper.
I don't know that this vehicle
is the right way to accomplish
that.
Um, I, I will make this comment,
and I made this comment in the
Department of Health. It, it
does bother me.
Um, that we saw.
advocates that are other cabinet
members.
I said it in health. It's, it's
like a circling of the wagons.
Let's all protect the status
quo.
Um, and it bothers me.
If those are the advocates or
those are the people that are
opposing something like this,
it, it.
Boy, it almost makes me pause
to.
Talk about it.
Um
Madam Chair Representative
Senator, I, I
I applaud you for doing this.
I just don't think that this is
the vehicle to accomplish that.
For the reasons that I stated,
Lived experience
I worked for both types of
agencies.
And it was a lot easier to
accomplish.
Um
The goal of taking care of that
targeted population.
When you have one person that
you answer to instead of 5 with
5 agendas.
Um
I'm just not sure that this is
the vehicle to accomplish what
we're all wanting to.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative Senator.
Thank you, um, representative uh
Beta.
Thank you, madam Chair, thank
you, representative. Thank you
for uh bringing this to us. I
Always appreciate creative
solutions, all issues and this
is.
One of those.
I had a question just going back
a little bit to the statistic
that I had shared with Speaker
Martinez, excuse me, about uh
the over 200 children, Native
American children that are in
the state's custody. Um, was
there any uh collaboration or
conversations with tribes about
about HJ.
About this bill.
Madam Chairman and
Representative Abeta, thank you
for that question, um.
All that this that this
constitutional amendment would
do would be to change the way
that the director of the
department.
I selected all the programs, all
the agreements, the, the uh uh
continuation of the uh uh
interstate compacts, for
example, that the department is
part of and the Indian Child
Welfare Act, all of those things
continue as, as now. Title 4E,
all of those programs, federal
and tribal and, and with other
states that are in existence now
continue. All that this does
then is it changes the way that
the one person who would be
running the department is
select.
affected by this five-person
commission who would all have to
be professionals themselves and
who would be responsible for
setting broad policy guidelines,
but the day to day operations
and the, and the trips to
Washington to sign the
agreements or to go to the
meetings. That would be done by
what's now a secretary, but
under this system would be the
executive director of the
department, named by the, by the
commission and who might be
there for years, hopefully would
be there for years.
wouldn't change every couple of
years.
Thank you Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative.
Is that a yes or a no?
No, no, we, we didn't, we, we
hadn't taken this to any tribal
governments or anything because
it doesn't impact anything
that's already in place.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. I understand
that, but it does and I believe
it will impact the the children
who are.
will be within the system. And
that's why I'm asking.
Madam Chairman and, and
Representative, I think it will
impact and hopefully for the
better. But the agreements that
exist wouldn't have changed.
It's just that hopefully we'll
have more staff and a better
qualified staff to work with
those kids, to work with the
tribes. Um, and to be supportive
of the tribe's own efforts in
providing child welfare services
on their own, which is also, uh,
you know, something that the
department should be doing.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative, and I ask
because I represent 3 large
pueblo tribes and
Navajo chapters and then a large
um city that is well
representative, I think over 50%
population of indigenous people,
so I ask, this is very crucial
to my district.
Um, when I was looking at the
commission, I did not see any
representation on there, and
that's important to me.
Can you expand on that? Thank
you.
Madam Chair, Representative, um,
the commission is, as I
indicated in my opening, the
commission, it will be appointed
by um,
Leadership from the House
leadership from the Senate. So
definitely there is the
opportunity for tribal
representation. We didn't spell
everything out in this um in the
in the joint resolution simply
because if it does pass, we have
to uh create enabling
legislation so that legislation
will be a bit more specific in
terms of uh the commissioners,
their background, their
expertise, as well as the
expertise of the um executive
director. Thank you so much,
Madam Chair Representative. My
next question is
about
Other states, had there been
other states that have been.
Madam Chair, uh Representative
Abada, none that I can find. And
again, I went to NCL and the
commissions that they had listed
were similar to again the bill
that you all looked at first
thing this morning.
So now they're.
Not doing this outside. I might
also add New Mexico's been first
in a lot of areas in child
welfare. We're the first state
sued for foster care under the
Joseph A. we were the first
state to get out from under that
federal court order.
And by the way, Kavis is an
agreement, not a court order,
um.
Again, I'm hesitant to mention
that in front of a room full of
attorneys, but that's what I
understand.
So the
The concept is basically to
sustain when we had one of the
best child welfare systems in
the country to be able to
sustain that. So we went back
and looked at why don't we still
have that? We don't have the
leadership qualification
requirement.
We don't have the the provision
where if you had a great
secretary executive director
that they could continue no
matter who the governor was.
As the commission approves and
then the organizational culture.
Thank you. Thank you. My last
question and comment, Madam
Chair and representative and
experts is that.
This state in particular, and if
you're saying that we are first
in a lot of leading initiatives.
I need
Personally, to see that there's
some representation for these
children with the high numbers
that we have, I have concerns
about why that's not reflected
in here with um over 20 tribes
and a very large population
throughout the state, it just
does not make sense to me that
you don't have a representative
from that.
Area, I know you're saying
Representative Chavez, that
there is an opportunity that
they could be appointed, but
it's not guaranteed and I need
guaranteed representation. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Includes my questions.
Speaker Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative and experts
and good to see you, Senator.
Um, I believe my wives.
Grandfather, who was a social
worker may have been one of your
mentors back in the day.
Madam Chairman and, and, and,
and Mr. Speaker, you're
absolutely correct. And Mr.
Montoya was my, uh, he, he, he
was running the training academy
when I first was hired, and so
all the social workers who were
going to work in child welfare
went through his training
academy. Very cool, yeah, he and
his wife were both longtime
foster parents. We learned later
in life after they passed that
they had.
Fostered I think well over 50
kids over the course of their
life.
Um, thank you for bringing the
bill forward. Um, I think that
there's
Quite a bit of good debate um
surrounding this joint
resolution.
Um, Madam Chair and, and
representative, um, some of my
questions have been asked, so I
won't belabor them.
Um, but I do want to
Highlight
Or the body for the audience.
Uh, the, the, uh, the nuisance
and the creativity here, not not
the nuisance, the, the, the
creativity of, of, of what we're
trying to do.
And um
When it comes to this
department, as we've heard over
and over again with the prior
bills, we know that there are
some changes that are probably
warranted at this point and the
approach that you've taken is to
really
Take something that is at the
whims.
Of whoever the next governor is,
Madam Chair.
And
Try to create more independence.
Now
Putting things in the
Constitution is always tricky.
Right, and, and I've probably
been one of the ones who has
been more resistant to that.
Uh, you know, I, I remember, in
fact, I think Senator, you may
have had a cannabis legalization
in the Constitution bill in the
past that, you know, I have a
hard time, right? Cause I kind
of feel like the Constitution is
Is there for a reason,
obviously, but also we should be
very um.
Diligent about what we put on
there.
Um
This is one of those things that
I believe.
Can and should be in there.
Uh, because I think that it
creates a
Very public value statement of
how we view
The state's role
Within
The issue of child well-being,
child welfare.
Um, I do think you heard some
really good suggestions. I, I
do, I do agree with San Beta
that there should be some sort
of
Uh, requirement that one of the
commissioners be
From one of these tribal
communities. I think that's a
great suggestion.
Um
In terms of, of, of what we
heard regarding Kevinness. Uh,
Madam Chair, representatives,
representative and experts, uh,
I'm gonna make my own statement,
but I'd, I'd be curious to hear
your, your, your response,
right? It feels like he was very
out of
character for these consultants
from out of state.
To write a letter
Opposing, uh, legislation in
front of us. Um, can you comment
on that? Because I was taken
aback when I read the letter
that was sent to the media.
Uh, by the way, I, I, I don't
think I ever received a letter
looking at my staff. I don't
think I did, but certainly the
media got a letter saying we are
the Kevin Nass out of state
consultants, and we don't agree
with this piece of.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
I mean, Mr. Speaker, um, I was
also surprised by that. Um, I
Got a phone call letting me
know.
From actually one of the local
folks who's involved in Kevin
Nas letting me know that the
letter uh was coming and I said,
well, it's already been
released. I've seen it in the
press. So no one,
From out of state, uh, call to
say uh we have an issue with
this. Let's talk about it.
Let's, you know, see what else
we can do. Um, so I was also
very surprised that the out of
state.
Uh, consultants did that as
well.
And I think
The senator, yeah.
Thank you Madam Chairman and Mr.
Speaker, uh, yeah, I certainly
blindsided us, which I think was
the whole point of it.
Um, the, the allegations in it,
I think several of them were off
base, didn't, don't hold water,
for example, they, they, they,
uh, alleged that other states
have rejected this approach to
our knowledge, no other state
has tried it. They cited
Oklahoma, which didn't do this
at all, and I'll I'll let uh
Doctor Sali speak to that, uh,
that was a very different
situation in Oklahoma. And that
came out, that letter came out
the same, the same.
I'm weak that the press had
carried the big story about
their, their concern over the
failure of the department to
meet any of the progress, uh,
uh, milestones that they had
indicated needed to be shown.
So,
They seem to be saying, leave it
up to us to continue monitoring
because we're doing such a great
job. And besides, the pay is
great because we're spending, to
my knowledge, in excessive 10 or
12 $billion million so far,
paying these co-neutrals for the
privilege of them criticizing
legislation before this body. I,
I thought that was really out of
line. Well, and Madam Chair, it
reminds me of the city of
Albuquerque, Albuquerque Police
Department, DOJ.
Uh, issue where we've paid
millions of dollars.
Or
Some guy from out of state to
roll in every once in a while
and tell us how horrible we are,
uh, you know, criticizing our
law enforcement officers,
criticizing our city and not
fixing anything because I kind
of feel like we're in the same
boat.
And I do wonder, Madam Chair,
and, and representative and
experts, uh, with regard to
those concerns raised by those
consultants.
How much of it is it?
Based on the substance and in
fact,
Uh, their expertise in child
wellbeing and how much of it is
just political opposition for,
for the reasons stated, Madam
Chair, representative expert Mr.
Sali, I'm curious about
Oklahoma. Uh, what did they try
to do, uh, that is different
from what we're trying to do.
Madam Chair, Mr. Speaker, yeah,
it was.
Surprised me that they cited
Oklahoma because their secretary
that's a cabinet secretary
recently met with the governor
in the next morning resigned.
And she was highly qualified and
MD years of experience in foster
care and child welfare. So I
think that really kind of makes
the argument for representative
Chavez is that
Here you had someone who was
turning the agency around but
meets with the governor in the
next morning resigns.
And you're starting all over
again.
So I, I, at a loss to understand
many of their points, uh, the
issue about funding being
diluted and changed and Title
IVE and all these other things.
Also doesn't track what's
reality. The funding federal
funding tracks with programs and
staff that are implementing that
policy within a state. The same
thing with ICA with the NHL
Welfare Act or the all the other
federal legislation that, that
we have, that would go directly
to the commission because that
is who is would be providing the
programs and the staff that is
doing that work. So they don't
know.
one from Kevin has spoke to me
either so I, I can't answer
that.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative and experts.
Uh, to the issue of, of we're
creating another bureaucracy. So
Madam Chair said this wouldn't
exist alongside the currency
YFD, is that correct?
Madam Chair, Mr. Speaker, no, to
answer simply, so we're not
doubling down, Madam Chair, on
the bureaucracy we are replacing
one.
Bureaucracy with one that we,
the legislature,
We'll have more oversight.
And one that arguably
Can have more consistency across
administrations. Is that right?
Madam Chair, Mr. Speaker, that's
correct, uh, in many ways, the
legislature will continue to
have, uh, input because you're
funding it.
You're going to be doing if it
passes the, if the citizens in
New Mexico, uh, passes and
becomes a constitutional
amendment, even before that, you
as a legislative body in my
experience could be already
putting together the enabling
legislation, so you're the one
who's going to ensure that the
ICA is in place that the tribes
have that. All this does simply
is that the first step. The
first step is you have to set it
up as an
independent commission.
Then you will as a legislature
will have the power to enable it
and define how that happens
right now you're a bit limited
because you have a, a possible
veto.
And, and a good quick example on
that that the uh Kevinness group
didn't mention in their letter
is that I believe it was a
senator last year put in the
budget $3 million.
To retain and increase the
number of licensed social
workers. The governor struck
licensed social workers.
Out of that, and there was no
message, so I have no idea why
she struck that.
I'm sure the the last couple
points I want to make for for
the committee for the body.
This is a proposed
constitutional amendment.
Um, and obviously we shouldn't
be in the business of putting
things on the ballot that are
You know, maybe run afoul our
own values, our own democratic
values, right? Um, or things on
the ballot that
Um, you know, we don't believe
should be in the Constitution,
right? Um.
And I mean, I can think of tons
of examples. I mean, I think
we've had bills here, we've had
joint resolutions here that deal
with housing, right? Or, you
know, perhaps, you know,
environmental rights or
whatever, right?
Uh, and those are policy
discussions for us to have.
And, and that's fair. Uh, but,
but on this one, I feel like
You know, we, this is not so out
of whack in terms of being in
the Constitution.
Given the fact that we've
already
In our Constitution guaranteed a
right to a fully funded
childhood education and quite
frankly, one of the best
departments this, this uh this
state has. I mean, it's, it's,
it's, it's a good.
Uh, you know, uh, concept in
terms of guaranteeing a
continuum of early learning and
early development services for
kids prenatal, all the way to
age 5.
Um, and actually I think it
actually goes beyond age 5. I
think they also take care of
school age kids. Um, this is
very similar to that, and I
think we as a legislature.
Um, have a responsibility.
to, in this case, let the voters
decide, because we're not voting
for this today, or even passing
it out of the legislature. This
is still not the law. The voters
will have to ratify this, and
they may very well say, you
know, this is not a good idea.
And that's fair.
Uh, but I think that the voters
deserve an opportunity.
To
To, to, to join their voice and
tell us.
Through their vote how they feel
about.
An independent
Children, youth and families.
Department
That is, that has more oversight
from the legislature.
And that truly reflects the
values.
Of each and every one of our.
Communities
Including our tribal
communities, including our
border communities.
Including urban, including rural
communities.
Uh, the last point I want to
make and Mr. Sali brought this
up, Madam Chair.
I
Should this be approved by the
voters.
We
The Legislature
Get to
Right, the enabling legislation.
And that is our opportunity.
Shape what this will ultimately
look like to ensure fair
representation to ensure that
we've got the right people at
the table as we build out this
concept, um, and that's
important, right? Because
In my prior statement, I said
it's up to the voters to decide.
But then ultimately, if they
decide that this is what they
want to do.
We get to shape what it's, what,
what this is gonna look like.
Uh, so we're not giving up
control of, of, of, of ensuring
that this reflects our values.
And reflects the intent of what
we're.
Um, what we're trying to do.
Um
But I support this. Thank you
for bringing it forward.
Um, and Madam Chair, I thank you
for your time.
You, I have representative
Romero then Chavez then Hall.
Well it, Madam Chair.
Speaker Martinez did a lot of
the talking that I was gonna do,
I think, um.
And I think, uh, you uh
represented Martinez's point, he
called this a drastic measure
and drastic drastic times,
right? Cause for drastic
measures and I.
You know, I think when we look
at the creative sort of thinking
about this and the opportunity
to think about enabling
legislation. I wish that was
also in front of us, and I know
Senator.
Um, you know, we've wrestled
with the right way to go about
how to, um, amend the
constitution and have enabling
legislation thereof, um,
attached to it and so I really
appreciate the the discussion,
um, given that, you know, in our
community, the question is just
like, do you just throw it out,
start something new, and that's
essentially, you know, what
we're what we're.
Looking at trying to figure out
how to, how to wrestle with, and
I really appreciate the
opportunity to do that because
there are really great um
independent agent.
Office of the Thunder being one,
I think that we here in this
legislature.
And come and speak to us about,
you know, various pieces of
legislation. I really appreciate
to have their independent.
analysis of the things that that
are before us and thinking
through that, you know, having
an independent agency or body
that.
Checks and balances, perhaps the
work that we're doing in this
space, you know,
You know, gives me an
opportunity to think, well,
that's the the real positive
piece here.
The other thing that I think it
might be missing, which I do
enjoy is the fact that the
governor is accountable to the
work that's being done within
the aid is important and that we
can go from administration to
administration and see what
progress we are making and hold
them accountable.
That as well. So, you know,
giving it to the voters to sort
of wrestle with that is is very
interesting. I think it's a
really important piece, um.
And would just, you know, would
love to think through what the
enabling piece would look like.
Um, with this. So I'm, I'm
loving the conversation and
learning so much just to where
the textures of dialogue have
gone with, with what we're
presenting today, and certainly,
um, to representative, um.
Abates this point.
want to ensure that the tribes
are part of this dialogue.
Um
But I'm, I'm definitely
intrigued and love to continue
to hear the discussion.
Um,
Senator, I actually no we we
we're in we're in, uh,
discussion here in Q&A, so.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, I guess, and I'm.
I think we all carry the same
thoughts of something needs to
change. We know we're at a
crisis, but
It just worries me, um, that.
And I know we're not going to go
over bureaucratic roadblocks
anymore or layering, but how
will you ensure that this office
remains impartial and doesn't
become politically motivated by
special interest groups or.
Right versus left. I mean, we
know that happens here in the
legislature. How, how can we
ensure that that doesn't happen
if this truly does become
replacement.
Madam Chairman and
Representative Chavez.
I think there are two ways we
would protect against that. One
is the requirements that the
people serving on this
commission would have to be
themselves professionals. They
would have to be from one of the
fields that deals with child
welfare.
Maybe a pediatric specialist who
specializes in, in uh child
abuse and neglect, maybe a
social worker who has extensive
history in running child welfare
agencies, maybe a psychologist
who's done particular work in
dealing with traumatized
children were early childhood
educator who's knowledgeable
about what shapes the, the, the
adult, uh, some professional
background related to child
welfare would be a requirement
for all commissioners.
that you, you, you, you tend
therefore to have a, a layer of
insulation against somebody who
might just be motivated by
partisan
political considerations. The
second one is by having those
terms staggered.
You, you, you have terms for the
commissioners, but the director
would be somebody who ideally
would last more than a four-year
gubernatorial term.
It would be refreshing if we had
any secretaries last the full 4
years or 8 years, we don't have
very many of those, but even
that, you know, to have the kind
of consistency over the time
that it takes to transform a
department will take more than 4
years. And so that's where you'd
get that other layer of
insulation that the
commissioners are professionals,
they hire the professional
director and that director is
one who might very well span
several administrations.
Thank you, um, Madam Chair
Representative, and
Following that statement, I
guess, how would we ensure that
kids, especially in a crisis,
cuz we're at a crisis. Don't
fall through the cracks. I mean,
what is the process because you
said it's gonna take years to
create this new entity or or
department.
And if we're completely getting
rid of CYFD, what happens on the
in between because I thought
that it was one over the other,
but as Speaker Martinez said,
it's truly replacing the other.
So then what happens?
Madam chairman and and
Representative Chavez, it, it
really is only the leadership
level that would be changed. The
programs, the divisions, as
they're set out now, the federal
funding, all of that would
continue as before. And in fact,
the your earlier bill earlier
this morning about an ombudsman.
If that it passes and that
becomes part of it by the time
this implement gets, that would
still be in place as well. We're
not replacing the department,
we're replacing the
the leadership of the department
is, is established.
Thank you so much and you
answered my next questions about
the ombudsman, so then it would
really be, would it be then a
struggle of power if we have,
you know, these cabinet
secretaries that are right under
the governor, but for this
specific entity over CYFD. It's
a completely different
committee. You don't think there
would be a struggle in that
instance.
Madam Chairman and, and, and
Representative Chavez, I mean, a
lot of this is going to depend
on, on people, on, on who you
have. But if you have
professionals running these
departments, and they're making
the decisions based on uh
If we need the health department
to, why not sit down and talk to
the health department. We need
the the uh healthcare authority,
why not sit down and talk to
them about how Medicaid can be.
I mean, there's no reason that
they couldn't still be part of
uh any kind of collaborative
effort, uh, the whole CAA
program is going to require them
to be involved. Uh, so, uh,
I, I would just find it very
difficult to envision a
situation which governor's
appointees would have such a
different view.
Of
Of um collaboration that they
wouldn't be able to include CYFD
even if it were under a
commission, not under a
governor's appointment.
Thank you, um, Madam Chair
Representative Senator, I
understand that it just seems
like it's gonna be a struggle,
and I guess.
I'm really struggling with this
most because.
I know we all know, especially
looking at the constitutional
amendment for bail and the huge
issues we're having now. It is
really hard to undo a
constitutional amendment that
we've taken to the people, and I
just feel like.
If this isn't working, and we
see a lot of roadblocks or more
crisis with the children.
There is almost no way we'll be
able to undo it. And again, I go
back to the the bail
constitutional amendment and the
issues that we're having now,
there's, it seems like there's
no way to undo what we've done,
and that is probably my biggest
concern with this bill.
Oh
Mm
No.
He doesn't.
Um, we don't do a lot of that
back and forth. This is amongst
the committee members at this
point. OK, uh, Representative
Hall.
Madam Chair.
Representative Senator, um.
Who actually came up with this
idea.
To do this.
Madam Chair.
um
Madam Chairman and
Representative Hall, this is an
idea that, that developed over a
three-year period during
meetings of the interim
Committee on Health and Human
Services. We went around the
state and began struggling with
how do we turn this around?
And uh
We were all, all three of us
were at a conference, a social
work conference two years ago,
and the keynote speaker was
Senator Michael Padilla, who
mentioned, well, maybe we need a
commission. And, and that I
think planted the seed that
germinated my original proposal
last year was for a 3-person
commission.
Uh, Republicans in the Senate
Rules Committee felt that uh
that put too much power in the
hands of
They never thought they would
ever be in charge of any, of any
chamber, either chamber again, I
guess, because they said they
insisted that the minority also
have an appointment. So the way
it reads now, I believe is the
minority in each house name
somebody in the majority in each
house named somebody, and the
governor named somebody. That
was, that was at the insistence
of uh some of, some of your uh
Colleagues in partisan
colleagues in the in the Senate,
but uh.
That's where the idea came from.
Madam Chair, Senator
Representative and expert, um.
So
It seems like
We're always trying to, I mean,
we've been working on this this
morning to try to fix if that's
the proper word.
TYFD
And now we're going to
Attempt
If this were to pass, to make a
constitutional amendment.
Take it to the people.
Who don't really have a full
understanding of the problem.
Is that a fair statement, Madam
Chair?
Madam Chair Representative, I
think they do. Um, I actually
was at a
Um
Neighborhood Association meeting
a few months ago and I was being
asked about, you know, what's
happening in the legislation
that that is is coming up. I did
not mention CYFD.
A couple of the people at that
meeting did.
They said, what about CYFD?
When I was out door knocking, I
actually met a woman who had
been doing case review.
And she expressed her concern
about what was going on in the
department.
So it's out there.
Part of the reason it's out
there is because the department
is in chaos.
The Keviness co-neutrals in 2023
basically stated.
The state conditions had become
significantly worse and
described the system.
In a state.
So things are not getting better
under the current system.
They're actually getting worse.
So I think the.
Thank you for that answer, Madam
Chair, Representative Senator
and expert witness.
I along I echo.
What Representative Chavez had
to say whenever we
Start to, you know, the law is
ever changing. I've heard that a
million times.
Seen it through a lot of years
of government service.
Constitutions are.
a whole other
Bailiwick, so to speak.
I understand what you said about
making this a constitutional
amendment versus a law, but
Did you
Try to maybe
Is that I'm not buying off on
that just yet, but I'm gonna ask
you, would you just try to
explain that.
Again to me, and maybe I can.
Grasp it a little better, madam
Chair.
Madam Chairman and and
Representative Hall.
Um, we put into the
Constitution.
Broad
Systems
Not the specific uh minutiae of
how a department would work, for
example, but that it would be
under the governor or not is, I
think, appropriate for the
Constitution. That's where we,
that's where we created the, the
cabinet form of government back
in the 70s with, with that by
going back to the voters and
establishing a constitutional.
That's where we took the, the
independent Board of Education
and put it into the Constitution
as a cabinet position. And as,
as uh
Representative Chavez said it's
hard to move out once it's
there.
But this I think is important
enough to put it into the
Constitution. And, and, and, uh,
the other reason, of course, is
that there's no way of doing
this. If you have to ask the
governor, would you voluntarily
relinquish some of your power.
Uh, no, they'll veto it every,
not just this governor, any
governor would veto any attempt
at removing something from their
authority that was there now.
And so what you have is over
years just a gradual
accumulation of more and more
authority in the executive
branch. The
only way to really remove that
would be to put it into the
Constitution, I think.
Thank you. I mean as an
observation, it seems like the
executive branch is overreaching
every now and then.
Um, but I just.
I'm a little concerned on that.
I
I'm gonna end with that. I just,
I, but thank you everyone else
asked my.
I think the speaker stole half
my questions. He's watching.
Reading your list and
Yeah,
he has laser eyesight
um, I don't have anyone else on
my list, um.
I'm happy to entertain emotion.
Uh I'm gonna do pass, madam
chair.
Is there a second? All right.
We have a motion for a do pass
on house joint resolution 5.
What you call the rule.
Yes, thank you, Madam Chair, um,
representative of Beta. Yes, and
I like to explain. Thank you.
No.
Representative Hall. No.
Representative Hochman V Hill.
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
No
Speaker Martinez, yes.
Representative McQueen.
Representative Reed.
Leader Sapansky. Yes.
Madam Vice Chair.
Yes.
Madam Chair, yes, Madam Chair,
you have a due pass on house
joint resolution 5.
Right.
Thank you, Representative. Thank
you, good to see you, Sandra.
Thank you Madam Chair and
members of the committee.
Thank you. Sorry, I'm bad on
that thing.
Sorry, um.
Madam Chair Representative and
experts, I just want to urge you
and let you know that I voted in
favor of this because I still
believe it's a solution working
forward, it may not be perfect,
but please take my comments into
consideration because that's an
important piece that's lacking
from your legislation, and I
want to see it. Thank you.
Thank you. All right. Our last
bill.
I
House Bill 364 Federal benefits
for CYFD custody, Representative
Anaya.
Representative
Great. Thank you so much. Good
morning, everyone. Madam Chair,
members of the committee, thank
you for having us CYFD day. Um,
I'm really appreciative. I'm
also really appreciative that
you added my, uh, House Bill 364
to that list.
Um, Madam Chair and committee
members, um, going from the very
big ideas that were here at this
table, um, I am actually gonna
focus in a little bit more on
the children who are currently
in uh CYFD custody is right now.
So House Bill 364 does is it
clarifies and really ensures
that youth in CYFD custody are
getting all of the federal
benefits that they are afforded.
Um, it also ensures that there
is a structure to make sure that
this is happening.
And so, uh, Madam Chair and
committee members, the way in
which this legislation does that
is it sets up a system in which,
um, within whether the child is
currently receiving or is
eligible to receive a federal
benefits.
Um, it will also um establish an
entity as the representative
child. Um, and it also adds um.
Some prohibited uses of these,
uh, federal, uh, benefits. It
prohibits CYFD from using uh
these federal benefits, um, for,
for anything that is the cost of
the child's care. Anything that
is above and beyond the cost of
the child's care, um, you can
for those. It also, uh, sets up
your committee members, um,
That is the gist of the bill. We
should have Amy Hartfeldt on the
line as well. I know she's up
there, um, but she's from the
Children's Advocacy Institute.
And with that, Madam Chair and
committee members, they stand
for questions.
Thank you. Um, let's go to the
audience, those wishing to speak
in opposition to this bill,
please.
approached the gentleman with
the microphone and line up and
they don't see anyone in
opposition in the room.
Those online, wishing to speak
in opposite, I see a hand
raised.
Amy Hartfield.
Amy
I am speaking in support, not in
opposition. I'm sorry, it's just
when you called my name earlier,
I wanted to make sure you knew I
was here. Oh, OK. Um, right. So
let's go to the room anyone
wishing to speak and support,
please approach the gentleman um
with the microphone.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. I'm
Teresa Casados, CYFD secretary.
Um, we are in support of this
bill. We feel that we want to
make sure that um children in
state custody are receiving the
benefits that they're entitled
to. Um, we do ask that benefit
be identified in the statute
more clearly to differentiate
between SSI and RSDI, um, and
are happy to work with the
sponsor on what that looks like.
Um, I'm happy to codify this and
Bill, we have done it through
directive or RSDI benefits.
We're working with the state
auditor.
for those accounts and we want
to make sure that we can
continue to do this work for
kids in state custody. So thank
you.
Madam chair members of the
committee, Gary Alpi and
executive director of Disability
Rights New Mexico.
Uh, the why for this bill, as
you've heard, there are many
reform and CYFD is slow, but
this is something you can do
right now for kids, and it all
goes to financial stability. We
know that 30% of kids that end
up leaving, leading foster care
end up being homeless. We know
that kids in foster care are at
very vulnerable for identity
theft because of the passing
around of information.
This would provide for some
financial stability for these
kids.
You've already done some things
like fostering connections
that's helped prepare the kids
as they transition to adulthood,
but this would be a great thing
to do to help these kids.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Jason Espinoza,
registered lobbyist with New
Mexico Child First Network. We
stand in strong support of the
legislation. The bill really
does provide a proactive
approach to securing benefits
for children, ensuring they have
access to the financial
resources they need for both
their current and long-term
needs.
Um
The bill does also ensure that
remaining benefits are preserved
and made available to children
as they transition out of state
custody, establishes
transparency and accountability
and fund management as well. We
really do believe by putting
these protections in place that
empowers children in foster care
with the financial support that
can help them build a stronger
foundation as they transition
into adulthood. We urge your
strong support. Thank you. Thank
you. All right, let's go online,
those wishing to speak in
support, um, please raise your
hand. Amy.
Yes, good morning.
Um, can
You all can hear me. OK. So, uh,
my name is Amy Hartfeld. I work
as the national policy director
for the Children's Advocacy
Institute, and I have been at
the forefront of a national
campaign to change this policy.
Um, over the last 3 years.
Over 30 states, including New
Mexico, have stepped up either
to voluntarily or through
legislation, uh, introduce or
advance reform on this issue,
and Congress is paying attention
as well, and I'm
Also trying to, to take care of
that piece of things. So I
wanted to applaud.
Uh,
the bill coming back, it was,
uh, it was I who was on the
phone with the department when a
determination was made on the
spot to issue the directive to
stop this practice. And uh New
Mexico is still the only state
in the country that acted that
quickly out of such a strong,
um values space and just sort of
acknowledging that that's,
that's not right. It has to stop
now.
There are currently thank you.
Thank you.
Um, any, uh, there's one more.
Admin
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
members of the committee and
sponsor, this is Nat Dean. I'm a
disability advocate and a person
with multiple disabilities, and
in the interest of time, I will
simply stand and support.
Thank you, Nat.
All right, I sponsor, anything
else before I go to the
committee? No, madam Chair.
Members, um, Representative
Chavez, represent.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. Um, I guess
my only question is, is there?
Anyway, or have you thought
about building in a financial
literacy piece into this because
I think it's important that
they'll have that money that we
saved for them or that have been
saved for them, but I would just
hope that we are teaching them
how to be responsible
financially and so if we could,
it would make me feel a lot
better if we could throw in a
financial literacy contract or
class or
Something into this bill and
we're handing over money to them
when they age out of foster
care.
Representative Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. Um,
You know if this bill would be
affected by the dollar for
dollar offset,
can you repeat your question or
maybe rephrase it?
Madam Chair, representative.
Do you know if this bill
is affected by the dollar for
dollar offset for for Social
Security income.
Um, Madam Chair, I will leave
that to my, I just spoke online.
I'm sorry, I didn't realize Amy
was your expert. She appeared as
just someone raising their hand.
OK, Amy.
Do you hear the question?
Amy.
OK
well to unmute.
OK.
So did you hear the question?
OK.
Um, can you hear me now? Yes.
Right.
So I think the question was
about the intersectional
relationship between uh how
Social Security disability
benefits intersect with Title IV
Ebenefits. Is that correct?
Madam Chair Representative
expert so.
When I used to deal with
veterans benefits. There was a
$1 for $1 offset.
In
In income.
Versus Social Security, so with
this, I know exactly what you're
talking about. So you are
correct.
OK. Go ahead.
You are correct, uh, and I
understand now what what you
were talking about, so it is
correct that uh for some reason,
TitleoE is considered income
that offsets the SSI benefits
dollar for dollar, and this
particular scenario that is
somewhat less relevant because
although a child can be eligible
both for 4e-maintenance costs
and for SSI, the agency is
prohibited from taking both.
It's called double dipping. So
they're actually not allowed
right now. I believe they should
be.
But right now, they're not
allowed to take both, so the
offset is not as relevant. If
the state takes the 4E benefit,
the SSI is not coming in, uh,
because they're not allowed to
take both and so that $1 for
dollar reduction wouldn't occur
in that instance.
Madam Chair, representative
experts. So if you have a family
member that would.
Come in and say, hey, you know,
I wanna, I wanna give you
$500 to help you out. Would
that, would that affect this
bill?
Under, under the, the scenario
that you and I just
Disgust
Would you like for me to respond
to that?
Well, um, I'll ask the
representative. Yes, please.
So, yes, um,
If a child is given cash, uh,
and they're receiving Social
Security disability benefits.
Um, they are allowed under
federal rules, they're allowed
to acquire up to $2000 in cash
benefits, uh, although there are
some exemptions from that cap
like a car, a personal effects,
uh, technology device, etc. So
if the child should not accrue
more than $2000 in cash while
they're receiving SSI. Now the
way the department continues to
collect that money and save it
for them is through an account
that's exempt from those asset
caps called usually for a
disabled child, uh able accounts
are used, and Enable account is
essentially a shelter, like a
529 savings plan, where you're
putting money there that doesn't
count as income for other
purposes, you're allowed to
acquire up to $100,000 in it,
um, and it follows the child
where they go. So the cash, uh
accumulation.
of cash is something to be
mindful of, and I believe this
bill addresses the appropriate
way to conserve that money so
that you don't breach the income
limit.
Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative. Thank you, uh,
expert.
Um
My next question, Madam Chair,
Representative.
Does this mirror the Senate bill
that's headed this way?
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
yes, it does. Madam Chair
Representative, so it's exact
language.
Uh, from my understanding, Madam
Chair, yes, it is.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative. So why did we
introduce a House bill?
Madam Chair Representative, my
understanding is that sessions
now and so I, I might, uh, ask
that in the reverse, uh, Madam
Chair Representative, um, I know
we're bringing it, um.
I, I might ask that question to
the Senate as well.
OK, Madam Chair Representative,
but I'm wondering why we
introduced a House bill.
If the Senate bill exactly.
Uh
You know, I, I, you can answer
that, but I'm not sure we need
to be talking about why somebody
and in terms of just filing,
certainly a why in terms of
policy is appropriate, but lots
of people filed dual bills, you
know.
Feel free to answer, but you get
my drifting.
Conscious of that.
I mean, I'm happy to answer,
Madam Chair, uh, the same
responses before. I know this
has been introduced in the house
multiple years.
Madam Chair, thank you,
Representative, um.
And the department is in in a
full agreement with this.
With this
According with the secretary
said.
Um
Did they help you draft the
language?
Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative, no, not to my
understanding.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative.
Thank you, rep, um, I have
representative Romero,
Representative Hall, and then
Representative Reeb.
Madam Chair, just in regards to
the comments that were made
about, um, clarifying perhaps
some of the definitions around.
RSDA, the retirement survivors
Insurance.
What is your opinion about
having to those.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative. I was actually
hoping somebody would ask this,
um, Madam Chair Representative,
um, we left it as federal
benefits as a whole because
there are actually a lot more
federal benefits that we could
be looking for. Um, not just,
um, SSI or RSDI, um, my
understanding, Madam Chair and
Representative for the wanting
to flush those two out is
because currently, if I'm not
mistaken, Madam Chair and
representative, um.
CYFD is using some of that money
from the federal benefits to pay
for things, um, that I believe
would be considered the um cost
of care for the child right now.
What we are trying to say is all
of that money should be going to
children, um, that is, that is
why Madam Chair and
representative, we left it as
federal benefits as a whole is
because we want to be sure that
every single dollar penny that
the child is afforded, they
should be able to have.
So Madam Chair, Representative,
just so I'm clear.
The making it less more broad
and less um specific. You're
looking to have other additional
benefits added.
Um, that doesn't need to be in
the statue, but I'm Madam Chair.
OK.
Representative Hall.
Thank you Madam Chair
Representative, um.
Is this, is this like part of
that A account?
Madam Chair Representative, this
is not part of the this
particular legislation, um, is
not, I would say part of the ABL
account, but maybe Madam Chair
Representative, um, the piece
going for maybe that the uh
sentiment of your question might
be how do able accounts interact
with this legislation, Madam
Chair Representative. Fair
enough. OK, um, Madam Chair
Representative, it actually gets
to Representative Romero's
question, um.
Folks limit a 2, I believe it's
$2000 limit on the amount of
money that um CYFD children can
have as, uh,
I believe it's called Counted
Income or some sort of
acceptable income, um, with an
AB account, Madam Chair and
Representative, you can actually
take money, um, that the that
the uh children in CYFD custody
are afforded and put it into an
AB account, so it's.
And then I saw I saw in here
where the department will pardon
me, madam Chair, Madam Chair,
Representative. I saw where the
department will, uh, I see them.
Listed as the representative.
Hey
Who, who all can be a
representative payee as he's, as
these young people move through
the system, Madam Chair.
Um, Madam Chair and
Representative, um, one of my
understandings is that a tribal
agency. So in this legislation,
what we wanted to do is say,
CYFD already exhausted all other
options, payee, um, but Madam
Chair Representative, if you're
looking for a larger list, I
might turn that to my expert
witness. Amy, would you mind
addressing that question?
No worries. Um, this, the Social
Security Administration, um, in
its palms, which are its rules,
uh, in implementing its
regulations, articulate that
there is a preferred payee list
for representative payees
serving children. The list goes
from 1 to 7 in order of
preference. The, uh, I won't go
through all of them, but the
idea behind it is that the
person who is in charge of this
money should
care about the child, ideally
have a relationship with the
child, uh, somebody we could
presume will act in the best
interest of the child. Um, the
first person on the list is a
parent, then it goes to other
relatives and trusted adults,
and the last person on the list,
number 7 is the rep is the state
agency. So they are already
supposed to be serving as the
agency or the payee of last
resort. Um, they're not supposed
to be serving if there's anybody
else in the child's life who
would be
appropriate to serve, but it is
a very important that they be
there because unfortunately
there are children in foster
care who don't have relatives or
loved ones or people in their
lives that could serve and they
are no less deserving of having
access to their benefits.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
This could I, is there a web
somewhere I could just look up
the, the preferred just for my
own.
Perfed list of payees just so I
kind of know off the top of my
head, and then the second half
of that question is, how, how
many children would this affect,
Madam Chair Representative.
Madam Chair Representative, I
will leave the list to my expert
as well.
Um, and my understanding, Madam
Chair and Representative, is
right now we have up to 80,000
foster youth who are disabled or
have a deceased parent, so, uh.
Who would likely be.
I apologize, manager, 80,000.
Representative, yes, but once
again, I'll have my um expert
witness. Um, I, I want to
differentiate between national
statistics that I may have in
front of me and New Mexico
statistics. Thank you
and that's once that's answered,
Madam Chair, I'm done. Thank
you.
Amy, did you hear that question?
Yes, um, I can go through them
quickly. The first preferred
payee is a natural or adoptive
parent who has custody of the
beneficiary. The second is our
natural or adoptive parent who
does not have custody, but is
contributing toward the
beneficiaries' support. The
third is a natural or adoptive
parent who does not have custody
and does not contributing toward
the beneficiary support, but
demonstrates strong concern for
the beneficiaries's well-being.
The 4th preference is a
Relative who has custody of the
child or a stepparent who has
custody of the child. The 5th
preference is a relative who
does not have custody of the
beneficiary, but is contributing
towards their uh support. The
6th preference is a relative or
close friend who does not have
custody of the beneficiary, but
demonstrates a strong interest
in their well-being. The 7th
person, uh, the 7th entity
listed is a social service
agency or custodian.
institution and they actually
added an 8, which is any person
or organization not listed who
shows concern for the
beneficiary and is suitable,
willing and able to act as the
payee.
And then just, I'm sorry man,
I'm curious to follow up. How
many kids will
representative Anaya thought
maybe 80,000, can we just get
a Madam Chair representative,
those were national statistics
but I am getting, I'm getting,
um, our New Mexico statistics
right now, um, about 400 to 500.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, um, Representative
Reeve.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, um, so, um, I
know we're not talking about the
differences between the two
bills necessarily, but I, I did
search your bill and um I did
see one difference in the bill.
You, does your bill address uh
financial literacy in your bill,
representative, it does not. OK,
and I, I noticed that the Senate
bill did and so would that be
the only difference that I'm
sure.
Um, my understanding, Madam
Chair and Representative, I want
to be sure that we're titles,
um, one of which I believe has
mirror language and another, and
so I just wanna, uh, get some
clarity on, on which one
we're speaking about um
so it would be. So it's um it's
the one that Padilla is
carrying, I believe. OK, um,
Madam Chair Representative,
those do not have mirror
language, the one that mirror.
OK. Thank you. And, and on your
bill on page 3 line 2, section
C, just so I'm
understanding if the departments
determines that a child is
eligible for benefits
administered by the federal
government department shall
apply, uh, Madam Chair and
Representative, where, where do
they apply to? I saw that in an
FIR that.
Um, maybe that needed to be
clarified.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, I might also
leave that one to my ex mine
taking that question.
Sure. The majority of benefits
that we're talking about are,
I'm sorry, I'm, I'm, uh, the
majority of benefits we're
talking about our Social
Security benefits. So an
application is made through the
local Social Security office,
um, once the child is is
screened in and if appeals need
to be made, and that goes
through Social Security's
administrative process, as you
heard earlier, there are other
federal benefits with many fewer
children that are eligible, for
example, if a child's
parent dies while they're in
active duty, there is a death
benefit there from the VA if
they're in active duty, if the
child's parent was a veteran and
passed away after they left
active duty, there is a benefit
that they might qualify for from
the Department of Defense, uh,
which is a different, a
different benefit from sort of
their version of Social
Security. Then there are other
small federal funds set up for
specific things like railroad
benefits and black lung disease.
Um, smaller programs.
Greek population.
You know, we don't want to leave
any of these assets out. Uh,
it's better to be broad because
we have seen in some states that
in Nebraska, for example, they,
you know, used to take the
child's burial plot, livestock
and farm equipment. So it's
just, it's, it's better to be as
uh comprehensive as possible to
give these young people chances
to be self-sufficient when they
age out.
Madam Chair and represent just
to answer the questions so they
apply to what department?
Yes
That was really my question.
Social Security. OK, thank you.
Um, and on page 4.
Madam Chair and Representative,
the bottom of your bill 24 lines
24 and 25, can you explain the
last couple lines, the
department may use those
benefits to pay for the child's
unmet needs beyond what the
department is obligated or
required.
Or has agreed to pay. Could you
maybe give me some examples of
what may be unmet needs would
be, Madam Chair, I will also let
Amy take this one. I'm happy to
address that Madison share and
representative.
I apologize if I, if I overrode,
um, Madam Chair and
Representative, some of those
unmet needs and that language
comes from a Social Security
regulation that says if a
child's care is provided for
already as with a child in
foster care, the money needs to
be spent for additional unmet
needs. So that's where it comes
from. What we're talking about
for unmet needs for a child
whose parents have died, um,
just a few examples might be,
uh, that the
child would benefit from going
to a grief camp to process the
loss of their parents, which is
something the agency isn't
really able to pay for. Um, it
could also be to pay for
transportation to visit extended
relatives that don't live close
to them and that they want to
maintain a connection, or it
could be something like going on
their class trip to Washington
DC during high school, which is
an expense that the agency
wouldn't be able to pay for, but
their parents probably would
have if they'd still been.
For a disabled child who needs,
um, who, whose benefits might be
accessed while they're still in
care, there might be a therapy
or equipment or service that's
not Medicaid approved.
Um, but that would really help
the child, uh, participate more
fully in life. It could be an
adaptive device, um, there are
new walking sticks that have AI
that are uh changing the lives
of a lot of uh folks that don't
have sight, um, just as, as an
example that are, you know, not
quite covered yet. There are um
other devices that help kids
participate in classrooms, uh,
that are not covered under any
other benefits. So that is the
idea.
Um
For disability benefits, uh,
those are some examples of uses
that that could be appropriate.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative expert, um, and
now, uh, just kind of a
different line of questioning,
and I think um I'm just trying
to make sure I address some
concerns that possibly um have
been brought to my attention and
I think possibly yours also. I
just want to make sure they've
been addressed by the funding
and the challenges the
department, um, I think CYFD is
trying to ensure the bill's
provisions, you know, align with
the federal requirements and do
not unintentionally create
funding challenges for children
in CYFD.
Um, so can you explain to me,
um.
Again, and we may have discussed
this man chair a little bit with
Martinez's questions, rep
Martinez's questions, but so the
children in CYFD who receive the
SSI or the RSDI, um.
There are a number of children
who are getting this, is that
correct representative Madam
Chair Representative and expert.
Yes, Madam Chair Representative.
OK, so, um, the federal
regulations allow child welfare
agencies to use the SSI benefits
to cover child's basic needs
like food, shelter, clothing and
things of that nature, um, so is
there gonna be any um.
Complications between the
federal funding and that, can
you, can you address that a
little bit um chair as briefly
as you can.
I will then leave that to my
ex-ray, maybe just to get a
little more specific so it
doesn't go long, like maybe more
describe what benefits are on a
chair and representative and
expert, what are the um because
the bill doesn't define
benefits, I don't think.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Amy,
would you mind taking that
question?
Sure, uh, Madam Chair,
representative, uh,
Federal bill that was just
introduced, for example, uh, in
December uses the term benefits
and assets. So I can, I have uh
helped introduce 30 bills across
the country and states have
chosen to define the benefits
slightly differently in
different hearings, Federal
benefits, we are generally
speaking about Social Security,
but we have a few other smaller
benefit pools, so we don't wanna
exclude them. Uh,
States have chosen to include
the word assets, in addition to
benefits to cover, um, you know,
other savings they might have or
um
a work, you know, income that
they earn and want to save, so
I, I, I'm happy to answer with
any more specificity if, uh, if
you need something more
specific.
and representative, so CYFD,
just so I'm clear, covers what
expenses through um a main,
their maintenance payments.
From the general fund.
Adventure.
I would
Oops. Sorry, madam Chair, I
would pass that to Amy, but we
also have um Rachel from LFC
here as well, um, who can cover
a bit more of, uh, how this
works locally.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
the, oh sorry.
I was just I thought she was
passing
clarify so.
If they have SSI and they don't
have SSI.
What's covered.
Madam Chair Representative CFYD
has the same obligation to pay
the full cost of foster care for
all children taken into care,
regardless of their benefit
status. So federal law requires
every state to pay for the
foster care of every child
removed and New Mexico law also
requires that these, the agency
pay the full cost of foster care
for every child. So there's
really very little difference in
the services that are received
between a child with disability.
ities
Um, with SSI and, and that
without the only difference, uh,
the, you know, the, the rate is
the same whether the child has
benefits or not benefits, the
difference is whether the state
is paying for the care as
they're required to or as has
been happening previously,
whether they're passing that
cost off to the child.
OK, and so, uh, Madam Chair,
representative and experts, um.
You don't have any um concern at
all that um.
The the child's SSI could
actually be reduced or they may
become ineligible altogether
because SSI would count that
maintenance payment as part of
their total uh resources, are
you comfortable that that's not
gonna be an issue.
it's.
All right, um, Madam Cha and
Representative, I just want to
make sure it's clear
we didn't.
We can, we can move on to the
next question, thanks.
apologies, right, um, and Madam
Chair, representative, I just
want to make sure that there's
just no unintended consequences
that occur, um, because of this
um bill, so or or we stating.
As far a madam chair
representative experts that
there will be no um unintended
consequences with these benefits
that you're aware of, Madam
Chair Representative, I believe
that's correct. I'll just point
to page 3, line 16. Um, it
actually requires the department
to establish an appropriate
account to use, and I would
argue, Madam Chair and to make
sure that those um
Uh, except, um,
Offset, if you will.
And so, Madam Chair, represented
an expert on line 3, the, the
process is to establish that AB
account.
Madam Chair Representative, I'm
not sure there may be other
accounts um that would act in
the same regard. And so while we
don't spell out AB accounts in
particular. Um, we do, um,
Uh, have a shell, the department
shall establish an appropriate
account. We may not have um
included in this conversation,
those would also be eligible.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair, and
just on that subject, Madam
Chair and representative and
expert on page 3, so just can
you briefly explain,
I know we're talking about able
accounts. I know they're not
defined, which I would like,
would love for them to be
defined in this bill, but um.
The process.
The process on the 2nd page or
the 2nd part of page 3,
Can you just briefly describe
that process to me, Madam chair,
Madam Chair and Representative
in charge of this particular
process, which would be to
establish an appropriate um
account to use to make sure as
many as possible are going
toward the child themselves. Um,
they would also, um, need to
annually determine whether there
was a better payee, um, if they
were the, they would also need
to notify um the child and um
any of the entities listed at
the top of page 4.
Um,
of those accounts and of those
federal benefits. Um, let's see
here.
They would also need to, um, oh,
important one, avoid receiving
the overpayment of federal
benefits, um, as well, Madam
Chair and Representative.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
representative expert. And is
there a definition for best
interests of bill.
Madam Chair Representative, not
in this bill, but I do believe
it's defined elsewhere in law.
Do you know where it's defined
elsewhere in I don't, Madam
Chair Representative.
OK. Do you know what the
definition is? I'm sure case
law, Madam Chair representative,
OK, and could you tell me what
that definition is, Madam Chair,
represented.
Manage Chair Representative, not
at the moment.
I was just curious what that
would be since it's talked about
in your bill. And then, um,
Getting close to lastly, what
I'm asking about is your bill on
page 5, section 7, the report.
Um, writing or the report that
has to be delivered and where
does that get delivered to, it's
a legislative Health and Human
Services, Madam Chair.
Madam Char, yeah, uh,
representative, yes, and what,
what's the purpose of the report
and what does that Madam Chair
Representative, um, I feel like
a lot of the discussions that we
have, I'm sure in judiciary, but
also on the healthcare
committee, um, is that there, we
might um establish pieces of
legislation, but there's not a
lot of follow up. And so this
Madam Chair, representative is,
um, to help put some um amount
of oversight into the spill, um,
to make sure that, um, the
department is specific entity.
OK, and Madam Chair represented
that's and is that an annual
report?
I'm sure.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
yes, it is.
And then you list on the bottom
of page 5 the different things
that have to be and Madam Chair
and representative an expert at
that.
It is reflective of the
beginning, um.
I qualifications that um um when
determining whether or not uh
children have actual benefits,
and whether they're being folks
are being notified in
appropriate ways, um, and also
whether or not those um dollars
are flowing to representative.
Thank you, Madam Speaker.
Excuse me, madam chairman would
do pass 364.
We have a do pass on House Bill
364 made by Speaker Martinez and
seconded by leader.
Pansky, please call the roll.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative Abita.
Representative Chavis. Yes.
Representative Hall. Yes.
Representative Hochman V. Hill?
Yes. Representative Martinez?
No.
Speaker Martinez, yes.
Representative McQueen,
Representative Reeb? No.
Leader Sapansky, yes.
Madam Vice Chair, Madam Chair,
yes, Madam Chair, you have a due
pass on House Bill 364.
Thank you.
We have finished our agenda and
we are adjourned.
