Sure you are muted right now I'm
sorry.
Did you get me.
With the role.
We.
I was told that Representative
Matthews is decided to not ready
to do House Bill I.
Until eight o'clock we were due
back on the floor of the house
so I thought it would be best to
start with our easiest bills are
simplest hello.
And Representative Nibert is one
of the sponsors on it so you
could actually begin.
If Representative Eli I just
realized it was on to that's
good.
Would you be ready
Representative number two house
bill one eighty.
Yes ma'am I am
okay very good.
Sure and committees house bill
one eighty yes Mister Michaels
is a bill that really
something we did last year where
we originally
passed the bill to enact the
uniform law on notarial acts.
I didn't realize that and many
others didn't realize it until
it was called to our attention
by some of the lawyers around
the state that we're concerned
about section fourteen dash
fourteen dash twenty nine.
What section does madam chair
is.
Yeah.
Brings them the inspection of
public records act to the
journals that are to be
maintained by notaries.
And there's some concern.
That these private journals
would then be subject ever
request and so the bill that's
before us today is to simply
remove that section of wall from
the uniformity aerial acts and I
might note about section is not
in the uniform law that was put
into the law by someone when it
came through the committee
process through this legislature
last year and so the bill is
simply removing section fourteen
dash fourteen a best twenty nine
from the uniform law notarial
acts number one to make it more
like the uniform law but number
two to exam or to not allow for
a request to get the private
journals of the notaries well I
might note madam chair that I
think can in connection with
notarial acts yes there are if
there's someone who questions
the
notarization of documents the
knowledge meant.
They can always subpoena and
depose or secure interrogatories
from the notary to determine
those issues anyway about that
and
For for for many many many years
so won't change the ability of
litigants to to access that
information from the notary but
it would prevent a fishing
expedition by members of the
public to secure private
journals of a non governmental
entity which would be the
private notary and with that the
madam chair all I see that the.
The the true sponsor of the bill
is is that water and he may want
to add some and and madam chair
we also have with us registry
best policy packet she's a
member of the uniform law
commission she's a former
What decided council service
director and she's very familiar
with your important laws and so
I believe would like her to be
our our expert on that but
Representative Eli may have some
some words and I want to further
introduce our best tactic.
madam chair I don't this is just
something we need to collect I
think representative Nibert to
provide an excellent job thank
you.
Perspective would you like to
add anything.
Well I think you said you said
you and I know we're just just
came on also I just had one
letter that there are two
dollars no appointee to the
commission of send a letter that
she was very concerned about its
because of the very personal
documents that clients have to
have notarized and she just has
very serious concerns about this
section in the in the.
In the in the act my only
comment was that it's not a
uniform act and it was not
reflected in the title of the
bill was passed simply said
revised uniform and directing
the secretary of state to do
there was no recognition.
Our knowledge and that this was
part of part of the act.
Madam chair at all I would like
to also introduce Roberta Cooper
Ramo whose work the model law
firm in Albuquerque and is also
one of our experts.
Would you like to say something
I don't think I can add much to
what you've already said
Representative up but I do think
first of all let me say how much
I appreciate everyone taking the
time to deal with this because
it's really a deeply concerning
matter and I know was all you
have to deal with and the thirty
day session of the notary Act is
not something on your agenda but
hopefully you'll paid attention
to it as has the governor one
thing I might also note is that
the requirement for the journals
are much different than it used
to be and so there's an
opportunity for a huge amount of
mischief I I have here of the
journal is required and for
example.
Even if somebody only ask for
the for the page with the
notarial information on it if
you have to put in exactly what
the identification as the
driver's license a passport you
have to actually put in the ID
number so somebody can get your
passport number or your driver's
license number and the date it
was issued and the date was
expired on and just an enormous
amount of mischief could be done
so I'm very hopeful that this
committee and that the
legislature as a whole will
simply delete this section which
as you all know it is not part
of the uniform act in any way
thank you.
Thank you madam chair with that
we will stand for questions.
Okay let me go and see if we
have any observers today who
would like to weigh in on this
so we'll put up a quick twenty
second call those in favor of
house bill one eighty and those
in opposition.
Here we go.
Okay the polls closed we have
seven people all in favor and I
would like to
See if anyone needs to make a
comment I think has been very
well explained and it's pretty
simple it looks like one person
has.
Raised shown in Congo go ahead
and.
Thank you very much good
afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Shannon Kunkle and I'm the
executive director of the New
Mexico foundation for open
government notice fog for short
we would just like to make clear
that fog has no objections to
repealing the section that
pertains to the inspection of
public records act a private
journal entries of the notorious
acts contain personal
information and should not be
open to public inspection
therefore fog supports H. B. one
eighty thank you so much thank
you very much we're going to go
to members of the committee
first I have Representative with
we.
Excuse me.
Thank you madam chair.
Mentors and divert.
Look at the the statute and I
guess I'm
I understand your concern but
It.
Being able to review and that
the governor's chair or.
Is
that correct.
Madam chair representative on
just right to use subsection
that says members of the public
may request journal entry and
audio or audio visual recordings
related to a specified notarial
act.
Transaction pursuant to the
inspection of public records.
That to me is very clear that
the members of the public could
secure that Representative
journal entry.
Sure arisen niner it's it's just
that journal entry it's not the
whole journal right.
I certainly.
We're we're think about our
could be read that way I would
hope that that would be the case
but it also says audio visual
recordings so if you have
multiple
multiple.
Knowledge mints at the same
transaction I suppose about
audio visual recording would
probably capture.
Possibly simultaneous.
It is about time
yeah I'm those are private
journals and.
If we're against me that but I
can always get that information
through the discovery process
but outside of that realm I'm
concerned that members of the
public could do some fishing out
operations and and get some
information that should
otherwise be gained
Confidential and proprietary.
Madam chair Senator
suppose a I'm a party to will or
perhaps another party to will
and
you know the wheels miniaturized
the the state has been left.
To someone else and I I think
there may be a new includes and
I want to see if it if that will
I want I want to know more about
the militarization do I have to
file a lawsuit first your.
Would it be reasonable for me to
inspect that one notarization in
another chair.
Personally I believe that you
need to file your lawsuit and in
that case you would need to not
only are.
Talk to the notary you would
need to talk to the two
witnesses that would be
witnessing that document for the
information that you would be
concerned about so I I I don't
think that.
A journal entry in and of itself
would would that get you very
far other than reflecting some
what I would consider private
private information
That would have no bearing on
whether or not that person was
subject under the undue
influence.
Appreciate your goal I I just
looking at the statue section
via the statute says naming the
notorious Act transaction with
particularity so I just I think
the fishing expedition
description might be a little
overstated I don't think you can
obtain an entire journal I think
some of the Tory Alacer being
videotaped.
Especially if they're being done
remotely which currently is now
an option.
you know it I.
Disagree I just
I think the
The need for the repeal has been
overstated and I was surprised
when I looked at the actual
statutes you what's that.
Madam chair.
Representative the
It would be surprisingly easy
are you could go to the county
clerk's office which is
something I do on a regular
basis and every document off
virtually every document in the
county clerk's office is
recorded and thirty recording
statutes require almost every
instrument there's a couple
exceptions but almost every
instrument to be acknowledge
which means it is subject to a
military Act and so it would be
quite easy to.
Secure information that a person
would otherwise be.
Prohibited from obtaining even
in the county clerk's office so
I think that's that's the issue
that has been raised now that
it's come to light and maybe
miss right good good elaborate
on that that point but I think
that's what the real concern.
Madam chair is it okay for me to
speak yes.
Thank you very much.
That's exactly right first of
all let me say that there's no
reason to have something related
to aircraft in a notary statute
and so one of the concerns is
that people won't understand yes
and it's not just somebody sues
interested Representative
point it's as members of the
public so anybody so one of the
things that would concern me is
that somebody for example who
wanted to take advantage of an
elderly person who knows they
have a well and they know who
their lawyer is simply can
request the at the entry which
as I've said before the journal
that's required has personal
information that could be used
in a variety of ways to take
control of of many things that
we wouldn't want to have happen
any governmental document is
subject to impress but these are
private documents another
example might be somebody who is
a and I'm happy expels and wants
to cause as much trouble as
possible to
a former spouse knows who their
lawyer is there just a member of
the public and some of the and
they can specify what the
documents they want a copy of
these are there well or maybe a
copy of their prenuptial
agreement and the information
that they could get even from
the journal could be extremely
damaging and I think it is
very troubling thing when
anybody can't part of what the
attorney client privilege is all
about is to make absolutely sure
that people have an opportunity
to have their own private
documents private.
Madam chair representative
Nibert
Three no
Thanks for your answers.
You representative madam chair.
Other for the questions from
committee members.
What's the pleasure of the
committee.
Yes I'll second that madam chair
we have a motion for two passed
through one of the sponsors
Representative Eli in the second
from Representative Lewis is
there further discussion.
The
clerk to call the roll.
Representative Akan yes.
Representative Armstrong.
Representative Chandler.
Yes.
Representative Cook.
Mr speaker.
Yes.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Lewis yes.
Representative McQueen I suppose
so.
Representative night we're.
Yes.
Representative Rehm yes.
Representative Townsend.
Yes.
Mr speaker.
I'm not sure what we're voting
on that because Representative
Townsend voting yes I will vote
yes as well.
By Jessica Benham.
Yes.
Madam chair.
I am eleven two zero we have a
due pass on house bill one
eighty.
Chair thank you both very much.
That was pretty pretty wily of
representative the live not to
be here on time.
I am correctly chastised thank
you madam chair thank you very
much thank you all for your
service thank you it's great to
see both of you
this right now and this Tackett
thanks for coming.
This was madam chair was is the
notary bill yeah.
The most consequential piece of
legislation in at least a
decade.
Hey.
Okay.
We're now going to move on house
bill sixty eight.
Which is what we're bringing
back up folks they went to work
on the committee some and so
we're ready to discuss that and
we should have Representative
Representative Dixon is here.
Go ahead Representative Dixon.
Good afternoon madam chair.
Representative Dixon.
Yes I'm here now thank you.
Great I'm and madam chair I do
believe that secretary but we is
also available and in attendance
if you can be moved over as well
in case there are questions.
He's there okay.
Madam chair we have a committee
substitute that I believe has
been distributed.
To all of the members.
Madam vice chair is going to
take over I have to go to
appropriations for a moment and
so we need to move that
committee is up for discussion
purposes and then.
You can describe that to the
committee and the audience.
Thank you madam chair we have a
motion to move this committee
set up for discussion purposes.
Madam chair all do that.
Thank you Representative Eli
Representative Dixon might you
read the two oh two number on
that well some of us the great
on the share file.
Sure thank you madam chair it is
to to to.
Five to four point two.
Okay representative if you'd
like so that we can reflect the
work and adjustments you made in
this up why don't you please
start with presenting the this
it would be helpful if you can
talk about the distinct changes
that have been made since you
were in front of our committee
last we'll do that first then we
will go to public for comment
we'll do our pull that are
public comment will return to
committee but if you might
please provide us with the
highlights of your committee sub
so by the time the public gets a
chance to weigh in on they know
what what we're up to today
thank you Representative Dixon.
Thank you madam chair I'm so
House Judiciary Committee
substitute house bill sixty
eight
Starting from the original so
section one is unchanged from
the original bill.
Section two is the previous
section three of the original
bill
It includes the addition of
language
In the exceptions to the law for
someone participating in a
lawful shooting activity it does
not change the existing penalty
in the law so what is in the
substitute is what is current
law right now there's no
proposed change to that.
In section three it is section
four of the original bill and it
it is not changed.
Section four.
Is section five of the original
bill and it is unchanged from
the original bill.
And then finally
section six it.
section five sorry is section
six of the original bill and
what we have done is removed the
mandatory component of the
proposed sentence enhancements.
in addition there's another
change that was made based on
some of the committee questions
of last week and that was
section I do delta
and we have deleted the word
transaction and replaced it with
a fence.
To provide additional
clarification.
And I believe madam chair that
that is a summary of the changes
in the substitute and
differences from the original
bill.
Thank you Representative Dixon
I just want to confirm I see a
couple of members with their
hands up do you have access to
the committee set up otherwise
we'll come back to the committee
after public comment but
otherwise you're good and you
have access to committee sub.
Thank you Representative Nibert
in Maine so we'll go to public
comments and then come back
Public you're pretty familiar
with our process here in House
Judiciary we are first going to
put up a poll asking if you're
interested indicate whether
you're in support or opposition
to HB sixty eight and now it
specifically would be this
committee so we'll do that
first.
Well we have this pull ready I'm
going to ask that folks are with
us on the zoom today if you're
here and would like to speak in
opposition so against HB sixty
eight please raise your hand
will go to those in opposition
first.
so far today we have several
people participating
we have about just over half of
those in in opposition to HB
Sixtyeight and just under half
of those here in support of HB
sixty eight we'll go to public
comment now you'll have one
minute each you'll be unmuted
and your name will be called as
we turned up to hear your
insight.
Starting with Diancie will make
cash.
I get afternoon committee it's a
little bit hard to follow but
from my understanding there's a
not a lot will change in terms
of defining new crimes
increasing some prison time I
appreciate some of the changes
that that happens but I still
don't think it'll make
especially safe there's no
evidence really just suggested
increasing penalties we have in
place will make a difference and
it would be expensive.
almost everyone will come out of
prison and it will be the best
you can have best outcomes for
them and for us who are in the
community the community a return
to and longer periods of
incarceration actually increases
that is and worsens outcomes so
that's not helpful I know you
all have our well being at heart
I do appreciate you for that as
I said before but I do urge you
to vote no thank you so much.
What are.
Thank you Dan staff might we
also be able to get our timer up
if it's possible next we're
going to go to Lucy let Campos
thank you.
Members of the committee my name
is listed in the combustion and
the policy manager with gold
futures we propose HB sixty
eight.
New Mexico is deeply impacted by
gun violence though Cumberland's
huge impact on our lives as New
Mexicans and hands them all
these have not proven to reduce
gun violence and have been all
these do not address the root
causes of violence.
There has been a significant
recent uptake in the use of gun
violence of guns by our young
people in New Mexico we must
address the reasons why young
people are seeking outcomes
young people need access to
quality healthcare mental health
care substance recovery programs
housing and many other forms of
support even gun control
policies that can truly reduce
gun violence policies and
procedures like HB sixty eight
although amended may simply
drive more young people in need
of resources into our criminal
legal system I ask that you
please vote against HB sixty
eight thank you.
Thank you before we go on to the
other speaking in opposition
I've been asked to confirm one
more time the to to number
Representative Dixon to make
sure our members have the right
share file link could you go
over that one second actually
funny put up one more time on
the screen well have you read it
again.
Representative Dixon.
I thank you madam chair it is
two two two five two four point
two.
Okay thank you Representative
Dixon members I do have access
to this on the shared file just
quickly you're going to go to
the.
Folder that says let's see I'm.
You go to the date so you go to
February seventh folder you
Madam click on the folder that
says of course HB Sixtyeight
within that folder you have to
find a file that says H. B.
Sixtyeight CS dot pedia and
there will have this committee
set up with this this correct
number.
Members let me know if if we
need to pause for a minute while
folks find that committee so.
Anyone okay we're going to
proceed with public comment next
speaking in opposition we have
Erin Jones.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Darren
thousand with the ACLU Mexico on
while we respect the intent of
this this legislation we stand
in opposition to we believe that
I'm creating new crimes is not
going to have our problems like
many of the speakers who spoke
for me and we need to invest and
and smart real solutions that
address the underlying causes of
crime in our community thank you
all so much for allowing me to
speak.
Thank you next we have Rikki Lee
Chavez.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee Rikki
Lee Chavez legislative
coordinator for the New Mexico I
want to employers association we
appreciate the work to address
public safety concerns by the
sponsors and advocates however
we respectfully oppose the
measure before you I'm
encouraged the members of this
committee to do so as well we
appreciate the changes I think
they did address some of our
concerns however we are still
concerned that as residents or
citizens of New Mexico we
recognize that we are in a time
of increased violent crime
instrument our communities and
part of addressing those
concerns is to not increase
penalties and not create new
crimes that do not have a
meaningful impact as they are
responsive to events in which
people in which crimes have
already happened in order to
prevent more people from being
in our criminal legal system and
are overcrowded correctional
facilities and understaffed
correctional facilities we
encourage our legislature to
create systems that stand
individuals up instead of a
society that fails them and then
box them up thank you for your
time.
Thank you it looks like that's
all of our participants that are
wanting to speak in a we have
one more we have miss Kim Chavez
Cook with that they will go to
you.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I thought my hand
was up so I panicked and you
said that Kim Chavez Cook with
the law offices of the public
defender and I also respectfully
stand in opposition and asked
the committee to do so I do
appreciate the the changes that
have been made already but I
what it just highlight one
particular concern that remains
which is in the the last section
of the bill which was just
amended in twenty twenty to
increase the enhancement period
the trade off and that in that
change was to limit it to when I
will economic is actually used
and right then that this version
of the bill still returns
possession mere possession into
the enhancements which doesn't
mean even possession on your
person it includes possession in
your car near you or under your
bed or in your closet if it's
near you because it doesn't have
the language we used to have
which actually required use and
so that is a serious concern for
us to be talking all this time
on to people sentences when the
firearm isn't actually even used
to commit the crime and we would
ask this committee to propose
legislation for that reason
thank you.
Thank you now we are going to
those in support of HB sixty
eight if you'd like to speak in
support of that HB sixty eight
please go ahead and raise your
hands now.
Okay seeing no hands based on
the side we are now ready to go
to committee.
First we have Representative
Nibert and Representative Rehm.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you.
Representative Dixon for
dropping off copy
as you know I'm working on a on
a a committee set up and
hopefully soon all have it
improper for mental share with
you but.
Let's go to page three one
twenty three.
You additive or participating in
a lawful shooting activity but I
think that's a real good
improvement
what we did not address is ten
point twenty five that number
two section that goes over to
the next page but with the new
language almost thank you could
totally number two.
You could probably delete number
three as well anyway I I don't
know what your thoughts on that.
Madam chair and Representative
Rehm
If that's something that the
committee would like to do
I don't see a problem.
Madam chair and Representative
Dixon will move on the.
The next one I have a comment
on.
Chair Representative Dixon was
go to page two to yeah we're
going to why can't we see the
the wi for brandishing a firearm
is three years.
So.
Now I want to go back to the
paragraph of bump that.
Where we're saying Hey if you go
ahead and you have a firearm and
you don't fire it the of what
we're gonna do is make it three
years and that doesn't seem to
follow correctly.
Madam chair and Representative
Rehm
Are you referring to section
five A. as compared to five B..
Madam chair and representative
diction correct.
I may year make the penalty one
year but if you remove section
eight you keep the existing law
which it is three years.
I think you ought to take a out.
Madam chair and Representative
what we're doing is
distinguishing between the
levels of
Potential violence and allowing
for graduation so there's a
distinction between use and
possession as opposed to
brandish meant and so that's why
there's the higher penalty for
Brenda Smith.
Madam chair Representative Dixon
I realize that's what you're
doing.
But the current law is three
years and what will be state of
the different way.
Okay if I were in ensure farm
and I'm not using the in the
commission of a burglary or drug
deal then the penalty is three
years but if I use it in a drug
deal for a burglary the penalty
is one year and that doesn't
make sense.
I think you need to take a out
we'd be standing the way it is.
And then you're then it flows
then she is five years so I just
started to.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative I do see your
point
I think though that part of the
intent of the bill was to
Be tougher on more violent
crimes as opposed to you know so
that we were really being
targeted in the enhancements.
Madam chair and Representative
Dixon I think you do exactly
that if you remove section may
and you keep the so if you bring
a gun that would drug deal or
activated but right you get
three years if you destroy
argent you're going to get I and
I think it follows the flow rate
you're trying to to have a
message.
I think that something we need
to fix and this the next we
don't want to get my next one
here.
So the section on page two so
the secretary of finance we're
now gonna reduce it from five
years which is the current law.
Two three years and to me that
that makes sense so I mean what
we're trying to do is say look
if you're going to go ahead and
use guns the police are going to
be stepped so I think we need to
stay with five years.
I guess.
So I think you need to stay with
the five years for the second
options which is the current
law.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative ram I don't know
if my expert witness
so I don't have secretary but we
would like to respond to that at
all otherwise I do know that our
other expert Mister James
Grayson was trying to log on and
I don't know if he's been able
to join as a panelist.
Or.
Yes Representative Dixon give us
one second to see if we can get
on now okay.
Is there now.
Been promoted to the panelists
might you be interested in
responding to this question.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you very much I
apologize I had internet issues
I did not to the question.
Madam chair Mister grace what
I'm pointing out is do you have
the the point two version bill
with you.
Madam chair representative
remake you not have that version
in front of me.
I have the original bill for me.
Okay I I may have the wrong page
but let's go to section five and
if we if we look at.
The point two is Page ten.
Yes it is it is section five is
the.
Possession use brandishing or
destroy our job of our.
So we look at section eight what
you're saying as if you're
burning a fire arm to a drug
deal or two then activated
burglary.
The penalty is one year.
But if you go to section the
which is the current law it says
the brandishing a firearm in any
instance is three years so we're
gonna lowered the penalty for
breaking to a drug deal or in
aggravated burglary but if you
use it it was state aggravated
assault or something like that
you're gonna get three years and
I've done followed correctly.
If you understand what I mean.
Madam chair representative
remote to understand the
question I think it's very
question Representative
agreement the way it will work
the way it works under the
amended bill is that the
section subsection eight applies
to use or possession.
Which is a less serious
Manner of using a firearm then
brandishing.
And I believe that's that's why
that subsection has the one your
penalty which is consistent with
the pre two thousand twenty
version of section thirty one
eighteen sixteen before two
thousand twenty there was a one
year enhancement for the use of
a firearm during the commission
of a non capital felony this
would limit the one your
enhancement to the use of a
firearm for possession of a
firearm during a serious violent
offence aggravated burglary or
drug transaction what the
penalty would increase stand for
brandishing and then would
increase further for discharge
consistent with federal law
which makes those graduated a
punishment distinctions based on
use brandishing report
discharge.
Madam chair and Mr Grayson so
what's what's just for a moment
take care graph allocate out
okay so if you bring a gun to a
drug deal or aggravated burglary
or anything the current law says
you're going to get three years.
Then we go to the next section
which is discouraging that and I
I agree with you with the
graduated you get five years.
But if you leave section eight
AM.
Yes once of a penalty to bring
orders for your gun.
At a drug deal that it is to do
it for an aggravated assault you
see what I mean.
Madam chair representative I I
concede that.
That that that
I can see your concern
Representative ring but at the
the way the section reads right
now is that it's the use or
possession and so if you if you
actually bring the gun out and
you threaten someone with a gun.
during an aggravated assault for
example which is a serious
violent offence under the the
definition in this bill.
that would be brandishing during
an aggravated assault with a
three year enhancement.
If you brandished during the
drug transaction it would be
also be because that would be
for example if it's a drug rip
it would be an armed robbery if
it's a an actual drug deal then
that would be a trafficking
charge which is a non capital
felony and so brandishing a
firearm during a serious violent
offence or during a drug
transaction would still receive
a third and three year enhanced.
But using or possessing a gun
during those very serious crimes
would now be would return to be
building a one year and a half.
As it was under prior law.
Okay.
Madam chair and Mr rations I I
disagree with that but you'd go
over to you page line line
twenty two and farm was
possessed or used in relations
to a drug transaction so I bring
in an outline displaying that I
I I think you ought to just
leave it at the three years you
don't need section may then you
go to be or the next section
were you discharged yet five
years I agree with that.
When you go to our the second
offense.
Currently it's five years and
you're reducing it to three.
Does that make sense.
The second offense ought to be.
You know more serious.
So anyway those are my questions
my concerns I think we need to
fix it I'm actually working on a
on a sub and it's not quite
ready once I have it all share
with you I do think that these
are are you know that the the
ideas in here good legislation
but I think we need to kind of
tweak it a little bit more
anyway madam chair that's all my
questions.
Is thank you Representative
green
other committee members.
With the pleasure of the
committee.
Madam chair I think we need to
do some more work on it before
we take a vote on it I don't
want to see it go down and I
think a little more tweaking and
will have a.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative Dixon without any
other motions being offered does
that sound amenable to you to
work with Representative Freeman
consider.
Possibilities to work this
three.
Thank you madam chair if there
are no other motions being made
then yes I think that
distinction is that
some of those suggestions are
more stringent and may not be as
amenable but we're certainly
willing to continue working if
there are no other motions.
Okay committee it looks like we
will potentially bring back HB
Sixtyeight at the sponsor and
other interested parties have
something else to bring to this
discussion thank you
Representative.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee thanks
for your time.
Next we have house bill one
twenty seven.
Representative McQueen I believe
that's you presenting.
Thank you madam chair actually
Senator Steinborn we'll be
presenting.
Let's see if Senator Steinborn
is with us.
Senator.
Untested is sherry.
We are ready for house bill one
twenty seven do you have any
other experts that you'd like
admitted at this time.
Yes madam chair could be with
you I am looking for first by
cell general counsel of the New
Mexico environment department
and.
John Hancock.
We do.
Noted okay we have Bruce in the
committee.
We repeat the second name please
John Hancock and Hancock.
Okay we have both your experts
and please begin your
presentation on H. B. sixty
eight okay thank you very much
madam chair.
Madam chair committee could be
with you again house bill one
twenty seven is a bill that
would do several things number
one it would prohibit the
storage and disposal of high
level nuclear waste in the state
of New Mexico similar to what
the state of Texas just it in
the last year and what three
other states have done.
It would also amend and kind of
update our radioactive
consultation task force which is
an executive level task force
and state law.
That looks of radioactive.
Storage issues in the state were
primarily was created for for
for wet but with upgraded to
include the state land office of
homeland security
Department which didn't exist
when the radioactive
consultation task force was
created the Indian Affairs
Department and others that
wanted to be included in that
task force they want to be
included in these issues and so
this is something we've been
working on for some time madam
chair committee for your
background I just want to share
with you that there's a proposal
that's a fast moving train
that's coming in the state of
New Mexico a proposal with the
Nuclear Regulatory Commission to
seek a license to build what's
called the consolidated interim
storage facility in the state of
New Mexico to potentially store
the entire nation supply of high
level waste spent nuclear fuel.
This is not what and I know it's
easy to confuse the two this
whip is a federal facility of
low level waste which is stored.
almost a mile underground into
and in salt caverns employs a
lot of people but it is
federally owned and and there's
a lot of federal money to ensure
safety this on the other hand is
a private company that has
there's simply that has no
comparable experience by factor
many many factors of anything
like what's being proposed
this proposing to take a has a
historic transportation
initiative in shipping.
Literally have two hundred
thousand metric tons of this
high level waste from all over
the country through all parts of
New Mexico via rail and it would
come in through all parts of
Ralph up parts of the state on
rail routes with armed guard top
secret only the governor would
find out right the fortunate
through.
And in unfortunately according
the company if there were to be
an accident with one these rail
cars it would literally be the
responsibility of a local
government and state The New
Mexico to do emergency response.
well it's seeking a license for
forty years with the
continuation of another forty
years and the biggest problem is
one of the biggest problems is
there is no federal repository
it's been designated madam chair
committee.
And the very significant and
real concern is that if this
place were to come in New Mexico
would never leave New Mexico it
would come and end up here for
something absolutely not
designed for it really as the
governor has put it the economic
malpractice and that is why in
Texas they passed a law against
it the oil industry is the one
leading the fight that in Texas
they're very concerned that if
an accident were not in this
facility would be in southwest
New Mexico southeastern Mexico
excuse me in Lee County they
could disrupt economic
operations in the Permian basin
and so this this could be
whatever economic upside you
think could exist this kid could
be billions of dollars of
exposure to the state in
multiple ways and so the
economic issue is paramount
And so
with that I want to say you know
that there's federal case law
madam chair committee is very
important for you to know about
the state of California actually
all the way up to the US Supreme
Court there was a court decision
called Pacific gas and electric
where the state of California
band new reactors nuclear
reactors from being built in the
state of California hi which of
course produces high level waste
in the U. S. Supreme Court
upheld that.
And so beyond that this bill
also prohibits us issuing
permits which is also in the
Texas law which is understood
purview of the state of states
rights to be able to have
permitting authority and
something acknowledged by whole
tech in the draft environmental
impact statement they documented
six state permits that they know
they need so we're really in
this case kind of taking a page
out of Texas is booking these
other states and saying that
You know this is a really bad
policy.
To to ship this way through the
federal government needs to do
its job and figure out a
permanent repository only move
this place once and so this is a
time this is our moment right
now to stand up for ourselves
before this facility gets
licensed and construction gets
so with that I I'm I'm happy to
stand for questions.
Thank you and because we do have
Representative McQueen and as
the house sponsor H. B. one
twenty seven I've asked him to
name his is the advocacy on this
issue and share the some of the
highlights he's bringing to the
table before we go to public
comment in case public comment
would like to hear from him and
and make their opinions heard
reflection of that go ahead
Representative McQueen thank you
madam chair madam chair Senator
work thank you.
The I. in the house sponsor of
this bill is brought to me by
Senator Steinborn I appreciate
that.
madam chair members of the
committee a lot of the
discussion on this bill that
there are
What people in New Mexico who
would like to see this not
happen there are some people in
Mexico who would like to see
this happen so there are two
sides all of the discussion on
the bill revolves around what
authority the state has to be
the fat you know can we simply
prohibit this.
And madam chair when we get to a
discussion from the committee I
will have a number of amendments
that address that issue and that
Taylor the bill to keep it.
Firmly within the state's lane
if you will the state has the
authority over some issues
related to the site it doesn't
have authority perhaps over
others and so the amendments
will address that when we when
we get to discussion committee
thank you madam chair.
Thank you so we're going to
public comment now I'm so we're
going to put up a poll as we
usually do and ask those in the
audience with us whether they
would like to indicate their
support or opposition to H. B.
one twenty seven will start with
that.
Okay we have a lot of people
joining into a in on this issue
today almost sixty people with
us about seventy percent of
those are here in support of H.
B. one twenty seven and about
thirty percent are here in
opposition to HB one twenty
seven some members of the public
group polite reminder here that
we offer this poll as a way to
capture the sentiment of our
participating New Mexicans an
audience today we're now going
to go towards public comment
what I'm going to first ask is
that those interested in
speaking against H. B. one
twenty seven or in opposition to
one twenty seven if you'd like
to speak you can raise your hand
now we'll go through you one by
one will call your name it will
have a limited public time are
up on the screen again we've
captured the the sentiment of
the audience in this poll but if
you feel so compelled to speak
you will have your chance to do
that afterwards we will go out
to those that would like to
speak in support so starting at
the top of that list we have.
Dale generate go ahead.
Members of the committee.
My name is Dale
Mayer Carlsbad to speak
opposition to HB one twenty
seven.
The local government to
pods crone recounting invited
okay to New Mexico to seeking or
just last.
Cooperate because we understand
the need to diversify our
economy this project is very
important economic development
in our area the state.
Contact project is safest and
most secure grant storage
technology available in in our
state is in the process we're
technical review will also noted
nuclear power easy absolutely
central to tackling the climbing
Crisis.
Project is not present any risk
our way of life including oil
and gas.
But we would not have been not
able to order you where there's
not in case we need to oppose H.
B. one twenty seven thank you.
Thank you more we appreciate you
weighing in today next we have
antibody is yes a.
Thank you can you hear me.
Yes.
Okay thank you settlement and
committee members thank you for
giving me the opportunity to
speak I am the director of
municipal services and capital
programs for the city of
Carlsbad I would like to express
my strong opposition to house
bill one twenty seven here at
the city of Carlsbad were in
favor of the future economic
development opportunities that
companies such as Holtec bring
to New Mexico this project
anticipates creating over three
hundred fifty jobs in
construction operations and
security these jobs will serve
to further our economic
development goals we are
confident that Holtec project
will provide a safe secure
storage facility and it's
important to our area and to New
Mexico's overall economy in
addition approving this bill
what would potentially have a
negative effect on current sites
such as we have Los Alamos and
Sandia labs our area needs to
continue to to diversify its
economy thank you Mr madam chair
and committee members for taking
these points into consideration.
Thank you next we have the needs
Madrid boy.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee I am
general counsel for the Eddy Lea
energy alliance and I'm strongly
opposed to house bill one twenty
seven it's almost identical to
Senate Bill.
That has been introduced by
Senator Steinborn for the last
three years the ban on
transportation and storage of
spent nuclear fuel in section
three of the bill is pre empted
by federal law.
There is a tenth circuit case
directly on point on this issue
and it's involves a Goshute
Indians versus the state of Utah
who tried to pass a very strict
laws against the siding and the
development of a storage
facility in Utah that was struck
down by the tenth circuit and I
believe that our situation here
in New Mexico is directly
related to that and I believe
the tenth circuit would also
find that it is preempted and
this law which should not would
not be upheld thank you members
of the committee.
Thank you next we have done
across.
Madam chair members of the
committee I'm a resident of
Carlsbad a local businessman
been here many many years I've
read and studied a lot about the
the train cars and the cast
stand the whole project and I
realize that as much as I favor
clean energy with windmills and
solar it's never going to be
enough to to really support the
energy needs we have in this
country and that we have to have
a solution for storing the spent
nuclear fuel where they're at
right now is putting large
population centers the lakes and
rivers and streams in danger and
I personally welcome the
millions or billions of dollars
and to the New Mexico economy it
would bring and I feel very
comfortable with having this in
my backyard and I thank you for
listening to my comments and I
hope you will oppose this bill
and now.
Thank you.
Thank you next we have rod
McCullum.
Can you hear me.
Yes.
Which yes my name's rob McCollum
of the nuclear energy institute
I'm a nuclear engineer in the
industry I represent is the
nation's largest producer carbon
free energy nuclear energy
produces a tremendous amount of
clean energy in a very small
volume of material if all the
use nuclear fuel material that
will be started the whole tech
site we're on one football field
would only be twelve yards deep
instead it is scattered across
dozens of sites all around the
country the scattered site
approach is costing taxpayers
more than one million dollars
today including the taxpayers of
New Mexico these facilities
become an important part of the
nation's carbon free
infrastructure by centralizing
the security maintenance
inspection of these materials
these are some of the safest
cleanest industrial facilities
in the nation we loaded thirty
six hundred of these systems
that are going to be stored
there over thirty five years we
transported over thirteen
hundred shipments please
consider this as part of New
Mexico not just benefiting the
economy of yourself these but
the United States health and
environment join the carbon free
conversation don't just say no
at the outset thank you very
much.
Thank you next we have John
Waters.
You Mr chairman members of the
committee I appreciate the
opportunity to.
Gives.
Some input to this H. B. one
twenty seven I'd like to
formally register my opposition
eighty one twenty seven my wife
and I will raise two girls that
haven't turned on come back and
raise our children here we chose
to come back to raise our
children after with open I see
the tremendous economic benefits
from the nuclear industry what
is brought to this part of the
state southeastern New Mexico on
the task of finding a solution
much of the nation's defense
waste we're proud of that we're
proud of the community was part
of the solution and not just
benefiting in in what creates
problems legislators mother
regions the state poses filler
unfortunately part of the
problem bus crucis depends on
twenty five percent of our
nuclear power Albuquerque needs
an ever growing supply right now
to let stand after some other
power plant shut down state that
will inevitably grow
imagining that nuclear ferries
don't make them use you'll
disappear
that that New Mexicans help
create it must be managed
government Stewart maybe someday
recycled and and eventually
disposed to any in the county
who do not currently depend on
nuclear our our offer temporary
but sit down solution used fuel
storage you know the same just
hired activists come back and
talk about so why this is that
in the use arguments that are
and prove that you get with the
aids we have a location it's
remote unpopulated state be
operated by population is most
adept in dealing with nuclear
materials in the world
all right you know for these
reasons are I think this band on
all storage disposal material is
short sighted currently in
opposition to such a simplistic
and shortsighted bill thank you
thank you next we have someone
called Sil- courage J..
Next we have Susan Crockett.
Good evening madam chair and
committee members my name is
Susan Crockett I'm a former two
term county commissioner and a
vice president of a local small
business in Carlsbad.
I am strongly opposed to H. B.
one twenty seven this bill calls
for the outright ban and wants
to stop a proposed project that
has been proven to be safe and
secure the local governments
have invited Holtec to southeast
New Mexico and to see can in our
state license to operate this is
because while we enjoy a robust
oil.
We understand the need to
diversify our economy again I'm
strongly opposed to HB one
twenty seven thank you for your
time.
Danny Fletcher.
Okay I'm sorry can you hear me
now.
Yes.
My name is Danny Fletcher I'm a
citizen of Carlsbad New Mexico
also banned the chairman of the
more Carlsbad energy committee
for cross stitch.
Well it's remarkable to me that
as a Carlsbad citizen people
lived and three four hundred
miles away.
Want to control what we're doing
here in southeast New Mexico we
know you all enjoying the
billions of dollars and
president number of the oil and
gas industry all the same time
you're trying to kill that
industry thank you state your
trying to diversify the other
part of the economy to place the
oil and gas but when we bring a
totally safe and by nine nuclear
project you want to.
You know we're never gonna grow
economically of the government
provided fifty two letters
levels of.
I am totally against house bill
one twenty.
Thank you.
Next we have Gary king.
Thank you madam chair I am I
think that the issue that
squarely before the committee
here is the issue of preemption
and and Senator Steinborn tried
to address that a little bit and
I'm wondering these now
admitting that the
transportation and storage of
spent nuclear fuel is safe since
he's changes arguments but
the Utah K. and the tenth
circuit was decided after the
the Pacific gas case and and I
think that the section three of
this looks very much more like
what the court struck down in in
Utah on the tenth circuit K. one
a straight man is is going to be
really hard to
to argue that it's not preempted
and then the secondary one where
it talks about licensing by the
state the Utah K. talk about
that a little bit as well and I
obviously can't go into it in
fifteen seconds but I think that
there are some real problems
there and it'll be interesting
to see the amendment so I hope
that they'll be some opportunity
to discuss the amendments but I
I I think that the Utah case
will end up being controlling in
this case and that section three
won't hold won't stand the
court scrutiny thank you.
Next we have John he and.
John he in you've been permitted
to talk.
I.
Good afternoon madam chairman
I'm and my okay now.
Can you hear me yes we can hear
you okay.
My name is John Heaton and I
want to clear up the fears about
transportation the sponsor
always in by the casks have a
fifteen inch one wall are
inspected carefully by DOT and
our state before leaving it will
be a dedicated training twelve
cars two engines and a security
car with guards and guns and
that also monitor the car
sensors and it is satellite
tracked maximum speeds on the
best track is fifty miles an
hour and reduced to twenty five
between Clovis in Carlsbad to
reduce risk the train has the
right away on the track there
have been more than thirteen
hundred shipments have spent
fuel an eight hundred shipments
of naval fuel without incident
and R. C. says risk of a cask
bridge is one of the billion and
if a breach no nuclear material
is released only minimal
radiation shipments will begin
with one per month and gradually
increased to two this is a great
safe and secure project with
enormous benefits I hope you
kill this bill thank you.
Thank you so now we've made it
to the end of opposition so we
are going to ask that those in
support of H. B. one twenty
seven now raise your hand we
will start with June Parsons.
Under bill Judiciary Committee
representatives and.
Chair my name is Jim Parsons
from Rio Rancho.
I'm standing and strong support
for H. B. one twenty seven
restricting storage of high
level nuclear waste in New
Mexico by prohibiting state
agencies from issuing building
permits because temporary is too
often permanent and because the
radiation threat to many
communities along our railroads
is too high train derailments
during transport of nuclear
waste contaminates communities
all along the railways all over
this state and larger use of
agricultural land that could be
unusable for decades if not
centuries and contaminating
rivers the water we drink am
going into the food we must be
in the air we must breathe for
these and other significant.
Reasons I implore you to please
please keep New Mexico state and
both for H. B. one one twenty
seven thank you.
Thank you next we have our
gardener.
Madam chair and committee thank
you for having me on I support
H. fund H. one B. one twenty
seven.
I am a resident of Eunice New
Mexico and I believe New Mexico
has done its part and continues
to do its part in the energy
production and nuclear waste
disposals New Mexico must
continue to protect and think
about it's it's interesting in
the environment and also to
protect the potash industry.
To concentrate all of this high
level waste across the nation in
one price has never been done
there is no model to follow my
concern is also for the
transportation on trains
recently at sentence on November
seventeenth twenty twenty one a
train carrying waste to waste
control specialists.
Accident with the car so
transportation needs to be
considered even sorrow it seems
to not be in our hands thank you
very much thank you next we have
Karen both the NMAA.
We have parents when you make.
It is
sharing committee members thank
you for letting me speak my name
is Karen boning.
Are you tired Albuquerque
teacher and unpaid activist.
I feel that H. B. one twenty
seven is vital to protecting the
health safety environment and
economic security of all New
Mexicans and I urge do pass
vote.
I attended the hearings the NRC
bearings in Roswell and
Albuquerque and I raised a
question that I have not yet
seen an answer to.
And it concerns the monitoring
of the tracks any insane person
any terrorist could place and I.
E. D. improvised explosive
device under the track.
Anywhere in New Mexico by dark
of night and I don't know who's
going to pay to monitor the
tracks for that kind of activity
twenty four seven no one has
answered my question in our
state or elsewhere and.
Thank you for allowing me to
speak please vote yes on A. B.
one twenty seven.
Thank you let Mexico to each get
at all.
Yes good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee please
get out with the Sierra Club
Yogananda chapter representing
over thirty five thousand
members across New Mexico we
strongly support H. B. one
twenty seven which bans the
storage of high level nuclear
waste just second in Texas
Oregon and other states already
have laws prohibits the state
agencies from issuing local
permits just like they did in
Texas and adds key positions to
the radioactive waste
consultation point we just
simply cannot allow we succumb
to our state New Mexico is a
major minority state with over
fifty percent being Hispanic
around twelve percent indigenous
tribes nationally approximately
twenty percent of the population
is Hispanic and about three
percent and indigenous New
Mexico has a long history of its
land being used for nuclear
development and experience in
the subsequent health impacts
contamination of the land and
water and displacement of its
existing economy it is time for
us to end the cycle we are put
us here please support H. B. one
twenty seven today thank you
very much.
Next we had me I'm Andrea.
Thank you madam chair and
committee for the opportunity to
speak my name is mandatory
Hammersley in a staff attorney
with the New Mexico department
to loss center my family's also
from two of Representative down
under community impacted by the
to the nuclear test hello Center
strongly supports each B. one
twenty seven.
Mexico has long services
sacrifice on for the development
of our country's nuclear arsenal
from the ongoing contamination
and health affects of uranium
mining to our own people being
exposed to toxic radiation from
nuclear testing instead of
transporting more nuclear waste
to New Mexico Law Center
supports addressing the existing
apartments contamination and
state from uranium mines
developing environmental
remediation industry over
economic economic opportunities
to impacted communities New
Mexico is well within its right
to reject nuclear disposal site
to protect our land water can be
used thank you and please
support H. B. one twenty seven.
Thank you during Grogan.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is sterling Grogan and the
colleges to have lived in
northern New Mexico for forty
six years I urge your support
for house bill one twenty seven
as a member of the Los Alamos
National Laboratory citizens
advisory board I have some
familiarity with nuclear waste
New Mexico already has lots of
nuclear waste that must be cared
for into internet we do not need
more nuclear waste brought to us
by a company whose motive is
money our motive when dealing
with nuclear waste must be
safety not process I urge you to
give house bill one twenty seven
a do pass thank you.
Thank you next we have that the
director route and the NMED.
Yes at the directorate.
Thank you madam secretary
members of the committee I'm
Rebecca Reyes deputy cabinet
secretary of the environment
department and I'm pleased to
represent the department and the
administration and speak in
support of H. B. one twenty
seven the bill is very timely as
a federal license process is
well under way as you've heard
and the NRC is reaching the end
of their safety environmental
reviews for the proposed Health
tax storage facility without a
federal permanent storage site
in place we view that as
licensing process as essentially
betting New Mexico for de facto
permanent disposal of spent
nuclear waste.
The environment department has
been actively engaged throughout
the federal environmental review
process the past few years
throughout that process we've
raised significant environmental
concerns that have not been
adequately addressed any
process.
Lastly I just closed it with a
noted the importance of the
provisions of the bill that at
the Indian Affairs Department
department of homeland security
and emergency management and the
State Land Office to the
radioactive waste consultation
task force thank you madam chair
members of the committee.
Thank you next we have a leak
that they're here.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is eight that
Trujillo with energy minerals
and natural resources and we
support this bill H. B. one
twenty seven is consistent with
the law Lujan Grisham
administration's position
regarding and Representative
storage of spent nuclear fuel
and high level waste in New
Mexico there is currently no
permanent disposal strategy for
spent fuel and high level waste
in place anywhere in the country
so interim storage is de facto
permanent storage also it makes
sense to expand the radioactive
waste consultation task force
EMNRD's what transportation
safety program already
coordinates with those agencies
I.
M. B. program manager for the
for the what transportation
program so making those entities
into the process as it relates
to not just with but other
Has as materials.
Would be very beneficial for the
state so it makes it would make
it official being that were
already coordinating with those
agencies thank you.
Thank you next we have yes.
Good afternoon chair committee
members of my name is yes ours
are and I'm a member of the
nuclear issue study group and I
am just here along with other
members of and I just need to
protect New Mexico our land
people animals water and air
everything is at risk if more
waste allowed to be transported
and stored in our state the job
wrote proposed proposed by
Holtec are not ethical claim
jobs and we cannot morally
subject New Mexicans speaker
exposed and exploited anymore
than we have already been with
our long history with the
nuclear industry human and
mechanical error are always and
enormous possibilities and we
cannot risk the livelihood of
communities today and the
generations to come please pass
pass H. feet one twenty seven
thank you.
Thank you next we have a thing
that Christodoulou.
Good afternoon madam chair my
name's at the necklace to do
though I'm a retired navy
nuclear engineer and
environmental engineer as well
as the vice chair of the
environmental justice caucus New
Mexicans are still bearing the
scars and cost to their health
and environment of the uranium
mining this is an egregious
nimby not in my backyard on the
state level yes we do need
nuclear power as a bridge to
renewable energy but we will
still need to close them to
honor our environmental past
which has yet to be fixed leave
the waste where it is to remind
the big states like California
New York otherwise we know is
going to be out of sight out of
mind and they'll continue doing
business as usual and the clock
is ticking to make that
transition to clean energy
happen fast and then that waste
can be still in our backyard.
Maybe Holtec can go to them.
In any case please pass H. B.
one twenty sep twenty seven
thank you one twenty seven thank
you.
Thank you next we have Carol.
Thank you for your service to
New Mexico all of you I am Carol
Merrill retired teacher
librarian author of two books on
a key as a member of St
southwest to Laura Alliance for
the state future I am in favor
of H. B. one twenty seven I want
to live in a land of enchantment
not a toxic wasteland we must
not be a glow in the dark
dumpster for every other
people's waste if it is safe and
profitable why don't they keep
it where it is now if we could
trust the nuclear industry there
engineers would have solved the
toxic waste problem by now.
To dump this stuff here doesn't
solve the problem it just moves
it when there is a serious
accident the offending company
would go bankrupt no insurance
covers health effects or
property damage from nuclear
accidents read your homeowner's
Apollo policy the solution is
leave it where it is now in
twenty inch thick containers.
Similar to what survived
earthquake and tsunami
implication mass thank you
please support age the one
twenty seven.
Thank you next we have drummers
at a.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is drawn with several and I am.
A former governor for the public
deal and currently serving as
vice chair for all public consul
governors thank you for the
opportunity to provide comments
on behalf of the APC junior
representing our twenty San Juan
Pablo nations and New Mexico and
Texas in support of the H. B.
one twenty seven as you know our
proclamations have Stewart
extensive areas of New Mexico
since time immemorial and
although we have come a long way
our communities continue to
experience disproportionate
impacts to our health or
environment and culture ways of
life as a result to exit impacts
of the nuclear fuel cycle
include development
transportation and storage the
historic and ongoing culture
losses and health effects
experienced by our people can
never.
Fully be compensated to recover
in twenty nineteen the PC G.
non unanimously adopted ABC Jim
resolution twenty nineteen dash
fourteen recognizing the
proposed transportation campaign
of send nuclear flu imposed.
But risks to the health of our
environment communities and
irreparable harm to public
culture resources located near
our own the transportation
routes in New Mexico's major
rural roads and highways systems
transfers through portions of
public lands within communities
near residents and schools for
this reason a BCG of poles
opposes the transportation of
sent nuclear flew across public
lands and we continue to urge.
Main for traditional
consultation for this
undertaking in conclusion to all
public comments of governor
support H. B. one twenty seven
to ensure include inclusion that
consideration of Pablo's and
tribal concerns in the state
decision making regarding this
project thank you.
Thank you to the pueblo council
of governors next we have any
issues.
Good afternoon madam chair
members the committee thank you
for allowing me to speak my wife
and I are third generation
owners of the small right she
quite County
and in twenty seventeen the
department energy attempted to
initiate a project about two
miles more south fans to very
high level nuclear waste three
miles deep and boreholes and
this too is counted as economic
development but immediately what
happened was our land values
tank our neighbor was attempting
to set up is to pass along his
ranch and get things initiated
value and the his that the
appraiser said until this if
this happens we don't know what
the body is going to be but it's
going to be down others had the
same issue around there so it's
not economic development
economic replaced that we've
experienced it I'm I also say
that Sandia labs and twenty
nineteen in our gap analysis
said that the canisters
identified that the currently
the what possible the race
tracks the canister Department
your chloride induced corrosion
stress cracking is poorly
understood and as a primary.
Are these canisters are the are
not safe thank you for we
strongly support H. B. one
twenty seven thank you thank you
we have Marlene Perot.
madam chair and members of the
committee.
I would like to I am sister
Marlene paradigm and member of
the southwest
southeast Alliance for a safe
future and New Mexico interfaith
power and light.
I am in support of one twenty
seven for the following reasons.
Marlene we seem to have locked
you I'm not sure whether to hear
Marlene that Marlene
The waste.
Can you hear me.
Yes I can now I'm not sure if
other.
I don't know but my connection
to your mining but I'm gonna go
ahead and we're going to prepare
your timer and we'll have you
try to get on your public
comment.
Thank you.
And I and the sister of mercy
remember of the southeast
Alliance for safe your church
New Mexico interfaith power and
light I support H. B. one twenty
seven for the following reasons
one the nuclear waste policy act
enacted in nineteen eighty three
maybe the management and
permanent disposal of commercial
spent nuclear fuel which is
growing by about two thousand
metric tons annually a federal
responsibility as of the end of
twenty nineteen about eighty six
thousand metric tons of
commercial spent nuclear fuel
we're being stored on site at
seventy five operating first
shuttered nuclear power plants
in thirty three states according
to the government accountability
at hi for phones that until a
permanent solution is found we
restore this wastes posed to the
side of generation as possible
utilizing more robust casts and
hard and storage facilities
thank you very much blessings.
Next we have and what can.
One more time and walk in.
Next we're going to Leona.
I'm looking.
Okay chair and members of the
committee and public.
HAT Leona Morgan inject twenty
eight and on the conditions
change on educator need
additional.
I just wanted to start out by
saying I am not in impacted
person directly but as it didn't
happen individual and voter on
both the Navajo Nation in the
state of New Mexico my family
has been hurt by uranium
production which was both for
nuclear weapons and this deadly
form of nuclear energy.
This is a national problem with
some of the most radioactive
toxic stuff we do not deserve to
be dumped on again we are
depending on your vote to
support this very important
bill.
And I want to thank the sponsors
for bringing this forward please
vote yes.
Thank you.
Thank you next the burden on
that.
Madam chair and members of the
committee
J. Joseph Hernandez you Mr
cloaking slash Medicaid by
searching addition to trick not
too dissimilar.
I am from the community of
Shiprock New Mexico we are on
the nuclear transport highway.
And I S. C. nuclear disposal
containers coming to my
community on a weekly basis.
This industry has devastated my
family there was little I know
about my chase because he worked
in the uranium mine and the only
members I have of him is of him
suffering from being a uranium
miner and I am asking this
committee to please a past this
the house bill one twenty seven
on behalf of of my relatives.
Thank you when we started public
comment just that was the last
person with their hand we had
several people right that has
been sent I'm just gonna need
now we have about seven eight
folks left and walk into the
second time will be the last
that we have it looks like seven
people at thank you just the
after that we'll we'll and and
and market.
And next we have John Bushehr.
Hi my name's John boxer I live
in Santa Fe a concerned citizen
One of the goals I think of the
state should be putting pressure
on the federal government to
establish a permanent
repository.
In the mean time establishing a
temporary storage location here.
Eight to the potential problem
that.
it's going to be a long time
before the federal government
makes a decision.
In the process the the casks
that hold the fuel pellets the
those fuel rods are surrounded
by a material that degrades over
time and it gets very brittle
and so.
What happens is that you can't
move those anymore.
So please vote for this bill
thank you.
Thank you next we have care next
that the New Mexico State Land
Office.
Good evening chair and members
thank you for hearing this bill
this evening and for those of
you who don't know me I am here
next I am the deputy
commissioner of public affairs
for the New Mexico State Land
Office and if you don't know it
is our minerals state where this
is supposed to be very on top of
so we stand at the very
concerned party we have been in
front of you for the last two
legislative sessions now urging
you to it anymore please add us
to the other agencies that are
missing from the oversight task
force to that task force that
way if and when the NRC.
Commits to allowing this to
happen in our state that we
lease are prepared I don't have
to tell you all that we did
stand last year in front of
everyone with our oil and gas
less sees all around our
minerals state who also listed
in.
Your is you to take the actions
necessary to stop this
development in the Permian so I
appreciate it has H. B. one
twenty seven and sorry I'm late.
Thank you reinvent the bonnet.
Hello can you hear me.
All right so my name is Benjamin
Monet thank you honorable chair
and committee members for the
opportunity to speak today I'm
proud to have been born in New
Mexico and I just don't want to
see it turned into more of the
nuclear dumping ground then RT
is now I recognize that people
in southeastern Mexico are eager
for the prospect of new jobs
that will tack storage facility
would provide and I respect the
people need Johnson job
stability but I have to ask at
what cost is this the way to
support our Carlsbad families
will take never guarantee safe
transport of radioactive
materials traveling thousands of
miles by rail your numerous
community it's accidental leaks
or spills are liable to cause
absolutely devastating harm
birth defects cancers radiation
poisoning even tax it's simply
no joke and because there are no
plans for permanent teacher
disposal and we New Mexicans
would probably just be stuck
with it with no and site it does
not make any sense to shuffle
this exceedingly hazardous waste
through dozens of communities
across thousands of miles.
Radioactive waste is too
dangerous and I urge you say no
to New Mexico as a secretary and
so on and vote yes on H. B. one
twenty seven today thank you.
Thank you next we have gained
more.
Came more.
Can you hear me I'm so sorry.
Just muted yeah James more thank
you very much for the thank you
for the opportunity to present
this to the to the the the group
but my name's James more and I
on green century exploration in
Midland Texas for an oil and gas
exploration development company
expression production company
I've had the good the good
fortune of being able to work
closely with Fastenal ranching
governor governor Abbott's
office and and a lot of of oil
and gas operators and leaders in
the community over here speaker
Craddick
and we we would strongly oppose
said the Permian basin petroleum
association with that there
there's I I met hardly anybody
that supports nuclear waste in
the Permian basin for a whole
variety of reasons which are
this or this so it puts a great
industry which is the main
provider in this area at risk of
any any kind of catastrophic
event which is possible it may
not be probable but it's
possible we're most concerned
with the terrorist attack this
is at that this this material
both in Andrews county and and
over New Mexico is at the
surface and it's highly
vulnerable to all sorts of
terrorist attacks and
unfortunately it's interesting.
It is that that my time.
Yes it is there were next going
to Stuart what thank you.
I'm sorry can you hear me now
thank you.
Okay.
Madam chairman and committee
members we have a national
problem here that that really
needs to be solved by the
national mindset of people where
we use our collective minds and
rational decisions come up with
the resolution and something to
solve this problem that really
needs to be solved not in a
private company which once
something goes south of private
company the declared bankruptcy
and all of a sudden we the
people New Mexico overstock with
radio activity and we don't need
to have a New Mexico is one of
the most beautiful state it's
done share for nuclear power
maybe we are the answer in the
future but let's bring this to a
national level discuss it at
that level give it to some
private enterprise to destroy
our beautiful lands thank you
very much.
Thank you next we have delivered
now.
Good afternoon are sharing
committee members my name is
Julia for and all I am the
director for public action
alliance and I'm from Sandia
pueblo
I'm here in solidarity with the
Pueblo and Dinesh communities
that have been impacted by the
Lakers Sierra uranium and
nuclear waste
We are here in support of H. B.
one to seven and urge you all to
vote yes.
Just.
Thank you very much all.
Right now we
act does does not have the
community's best.
Starman this is.
The National no problem and to.
Sir.
say comprehensive so.
Lucien by the governor.
Can you hear me.
What this bill we urge you to
also see a nuclear within our so
called New Mexico thank you.
Thank you finally we have and
walk in.
And what can.
For the final time.
Okay with that we've concluded
public comment and now we are
going to return to the committee
I Representative Townsend Here
first.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you.
Representative Senator is.
I just want to make sure that
everybody understands.
That.
And he and Lee counties.
Who have studied and been.
Involved in this.
Potential development for years
are both supportive of this
project Senator are you aware of
that.
Chair Representative yes and I'm
also aware that local
governments in the region some
of them including childhood fast
resolution supposed.
And
Senator.
In your district you have a
white sands missile range down
just.
Madam chair representative not
not in my district but in our
county yeah.
And do you suspect that there is
activities that go on in that.
That cost transportation of.
May be explosives or
dangerous facilities that go
through.
Any Lee County going to your
county all the time.
Well.
Here Representative I guess it's
possible but I mean I I that's a
hypothetical I really don't know
the answer to.
And I think that's important we
have thanks go around go on
around us all the time I mean
there's facilities that Pantex
to transport all across New
Mexico
very very often we have Los
Alamos that has transportation
in and out of the at we have
Sandia and and downtown
Albuquerque
you know all of these things go
on all the time
Senator Representative of.
Madam chair.
Our.
You understand that those cast.
Have been tested.
extensively is that correct.
Madam chair representative yes I
am aware of that and I'm also
aware though because and I'm
just for everyone's benefit I'm
also the chair of the
radioactive and hazardous
materials committee of the
legislature the Senate house
committee it's a two year
chairmanship I'm in my second
time doing that we've had
numerous hearings and actually
study issues involving these
Casper extensively you may not
be aware that there been
problems with these cast they
have not been infallible in fact
there was a design flaw with the
U. Max hi store container such
that the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission told all tech they
had to change back to a previous
model is this high Max use or if
I'm saying that correctly model
that they're planning on doing
this with so they have not been
infallible another thing I've
learned it's super important
lesson for everybody to be aware
of this it's not always what you
can plan on and anticipate when
it comes to nuclear accidents
it's it's just it's access you
don't plan for only is what
happened with that with a lot of
the wrong kind of Kitty litter
into a drum.
And it costs an explosion of a
drum they were supposed to load
it with I believe in organic and
they loaded with organic it was
on the wrong label material
something having nothing to do
with the drum design and it
literally caused an explosion in
a billion dollar that so things
happen and when you're dealing
with a historic scale that we're
talking about here and and and
also say that order I ask the
Nuclear Regulatory Commission
for safety records of dry cask
storage across the country
because they regulate try cast
their been almost a hundred
safety incidences involving our
dry cast around the country just
over the last ten years so you
multiply that out on the scale
of this project over forty years
you can get a sense of what we
can expect and then we exceed
the actual
international experience with
dry cask storage then we become
a real can you take on a massive
scale so.
Welcome.
Madam chair and senator that
gesture that you were talking
about was loaded at Los Alamos
say wasn't loaded it yeah.
Think that the.
The problem that you're talking
about.
Actually occurred my
understanding and Los Alamos and
then it was transported all the
way through
of the state was safely I'm
allowed that was safe late but
in position with the M. where
before there was any problem and
it was
It was an accident but it was
safely transported in what
you're saying.
Yes.
I think everybody needs to
understand yet as that the
transportation still occurred
very safely Senator let's say
for example that this project
was a project that.
That you happen to agree with do
you think that you could propose
a bill for approval without the
federal government being
involved.
Schools.
No Mr Madam chair representative
you know that the the federal
government is involved in this
issue there is a federal
listening but but I wouldn't
agree with this because it's
dumb policy.
This is this is this is policy
being promulgated by.
The company.
This not in the interests of New
Mexico or the nation our state
because this place is not going
to ship through our state so
should through the entire
country so it's thank.
Madam chair and senator.
It's my understanding.
When you were talking about the
cascade those.
Well.
Mexico or maybe that was all
part of the design and testing
of the casket was to perfect the
cast and since the M. these
Casco had I mean Madam been hit
by trucks and run and bike
trains and dropped and had
explosions around them and all
sorts is that and none of them
have failed not a single one of
them after they have been
perfected and it's my
understanding there hasn't been
a single.
A single occurrence where they
have failed since that and there
have been any lakes I have a big
you know I.
I think what.
This bill proposes to do it in
as it's it's crying all.
Without letting the.
Processes.
That have been approved by the
federal government run their
course.
And I I understand where you're
coming from.
But I think we all have to
understand.
That every day.
In New Mexico.
Where.
Cheerio is transported down I
twenty five I. forty to eighty
five sixty to one eighty comes
across on eighty two from Pam
tax.
We have has shipments coming in
and out Sandia lab has stuff
coming in and out Los Alamos
have stuff coming in and out and
going after.
One particular.
Side that is strongly supported
by the to communities would be
no different from maybe going
after Los Alamos and Sandia or
you're still the FY stands that
quite frankly has been operating
safely for a number of years I'm
sure that have accidents out
there but they continue to
address some and they improve
their operations and I am
standing in opposition to your
bill for that reason I I believe
the federal government has
preemption.
They have a process that's
proven.
You have communities that are
supportive.
And.
I have listened to a lot of the
testimony today and I would have
to tell you that of the sky is
not falling but the process can
be done safely and we should
miss madam chair.
Senator and Representative we
are left just run its course
currently I believe there's a
couple of cases before the
courts
concerning yes licensing is that
correct.
Madam chair representative there
is.
And.
Yes yes it wouldn't be proper.
Or asked to allow the court
process to proceed without
without us trying to run in and
run around them.
I'm sorry yes madam chair
representative know that they're
really totally separate issues
the the there are cases
contesting the federal
government's legality in issuing
a permit we're really talking
about here states rights.
And and empowering our rights
to.
To issue permits are not issue
permits and to not what this
material stored in the state the
state so it's really kind of
want one that challenges the
federal government's forty one.
Claims our own you know inherent
authority.
I think the federal government
has already spoken and they said
that the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission was the agency with
the authority that has been held
several times
I believe that will be held
again and I believe it's the
right process
for us to address this issue I
I.
I'm.
I'm a little bit.
Trouble I don't do that
I don't think it is in the best
interests of our state.
To.
And start ourselves at this
point.
In this process I have.
We all want to state operation I
mean everyone of us do madam
chair and senator I think when
you look at hello Tax operating
history.
it tells me that they have
worked hard to perfect.
Their operations I have
opted nuclear engineers.
who had looked at the sign and
smiled and said sweet this is
the way this store the staff.
so I think I think the process
desires.
All recognition that there is a
nuclear regulatory agency that
the federal government has said
it has the authority to approve
monitor and control the
operation and we should let it
wrong so I will stand in
opposition to your bills but I
do appreciate you bring it
forward
madam chair.
Representative Senator thank
you.
Thank you next we're going to go
to sponsor medically and then
potentially hear his amendment
to this legislation.
I'm ready to offer those minutes
now if you're ready.
Yes Representative thank you for
that I need amendment that are
in our shared file or you be
bringing them to the committee
now.
Madam chair I'll be bringing
them to the committee now.
Okay I'm.
Representative McQueen and that
would be if we need to note a
motion to discuss the matter.
For amendments for breach
amendments plus to change the
title do you want me to do that
one at a time or should I
describe all for.
Do that had occurred
Representative McQueen and then
I appreciate that we have room
to discuss each one by one we'll
take action on the should the
committee desire to add level
package.
The manager I'd like to see the
total for last
because the amendment will
explain the changing the title
rather than resources.
Representative so the first
amendment so so again there's
not sufficient preemption and
it's clear that the federal
government can preempt the field
when they want to it's also
clear that the states retain
certain please powers over
activities within their state
you know where that dividing
line is is the tension and what
we're trying to do.
Through this bill and
particularly through the
amendment is make sure that.
This bill is on the right side
of that line this bill is within
the.
Within the powers of the state
of New Mexico and I do think
Yeah I'll say now that you know
we have we have some local
support with some local
opposition
this this proposal absolutely
has statewide impact.
it in my opinion would
stigmatize the entire state and
that's just having here.
The state will be far worse if
there's ever an accident.
so mention the first amendment
would be on page two.
One fourteen.
So this is dealing with the the
commission.
the task force excuse me so it
currently says the task force
self child of your sheet for the
state with the federal
government in all areas relating
to the siding etcetera.
The proposed amending that after
the word areas online fourteen
add a comment in other words
including economic come out
water quality environmental
justice impacts comma and the
reason we're adding this is
because the state lacks the
jurisdiction to regulate the
site on safety grounds but it
retains jurisdiction over these
other areas and so we're just
making it clear that these other
areas are included.
Within the scope of the task
force.
And then chair I I would move
that.
The friendly amendment and you.
All.
Amendment has been moved for
discussion with the second
Representative Eli on the phone
name that this amendment would
be considered friendly and we
have the amendment in the share
file.
Though we clarified Mr speaker
that we do not have the
amendment on the shared file
Representative McQueen is
presenting be that loud.
The question though madam chair.
I is there another version of
this or is this the bill as
introduced because I wasn't
wasn't tracking with what I the
Bill I was looking.
Madam chair this is an amendment
to the bill as introduced it was
passed through house energy
without.
So the two into number is two
two two one six five point one.
Madam asked the Representative
McQueen to please repeat his
first amendment it's in the
title right you're changing the
title.
Madam chair now we decided to
save the title changed until
okay discuss the amendment that
would necessitate a title
change.
And the bill is in the Here file
madam chair of the bill.
I just wasn't.
Wasn't following sorry.
Committee I do want to ask a
question quickly Representative
McQueen has offered to either go
through each of our amendments
and then take discussion on the
amendment afterwards or we could
cause and discuss each of these
changes one by one
you all have a preference of
what you would like to do
they're all four of them or
begin discussing discussion on
each one of these I think that
uniquely.
All.
But I think that New Mexico
coming here and.
I thank you madam chair what I
think you saying and you can
correct me if I'm wrong I think
you saying you'd like to hear
all for us you can not also
opened down okay I said that
right Representative Nibert.
Correct okay thank you and then
we'll continue to hear
presentation on all four please
indicate you come off my if you
do that the slow down or have a
clarification making sure your
tracking the amendment
Representative McQueen operate
them verbally otherwise we'll
wait to the end thank you
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair so the
second amendment would be on
page three line nineteen.
And it would restrict the or any
would undo the the line wipe out
of the or spent fuel so
essentially we're in doing the
change the recently proposed
change on a line nineteen would
be just a doing that back to the
original
yes the current statute.
That's the second amendment the
third amendment.
On page three line twenty two so
we're we're gonna strike the the
there's two provided that
clauses we would strike the
first into we would actually
strike
one twenty two after the word
that.
And then through the end of the
line next slide and then into
line twenty four in provided
further that.
So it is three there's one
proviso provided that the state
or political subdivision so
we're we're taking out there is
that there's an absolute
prohibition.
And we think that's beyond our
be on the state's powers our
intake that.
That would be the
The thirty minute.
And then the last amendment and
this is one of the would also
necessitate a title change well
actually there's another that
the substance type of change
teach for lying to.
After the work waste.
We would insert com.
Hello unless a repository Madam
has provided forty two USC one
zero one zero one for an
eighteen is in operation.
In what this is is saying it's
not a temporary facility in so
there is a permanent solution.
And if there is a permanent
solution that's one thing but
the problem is you know the we
have a federal law that requires
them to come up with a permanent
solution they don't have that.
So if we could put temporarily
put it in New Mexico for eight
forty year term that's renewable
for another four year term it
pretty quickly becomes permanent
in New Mexico this would require
the federal government to
establish a permanent repository
as they have already said they
will do.
Those are the four of
substantive amendments.
The title amendment.
On page one of the lines
twelve eleven with strike the
the storage or disposal of spent
fuels and high level waste and
replace that with the language
essentially the language I just
read this issue answer
certification of a prohibit the
issuance for certification of a
permit for the construction
operation of a disposal facility
for spent fuel or high level
waste until a permanent
repository is in operation.
So those are the
The five changes including the
title and I would I would move
adoption of those changes.
Okay committee before we go to
that that the nineteen year
we're just gonna make sure we
get this right for accuracy take
are fast after that without any
of the explanation we go back we
change one by one going down
Representative Michael you can
make sure they're capturing the
actual
amendment so again this time we
don't even the the discussion
just for you to go slower and
read through the amendment
making sure that that the
tracking that.
Thank you Representative McQueen
in committee thank you madam
chair and we were working on
these amendments types of not
for my benefit
and I'm of course happy to share
share my nose with the staff but
I will say all rural start over
beginning with the title.
On page one line twelve after
prohibiting.
Strike the remainder of the
line.
Strike one thirteen through
waste.
And and certainly there of the
issuance.
Or certification.
Of the permit.
For the construction.
Or operation.
The disposal facility.
For spent fuel.
Or high level waste.
Come.
Unless he permanent
repository is in operation.
Number two on page two one
fourteen after the word areas.
Search com.
Including economic.
Water quality in a viral
environmental justice impacts.
Com.
On page three.
Line nineteen.
Strike.
Strike.
The war the first occurrence the
word or which is currently under
lined strike that and replace it
with a comma.
And then remove the.
the lined out in the brackets
around were spent fuel.
Number four on page three line
twenty two.
After the we're that.
Strike the remainder of the
line.
Strike all line twenty three in
strike line twenty four.
Through the words that.
On page four wind to.
After the word waste.
Insert.
Comma.
A repository comma.
As defined in forty two USC.
One zero one zero one.
Current eighteen close Karan.
Comma.
Is in operation.
That's it.
Okay Representative impact your
bottom chair here and it looks
like we are going to represent
Council prepare these amendments
to make sure tracking them
appropriately but to make sure I
do feel that our committee has
the capacity to understand the
intention and implication of the
amendment we'd like to offer the
opportunity to discuss the make
sure we have an agreement about
where we would like the
committee to take these and then
give you room to reset our
committee get the prepared by
countless services and then
brought back to us but for now I
would like you and the committee
to have the opportunity to
discuss the amendment make sure
they are headed in the direction
that the committee would like
I'm so on the amendment madam
chair just to clarify we don't
have to be on the floor tell
eight so I think you have time
to get that done so it can go
out.
You know if if the bill is voted
out of committee.
Thank you madam chair
representative on the amendment
I'm in a very yes.
Are you on the amendment
otherwise I'm gonna go to
representative Nibert.
Great granitic it that you're on
the bill on the proposed
amendment Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair representative yeah
I do understand the impact of.
Members.
Why Aston Memon.
Requires a repository to be at
appropriations so my question is
how many repositories or an
operation that would fit that
definition today.
Madam chair
Representative Nibert I I can
answer that question Senator
Steinborn cancer that question
the answer is none.
The answer is the federal
government has committed to
establishing a permanent.
Repository they have thus far
failed to do so and yet the the
plans ship everything to New
Mexico for eighty years maybe
maybe less maybe probably more.
Yeah well they figure that out.
Mr madam chair if I could just
have Representative might be
helpful this the federal
definition the federal.
mark the federal reference there
in the amendment is to the gap
federal definition of a
repository that is a deep
geological permanent facility so
this amendment and tracking
really with federal law and
lining.
Aligning our deal with federal
law.
Madam chair.
Senator
I just what I was getting out.
You would not find that the
current waste isolation pilot
plant would fall within this
definition of a repository as
defined in the
United States code as being in
operation are you I understand
the answer from Representative
requiring.
Madam chair representative
divert no.
The the page site.
For type and level of
radioactive waste.
So your your statement that
there are which means the impact
of this ammendment frankly of
the of the bill.
Yes to.
Pro.
Our.
Yes.
Project of this type.
To receive proper permits from
the state or local governments.
Your.
Here is a number the impact
would be to hold the federal
government to their word that
they will identify and establish
a permanent site before they
ship the waste to New Mexico.
Madam chair representative.
It looked to me like your
amendment serves the.
But receive the permits.
last repository as defined.
Appropriations and there's not
any at appropriations.
So.
Permits can be granted to have
an operation because there are
none in operation how one ever
going to get apartment.
Madam chair representative
divert.
This prohibits the.
The granting of permits for
temporary facilities.
It does it does not is not
intended to address the
repository itself.
I suppose I I think I see your
point madam chair the numbers
that is the permanent repository
was being proposed for New
Mexico then at that cases might
be circular.
But that's that's not what we're
dealing with at the moment.
Madam chair representative not
to be argumentative but.
Basically this ammendment.
M. I mean you took out some
language in the language but the
crux of the matter.
You boil it down since there is
no repository in operation.
Is this.
The legislation and specifically
with that amendment.
Yeah prohibits a permit from
ever being issue.
Your amendment critical mentors
never to be clear the the
federal definition that we use
is not does not describe the
facility being proposed.
What we are saying is.
You're telling us this is
temporary you've told us you
will find a permanent solution.
Find a permanent solution.
Before you ship it to New Mexico
and forget that was supposed to
be temporary.
Well.
Thank you.
The language.
As I read your amendment.
Senator is no repository in
operation.
Absolute prohibition on any
person sorry to store or dispose
of radioactive materials comma
radioactive waste for spent fuel
disposal facility
You go further in your in your
language are you struck some
language but the state political
subdivisions shall not issue or
survive permit.
Or construction or operation
And so if we don't have.
Yeah we don't have a check and
and if we don't have a check and
we don't have a day I'm.
Basically it should just say
we're not gonna have any of
these that I think that's what
it says you may be more words
but the parents the effect of
your
Your your amendment and really
the effect of the bills are read
to have
are yes the question would be
Madam chair representative is
that your intention.
Chair representative divert I
guess I I the.
We disagree with your ticket or
a characterization because it's
more apples and oranges you have
the if that apple is the
temporary site in orange is the
permanent repository as required
by federal law those are two
different things so the Madam
chair tonight right they the
proposed change would prohibit
the issuance of a construction
permit for a temporary site
until there is a permanent site.
Established by the federal
government.
So this is not really a chicken
anna whether this is the federal
government has committed to
doing this.
We have reason to believe that
the storage in New Mexico would
not be temporary you you one of
the gentleman that testified
publicly today testified in
House Energy it'd be fine if the
waste was there to help me at
that time.
Enemy will be so what we're
saying is it's not supposed to
be it's supposed to be temporary
federal government has told us
it's temporary so the federal
government before the ship it
here for the quote unquote
temporary storage they need to
meet there at the other end of
their parking which is
establish a permanent
repository.
And the goal of this legislation
is in fact to block the
construction of temporary
storage until we can be sure
that it is in fact that for.
Maybe it's my fault because when
I was writing down your
amendment hi the word is in
operation meeting today.
Thank you just a Montoya so that
I wrote it down wrong very is
your amendment.
Requiring the operation of the
operation today or is it until
there is such an operation.
Madam chair representative
Representative Nibert.
The word in the amendment is
actually unless.
So unless a repository as the
provide federal law is in
operation.
Testified that there.
Are no appropriations so there
was Clause wonder maybe just.
It was clause doesn't really
have much meaning so so I mean.
It tells me.
We're we're telling the state
and local governments they can
not issue a permit for the these
types of facilities because
there are there are none in
operation.
Representative night Burt
currently that is correct and
that is part of the problem.
Is it your intention the to go
back to the word you used until.
I repository is M..
Operation.
Madam chair representative
Nibert I believe the word unless
captures.
The intent.
I fully believe that you're in
I'm just.
My reading thanks.
Absolute prohibition and your.
Arguing that maybe that's
not exactly your calf and if
that's not your intent of the
word.
Ill or
I think would be a more
appropriate term the user but
the.
That's my concern with your your
amendment Madam chair
representative.
Thank you.
On the amendment representative
County
thank you.
You madam chair first I have a
couple questions on the the
amendment on page two madam
chair and representative.
Fourteen the line that you are
amending there is language that
refers to all areas.
Would you interpret all areas to
include.
This health and safety issues
associated with the operation of
the facility.
Madam chair representative
Chandler
I mean yes that you're you're
basically saying all areas need
all areas and I don't disagree.
There are limitations on the
states ability to regulate
safety issues what we're we're
trying to do here is is
highlight what we can regulate.
By specifically calling it out
and adding the phrase including
these areas that we know we can
regular.
Well madam chair and
representative that's what I'm
getting at their when you say
all areas I think we all at
least those of us who present
the case law madam chair and
representative no it can't mean
all areas it cannot mean all
areas because federal funds law
has preempted our ability to
negotiate with the federal
government or at least negotiate
in a way that you could bar
something madam chair and
Representative McQueen in in in
in terms of health health and
safety issues associated with
the operation until it
disability madam chair and
representatives is that not
correct so madam chair isn't
Chandler I I appreciate that but
what we're amending here is is
as you point as you observe the
point the ability to negotiate
we can certainly discuss these
issues with the federal
government I I agree that we
cannot regulate we cannot
prohibit things on a safety
basis but that's not what this
this portion of the statute
says.
Well okay madam chair and
representative let's now go to
page three.
This may be the in the actual
bill so out if you wish me to
wait on this question but no
person shall store or to put
dispose of radioactive materials
or or radioactive waste and I
may not capture the amendment
there until the state has come
Kurt.
So
Madam chair and representative
all areas is something the state
can negotiate and if the state
is not happy with the outcome of
the negotiations on health and
safety issues for example would
that be a legitimate basis to
not concur madam chair and
representative.
Representative Chandler you're
correct we're we're staff for
restoring the language of the
existing statute which is
already on our books but then
tier Representative Chandler I
ask you to read further down
there online twenty one except
as specifically preempted by
federal law.
So we're knowledge in that
preemption in the existing
right.
Mr chair representative I'm
sorry to jump in but I think
it's important believe it or not
the federal government makes a
distinction between federal
facility in a private facility.
And our authority is a different
and our rights are different
under federal authority under
federal facility which is not
and don Hancock can speak to
that I don't want to take you
further down the rabbit hole but
that section of the bill deals
with the federal facility and
you'll see the work federal
there.
sell it.
So sorry to confuse you and
madam chair and representative
and senator thanks for that but
I'm not sure it it's my question
so.
Create the interest did not
answering so.
I'll wait until we get to the
bill madam chair because I I
started to dip drill into the
bill so at this point I'll I'll
leave it at that and I'll get
back to the bill one ready to
talk about that thank you madam
chair.
Others on the on the proposed
amendment.
Okay it madam chair way and if
we're doing something otherwise
but it seems that this point we
will be respecting House
Judiciary we will be sending on
Thursday Representative outlook
you madam chair.
Yeah for it to let people go yet
Representative McQueen tells me
he's in touch with Council
services let let's let him talk
about how what he's planning to
do so we can take a brief break.
Thank you madam chair and I'll
Representative be like if you
have something up that I did
once that once this is done I
just have a quick motion to make
but it's not on the bill.
Thank you Representative I will
go back to Representative
McQueen to update us on.
Madam chair
Madam chair.
You as I mentioned previously I
have the state that for for my
benefit we did work with the
council service in the
preparation of them.
For example I probably was
forgotten to then the title so
they are helping us I had
emailed my typed version to our
drafter I expect to have those
shortly
you know if there's other
discussion on the bill I'm happy
to address that I think Senator
Steinborn and experts and I
could could address that now I
do I would hope to get the the
amendment yeah within you know
yes probably proving of the
king at fifteen or twenty
minutes.
It and madam chair I also know
that the.
Representative Ely has something
on the other prior bill you know
maybe we go back and do that and
then and then turn right that.
Yes madam chair that's what I
understand too that
What we could do right now is to
spend discussion and tells us
time and Representative McQueen
has the actual.
amendment in hand.
And
So.
We can just start to press pause
on one twenty seven and to what
we had.
I actually ran and I'm back a
little while we.
Representative Eli
if you live.
So madam chair I want to go back
to house bill sixty eight
because we didn't finish that up
so I'd like to do a motion do
not pass on Bill Sixtyeight in a
motion to do pass on as she to
sherry Committee substitute for
House Bill Sixtyeight.
I hope there's a second
somewhere out there.
So second.
Also.
Okay Representative Armstrong
second that motion.
I know that.
I wanted to ask.
I was in the house
appropriations at the time we
discussed this bill so
It would have been.
Representative Dixon here right
now.
Madam chair she's of the
freshman dinner.
Okay.
I was told by those of you we're
here for the discussion of the
bill I was told that the
mandatory language was removed
and
I was in there and I'm just
wondering.
Where we are on that.
madam chair I think the problem
was she said so many of us were
distracted by other issues right
that's what happened but as I
understand the discussion it
ended and then we got to a
motion nobody made the motion
and I thought I'd better go
ahead and finish this up.
During my question.
Share Chasey where we left house
bill sixty eight was that
Representative Rehm had asked
for a little bit more time to
fix the bill with Representative
Dixon.
And that's what we left that
matter is that correct
Representative Rehm.
Madam chair and and this Kelly
yes that's correct I've already
spoken the Legislative Council
we're making the changes right
now hopefully I'll have it back
here in a while.
I'm if it's tonight the problem
is we don't have Representative
Dixon I'd like to get this
moving and there was no motion
on the table it was just a
discussion and so I'd like to
get this going and we can always
do it as we get to the floor we
can but I'd like to get this
out.
I think it's important I'm free
we're gonna run out of time
madam chair with that discussion
with Representative Dixon she
rolled the bill because there
was no our motion so that's
exactly right and madam chair
there is no motion and so that's
why there was no.
Iraq was no motion and I'm
bringing the motion now there
was no motion to table or parole
or anything else it was a
discussion and I am now making
the motion it is a proper motion
before the committee that is
correct it we have a promotion
proper second I'm just wondering
if there
are yes Mr speaker.
We can
okay.
Just Mr speaker is trying to
talk to us now now he just
wanted to make sure that when
the doctor came you can hear me
is on my cell phone so I'm just
going to well I think it was me.
Okay.
Into Representative will.
Representative Townsend.
Can you hear me now.
I can hear you.
I.
There's been a lot of
conversation and in fact of that
supported from use that we don't
put things out of this committee
there are fixed.
And here we are having had a
conversation and everyone who
collected the right that this
bill needed more no one would
make a motion.
And the sponsor.
And one of the members agreed to
work together to get it fixed
and I think the word of that
individual should be honored and
that's but we should to.
Madam chair if if the text gonna
happen tonight we can get it
back I don't have a problem with
waiting and we'll come back
we'll get it done but I don't
see any reason why this we're
ready to go I've made the motion
it seems appropriate to do the
sponsor name in here so I think
we get it done right now this
would be able.
I'm asking I'm a little confused
by what you just said
Representative behind.
Yeah so in other words what
happens is is hi we're sitting
there all of us are distracted
the discussion is died I guess
there was some discussion over
making me maybe making some
further changes but there was no
motion there was no anything and
I did talk to the sponsor to she
she would be willing to have me
make the motion tonight to get
it out of here yes
Representative Rehm wants to
make some changes that we can
look at tonight so that we don't
further delay this bill great
but my understanding is
everybody is basic well not
everybody but Representative
reading and I are both
supportive of this bill and I'd
like to get it moving and I'm
concerned that any further delay
could jeopardize this balance
insert isn't the motion on the
table it is appropriate for me
to make the motion and that's
what I've done and we have a
second.
Well madam chair with all due
respect the sponsor of the bill
is the one that made the
agreement to work together there
has been conversation with the
fourth for their ongoing
conversations with eight counts
all and that's the reason a do
not pass motion are tabling
motion was not made was a
across there was an agreement
with the sponsor to do that
Representative Rehm is not
supported of of the bill and he
said it needed some work all
right let's do this I I have a
Centers venture.
Yep.
I see Representative Dixon and
the attendees list with our New.
Right.
Everybody just hold on a minute
we'll get her here right away.
Should I madam chair hello there
you are somebody else promoted
you so.
So Representative Dixon if you
heard what we've been discussing
here in order to try to get your
your building is thank you
Representative McQueen I didn't
mind you interrupting appreciate
it.
Okay.
Yes madam chair.
Okay so I think what people
would like to do because
this is a bill that a lot of
people.
Wanted to get moving if possible
and
We're talking about if you would
continue to work on it before it
goes to the floor.
Is that what.
After it well is there.
We have a motion and a second
here a proper motions.
I think that would be wonderful
I knew you were it was conveyed
to me and I wasn't
appropriations that you had
agreed to work on a little
further with Representative
right and if you're willing to
have a discussion with him
before we vote on the floor I
think that might take care of
those concerns.
Okay.
Thank you.
Representative right did you
have discussions.
On the motion I see a hand up
there.
Well.
What we do is work on this
as we know it takes Legislative
Council would little bit of time
to get ready I've already spoken
with the Sean Dolan and he's
making the changes.
You know I can't tell you how
fast that would be it at that
but if you want me to call him
and find out I can but I don't
think this bill is ready for
prime time the way it is and
it's just gonna take up more
time on the floor when we get it
to the floor.
Well you know it's not unusual
for us to make four minutes the
Sanchez and others so I think
that we can probably live with
that
well.
Well madam chair you know I
thought we had an agreement to
go ahead and work on it and
Yeah.
If that's not the green meant
then.
You know I withdraw my support
so.
Just let it go where it goes I
guess.
Okay already well let's go ahead
and call the roll on the motion.
Representative Alcon.
The vote on.
House committee substitute for
house bill sixty eight.
Yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Chandler no he.
Representative Cook.
Representative.
Occurred yes.
Madam chair to the committee
secretary here my vote.
Lays you didn't call
Representative the line.
She did not know we did not hear
it.
You madam chair right hi my.
Medicare this Brian Egolf my
vote is yes.
It Representative Ely yes.
Representative Lewis.
Yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert.
Representative Rehm no.
Representative Townsend.
Vice chair.
I just like keep going muted.
Did you get my doctor.
Please listen.
I don't think she heard your
vote Representative Townsend
just a moment.
This I needed you for a moment
because there was conversation.
So you need to you okay I have
as well Representative Townsend
yes.
Thank.
Madam chair.
We.
Here I was.
I didn't hear representative
Cadena.
You know the.
You madam chair.
Yes.
Seven two five.
We have an do you do not pass
on.
House bill sixty eight as
amended and we have a due pass
on house bill committee house
bill sixty eight committees of.
Okay thank you.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative McQueen.
Muted.
Madam chair
I was just ten minutes.
Ten minutes.
That would be good.
Let's come back at six thirty
it's it's.
That's eleven minutes.
Okay.
Live it.
Six thirty.
Just a brief recess thank you
madam chair.
While members.
It is six thirty one so let's
see if we can get everybody
back.
Yes we're we're trying to get it
would not now we've got in our
share file.
Again or.
Two oh two number and make sure
everybody's got it.
We'll will look right at that.
The to to number is two two two
five five three point two.
Right.
Would you go through them.
Okay.
Madam chair of the.
Previously indicated there there
are five changes the first is to
the title.
On page one line twelve after
the word prohibiting us right to
remainder the wind straight line
thirteen through waste insert in
lieu thereof the issuance or
certification of a permit for
the construction or operation of
the disposal facility for spent
fuel or high level waste unless
a permanent repository is in
operation and so that that title
within read prohibiting the
issuance of you know so it
connects those those two
concepts.
On page two one fourteen after
areas insert.
Including economic water quality
and environmental justice
impacts in and again as
Representative Chandler pointed
out
the language already says all
areas but this just highlighting
those areas over which we as a
state have jurisdiction.
On page three line nineteen.
In that language it it's helpful
to look at the bill itself
because we're simply doing the
changes which were proposed to
the existing statute so you
strike the first occurrence of
the word war and certainly there
of the COVID and then removes
the brackets in the line through
were spent fuel that's the
second.
And since of the word war.
And then
On teachers.
Three hundred twenty two.
We're doing here is striking the
first provided that clause.
We're using the language
provided that so we straight
after the war that through the
in the line of the next line is
the following line through the
words that so we would then read
provided that the state or
political subdivision the state
shall not issue or certify so
again we're using existing
language in the bill it just
connecting it to the following
thought.
And then on page four line to
after the word waste we're
inserting unless a repository as
defined in forty two USC one oh
one oh one current eighteen
close friend is in operation and
that's the.
The the the permanent repository
that we have discussed so I I'm
pretty sure a.
That the amendment for prepared
by the Legislative Council
Service is the same as I
previously proposed.
Do you want to move adoption of
those amendments Representative
I would option those amendments
and I'll second that motion now
discussion on the amendment.
You can actually see them there
might actually be.
More discussion.
If I have any hints or.
On.
Representative Eli yeah madam
chair just a comment that I do
think that on these amendments
having read the basis of which
the one site was provided
anything we can do to kind of
limit the scope of this would be
helpful in terms of not setting
up red flags on preemption and I
think this works in the right
direction I really do I think
this is this is an attempt to
fall outside of our preemption
that accord  might approach so I
appreciate the job I do thank
you madam chair thank you
Sanchez.
Are there other discussions.
The comments on the amendments.
Let's call the roll on it up to
the and and and and I don't see
it in their hands up.
Representative up on.
Yes.
Representative Armstrong.
Yes.
Representative Chandler.
Yes.
Representative Cook.
Mr speaker.
Representative Eli.
Yes.
Representative Lewis.
Yes.
Representative McQueen.
Yes Representative Nibert.
Representative Rehm.
Representative Townsend.
Question.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Yes.
Eight two zero the amendment is
the amendments are adopted.
Okay so we're back on discussion
of the amended bill and is there
further discussion yes
Representative Chandler.
Thank you madam chair.
If I could just get some
clarification we were talking
about the amendment and then I
started to delve into the bill
so I stepped back a little bit
madam chair so I'm I'm going
back to that the the bill now
and the question I had four
Representative McQueen is and or
the attorney from the New Mexico
environment department is.
With the only basis for not
concurrent being half to be
economic water quality or
environmental justice impacts
madam chair and representative.
Chandler
You know the languages as you
know that is all areas including
the including because this is
not limited to those areas but
as we previously discussed you
know we don't have the ability
to not concur based on safety if
the bill the to discuss safety
negotiate regarding safety but
safety cannot be the basis of
our failure to concur and I'm
happy to defer to Mister as well
I pronounce that correctly for
his thoughts.
Madam chair may I speak.
What would.
Basil looks like the
So.
Representative members of the
committee.
I think I think Representative
McQueen.
Pretty well summarized it I'm.
But I will I will say for
example on the current draft EIS
that is being prepared for this
facility I'm the NRC has
recognized the state as a
cooperating agency and so areas
of water
They've engaged us is having
expertise.
I'm so there certainly you would
say we are in fact having a
discussion with them about water
issues that includes waste water
that includes to some extent
what.
Hazardous waste other than
nuclear waste that might be
generated at the site those
discussions have been going on
so that's an area.
I'm and then frankly
environmental justice is not
been on their radar
Economics is not been on their
radar in terms of impacts to the
state as a whole yes
so there is there a number of
places where.
We we dialogue now but as a
legal matter we they would not
be the case.
Madam chair and representative.
I then I'll turn on this bill
because I think the health and
safety issues that many people
discuss our weigh heavily
overblown.
And exaggerated and frankly used
to scare tactics to by some I'm
not accusing you of course Mr
Representative McLean.
Of of doing that and it the base
of many of the Basie's for
objecting to the site are not
well founded in science
something at least a number of
us madam chair on this committee
so frequently when discussing so
many issues these days and and I
find that very disappointing.
Very very disappointing that we
rely on those kinds of action
arguments to oppose a facility
that I believe has had very few
safety concerns very few and I
definitely do not buy into the
transportation it's true that
everyone seems to like to bring
up
the canisters in and they
transportation first
Means our mechanisms or tools or
whatever quit meant that use now
has been heavily tested and I
think it's been tested at Sandia
national lab I could be wrong
about that a facility that I
hope you're proud of that maybe
not.
because there seems to be a
stigma with anything that has
associated with national
security or nuclear nuclear
weapons and that sort of thing
so maybe we're not proud of
standing maybe don't trust the
work that they do madam chair
but I do I trust the science and
I yes trust the integrity of the
scientists who are working on
those activities on the other
hand madam chair
I agree that this has the
potential for being a long term.
site if not an indefinite term I
I don't I don't believe without
us identifying a a true
for efforts disposal site as we
did when we identified yucca
mountain
we will we will be placing
ourselves as New Mexicans as the
the site for high level waste do
I think that's a safety problem
I don't but I do think it's
misleading our residents and our
citizens and the country by.
By I'm pretending and buying
into that it's temporary it's
not temporary I really don't
believe it is until somebody
truly identifies a permanent
site and it will be on that
basis if I choose to support
this bill not on all the scary
stuff that people are misleading
the public with but on the idea
that the federal government has
an obligation to identify a
permanent storage site it has
for decades fail to do so and I
see very little movement in the
direction of of identifying such
a site and not it will be on
that basis it if I choose to
vote for this bill that I and
doing so thank you.
Zero is there further
discussion.
We were Representative Eli make
a motion go ahead R. I move I do
passive house bill one twenty
seven as amended.
Okay okay we have a motion and
I will second that motion.
Is there further discussion.
We're going to vote for this
bill than not although I
appreciate what Representative
Chandler raises and I know she
worked at one of our national
laboratories for many years on.
But.
It's just that I know there was
the storage facility in Denver
that has never been properly
mitigated the effects of the
problems and these things are
done on the premise that the
federal government's going to do
the right thing and yet it
doesn't happen so.
Despite all the.
Meticulous work I would say by
some of the scientists here.
I don't see that the Feds are
helping us out much.
So I'm I'm more inclined to
support your your bills
Representative McQueen.
So let's call the roll now.
Representative Alcon.
Yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Chandler yes.
Representative Cook.
Mr speaker.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Lewis.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert.
Representative Rehm.
Representative Townsend.
Vice chair because then a.
Yes.
Madam chair.
By a vote of seven to zero we
have a.
Richard.
By a vote of seven to zero we
have a do passed as amended on
house bill one twenty seven.
Okay.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you and particularly for
working with us and Legislative
Council sure Sir thank the
council service for their twenty
four seven we're.
Members I it seems that we are
can adjourned for the day and
might have a little time before
the for the money.
