Here.
Representative Chavis here.
Representative Hall here.
Representative Hochman v. Hill.
Representative Martinez.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen.
Here.
Representative Reeb.
Leader Sapansky.
Madam Vice Chair.
Madam chair
Madam chair, you have a corm.
OK. So before we get started, I
just wanna bring up a little
housekeeping item that was
brought to my attention by our
my dear colleague.
My
The issue has come up as to how
we post things and when we post
things on the website.
And um the suggestion has been
made that if it's not posted
within 24 hours, then that is
grounds for rolling a bill.
And I consulted with the author
of the bill that required
posting in the rule actually
says as soon as practicable.
So, you know, we all strive to
be as prompt as possible, um,
and we work very hard amendments
and CSs within 24 hours and
generally we're pretty good
about that.
But we have a lot of stuff that
goes on around here.
And our staff is tugged in many
different directions, so we will
do our best to make sure that
things get posted, but um, first
of all, it doesn't require 24
hours for the website.
Second of all, we're working
very hard to do it as soon as
practicable, and nothing in the
rule because it wasn't posted,
um, within 24 hours of uh the
bill being heard. So just wanted
to clarify that for everyone. So
we'll be working on the full
agenda today.
Um, Representative Thompson, you
have House Bill 78, um, the
floor is yours.
Madam Chair, and we do have a
committee sub.
And it has been handed out.
Do you want the number or?
Yeah
Would be helpful. OK. 231-183.1.
That's what we have in front of
us. So, Madam Chair and members,
I'd like to say this is a simple
bill. This is not a simple bill.
I wish it was. So what, what the
intent of this bill is to
prohibit discrimination from
entities against entities
participating in the federal
340B drug pricing program.
Um, it's, it's, it's a federal
program that is
Has major issues, but we can't
fix them here, so, so what
we're, what the intent is so
that that like federally
qualified health centers, um,
those kinds of places. The
program is, they get the they
get certain drugs at a specialty
price and then they are supposed
to uh the provider is supposed
to plow that money back into
services for uninsured or
underinsured and, and so I, I
have two experts with me and I
will let them.
explain a little more.
Thank you Madam Chair.
OK
Thank you.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I mean Bed mudez,
Ammerman. I'm CEO of the New
Mexico Primary Care Association.
Um, we represent all of the
federally qualified health
centers in New Mexico,
collectively we have 200 sites,
80% of our sites are in rural
and underserved areas, 80% of
our sites are in rural areas. We
serve a large population of
uninsured folks in New Mexico.
Um, we're all nonprofit, we are
governed by community-based
boards, any savings that we
received from the 340B discount
program goes right back into
services to the underserved
populations.
Um, we are in 32 of 33 counties
and uh last year we served
331,000 New Mexicans. So we
really do represent the
healthcare safety net of the
state.
And I'm gonna defer to uh um
Melissa Manlove who works with
the primary care association,
but also has run a 340B pharmacy
program for over 20 years.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I just wanted to
provide a couple of little facts
about the 340B program.
It was established in 1992 and
allows for uninsured and
underinsured patients to receive
a discounted price on
medications.
The 340B drug pricing program is
not funded by taxpayers.
Um, it allows for uh.
Pardon me, federally qualified
health centers, is it Yvette
mentioned must follow health
resources and services
Administration rules to provide
a sliding fee discount for
uninsured and underinsured
patients.
And that discount is based on
annual submission of income and
family size. And again, Hersha
does require that the proceeds
from.
Participation in the program are
used as part of the mission for
the organization.
we will stand for questions. OK,
um, very good. So let me explain
how we're gonna do public
comment today, um.
I've been approached by the
manufacturer group.
About having a little bit more
time to explain their position
because they interacted with
this programs, um, um, so I've
agreed to give one
representative from the, you
know, the industry 5 minutes,
we'll have 2 minutes.
Remaining for for individuals um
who are not affiliated, um, to
speak, you know, one minute
each.
And we'll do 3 minutes online,
you know, 3 people online, the
same is offered to the um those
supporting this, and I don't
know what the decision has been,
um, Linda, do you have, um, can
you share with us?
One minute for one person.
Uh
Well
Oh, and so you're negotiating
with me on how that happens. So
I hear you saying you want 2
minutes for 2 for 4 people.
Yeah, OK, so let me, let me
explain. I had understood that
we were gonna be getting, you
know, I said, OK, if you guys
want 5 minutes and then 2
minutes. That's great. We're
not, you know, this is not for
the audience to divvy up the
time, so, so if someone wants to
speak to explain cause this is a
complicated thing and I wanna
make sure people on each side
have the ability to explain
themselves.
Frankly, 5 minutes is pretty
pretty small too. That's fine,
but um, you know, let me just
say that's, that's the offer
that's on the table, the same
offer that's going to the
manufacturers is going to.
Um, those in support and so
that's if somebody wants 5
minutes to talk, that's great.
They can do that and then we'll
do 2 more for a minute each and
then we'll online, we're gonna
do 3 for up to 1 minute each.
That's, that's the plan. Same
for everybody, and, um, OK, so
those in the audience wishing to
speak in opposition, there's one
representative for the industry
and then if there are 2
additional, please, um, line up.
I would like it if they're not
affiliated so that it's, you
know, but I can't lease
everything. So gentleman in the
back, how are we gonna do this?
Good afternoon. My name is Kyle
Piccola and I'm the director of
state policy for the
pharmaceutical research and
manufacturers of America and we
are respectfully here in
opposition to House Bill 78. I
want to first take a brief
moment to thank the bill's
sponsor Majority Shupansky, many
of you who have talked with us
in FQHCs for having meaningful
conversations about this very,
very complicated issue. Um,
first, I want to talk about the
intent of and the integrity of
the 340B program. As was said,
it was codified into statute by
Congress.
1992 to help safety net clinics,
um, afford their drugs for their
low income and uninsured
patients before Congress
codified it, manufacturers were
voluntarily providing discounts
to many safety net providers
because they understood the need
and the importance. The intent
of this program has been and
always should remain to help
vulnerable patients.
Unfortunately, the 340B program
has strayed from its intended
purpose, as evidenced by many
state studies and recent
articles. I know you guys have
read the New York Times article.
I think the most compelling
piece there is that the drug
company, the uh insurance was
charged $22,700 for a drug that
they paid 2700 for and then that
patient got sent to collections.
There's another study out of
Minnesota, uh, a very salient
point in there has shown
specifically that those safety
net providers were benefiting
the least from the 340B program,
uh, a report out of North
Carolina looked at their state
employees seeking cancer.
treatment and on average, their
state employees paid almost 90%
more for their care at a 340B
entity than they did at a non
340B entity. These studies are
alarming. 340B hospitals markups
are driving up costs for
taxpayers, patients, employers,
and the healthcare system as a
whole. And it's not meeting the
intent or the integrity of the
program.
Second, another reason why we
are concerned about the mandate
to manufacturers to provide 340B
pricing to an unlimited number
of contract pharmacies.
Simply put, explosive growth has
led to the abuse and the
siphoning of 340B dollars away
from New Mexican patients. The
contract pharmacies have grown
by 12,000% since 2010.
Even though this program is
meant to serve underserved
patients just 30% of the
contract pharmacy's located
physically in New Mexico or in
rural areas, just 5% are in zip
codes where the median income is
lower than the state medium
income.
More than half of the 340B
profits retained by contract
pharmacies are going to the 4
biggest uh the four biggest
companies, Walgreens, Walmart,
CVS, and Accredo. Every dollar
that goes to a middleman, like a
contract pharmacy or a PBM is
not going to a patient.
Um
Something else that I want to
point out from that same
Minnesota study, it found that
10% of the safety net federal
grantees reported a negative net
340B revenue due to the payments
made to those same middlemen.
Hospitals, contract pharmacies
and PBMs can do all of this with
little to no transparency,
accountability, or oversight.
Lastly, I did want to talk
through um why we believe this
is a federal issue, uh, I want
to also acknowledge that we also
believe that this, this program
needs significant reform to
address the the systemic issues
that we're seeing. We believe
that that has to be done at the
federal level. The 340B program
is a federal program that's
governed exclusively by federal
statute and state governments do
not have the authority to place
requirements on how
manufacturers engage in the 340B
program.
Um, what's happening in the
courts, this is being litigated
both nationally and around the
country. Two courts at the
federal level did find that the
statute does not require
delivery to an unlimited number
of contract pharmacies. Um, and
I would just want to end briefly
on the most recent court
decision that came as early as
December of 2024, was out of the
state of West Virginia. Um, this
is one of the first times these
claims data prohibition has been
litigated. And what that court
found was that the
Prohibition on seeking claims
data stands as an obstacle to
achieving the federal objective
of preventing fraud in the 340B
program.
Uh
Arma agrees that it's important
to ensure that 340B program
truly benefits the safety net
that helps underserve
communities and, and is
committed to this crucial
federal program, but we just
respectfully disagree that this
legislation will serve that
purpose and we think that it'll
exacerbate the issues we're
seeing very respectfully ask for
a no vote on House Bill 78.
Thank you so much for your time.
Thank you. Now there's um 2
minutes available for anyone
else in the audience wishing to
oppose the bill.
Um
All right, let's go online and
I'll take 3 individuals up to
one minute each.
All right, please raise your
hand if you're in opposition.
One minute, please. um, Brian
Warren.
Brian
Hi, uh, can you hear me, Madam
Chair? Yes.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I
will do my best to get this
under one minute. Brian Warren
with a biotechnology innovation
organization we represent
biotech companies across the
country. Um, and we support the
intent of the Federal 340B
program, but even good programs
can be abused. There are many
documented problems with
oversight, accountability and
transparency in 340B. So we must
oppose efforts that attempt to
eliminate some of the limited
oversight and accountability
while continuing the complete
lack of transparency.
340B has experienced exponential
growth in recent years, yet it
has been in primarily in areas
that deviate from the program's
original intent. Safety net
clinics such as FQHCs make up
only a small minority of 340B.
DishH hospitals alone account
for about 80% of 340B sales.
Instead, hospitals and
for-profit chain pharmacies have
found out how to game the system
by expanding into wealthy
neighborhoods. Oftentimes this
means hospitals buying up
independent clinics and
physician practices to expand
their 340B footprint.
Leading to new concerns with
healthcare consolidation, a
topic of interest currently
being discussed right now in the
Senate.
Um, thank you. Thank you.
All right.
Sure.
Um, Brian, um, Barbara
McInerney.
Barbara
Barbara
We're having trouble. I don't
know if you're muted or don't
see. OK.
We show you as unmuted, Barbara,
so it must be on your end. I'll
give you a couple seconds.
All right, well, I, there must
be some technical issue there.
All right, so we're gonna now go
to those in support.
Let's, so what's.
Um, I'm looking to, um,
Miss Siegel, in terms of how
we're gonna handle how, who,
what's the preference someone.
Want to speak for 5 up to 5
minutes and then we can have.
Couple of people for a minute,
up to a minute each.
That
Same thing that we.
Offered to the other side.
All right, so are you going to
be speaking for 5 minutes or up
to 5 minutes, sir. OK. OK.
OK, very good.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Virgil
Medina. I'm the CEO of La
Clinica de Familia, federally
qualified Health Center serving
Southern Donana County.
Our organization sees 20, I mean
33,000 unique patient visits
with 23, 33,000 unique patients,
which equates to 255,000
patients visits annually.
The 340B program is essential to
federally qualified health
centers, as it enables these
centers to stretch scarce
resources, ensuring that
vulnerable and underserved
population have access to
affordable medications and
comprehensive healthcare
services by allowing FQHCs to
participate in 340B programs. It
enhances patients' care by
lowering medication cost.
Funding essential services and
expanding access to care for low
income, uninsured and uninsured
individuals without 340 savings,
many health centers would
struggle to sustain critical
programs, including chronic
disease management, behavioral
health services and preventative
care.
Protecting and optimizing the
340B program is critical to
maintaining the financial
sustainability of FQHCs and
their mission to provide high
quality.
Thank you.
It probably be more efficient if
everybody lines up who wants to
speak, so.
And we're not losing time on.
Madam Madam Chair, members of
the committee, I'm Steve Hanson.
I'm the CEO of Presbyterian
Medical Services, not to be
confused with Presbyterian
Health Services. Uh, we operate
55 um community health centers
around the state, medical,
dental, and behavioral health.
We care for about 80,000
individual patients annually
that computes to about.
4
75,000 visits. Um, 22 main
points I wanted to make about
340B is with the 340B program,
we are able to dispense
medications to underserved um
uninsured individuals, uh, any
change or elimination of this
program would not allow us to do
so. Um, second is the, the
benefit of the savings that are
generated through this program
in New Mexico in our
organization.
The vast majority of our
programs are rural and frontier.
And without.
Um
These savings being able to keep
those facilities open and
running, uh, would be very, very
challenging. And
Just one.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name's Jeremiah
Dai. I am a CEO of First Choice
Community Healthcare. Uh, we
operate in Albuquerque,
Edgewood, and Los Lunas serve
50,000 patients each year, um.
One of the things I want to
point out to you is that those
who spoke in opposition all
mentioned that FQHCs are not the
problem when there are concerns
about fraud, waste and abuse
related to the 340B program. We
are not the problem. We are the
intended recipients of it so
that we can continue to provide
the essential services that are,
that are patients in the
community needs. Thank you.
Thank you.
Madam Chair and committee
members, my name is Doctor
Teresa Riaga. I'm a psychiatrist
and I'm the chief behavioral
health officer and medical
director at Hidalgo Medical
Services. We serve a very rural
and frontier part of New Mexico
and southwestern part of the
state. We have about 14,000
unique patients with about
60,000 visits per year. And, um,
the 340B program helps centers
like HMS improve patient care by
improving and providing access
to affordable medications and
also supporting local
pharmacies. It also helps the
health center and others expand
services and access ensuring
long-term care for the
underserved communities. And
when I was thinking about this,
I was thinking about some of my
own patients that I treat. And
one in particular, someone with,
uh, treatment resistant
schizophrenia, who had gone for
years, um,
Treating trying to treat his
symptoms with illicit
substances. And when we were
able to get him on consistent
treatment through this 340B
program. He was able to
You are, you are up, thank you.
Sure.
Um
All right, let's go online up to
3 individuals, um, this is in
support.
So up to 3 individuals, um, a
minute each. So please raise
your hand if you're gay. I see
AARP of New Mexico, AARP.
AARP, I want, are we having
trouble on our end. I'm getting
concerned.
Can you hear me, can you hear me
now, Madam Chair? OK, thank you.
Yeah, I was having problems as
well. Madam Chair, my name is
Jackie Cooper. I'm, um, um, AARP
Legislative advocate. I'm a
volunteer and AARP has a long
history of supporting and
championing uh prescription drug
cost, affordability, and we
stand in support of this
legislation. Thank you.
See anyone else, um,
representative.
You, Madam Chair, just a couple
of things I wanted to clear up,
as I stated in the opening, the
feds are having a problem with
this, and we can't fix that.
We're the first ones to say
that, but we're trying to do
what we can to protect New
Mexico's clinics, and if you
look at page 3, line 16 through
20. It, it basically it when
there was talk about not, not
having any data. What, what we
are trying to do is not allow um
pharmaceutical or whoever to
require
more data than the federal law
and the line 19 to 20 and um.
The sharing of claims or
utilization data is required by
federal law. So we are not, I
mean, what's in place now will
remain in place. I'm not sure
why they were talking about um
not being able to collect data
because what's in the federal
law will continue, of course.
OK, um,
Let's go to the committee who
has those questions.
I'm certain people have
questions.
Representative Martinez.
We'll take a swing at it.
OK.
Chavez
Go ahead, Representative
Martinez. Thank you, madam.
Um
Looking at the committee.
Can you explain to me.
The definition of a
Can you, can you just tell me
and
8 th grade level who affiliate
means on page 1 line 23 to 25.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee and House minority
Whip Martinez. I believe that
we're trying to indicate there
that there is actually a very
complex relationship in the
pharmaceutical industry and that
there may be affiliated entities
with a manufacturer actually
produces the medications.
Thank you Madam Chair
Representative and and who would
that be?
I don't have a good example for
you. I'm sorry.
But Madam Chair Representative,
you felt.
Felt that important enough to
Included in the bill.
I
Curious as to
If, if we don't
Have a clear understanding of
who that is, why was it included
in the bill?
That confuses me even more.
Chair and um minority Whip
Martinez, the, the
pharmaceutical industry and
business is so complicated that
it would be a.
That there's lots of.
Um, putting
Peas under the shell and so, so
it's, it's trying to.
Be all encompassing of folks who
might be involved in this
without listing them because
there's, I'm sure there's some
we don't even know about.
Madam Chair Representative, so.
Why don't we just replace
affiliate with everybody.
Representative, um, because it
A person that directly or
indirectly controls is
controlled by or is under common
control with the manufacturer.
So we are limiting it, we just
aren't enumerating what that
might be because they they'll
they'll, as you all know, um.
Prescription drugs are, it's
very complicated. There's
I don't know if there's anyone
in the world that understands it
from top to bottom.
I'm sure that that that kind of
Would, would PBMs fall under
that definition?
Madam Chair Representative No.
I'll just leave the question
there, um.
My next question, Madam Chair
Representative is if this is, if
this is, um,
Part of federal law, you
reference.
places
What's the purpose of
asking the statement,
we have, we have done this
before, actually, I passed a
bill a few years ago on 340B,
um, it's, we're doing the best
that we can on a state level
because we can't force the feds
to do what Madam Chair
Representative, that would be
great if we could force the feds
to do what we want.
Um, Madam Chair Representative
or FH.
Um
Are they not?
Able to take advantage of the
340B program now?
FHQ uh whatever FQH.
Madam Chair Representative, we
are able to take care, uh, we
are able to take advantage of it
now, it's federally qualified
health centers. What has
happened since 2020, is that all
the different um pharmaceutical
manufacturers have started
putting restrictions and
requiring really um extreme
reporting so that for each.
Different pharmaceutical, we
have to do different kind of
reporting and it's become so
onerous and we have so little
ability to have the staffing to
even respond to that, that we're
trying to stop it. We're trying
to stop every single
pharmaceutical manufacturer from
requiring a different reporting
system, a different platform and
more onerous problems. We're
trying to prevent that.
Madam Chair representative.
Bill
It is very complicated.
Trying to uncomplicate that.
Uncomplicated, uh, let me go on
to my next question, Madam Chair
Representative, um.
On page.
3
Or like sick.
Um
Talking about manufacturers,
manufacturers agents, affiliates
of.
sure
Will not deny restrict prohibit
or interfere with the
acquisition of a 34, 340B drug
by.
Or delivery of a 340B drug 2.
Pharmacy physically located in
the state or
Contractually obligated.
Applicable.
Can you please explain to me,
Madam Chair Representative Watt.
Or who
is a contractually obligated.
And
Madam Chair Representative, um,
we added that language because
there was interest in keeping
contract pharmacies just in New
Mexico, but there are some
specialty drugs that do not get
distributed in New Mexico and
that you have to go out of
state. So if you have rheumatoid
arthritis, for instance, and
you're in one of our clinics,
and you should be getting 340B
drugs. You can't actually get it
into New Mexico, we have to get
it from out of state because
that's the.
We, we wish that we, it was
easier, but.
That is the way it is.
Thank you Madam chair.
Representative so forth.
Forcing the federal government
to act.
been to our will with this
statue. Why can't we make the
manufacturers just.
Send the drug.
Send it to Walgreens, send it to
CVS, send it through somebody
else.
Why is that not happening?
Madam Chair representative.
I can't answer that. I think
that this or that.
Um, I wish that were the case.
You made sure, is there anybody
here that could
answer that question.
We're not doing that unless it's
one of the members who's
presenting, we're not going to
the audience. I'm sorry, that's
not how we do, the expert said
there was somebody in the room
that.
we've got presenters that we
don't go to the audience for
input on the normal input
requirement, so there's someone
here.
The clarification of the rule,
Madam Chair, let me go on.
Um
On page 3.
Line 16 require an applicable
entity to submit any claims
utilization, purchasing, or
other data.
for allowing the acquisition of
a 340B drug by.
Or delivery of a 340B drug 2
inapplicable entity unless
sharing of claims or
Utilization data is required by
federal law. Once again, if it's
required by federal law.
What are we trying to say there?
Adam chair and uh minority Whip
Martinez, we're trying to say
that Pharma can't put more
restrictions on, on 340B in New
Mexico. We're we're not trying
to interfere with the federal
law. We're just saying don't add
more and and someone spoke about
how, how much, how onerous it
is, and these are the clinics.
Hospitals that serve our low
income and they, I mean, if you
ask any healthcare provider, the
number of people they have to
have to do data, paperwork kind
of stuff is that's where a lot
of our healthcare dollars are
going, so we're trying to, what
we're trying to do is say we
will follow the federal law, but
you can't do more than that in
New Mexico.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, is that
happening a lot right now,
manufacturers are coming up with
their own rules.
Even though they're covered by
federal law.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee and House Minority
Martinez, yes, since 2020, there
have been several dozen
manufacturers who have
unilaterally imposed a variety
of restrictions on 340B covered
entities.
Inclusive of data submission
requirements before they will
ship 340B medications, uh, as
well as contract pharmacy
restrictions, and you know, part
of the problem is the different
manufacturers have different
requirements have thrown down
different barriers to
participating in the program,
um, I will answer a question you
you asked earlier that I didn't
have a good example for.
affiliate of a manufacturer they
have set up a uh platform a data
submission platform, for
example, called ESP.
Which is proprietary to the
industry, but not used by all of
them.
And that would be an example of
an affiliate to a manufacturer
that is not actually producing
medications. And when they
require this information, I will
point out that in fact federal
statute does allow for
manufacturers to audit covered
entities at their own expense,
at the expense of the
manufacturer just like the
federal government can audit
this program at the federal
government's expense.
But they by virtue of
establishing these data
submission requirements, they
are essentially putting the
burden on the covered entity
themselves.
Madam chair, so the federal
government requires them to pay.
And they're passing that cost on
to
For the local clinic?
Madam chair members of the
committee and House Minority
Whip Martinez, the Federal 340B
statute does allow for auditing
of covered entities by the
manufacturers and the federal
government and allows the
federal government to also audit
manufacturers and covered
entities.
And whoever initiates the audit
is expected to bear the expense.
In this case, that's been turned
around.
And so the onus is now on the
covered entity to submit
information or not receive
future orders of discounted
medications.
And that's problem and it's
essentially sown chaos and
entropy into a space that was
already very complex.
And
We all know that.
Data means power as well, so.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative so.
What you just said to me, it
sounds like they're breaking
federal law. Why, why are the
feds not in.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee House minority with
Martinez, that's a good
question. The statute has
existed since 1992.
And health resources and
services administration has not
Enforced many things.
I will tell you that one of the
reasons this is becoming even
more difficult for covered
entities is that there are
efforts now by I think 6
manufacturers or at least 5 that
are suing health resources and
services administration because
they wanted to unilaterally
impose 340B as a rebate program.
And that's part of why we wanted
to bring this to you all this
year, this session, because our
members are likely not going to
be able to to pay upfront the
manufacturer established costs
of medications and then wait for
a discount to be rebated to
them.
So it made it more important for
us to bring it to you today.
You might chair, thank you for
that explanation, um.
I'm chair representative, can
you tell me who a contract an
example of who a contract
pharmacy would be.
It could be a Walgreens, it
could be, it could be a small
local pharmacy, uh, and, and
there has been some discussion,
you know, that, that pharma
doesn't want CVS or Wal,
sometimes that's the closest
thing. I mean, in New Mexico,
it'd be great if we had a
pharmacy. We had enough
pharmacies, but we don't, so
whoever is is closest and
willing to do it, um.
It may be a big chain pharmacy.
But such as New Mexico, we.
We don't have everything we
need, so we have to kind of
piece things together as best we
can.
Madam chair, so.
It could be anybody if they're
contracted.
Madam Chair, Representative, who
would they who would
Contract be with the federal
government, with the
manufacturer.
It's actually with, I'm sorry,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee and minority Whip
Martinez, the contract is with
the covered entity with the
340B um provider if you will,
and they established those
contracts in order to provide
coverage for their.
Patience, they're eligible
patients and those are the
restrictions in the program is
that you must be a patient of
record and eligible um by virtue
of your relationship with that
in our case, health center and
contract pharmacies are set up
because our folks are
outpatient.
Um, for the most part, I don't
know that we have any exceptions
to that. And so if you need
medications and I will also
point out that.
Most of our center systems do
not have their own full scale
pharmacy.
At best they might have a drug
room.
Uh, contract pharmacies held to
extend access to medications,
particularly not during non
working hours, if you will,
during not during the 8 to 5
Monday through Friday for our
center patients.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representatives, so.
I'm wondering who are we.
Who are we trying to protect
with this bill or who are we
trying to benefit with?
Madam Chair and Representative,
we are trying to protect
patients first and foremost, by
protecting the clinics, the
federally qualified health
centers and, and those like so
that they can continue to
provide care for our
underinsured and uninsured.
So the FQHCs.
I asked earlier.
They are taking advantage of the
340B program.
Chair and representative. Yes,
they are, um, and we want to
continue that.
We, we don't want more onerous
reporting more onerous uh
applications, whatever, um, to
make it harder as it's been said
many times, it takes people to
do all this stuff and we, we all
in this room know that we have a
shortage of healthcare providers
and, you know, would you rather
have a physician treating a
patient or filling out forms.
You, Madam Chair, thank you, I,
I agree with you.
Business climate is.
difficult, especially for
Hospitals, um.
You can imagine what it's like
for the clinic.
Um
Madam Chair Representative, can
you
Kind of briefly
Tell me what like what is
required in these reports.
I mean, is, is, I guess maybe I
should ask first, is there a
brief answer to a question.
No
So
Madam Chair.
Or these reports like 10 pages
long, 20 pages long, is it?
Madam Chair members of the
committee and minority whip
Martinez, my own personal lived
experience was that I spent
hours of my life while trying to
support the administration of
340B in a community health
center some years ago when this
was beginning, I would receive
files unilaterally from a
manufacturer saying encrypted
files, fortunately, um, asking
me to go through and declare
whether or not those were our
patients.
That was my experience.
You know, 4 or 5 years ago,
maybe 3 or 4 years ago when this
began, when this pressure began,
you know, what is it like now,
the some of the expectation
includes uploading all
pharmaceutical claims into their
portal for the manufacturer to
determine whether or not there
may have been uh some discount
that they unilaterally provided
to a pharmacy benefits man.
of their own decision.
And that's time, you have to
have a skill set that includes
understanding pharmaceuticals
and understanding pharmacy,
understanding your own patience
and being able to uh navigate
through all of that. So it's
very time consuming and
My personal experience was that
it was really frustrating.
Because the majority of the time
I was getting reports from
manufacturers that were that
contained none of the patients
that we saw in our center.
But yeah, I still had to go
through and respond and
I felt under duress.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, and all these
reports go.
The federal government or to
manufacturer?
Madam Chair, members of the
committee minority with
Martinez, they were initiated by
the manufacturer and go back to
the manufacturer.
Thank you, Madam Chair, rep
representative, and this is
required by federal law.
I share members of the committee
and minority Whip Martinez.
No, um, that was, that is not
something that is at all
outlined in the 340B federal
statute. This was a reaction.
This is now my opinion, um, by
the manufacturers to
Uh, an expansion of utilization
of 340B.
And
In the organization I work.
And I was it.
to help deal with that and my
title there was chief operations
officer. It really had nothing
to do specifically with
pharmacy, but there was nobody
else who could take on that
task.
You made him chair
representative and this report.
Patient
Please respond to just the
specific question that the
answers are getting a little
long.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Minority with
Martinez, um.
The manufacturers can produce
more than one medication. They
aren't specific to the to a
specific drug so it could be
across a variety of medications,
but they were manufacturer
specific.
Um
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative
Mm
Each starting at 916 are these?
Is this a list of the exempt.
F QHC state or local government
unit providing outpatient
prescription.
Critical access hospital sounity
Hospital Urban Indian Health
Organization.
UNM
So Representative and Madam
Chair, if you look at the top of
page 2, those are applicable
entities.
It's not a list of people who
are No, Madam Chair, it's people
who are included.
OK
Sorry about that.
Madam Chair, uh, Representative.
I know we heard this in health,
but I'm really
Really having a hard time.
Understanding clearly what we're
trying to
accomplished because it's
already part of federal law.
Just, I'm just not quite clear.
How if we pass this bill.
We are going to
Just
protect
FQHC if
PBMs are gonna be
Benefiting from this.
Big hospitals are gonna be
Better off with this bill.
It's, it's really, really
confusing to me.
Now with the
And he substituted just got
more.
So I'll, I'll listen to the rest
of the debate. It just
took something that was almost
clear to me and made it.
way more confused.
Madam Chair and Representative,
now there's no response to that.
That's not a question.
Um, let's go on to the next
person representative Hall. I
don't have the I don't. Oh, I'm
sorry, I thought you.
I'll bend to your will, madam
chair. It's up to you. I didn't
want to interrupt. I thought you
were getting to that point where
you're winding down. I'll sit
and listen to the debate and
yada yada, so sorry about that
representative um Hall.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative expert witnesses,
um,
Are there appropriations for
this?
Madam Chair.
Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative Hall, no.
And I
This is
If this law is passed, it'll go
under, it'll create a new from
what I understand, a new
section.
In the insurance code, is that
correct, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair and representative,
that was the prior bill.
Uh
The one that we're substituting
for. So that's, that will not
go, who will enforce then
Madam Cha.
Redirected, how will this be
enforced?
the shirt straw on this one,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee and Representative
Hall, I'm not entirely sure we
were uh depending on
Advice and support from the
legislative council service who
originally wrote in Office of
Superintendent of Insurance and
Health Insurance code into the
first version of this
legislation.
And OSI has firmly pushed back.
Um, I saw information from from
the New Mexico Board of
Pharmacy, which does not feel
like it's under its purview.
So
I'm not sure.
Madam Chair, thank you. I think
this is, this bill is confusing.
Um
I think early representative.
You said
The, uh, this bill does not
prohibit federal regulatory
requirements in regards to 340B
medications. Is, is that
correct that is correct. We, um,
all we're asking is that
In New Mexico, they only have to
report the federally required,
not the other things that Pharma
has come up with to more hos
hoops to jump through.
And, and who are they gonna be
madam chair and who will they be
reporting to representative for
experts.
Madam Chair Representative Hall,
the Department of Health will
receive those reports and so
that is how we interpret how it
will be enforced as they will be
receiving those reports that
we've indicated here.
So, madam chair, Representative
experts, we don't know.
When they received the ports, if
they would be receiving accurate
reports and then what the
enforcement mechanism would be
through the Department of
Health. In my understanding that
correctly, madam Chair.
Um
So it
We we're depending on the
Department of Health to follow,
you know, to come up, we're not
gonna lay out what rules, how
they're gonna do whatever
that's, that's kind of their
purview to decide how exactly.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair,
that's all I have for now. Thank
you, ma'am.
Thank you, I have Amanby Hill,
but we'll see and then
representative Reed.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representatives. So,
I
To have the same, I guess,
concerns. One.
We don't have any jurisdiction
over the federal government.
Which is going to lead to legal
challenges.
To
There's no oversight.
There's no oversight of
something we're creating.
Bree, I really think that there
are strict restrictions.
In my thought process.
From pharmaceutical companies
because
They're extremely um.
Reducing
The price of these medications.
I understand why they're asking
for this data because they're
Intent, I believe, was to
provide it to providers like
yourself, RFQHCs, um, at a much
lower price for Medicaid and
low-income population.
But what's happening is, and
correct me if I'm wrong.
A hospital
could purchase a drug for $2000.
I think just like the New York
Times.
They then would charge a
commercial health insurance.
$22,000. So they're not passing
on the savings.
And I believe that's why the
pharmaceutical companies are
asking for these reports.
Because when they're not passing
on the savings and continuing to
get this medication at such a
low cost. And then they then
bill.
Presbyterian, Blue Cross Blue
Shield, $22,000.
And the insurance companies
having to pay it, or a member
who may be on an individual plan
or maybe a commercial plan, and
they're
Third tier
Um, prescription copay is
25%.
They're gonna pay a lot out of
pocket. So that's from a
patient.
Plus an insurance company.
When that hospital is only
paying a small amount.
So, I believe this is why
they're so strict in their
reporting.
My concern is if states start.
Creating their own bills.
To forego that.
What is?
How do we know that those
pharmaceutical companies are
going to still offer this
program as a federal program and
then take this away completely.
From people like you, the FQHCs
that truly need it.
Chair and we are not taking away
any requirements that the
federal government has. We are
taking away requirements that
Pharma has put in the way to
make it more difficult for, for
clinics, etc. to, um, so I mean
it, it's clearly states in
there, you can't and, and to
pharmaceutical get data,
they're, they, they really can't
do anything with it. That's a
federal part of the, of the
equation, so they can, they can
gather
all the data they want, but the,
the program is a federal
program, and as I started out
saying, Madam Chair, um, we
can't control that, so we're
trying to control what we can in
New Mexico to keep from adding
more roadblocks to the people
who need these drugs to getting
them.
Madam Chair Representative, I, I
understand your response, but
they are requiring the
pharmaceutical companies are
requiring this data.
Much more on top of what the
feds are requiring, and that's
what I'm saying. They're
requiring this data because
people truly are using it.
Providers, hospitals, whoever it
may be, are taking advantage of
this program that was developed
in a very good way for very good
reasons for our low income
providers and clinics across the
state. And so I'm just afraid
that one.
Dates are gonna create these
bills like we're trying to do
today, and it's just gonna
backfire on us eventually, from
the federal program. So so that
that's one of my concerns, I
guess. Um,
To
If this is truly, and, and I
believe that's what the purpose
of your bill is for FQHCs.
Why are we not just putting this
bill and the language.
Or FQHCs and removing completely
and excluding hospitals.
Pharmacies, the, the big chain
pharmacies, why are we not just
saying FQHCs if that's what
we're trying to do today.
and representative, it's much
more than HQ FQHCs. There's a
list of um.
Critical access hospitals, Seoul
Community Hospital, Urban Indian
Health Organization, UNM,
Frederick qualified Health
Center, um.
Family planning project
participating in the family
planning program established by
Title IX uh HIV virus outpatient
early intervention service.
There's a whole list, so we
can't just do FQHCs.
Thank you. So I think, um,
That just
Says that this really isn't to
protect FQHCs. This, this will
go to other hospitals, so, am I
correct in
A hospital.
And get a medication for $2000
and then charged $22,000 to the
health insurance company.
Madam Chair, uh representative,
that's been reported. I, I can't
say that that has happened or
not, um, and again, as I say,
that's the federal government
has to rein that in. The
pharmaceuticals cannot rein it
in, um, and New Mexico cannot
rein it in. That's a federal
thing, and we, as I said before,
we can't control what they do.
Madam Chair Representative, we
keep saying federal, the federal
government is asking for the
reports. The federal government
has oversights, but yet we're
trying to cut out the federal
government and making a state
bill.
To change that. And so, again,
that that's another concern, um,
I guess my next question is how
many contract pharmacies are
associated with the FQHCs.
We know that.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Representative
Chavez, hundreds throughout New
Mexico, um, our.
20.
FQHCs or FQHC lookalikes are
located in over 200 communities
throughout New Mexico.
And I um.
Believe that there would, it is
fair to say that hundreds of
contract pharmacies are
affiliated or associated with
those 20 entities.
And how many of those are
associated with Madam Chair
members of the committee and
Representative Chavez. I can't
answer that question because we
don't represent or completely
know how hospitals manage their
own 340B programs.
I will say that the information
is publicly available on the
health resources and Services
Administration Office of
Pharmacy affairs Information
website.
I think that's all the questions
I have.
Thank you. Um
Representative Reeb. Thank you,
Madam Chair, Representative
experts.
I won't go too much back into
the federal issue, um, because
it's kind of been discussed, but
I just would reiterate that it
seems like there's a lot of
litigation going on in federal
court on this issue and I always
have an issue with state when
when I don't believe states have
the authority to govern federal
agencies to the unintended
consequences you might get from
something like going on, um, so
I, I do have concerns about that
issue, I think that's been
addressed, I will just state
that and move on to more.
my question.
So does your bill do anything
um.
To improve or access to
prescription. Madam Chair, um,
representative, the way that it
expands access is to make sure
that these savings from these
pharmacy program can then be
used for uninsured patients of
our clinics. It also can be used
for people that are on Medicare
and don't have enough drug
benefit, they can get a sliding
fee scale for the
pharmaceuticals they need,
that's a huge.
We do expand access expert and
representative, it seems more
like a, it's a drug pricing
program, uh, first
drugplenishment program and so
that the pharmacies are gonna
continue to restock the the
medications and and get access
to the medication, so I guess
I'm looking at does really
nothing to expand access to the
medication.
Except you're saying it's
through a price possibility I'm
sure.
Chair and Representative Reed,
um, many of these clinics don't
have money to put out, you know,
in upfront to, to, as was stated
before, to buy these drugs, so
they may not be able to stop
drugs that people need if
they're really expensive cancer
drugs, etc. They may not be able
to, so then that means that
patients have to travel further.
To uh
To get, you know, to go to a
bigger pharmacy that has enough
of a cushion that they can buy
these things ahead of time and
and carry that debt until, until
they're used and paid for by
whoever's paying for them.
And so Madam Chair, an expert
and representative.
I understand what you're saying,
but I.
I also struggle with whether
it's really made because.
It seems like, as you stated,
these prices are being
significantly marked up.
Um
So it's not really impacting
affordability because of what's
happening.
Madam Chair members of the
committee and Representative
Reed, uh, I think bringing in
the middleman into this
discussion is not our intent at
all. Prices for the actual drugs
are set by the manufacturers.
At a federal level. The
participation in the 340B drug
program allows them to have
their medications utilized in
the formulary for Medicare and
Medicaid patients. That was the
deal in 1992.
And how insurance companies may
agree to reimburse pharmacy
claims is also not something in
which any of the covered
entities specifically have a
role.
So talking about the articles
that you guys have addressed,
um.
That's a clear example,
obviously of New Mexico of a
patient being taken advantage
of.
Um, so how does your bill
actually protect patients as
I've said, that's, that's the
federal part of it. Let me try
and make this simple. What we
are trying to do is to keep
pharma from throwing roadblocks
in the way. We're not taking
anything away from what's
reported to the federal
government. We're not in, in
control of prices or what, what
different entities charge. We
are just trying to make it less
onerous for these listed
entities.
To be able to participate in
this program.
Hey, but I'm sure, but again,
kind of back to what I was
saying, there seems to be a lot
of recent reports from states,
um.
That they found no one is really
benefiting, but the hospitals as
we.
about in the middleman like
contract pharmacies, um, so.
I guess that's, that's when you
really look at it.
Then if I just wanted to clarify
one thing. The reason that we
only included certain entities
in here was to try to preserve
the safety net to have these
savings preserved for the safety
net, so there's critical access
hospitals, UNM is the only
trauma one care facility, um,
and then there's a few other
entities that without this kind
of savings may not be able to
operate in rural areas or serve
underserved people, so it is not
something that.
I, you know,
Preventing pharmaceutical
pharmaceutical companies from
putting more onerous things on.
Very large hospital providers.
It is something that prevents
them from putting it on smaller
entities that are essential
community providers, safety net
providers.
Thank you. Thank you, madam. So,
Do you have any specific data
that you can provide on who is.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee and Representative
Reed, could you be a little more
clear about what sort of data
you
are thinking of. So, so you're
partly requires like some type
of reporting data.
Madam Chair representative, so.
Um
Do you have any current data
though right now about who this
program is protecting like
currently.
we,
we are not requiring any data.
We are, we are saying you have
to do what the federal
government says you have to do,
but you can't do more to these
safety net providers.
So I just, I'm I'm I'm.
I'm having issues as um Madam
Chair, chair, and representative
and experts.
That this is a federal program.
I think I understand what you're
trying to do, but I a bill that
we need to be presenting at the
beds figured that federal
program figured this out, let
this litigation pan out, see,
you know, it seems like there
are people working on this. I, I
think I was told that, um.
You know, do you know what's
happening at the federal level
right now, Madam Chair, and
representative and expert as far
as like where they are on this,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee and Representative
Reed, there was a bipartisan
bill introduced last summer that
would have resolved many of
these issues, but then at the
last moment was thrown off
course.
And at this point, your guess is
as good as mine as to when or
how or if that legislation might
be revived.
OK. And so there, Madam Chair
represent any recent court with
all this litigation, any recent
court decisions on this that you
can tell us about, um, the area,
Madam chair.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee and Representative
Reed, the language regarding
banning contract pharmacy
restrictions was first passed in
Arkansas some time ago, and
actually went through an appeals
process and uh further appeal to
the Supreme Court was denied,
but
That hasn't stopped lawsuits
against other states, laws using
the same language.
So I guess the answer is the
litigation continues as the
lawsuits do that I mentioned
earlier, where several
manufacturers are suing her
itself because they rejected the
rebate model.
I thank you for that, ma'am.
So
What about this West Virginia to
2024 decision, um.
What was the outcome of that?
That issue in federal court on
this situation.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, and Representative
Reed. My understanding is that
by suing in another district
court, federal court that a
different opinion was um
provided and that then helps
pave the way for requiring the
Supreme Court to get involved.
So it again, we would all uh
love for the federal government
to address this issue and to fix
the statute.
But the litigation has
continued. In the meantime,
however, 17 states have
initiated.
Uh, similar language and
initiated similar actions to try
to get laws passed, particularly
with regard to banning the
contract pharmacy restrictions.
So it is an ongoing issue and
our response is that we know
that our members need this
support, which is why we took
this on.
OK, so
down chair and representative,
you're saying there's 17 states
that currently have litigation
or currently have a a bill like
this in place.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Representative Reed,
yes.
And
Thank you, Madam Chair. um.
And thank you, Chair Thompson,
um, an experts for bringing this
bill forward. Um, I, I wanna
just take a minute. I have been
spending a lot of time on this
issue in the last week, um, in
an attempt to help um on this
bill and and I wanna thank the
sponsor and the primary care
association for doing so much
hard work to get this substitute
to the place where it is, um,
and I also wanna thank the
representatives of the
pharmaceutical manufacturer.
um, that have been very diligent
and trying to work with us and
understanding the issue of uh
what we are, the, the needle we
are trying to thread, which
members, uh, and Madam Chair, I
would just say is a very.
Tiny eye of a needle that we are
trying to thread. Um, so, Madam
Chair, um, in committee this
340B program was created after
um, uh, Medicaid and Medicare
started offering a prescription
drug benefit.
And so, uh, it sort of in
exchange for saying, OK, as uh
our government health care
programs are gonna start paying
for these drugs and
manufacturers, we want you to
shore up our safety net.
And that was the genesis of this
program and 340B has been a
program that's been a lifeline
for a lot of small clinics, um,
and so as in all things health
care policy related when you
pull a little bit this way,
you're, you're pulling some
stakeholders that way and they
start pulling this way and so
that's part of the tension in
this bill is that.
With the federal program.
We really need to have a full on
solution for a lot of the
issues.
The needle we're trying to
thread here is what can the
state do to protect our safety
net as we wait for the federal
government to take action on
this, um, and I do hope they
will take action. And
interestingly enough, it's been
states like Arkansas,
Mississippi, West Virginia, that
have led the way on this and
we're very aggressive in passing
this legislation to protect the
primary care clinics. Um, so it
hasn't been big states like, you
know, California.
New York that had been leading
the way, it's been rural states,
um, states that are very mindful
of how they're spending their
public dollars that have led the
way.
Um
Madame Charon and
representative, um.
One of the things that uh you
all crafted into this substitute
was narrowing the list of
Entities that you were, uh,
intending to serve so that
Um, and I, I just wanna make
sure I'm getting this right so
that we're only really
addressing
The very core safety net
providers, the 340B program was
intended.
too, sir. Is that, is that
right, Madam Chair
Representative?
Exactly.
Thank you.
Um, and I really appreciate that
because we see that New York
Times article, we see um that
potentially there is misuse of
this program.
And while we see that misuse and
we need a solution for that
misuse, we cannot penalize the
safety net providers.
At the same time.
Madam Chair represented one of
the things that I have seen over
the last uh couple of years is
that we've had some primary care
providers hanging on.
I thread, basically.
Our own La Familia Medical
Center in Santa Fe, almost
closed, um, which was shocking
after decades of being in
operation. Um, Madam Chair, uh,
and representative. I don't know
if you're an expert could just
brief briefly just describe the
financial situation, um, that,
that primary care clinics are
in.
As as briefly as you can, but
just I know it's complicated.
Majority leadership.
Our operating margins tend to be
like.
Less than 1%. So what's happened
is we have lost um monies that
came from the state.
We have
Had an increase from the federal
government since 2015.
are
Inflation in our especially the
medical services has
skyrocketed.
We can't keep providers cause we
can't afford the salaries that
other big providers can't
afford, so there are so many
different things impacting us
right now, not even talking
about the incredible monitoring
and reporting that we have to do
as federally qualified health
centers. So all of those things
have combined to have us so many
of us hanging by a thread, and
I'm sure I forgot more things
that are impacting us.
No thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair, and um.
Ms. Amerman, I.
Um, that is one reason why this
legislation has urgency.
You know, there has been a lot
of discussion about to me, for
me, Madam Chair, um, there has
been a lot of discussion about
can we delay this while we work
on this in the interim and um I
certainly am committed to
working on a bigger reporting uh
uh bill or um looking at some of
the other legislation that has
passed in other states that um
pulls in some of the middle man
pulls in, uh, some of the
reporting and looking at how do
we create a more comprehensive
solution, but for the mean
time. Um, I don't want to see
this important source of
revenue.
For the entities for which it
was intended to serve.
Um, become more challenging to
access. So, um, Madam Chair and
Representative also read uh at
least 3 district court opinions
in the last 48 hours, so, um, I
think this bill, um.
I
Interesting because we discussed
taking out a uh or modifying
some pieces that maybe were
found vulnerable in the West
Virginia case.
Um, however, in modifying some
of that, we then open up
potential litigation from other
entities that would not like
that change. And so that is why
this this the eye of the needle
that we're trying to thread here
is so narrow, um.
I appreciate your willingness to
work on this and modify it so
heavily um with great input from
the pharmaceutical manufacturers
and others who were interested
in the bill, um, and I know
that you know that still remains
that there are concerns, um.
And it's not everything that
that you all wanted either, um,
and so I think.
Um, while this, uh, certainly.
No one can predict whether this
will be immune from a negative
litigation outcome.
Um, I certainly think that we've
given it like the old college
try on getting this right, um,
and I think it's a really
important bill to protect those
safety net care providers.
Even as we pursue and continue
to advocate for that federal
solution. Um, and so I just just
the final point I would make is
just um.
On the uh claims data that still
remains outstanding. That was
the one thing that could not be
incorporated into this
substitute, um, and part of
that, madam chair is.
Because these providers
Spider clinics are so small.
After they submit billing to all
of the different insurance
carriers that they need to
submit the claims data to for a
particular patient visit.
Then to identify the
manufacturer of each and every
drug that was prescribed during
that visit and then submit that
information into a separate
claims database for every single
pharmaceutical manufacturer when
we don't have additional state
funding going to primary care
clinics is just too far to go
for this particular bill for the
safety net providers that we
are.
Um, looking after here.
It is something that I think if
we were able to put funding into
that and allow for um.
Uh, adequate staffing for that.
Um, Madam Chain Representative,
I think it, I, I want, is it
fair to say that that would be
um acceptable to you all if if
that funding were available if
the staffing was available to
make all of that happen from
from your perspective is the
primary care clinics.
Madam Chair, um, majority leader
was
um, there's so many more things
that I forgot to say we have
lowered collection, um, rates,
um, we're serving more and more
uninsured folks. You answering
your question. I am getting just
really close to it, um, that,
that to give us money to staff
to to deal with this onslaught
from manufacturers is not the
stuff that we need, we really
need to.
Much larger redress. It would be
my answer.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um, and
representative, and I appreciate
that candor because it, I think
it does have to be a part of a
bigger solution for how are we,
uh, funding safety net care,
part of why the other avenues
available are not acceptable is
because primary care clinics
don't have the upfront capital
to.
Purchase all these drugs and
then wait to get reimbursed.
Um, and so.
Madam Chair, I'll, I'll just end
by saying, um.
I think this is a really
important piece of legislation,
I think that everyone has worked
really hard to try and make it
be the best that it can be.
And I'm certainly committed to
continuing to work on solutions,
um, that are more comprehensive
and we should all be calling our
federal delegation and asking
them to to fix the stat because
um, every state is dealing with
this in their own way and really
we need a solution at the
federal level that deals with
the broad, you know, the
composition of the entire
needle, not just this little eye
that we're trying to thread
here, so thank you, thank you,
Madam Chair.
See anyone else with their
Andres, but.
Couple things that that I'd like
addressed, um, on page.
3 of the bill.
we talk about.
Um, a manufacturer, etc. may not
deny restrict or interfere with
the acquisition of a drug.
And, you know, there's some
other language there.
Is it your contention that.
Their requests that the
manufacturer's request for
information is in fact, um.
Denying, restricting, or
prohibiting or interfering with
acquisition of the.
Uh, members of the committee.
Um, the top 10.
Grossing manufacturers, the top
5 of those are all putting
onerous reporting mechanisms
into place that we've had to
meet, so, so, yes, uh.
We're trying to prevent.
The next 5 from Footy more
onerous reporting requirements
on us and it's your belief that.
A court is gonna interpret this
language.
To prohibit the request for
information that.
I think it's awfully broad, and
I think that's subject to
interpretation that could not
necessarily go your way, um.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, you're right, um,
actually the contract pharmacy
restriction ban has held up.
Through a court process.
But the data piece is the piece
that is currently being argued
over.
And my argument would be that
there is already, there are two
pathways in the federal statute
for manufacturers to
Audit or enter into an
administrative dispute
resolution process if they have
concerns.
I, I heard you, let's just try
to keep to the questions that
I'm asking, so, um, the, the
leader just pointed out that in
paragraph 3.
That might, um, there is a way
you're also precluding the
manufacturers from asking for
um.
flames utilization, purchasing,
or other data as a condition for
allowing a continu on item 3
unless the sharing is of claims
or utilization data is required
by federal law. So we're just
saying stick with the federal
law. Don't try to do more to New
Mexico or or what I mean, yeah,
OK. So what is federal law
require in terms of sharing of
information.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, the federal statute
does allow for auditing, OK? If
there isn't a portal that has
existed since 1992 for all that
information to be uploaded.
So, um, has it occurred to you
that in the in the framework of
auditing, the manufacturers will
be asking you to provide
information and that the actual
information that the actual
process could be considered more
burdensome if they're just going
to rely on the auditing process.
Do you see where I'm going with
this? Madam Chair, I would
answer that, but if they want an
audit, they have to pay for it.
Uh-huh. Well, fair enough, but
there's still gonna be.
Um, working, you know, involved
in requesting information,
they'll characterize it as an
audit.
And you all will have perhaps a
more onerous thing to be having
to address if this bill were to
go through.
Venture represent
Um, Madam Chair.
So I, I don't believe that's
true. I, I would believe that
the federal government would
allow them to audit what the
federal government requires them
to. They wouldn't require, they
wouldn't require in an audit to
go through thousands of names of
patients to, to determine
whether they are patients of
your clinic or not. So I think
the, the federal government has
guidelines for what can be in an
audit, they, it's not just wide
open that uh.
That a pharmaceutical can
ask for an audit of something
that's not.
Germaine.
So my understanding is.
I'm gonna really have fun with
this one. The federal government
can audit.
I imagine that's not a great
picnic to have to deal with
that.
And the law also allows the
manufacturers to, they have a
legal ability to audit that is
in the statute.
And it did occur to me, just if
I can plug my own stuff. That's
like a private right of action
almost, because what they're
saying is the federal government
can enforce the law and also the
manufacturers have the ability
to enforce the law by by
creating this audit provision.
So, um, and I haven't read a lot
of the case law, but I certainly
did read the one case that the
pharmaceuticals point us to the
Virginia case, and that was,
well, yes, they have this audit
um authority. So do you want
them to just come in and audit a
lot because they won't have any
backup information if if they're
not allowed to seek.
Prefatory. That's how I
understand.
So the question here is.
You would you rather they have
no access to prefatory
information, you know.
And then they just audit.
Because they have a suspicion,
so they have a suspicion that
Christa violates things cause we
know what they've done already,
right? So is that a better
situation for small rural.
entities. Is it better to have
them just audit without any
predicate information being
provided to them.
Representative Madam Chair.
I, I think that there are
parameters around the audit in
terms of what is required by the
federal government. Um, I, I've,
I'm, I'm not a lawyer and
Never planned to be one too old,
but, but so I, I, I, I don't
agree with your premise that
that a pharmaceutical company
can come in and audit whatever
they want. There are guardrails
about what they're gonna audit
and my assumption is that it
will be stuff that's required by
the federal government that they
can't come in and and make up
their own um things that they
have to know, um, if it's not
something that the federal
government requires.
OK, well, you know, I, I guess I
would like more information
about the audit process, cause I
think we're just.
No disrespect your're
speculating a little bit about
how that plays out, but I could
see this creating a different
issue that you all will be
coming to us, which we will not
be able to fix because the
federal government allows
manufacturers to audit.
And
You know, I just want us all
thinking about that sometimes
you need to be careful what you
ask for.
Um, because you'll get something
that you're gonna be even more
um strained and um pressed to to
address um.
You know, I, and I do want to
say I, I think it's reasonable.
Or a manufacturer.
to want to validate that the law
that.
Requires them to provide low
cost drugs is being used
properly, I mean, I don't think
that's an unreasonable thing to
expect.
Um
Because everyone pays if it's
not followed correctly if it is
going beyond what the intent of
the program is, then we as
consumers, as middle class folks
or others are gonna be getting
it from our insurance companies
because we'll be taking up the
slack.
And so, you know, it's, there's,
it's a complicated thing. I
totally understand that.
But you know, my concern is this
isn't gonna address the concerns
that you have and um I
appreciate where you're coming
from, but.
I think it could create a bigger
problem for you than you
anticipating at this point, um.
So anyway
Without, uh, is there emotion?
Madam Chad would like to move a
do not pass on, um.
pill 78 and I do pass on um.
substitute for House Bill 78.
or 2.
OK
Um, all right, we have a do not
pass on House Bill 78, but a due
pass on House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 78 made by Representative
Romero and seconded by
Representative Sapansy, which
you call the roll? Yes, thank
you, Madam Chair. Representative
A. Yes.
Representative Chavez. No.
Representative Hall, no.
Representative Hochman V. Hill.
Representative Martinez.
No
Speaker Martinez, Representative
McQueen.
Yes.
Representative Reeb.
Leader Sapansky. Yes.
Representative Hoffman v. Hill.
Yes.
Madam Vice Chair.
Madam Chair, no.
Madam Chair, you have a do not
pass on House bill 78, but I do
pass on House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 78.
65.
OK. Thank you.
For a lively discussion. It was
interesting anyway.
Hey, we are now on.
House Bill 72.
Yes, and we have a.
Committee sub and.
Um,
It's
We have a committee sub. Let's
pass that out first.
Yeah.
Right.
Um
So I just want you to know that
sponsor has a document that.
As in bold the changes that were
made from the original bill to
the.
So, I'm happy to share that with
you. It's not an official
document. It's an aid. Would
that be useful for you? OK, so
we'll pass that out. We've
passed out.
Um, the sub.
Yeah, everyone, it's a handy
thing to have actually.
Thank you.
OK.
Representative Chavez.
The floor is yours. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Uh, we do have a
committee substitute.
Would you like me to read the
number? Yes, please. OK.
230978.3.
OK.
So go ahead, we're on 0.3. Go
ahead. OK, and Madam Chair, um,
so the, the document that's
being passed out is, um, a.
I don't want to call it a
summary, but it compares the
changes from the first bill to
the committee substitute right
now and I'll go through those
changes, the changes are in
bold, um, and there is just one
small error and I'll point it
out when I get there. Um, so
what we've done is in the title,
we have changed nursing staff to
patient to nur licensed nurse to
patient staffing.
Creating a statewide committee,
um, in the last committee there
was conversations about the
different committees, um,
hospital level committees and so
after.
Several conversations with um
the hospital association,
hospitals, um, and others, uh,
we've, we've come to, um, the,
the committee substitute and so
basically there are definitions
in here you'll see on the first
page of a definition of what a
critical care hospital is. I'm
not gonna read all of that.
Um, we also, um, um, we've also
included or we've excluded um
clinics or outpatient
departments that don't provide
inpatient or emergency services.
Um, so basically we're just
talking about what's inside the
hospital, those units. We've
created a community called the
Hospital Network Committee.
Um, and that would, for example,
be a a committee that might be
established, for example, by
Loveless Hospital. They have
several hospitals and so, um,
one of the conversations that we
had, um, you know, the
suggestion was if if some
hospitals wanted to create
committees that were network
wide, they could do that, so
that language is in here.
Um, and then there's also the
possibility the opportunity for
hospitals to establish single
hospital committees. So
therefore, in, in a particular
hospital, say, uh, Memorial
Hospital might be an example.
They, they could establish their
own um hospital committee.
Uh, we have a definition of roll
in here and then also a
definition of what a staffing
committee is. Definitely wanted
to make sure that those are
nurse-led committees, um, since
they're the ones that are gonna
be um greatly impacted um by
this bill.
Um, in, in section 2, we've,
we've we've struck the word
administrators and added
directors of nursing, um.
to the committee because in some
areas that's what they're
called, directors of nursing,
um, or, um, chief nursing
officers who wanted to be
inclusive, uh, and make sure
that, that, um.
That everyone is included. There
are 14 members on the committee.
Uh, 2 members are rural hospital
directors of nursing or chief
nursing officers, uh, and then
two members of uh uh
representing workers at least
one shall be a nurse at the
last, at the last, um, the last
time that we met there was a
question about, you know, who
would be on the committee so we
wanted to make that, uh, very
clear, um, and the rest of that,
um, line goes through that also,
um, the one thing that we have
added in here is.
A member of a, uh, nursing
faculty from a public university
or a community college, uh, and
we thought that that might give
some good um expertise to the
committee in terms of maybe, for
example, data collection or
research uh on the subject of um
we've defined the terms, um, I
changed those terms that the
committee will serve, so 5
members will serve 3-year term,
3 year terms instead of 4.
members were served 2-year terms
and 4 members will serve for one
year in your document.
Uh, the, we've also added dates
by which certain things should
happen in the last rendition in
the first actually bill it
didn't have dates. I have a.
Oh you said the document
Right.
Yeah, um, 4 members shall serve
for 1 year terms.
And then here it says for for
the vice chair is asking you the
committee said, we're on a 0.3
is that correct? Yes, it is
correct. Yes. Thank you.
Sorry, I missed it.
Um, so, um, let's see. Oh,
initial appointments, um, shall
be made by September 1st of 2025
by the by the um.
Healthcare authority and then
the the first meeting should be
held on October 1, 2025.
Um, then again, going to um.
Defining the the staffing ratios
each committee or hospital
network may establish a
committee to make
recommendations, um, and those
recommendations would go to the
statewide advisory committee,
um.
The rest of that is uh in terms
of the authority with the advice
of the statewide advisory
committee, um, will ensure that
like nurse to patient staffing
ratios.
Um
Promulgated by the authority are
being maintained by by the
hospital.
There's also new language that
that allows for the
consideration of unlicensed
personnel that provide direct
patient care as a factor when
setting, um, nurse to patient
ratios, and I think that's very
important because sometimes um
those and they're called
different things, patient care
texts, DNAs, um, are really a a
good asset for the nurses, so
taking them into consideration,
I think is very important.
Um, the authority also has the
uh ability to uh wave nurse
licensed nurse to patient
staffing ratios for general and
general rural general acute care
and we added critical care
access hospitals as well to that
again, uh, to make sure that
we're not leaving anyone out.
Um, then on October 1, 2026, the
authority with the advice of the
statewide staffing advisory
Committee shall hold hearings to
promulgate rules.
Um, and the language that's um.
Chad is also bolded there, um,
and it's, it's consistent with,
uh, nurse to patient staffing
ratios by licensed nurse, and
again, the authority may
consider the um unlicensed.
Um, personnel when ratios.
Um, let's see what else.
We added um circumstances in
which it is permissible for a
hospital to be outside the
established licensed and nurse
patient patient staffing ratio
and really expanded that
section, um, greatly, um, we
included um patients who are
cleared for discharge, who or
who have not, but have not yet
been discharged or are waiting
transfer. There was concern from
the hospitals that um they would
be um in violation for.
For example, if a nurse called
out or had to leave a shift
early, that will also be taken
into consideration.
Um, and then, um,
The duration of time would also
be taken into consideration in
terms of, you know, if, if the
hospital needs to to bring in an
on call nurse or unlicensed
employees to meet the hospital
units staffing ratios.
We
Also had discussions about the
emergency room that was a, a, a
huge issue, um, and we have
language in here that allows for
um that to be taken into
consideration so that um nurse
to patient staffing ratios, uh,
shall become effective no later
than 180 days after the ratios
are adapted, are adopted by
rule.
Um, for the emergency, for the,
and for emergency departments,
um, 18 months after the initial
ratios are adopted.
Um, there's also language in
here that allows any hospital
that wants to establish um nurse
to patient staffing ratios
earlier than the 18 months to do
so if they want to do that.
Let's see um.
In a
Um, I know that you explained
the change to the rule. I was
out of the room.
The 24, the 24 hour. Shall I
repeat it because it's not a
change, um, the rule, um, well,
and, and it's not a rule that's
been pointing out to me, it's
been a policy and a practice of
most committees here and it's
one that I have applied is
receipt of a um an amended.
Amendment should be sent to our
committee secretary within 24
hours of our usual meeting time.
We received this one, I think at
around 10:30 or something
yesterday, we distributed it to
the members.
Um, the issue that was raised
was whether or not.
Um, it has to be posted within
on the website within 24 hours.
That was the issue that was
brought to my attention. There
is no such rule that requires it
to be posted to the website, um,
within 24 hours. It says within
what, what is most practical or
something along those lines. I
conferred with Representative
McQueen on this rule, and so we
posted it, I think at some point
this morning.
And that is what was most
practical for us. We work very
hard to get the information out,
but we are juggling many. It's
not, frankly, hasn't been that
unusual that it's the morning of
that's the rule, there's been no
change in rule. The rule that
the committee is 24 hours. The
the posting on the website is.
No changes in rules.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um.
I appreciate that because I am
getting a lot of messages from
people who are interested in
this.
Issue we're not able to make it.
Um, and we're wanting to get on
to discuss the original bill.
And just found out this
afternoon that there was a
committee sub and.
Being that we are a.
Public body and we, we here to
serve the public.
Uh, you've been very fair up to
this point.
Um, when you, when you've held
Republican bills.
Because there was
Some amendments to to a bill.
You
In the, the uh democratic
supported bills and I
I would just expect a
continuation of that.
I just wanted to raise that
issue for
On behalf of the public that's
reaching out.
Uh, but I do appreciate that,
madam Chair.
You should expect me to continue
to be doing what I've done.
So, uh
We, uh, and let's not interrupt
the presentation and like this.
A little later. So, um,
representative uh Chavez.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um, the,
um, committee substitute also
provides for a semiannual report
to be completed by the Hai
submitted to the statewide
advisory staffing committee, the
report, um, documents the
hospital's plans and efforts to
make staffing ratios recommended
by the statewide staffing
committee.
The next, um,
I think important um piece is uh
under hospital staffing ratios
violation, enforcement remedies,
we've tightened that up to, I
think, make it a little bit um
clearer, um, the hospital, um,
shall provide written notice to
the authority and the statewide
staffing advisory Committee when
there have been 7 deviations
from ratios, um, in a rolling 90
day period.
Um, and then it goes on to speak
about what the written notice
shall provide, um, it needs to
be provided within 10 days from
the 7th deviation, explain the
cause of the deviation and pla
um and submit uh provide a plan
for to prevent future
deviations.
Um, no later than October 20
October 1st, 2026.
Uh, the authority with the
advice of the statewide advisory
committee shall hold a hearing
to promulgate rules that
establish a process for
investigating and remedying any
violation of staffing
requirements, um, and then, you
know, it goes on to be specific
about what the rules shall
contain specify reporting
requirements, allow for the
acceptance investigation and
resolution.
Of complaints, um,
Provide an administrative
appeals process for hospitals,
um,
That are determined by the
author to be in violation and
also providing um hospitals with
the right to judicial review of
any final decision by the
authority.
Um, the next, um, section is
also a tidying up of the
violations, um, uh, the hospital
received a, a warning for the
first violation in a one year
period, it was 4 years, uh,
impose a civil pen penalty not
to exceed, um, and then it goes
through, you know, what the,
what the amount of the penalties
are.
Um, and I, I won't read all of
those, um.
The other, um, thing that we did
and that's on the last page is
really expanded, um, the, um,
events where a hospital is not
required to follow the staffing
ratios and again have lots of
conversation around this. We
added mashed casualty event.
Mass mass casualty incidents,
pandemic, epidemic or endemic
illnesses, uh, circumstances,
um, that make staffing ratio
requirements unreasonable or
unattainable due to the
limitations of the workforce.
Uh, we heard a lot of concerns
with regard to, um, you know,
the, the workforce limitations
that we're facing right now, um,
and, um.
Wanted to recognize that in in
this bill, um, and then the that
last one is um any staffing
ratio conflicting with federal
or state law regarding. And we
removed the emergency clause.
Um, major.
So why don't we go to the
audience and those wishing to
speak in opposition, and this is
what we'll do, we'll do, um,
about 7 people in the room for
on each side, one minute each,
and then we'll go online for
about 3 people up to 1 minute
each, that's kind of the what
we've been doing in the.
Recently. So those wishing to
speak in opposition.
Please come step up and it would
be helpful if you form a line so
we can facilitate.
Prompt
Participation.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Jared Najar on
behalf of Christi's Health.
Um, we appreciate the intent of
the sponsor, and we thank her
for listening to our concerns,
but we must stand in respectful
opposition today for two main
reasons. Um, first, this bill
could potentially decrease
access to care, um, if hospitals
can't meet the minimum ratios
required, they're going to have
to close beds. Um, second, um,
with respect to hospitals such
as Crius, um, that are already
subject to collective bargaining
agreements and negotiate with
unions. This
Bill potentially subjects them
to double penalties, uh, one
under the bill and one under
their collective bargaining
agreement. So for those reasons,
we respectfully oppose this
bill.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee. uh, I'm Troy Clark,
the president and CEO of the New
Mexico Hospital Association. I
want to start off first and, uh,
express our gratitude to the
sponsor for the numerous
meetings that we have had and
discussions.
To try and offset what what
really here is an issue that uh
affects the staffing levels, but
unavoidably also will affect the
ability of hospitals to keep
beds open or to maintain access.
We appreciate the efforts to try
and reduce that those
implications, uh, especially in
the efforts that create the
flexibility. However, the
potential still exists a strong
potential exists for uh
especially a rural hospital's
ability to transfer inpatients,
uh, and into urban areas when
they're not able to provide that
care due to the staffing
workforce shortage that we've
got in the state.
Good afternoon, Scott Scanlon
registered lobbyist for San Juan
Regional Medical Center were a
private not for profit 501c3
community owned hospital. We've
been around for 115 years. We
began in 1910, a few years
before I was born. Uh, currently
we have 95 R in vacancies or
about a 31.5% vacancy rate.
We're supplementing with 51
agency RNs and 46 other
caregiver disciplines.
Um, with, uh, uh, with these uh
agency RNs were able to continue
our daily census of about 120
and 140.
Uh, we could find more, uh, we
could accommodate more if we
could find more.
Nurses, uh, workforce is our
number one challenge, so under
this legislation um we believe
that our vacancies could more
than double.
could more than double, I'm
sorry, and uh it would require
us to have an inpatient gap
between 90 and 110 beds to avoid
penalties, thus limiting the
access to care for San Juan
County residents. We
respectfully members of the
committee, my name is Alison
Riley, public policy director
for the New Mexico Chamber of
Commerce. Here in opposition of
House Bill 72, we appreciate the
work of the sponsor and fully
recognize the intent behind
ratios, however, our our current
nursing shortage is over.
7000 nurses statewide, and this
bill risks making an already
difficult situation even worse.
This is not just a public health
issue, it's an economic one.
Access to quality health care is
a key factor for businesses
deciding whether to invest,
expand, or relocate to New
Mexico. If we create policies
that further strain our
healthcare system, we'll push
businesses away at a time when
economic growth is critical for
our state.
Staffing decisions are best made
by hospital-based nurses who
understand the needs of the
patient, the experience and
skills of each team member and
all resources that are available
or could be made available. So
for those reasons and for those
stated before me, we oppose the
bill. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Dan
Weeks represent University of
New Mexico Hospital registered
lobbyist, I have a couple points
on the bill itself, and I
appreciate the fact that we
worked hard to try and make it
more palatable, however, it's an
it's, it's, it's an unfunded
mandate and a big one.
If you look at your FIRs.
There are impacts on the
Department of Health, on the
health uh authority as well as,
as on the facilities themselves
that are going to incur
significant costs.
Um
In that regard,
This bill's not going to HAFC.
As I, as I look at the
referrals.
House rule 1114-2.
States all beer pills carrying
appropriations.
Or requiring expenditures of
public money when reported
favorably by any other
committee.
To which it's been referred or
which shall be considered for
passage by the house shall.
be referred by the speaker as a
regular order to the committee
of appropriation and finance.
I thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Drew Sutter, uh,
registered lobbyist for
Presbyterian, and I want to say
uh I want to really thank the
sponsor for working with us and
addressing many of our changes
in the substitute and with the
changes made in the substitute,
we no longer oppose the bill.
Thank you.
Thank you. Um, let's go online
and and we'll have. Oh, I'm
sorry, there's one more, oh, I'm
sorry, Charlie, my apologies.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee named Charlie Marcus,
uh, registered lobbyist for New
Mexico Healthcare, New Mexico
Centers for Assisted Living.
Uh
We respectfully opposed the
bill one because if this goes
into effect, typically what
happens is that nurses are taken
from nursing homes into
hospitals and so it would leave
us high and dry.
The other is, is that there's a
definition within the bill that
could include us, which could
set us up for some uh liability,
uh, the other is, is that um we
already have a a state mandate.
That requires um
It's 2.5 hours of daily care per
resident day in a nursing home.
On top of that, we have a
federal mandate that has a
little bit more complicated
formula.
Um, and for those reasons we
stand in opposition to the bill.
Thank you. Thank you, Charlie.
Um, let's go online. I'll select
um those wishing to speak in
opposition.
Please raise your hand.
All right, um, Doctor Don Bates,
you can speak, um, you have up
to one minute.
Madam Chairman, committee, uh,
Doctor Don Bates, CEO here at
the hospital. I, I speak in
opposition of this bill for
those rural remote hospitals in
our state, we're already dealing
with the nursing shortage, and
many of us rely heavily on
contract labor, which we can't
even afford to pay those rates.
Again, I stand in opposition.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Let's see, we have, uh, anyone
wishing to speak in opposition.
Oh, OK, I see someone named SA S
Adam.
Adam S. Adams.
I'm Sheila Adams. OK. Go ahead.
I'm the chief nursing officer
with Sierra Vista Hospital
located in Truth or
Consequences. Plus his hospital
to us is 75 miles.
While we struggle as Doctor
Bates discussed with staffing
our hospital.
My opposition comes down to the
places where we transfer for
higher level of care. We help
patients in our emergency room
at this time due to the in the
beds being unavailable at the
higher level of care hospitals
and once this law should it go
into place, this bill will put a
hardship on the hospitals across
the state.
And they, we will have patients
dying in rural emergency rooms
in my opinion, because we cannot
get them to the right level of
care they need.
Thank you so much for listening.
um.
Adrian Gomez.
Good afternoon, uh, committee
and Madam Chair, Adrian Gome is
here for the greater Albuquerque
Chamber of Commerce and the
Gallup McKinley Chamber of
Commerce.
While the chambers appreciate
the goals behind HB 72 striving
to prevent nurse burnout and
deliver high quality care. The
reality in our state as in
states throughout the nation is
a severe nursing shortage and
the number one consequence of
this legislation will be less
care for morning New Mexicans.
With that, we respect the
respectfully ask you to vote
against it. We stand in
opposition of HB 72. Thank you.
Ah thank you concludes the
opposition public comment, those
wishing to speak in support,
please um, line up and we'll do
the same thing up to 7 people in
the room, one minute each.
OK.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Gloria Doherty. I am a
nurse for 35 years and a nurse
practitioner for 25 and feel the
strain of this every day.
Um, here on behalf of the
nursing association and the
nurse practitioner counsel. And
we'd like to thank the sponsor
for the tremendous work that
she's done, meeting with every
stakeholder, trying to get this
in a way that we can get it
passed. Our professional nursing
organization, American Nursing
Association also supports, um,
optimal staffing and
Uh, the literature shows that it
improves outcomes.
There are some hospitals that
may find this difficult, and
what this bill does is it starts
a conversation, and it allows
the flexibility of staffing
committees to report to the
advisory committee. It doesn't
mean the whole hospital has to
go on ratios. It could be
stepwise. Like, let's say Medd
surge has a lot of quality and
safety issues. It could target
the retention and recruitment of
hospitals to just that area as
the first step.
And the emergency room has been
given away.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Sharon Argenbright,
Master's prepared registered
nurse, retired Air Force nurse
Corps officer. I taught nursing
here in New Mexico for more than
20 years to try to alleviate the
nursing shortage which has
existed my entire career,
greater than 45 years. When I
relocated to Santa Fe over 30
years ago. I worked for a
hospital which had nurse
staffing ratios. That was before
the California mandated ratios.
With staffing ratios, I
experienced the best nursing
work environment ever hands
down, the patient I was patients
I was assigned.
The two were cared for, received
the care they needed, nothing
more, nothing less. Fast forward
10 to 15 years, things went
south rapidly when ratios became
an option in the first year
after ratios became an option,
the hospital experience, the
nurse turnover rate of 20% over
100 nurses resigned the second
year, same thing, over 100
nurses resigned. Since then,
over 12 years ago, nurses have
petitioned our legislators.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, I'm Deborah
Walker, a registered nurse and
the
Executive director for the New
Mexico nurses Association.
I stand in support of this.
Committee substitute.
Um, because of the public policy
approach it takes for almost a
decade, we have come before you
with different options to
address issues around safe
staffing.
We've reached a tipping point.
If you think this would have a
negative impact, I believe it is
counter to that. Having a public
policy approach will allow us to
have the discussion that is
necessary on this issue.
Most states don't have a nursing
shortage to the extent that we
do. When you talk about uh
agency nurses. It begs the
question, why are our new grads
not
Seeking employment where they've
had clinicals, why do we not
hire our agency nurses.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Carter Bundy with
asks me, we want to thank the
sponsor for all of her work with
all the stakeholders. You know,
this is a little bit of a
chicken and egg thing. I think
you've heard over and over again
that we already have a staffing
shortage, the current system,
therefore, isn't working. A lot
of the staffing shortage is
driven by the fact that nurses
are getting burnt out.
When they're understaffed and
they can't deliver the right
healthcare, and of course
stresses them out and they want
to find something else to do or
find a place that does have er
safe staffing ratios, and you've
heard about studies where in
states with safe staffing
ratios, the number of people
coming into the state is
actually increased. So I think
we need to try something
different. One of the key things
to think about in terms of the
economics is that traveling
nurses make 3 to 4 times what
regular staff nurses do. Maybe
it's time for the medical
facilities to take some of that
money and.
it into a full-time nursing
staff. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, John Lipshutz
with the New Mexico Federation
of Labor, representing over
40,000 workers throughout the
state. We stand in strong
solidarity with our nurses on
this bill. Um,
We view this, uh, it's right in
the title of the bill, Safe
Staffing. Um, we always advocate
for safety in our workplaces. In
this case, it's not just safety
for the nurses, and this is a
safety issue when overworked,
um, nurses put themselves in
potentially their patients in
danger, and this is something
that we need to address, but
obviously we're talking about
safety of the patient as well.
So for those issues, we urge you
to support this for the safety
of all.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Kelly Stout Sanchez. I'm
an attorney who represents
people who have been injured
because of the misconduct of
others. We strongly support this
bill and thank the sponsor for
bringing it forward, um, as, as
we can see, hospitals that are
appropriately staffed has a
direct impact on, uh, increased
patient safety, um, and nurses
and providers who are
overburdened and overworked, um,
are less likely to be able to
provide care for our patients
and um
Um, those who are actually
supported, hopefully will, will
stay in our hospitals in New
Mexico. Thank you.
Madam Chair and representatives.
My name's Nancy Novak. I'm an RN
or a semi-retired RN and
This is so important for patient
safety. I think we're, we call
it nurse ratios, but really this
is about the patient at the
bedside, and unless any of
you've been a patient or a
nurse, it's real frustrating for
us because we cannot deliver
quality care when we are not
appropriately staffed. And I
know some of the places it's
more important and they value
the dollar more than the
patient, and especially I was
really surprised by the chamber
of commerce because you're gonna
get more.
People into the state and more
businesses into the state when
they know they can get adequate
care.
And get good, safe care. Thank
you for your time.
Um, now let's go online.
Um, those
Oh
Um, Deirdre Murphy.
Deirdre.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee.
My name is Deirdre Murphy, and
due to a bot surgery 15 years
ago. I was left permanently
paralyzed and they have
experienced multiple
hospitalizations. Through the
years I've witnessed overworked
nurses and stretched thin stuff.
Struggling to meet the patient's
needs. Research has shown the
adequate staffing not only
improves patient outcome, but
also enhances staff morale and
retention. This bill is crucial
step toward creating a
healthcare environment where
both patients and providers can
thrive. I urge you to pass this
bill to protect patients and to
support the dedicated healthcare
providers who care for us. Thank
you for your time.
And your consideration.
Lindsey
Madam Chair and committee, thank
you for the time to speak. I'm
Lindsay Hurst, vice president of
CWA Local 7076. We represent
nurses and direct care staff at
Miner's Colfax Medical Center in
Raton, the New Mexico
rehabilitation Center in
Roswell, Sequoia Adolescent
Treatment Center, Turquoise
Lodge and at UNM Hospital, as
well as techs in the children's
psychiatric unit. We stand in
support of House Bill 72 because
our members deserve to work in
safe conditions where they are
given the best.
to help their patients. We, we
all know that we have a vacancy
rate crisis across many of our
state agencies and research
shows that improving the
staffing ratios positively
impacts the number of employed
nurses. We believe that better
working conditions would
decrease the attrition rate of
our members in these critical
positions. Please pass House
Bill 72 as amended. Thank you.
Thank you. And.
I don't see any other.
I suggest we go to committee
with questions and and the like,
so, um, who wants to be on the
list?
Chavez.
I hearken back to Reim, um, and,
um, a beta.
OK, we got a pretty full list
here. Let's start with
Representative Hall.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative, uh.
Expert witnesses
On I was looking through this.
So you're gonna have to forgive
me. I just kind of made a bunch
of random notes, but I'll try
not to be too random in my
questions.
First of all, the 4-member
advisory board that's mentioned
in section.
To subsection A, page 3 lines 23
through 25.
It says it will represent the
the the geographical diversity
of our state.
Who is gonna determine that
board.
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair.
And Madam Chair, the healthcare
authority is based out of
Here in Santa Fe.
Or where's where are they
actually based out of.
Main office, I would assume is
in Santa Fe. They are a
statewide agency.
In so.
Me being from the northwest part
of the state, I'm assuming we'd
get a rep for San Juan Regional.
And then there'd be reps out of
everywhere else.
Or is it going to be done?
Based on
Per capita population type
thing, Madam Chair.
Madam Madam Chair
Representative, that is not
specifically defined in the
bill, but the idea is to have
geographical representation.
The committee, um.
And then when it began to talk
on page 7.
About
Seeking
Injunctive relief.
For hospitals apparently they
couldn't meet the, the mandates.
That injunctive relief will be
determined by this board, Madam
Chair.
Um, no, madam. By a quart. So
the courts.
health
Pardon me, madam Chair. So my
question is, I guess so.
We have a healthcare authority.
And then if they don't meet
these.
We go to a
court
Determine the needs of a
hospital.
In different parts of the state,
am I misunderstanding this,
Madam Chair Representative Madam
Chair, um, representative,
you're, you're uh speaking about
the um appeal process. Is that
correct?
The administrative appeal
process if the hospital
disagrees with um whether or not
they've been in violation.
Is that correct? Correct, based
on the mandated.
Staffing that would be laid out
by.
The authority and the.
Board,
so Madam Chair Representative,
the hospital will then have to
appeal that decision if they
thought it wasn't a correct
decision, um, they would have
the ability to appeal that to a
court. This is something Madam
Chair Representative, that I do
want to point out that the
hospitals actually asked the to
be included in in um in this
bill, um, but I also want to
point out that there are a
number of um.
Exceptions or waivers that we
have provided in the bill, um,
that would consider the
particular circumstance in terms
of why that violation.
Oh
OK. And so as we come up with
this.
Madam Chair, I, I apologize. I'm
trying to think this question
through, so.
As is the staffing mandates.
Come up.
And then you're in areas that
are already down.
depending on where you're at,
dozens of nurses.
That
Right
The
Question, I guess, is the, the
one we've asked every time,
where are the nurses coming
from. I keep hearing.
References to the California.
Uh
Where they had mandatory
staffing.
And then they created my
understanding in California
state funding processes to pay
for traveling nurses to come in.
How are we going to handle this?
As we force this upon.
Hospitals
And their ultimate
Answer is to reduce the number
of beds. I think I've kind of
got my mind wrapped on this,
but.
Uh, where are all these numbers
gonna come from?
Because we already have
hospitals that are having to
pare back or doing the best they
can to.
Meet the numbers.
Uh, madam chair representative.
Madam Chair, Representative who
asked a whole bunch of
questions. And I don't know that
I can remember all of them. Um,
so I will speak to the last one.
I think, um.
So I don't know about any
funding process in Califa.
Um
In the bill, we have allowed for
consideration of workforce with
regard to the workforce. That's
uh when the staffing ratios are
established and whether or not
the hospital, um.
Uh, can there and the other
thing that I do want to say too
is that there is nowhere in this
bill speaks about closing baths,
um.
That is not the intention, and I
know that several uh in
opposition spoke to that, um,
you know, when you think about
it right now, the situation is
that beds are actually being
closed, there are patients who
are being boarded in, that's
what they call, right in the ER
waiting for a bed. They're not
really waiting for a bed,
they're waiting for an, if you
look at California, what the
research has shown is that
California has actually
increased the numbers of nurses
who are graduating and the
number.
Of nurses who are moving ratios
has also increased. I don't
remember the numbers right now,
but it's really, um, it's really
very significant, 13,000.
And they had a 20% increase in
new student graduates. That's
when, because we're not
increasing the numbers of nurses
that were graduating at the rate
that we need to, um, as a matter
of fact, I heard just recently
that there was all of their
slots.
Um, and the other piece in terms
of looking at California, which
has had this law for more than
20 years, um, they have um seen,
um the better patient outcomes,
um, less patients being
readmitted to the hospitals,
less fewer falls, fewer
infections, and the list goes
on.
Let's try to focus our answers
on that direct questions, you
know, I appreciate what you're,
I appreciate your passion for
the bill, but in fairness, you
know, we need to tighten up our
answers a little bit. I'll try
to tighten up my question, Madam
Chair.
Um
So
as we look at this.
I know, I can speak quite well
to the hospital in my area.
They're doing their
Best they're working with the
local junior college as a
graduate nurses, they're
bringing students on.
To help get them
Uh
Knowledge of how the hospital
works and things like that. And
then still having to bring
travel in, I just, I
I don't, I, I'm not saying.
How we're gonna get nurses in
the rural New Mexico because not
everyone wants to move the rural
New Mexico. It's.
It takes for those of us from
there who love it, that's fine,
but a lot of folks.
Don't like it and spoken with.
Traveling nurses.
Over the years, um, they're
simply, they enjoy the money but
they're going back to where they
came from.
So, by forcing the bed issue,
how do we
In
And not the bad issue, the
nursing number issue, pardon me
for misspeaking. How do we
actually
Yeah
These nurses to to stay. Has
there been any thought on that,
Madam Chair Representative?
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
um, I think we kind of talked
about this last time too, um,
where there's kind of a couple
angles that you can take at
this, you can, you know,
somebody asked, why don't we
just pay nurses more because
that would attract nurses and
that's also how we get travel
nurses, the pay is better and
now nurses travel to where the
pay is better. Um, the other,
um, side of the approach would
be to make the conditions
better, and that's kind of where
we're, what we're focusing on,
um, nurses will go and work
places that are.
safely staffed that have, um,
pleasant work environments where
they don't feel like they're
license is at risk. Um, and this
bill kind of tries to hold
hospitals accountable to
prioritizing, um, their funding
or, you know, their decision
making to, um, having safe
ratios, which would attract
nurses. And like you said, right
now, you know, nursing students
go into these rural hospitals,
and we're trying to foster these
connections and if they see an
environment where
nurses are stressed, burnt out,
you know, counting down the days
for their contract to and it's
not gonna make them want to work
there. So we have to make the
environment better to attract
people to it as well.
OK. Um, Madam Chair, so
With, along those lines, can you
briefly
Explain to me, yeah, I noticed
there's some time limits and I
didn't go through each one
specifically.
But there's, I think there's a
time when this comes into play.
And there's a time that allows
Hospitals to respond to the
staffing.
Uh, if this were to pass the
staffing that the authority
would put upon them. Would you
mind just explaining that those
time frames briefly.
So, um, Madam Chair,
representative.
The um staffing committee has a
year to uh come up with
um recommendations, um, and
following those recommendations,
we will, I can't find the page
right. Oh, I'm sorry, uh, by
October 1, 2020 meetings to uh
promulgate the rules so they
have a year, uh, to take input
from hospitals around the state
and make some recommendations,
um.
Once those recommendations are
made, then the emergency
department has or the ERs are
given an an additional 18
months, um, to
Uh, basically, um.
Implement emergency rooms are
given a little bit longer. Also
just wanted to add that some
units already have ratios that
they're following the question
was on the timeline. You answer.
So from October of 26th in the
ERs will have 18 more months.
To comply with what with what
the authority and and what if
we're still in a shortage and
they can't comply. Is that when
there is a
Punitive, maybe punitive is not
the right way, some kind of
action against the hospital,
madam,
the um the authority will take
into the situation of the
workforce. So if there's not
enough of the hospital has made,
um, efforts to, um, hire and
attract additional nurses, um,
then no.
There's, there's again, there's
language.
Thank you, Madam Chair. That's
all. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative, um,
Representative Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative, for
bringing this um.
I've, I've heard a lot of
Information and discussion.
I know how hard you worked.
Who, uh
Get it to this point.
But I do, I do have a couple of
questions that I just
I need to clarify.
Madam Chair, I have a clarifying
question
on a
procedure
I'm sure.
Oh, I'm sorry.
Go ahead. Um, there was a
comment made.
Um,
About the build by one of the
people that stood not working
and I was just wondering if I
could get
Clarification. I don't need
clarification from the person
who I don't remember what it
was.
And I asked that question you
can ask the question to Martine,
um, representative Chavez, if
she knows.
Sorry about that. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Representative
Chavez, there was a uh stood up
and said that in this bill,
There is
The ability for a hospital or
a unit
Go
Um
I wrote slowly, that's not the
word they used.
But
adjust their staffing.
I think the word that they used
was stepwise.
Is it, is, can you show me where
that is in the bill, or is it
just
You know
The way the rule would be
written there, that's. Um, Madam
Chair Representative, they may
have been referring to the fact
that, um, because there was so
much conversation about the um.
Emergency room that we've delay
um in terms of.
Thank you for that. I was just
wondering if
Cause it's, it's difficult for
some of these hospitals,
especially the rural hospitals
to go from.
This amount
What
The rule is gonna call.
I was wondering if it, if there.
Able to do that gradually.
You know, a lot of them are
gonna have to pay traveling
nurses so.
Um
You have enough nurses in New
Mexico.
But hiring those traveling
nurses doesn't always take.
We
I mean, sometimes it takes a
month to be able to get up to
that level.
Is that a possibility, and could
you show me in the Madam Chair
Representative, yes, um, there
is consideration with regards to
the situation, um, the authority
can um waive, um, some of those,
and again, the rural hospitals
will like as long as it's not
jeopardizing the safety of
patients. Um.
Where is it? It may be in
several sections.
I, I, I
Try to find it, but I couldn't.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
I think this also, um, has to do
with the timeline, you know, uh,
where we start, um, on October,
I believe October 2026 is where
they make the recommendation and
then it gives an amount of time
to where they, um, where these
ratios are expected to be
followed, and then the emergency
department has
on page 6.
Only 2325, and then on to the
next page.
Um, that's one area where um.
Where the author authority may
waive the.
What, what
What I'm looking for is on page
7.
5.
So that talks about there,
there, there's a great, they can
have this gradual buildup.
Madam Chair Representative, yes,
and that can also come from
recommendations from a committee
that is going to receive
information from the various.
OK.
I, I appreciate that.
Um
Uh, on the definition.
Oh
Um, means any public, private,
acute care, rehab, or
rehabilitation.
Limited services, critical
access, general or specific 7
days per week.
Or, or
Uh, behavioral health,
behavioral health rehab center.
Madam Chair Representative um
Nursing homes
Mm
Do they, do they fall under
this?
Medi, uh, representative under
this definition, yes, they would
become.
24 hour
Uh, monitoring.
And or the included in the
committee, do they have?
Madam Chair, uh, representative,
not specifically, but um, that's
why we changed the definition.
In the bill to, um, and then we
also um added additional
representatives for rural areas
so as to an opportunity to have
a seat at the table.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, because I was
very concerned.
About nursing and
It's difficult to get a nurse to
move.
Please.
But he received
Very good.
I wish he had allowed him to
stay.
Place that was not as, not as.
I understand personally the need
for
staffing ratios, but for me it's
more.
commitment of
The nurse taking care of a
patient.
Then having
One nurse because my fear is
we're still gonna have. Um, let
me go that was just uh um asking
a question.
Um
Up to this point, um, I have
been known to overstay my life.
Um
Are there waivers in this?
This bill,
there are.
Um, would it be too difficult to
Madam Chair Representative, if
you look on the last like uh ga
that has the differences, um.
I don't know,
um, it's in section.
If
actually, um.
And that's on the last page of
the document that I gave you, it
outlines all reasons why the
ratio, uh, and then on in other
sections of the act. It also
allows the authority continue to
look for that that's fine. I
just,
I was wondering.
You said it would be up to the
authorities that the health,
they would be the
Enforcer of they would be the
one to.
Madam Chair,
hospital. Uh, no manager
representative, they would
impose a fine if they believed
that the hospital after all of
these considerations was not um
following the ratios, um, if the
hospital wanted to uh appeal
that, then the hospital.
Um
Can you tell me what the average
is
Veronica.
$50,000 seems awfully high to
me.
Madam Chair Representative,
that's the highest fine and that
that's after a number of uh
violations of rectify the
situation. I don't know what the
average fine is.
1 strike, 2 strike a
man
Madam Chair Representative, no,
there's the, um, the first one,
and then, and then there are 12.
4
4 levels of fines, Madam Chair
Representative
on the on the page with the
changes.
Um, issue a warning for the
first violation.
Used to be a 4 year.
You, you changed it to what was
a civil penalty not to.
So is this consecutive years
this year.
I get fined 7. I don't fix it by
next year.
Uh, the other piece that I
wanted to point out in this,
it's also up to, it's no longer,
it was a definite.
Thank you Madam Chair.
Representative, so that's the
authority would determine that.
Yes, madam. Earlier when
We're talking with
um
No, Madam Chair Representative,
hospital has the ability to feel
that the decision, um.
That was made.
Thank you, Madam Cha.
That, that makes me so the
appeal would go to court.
Just out of curiosity, Madam
Chair Representative.
I get fined 50% general fund.
Madam Chair, I would assume the
general fund. But it's not.
Spelled out in the HCA could
just.
Manage representative they would
do.
They could
I was a really bad operator.
Brand new furniture
computers.
If you're bad.
Um
I, I find that interesting that
might need to be looked at.
I know
People that are want to be very
specific about where the money
would go.
So I would just make the
suggestion that you
You look at where
That it doesn't go into their
budget and it.
Burs back at the end of the
year.
I'm sure you, I'm sure you know.
You know what I'm
What I'm getting at.
Um
Madam Chair Representative, the
committee that comes up the 14
member nursing.
Uh, that committee is just in a.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative
correct.
So the advisory committee spends
all this time coming up with
ideas
Suggestions for the ratio.
And I go
Rita one
Merged 5 to 1.
They go to the
Secretary of the ACA.
I don't care.
I'm gonna go
5 to 1 across the.
Is that possible, madam Chair
Representative Madam Chair
Representative, I suppose that
it's possible, but the authority
is a at this point in time, a
non-voting member of the
committee, so they would be
participating in these meetings,
why the committee is making
those and of course, at that
point in time, they also have
it, so it's not that they are
actively involved in the
process. Thank you, Madam Chair
represents part of the
committee, non-voting during
this process.
They say I don't care. I'm gonna
decide to go 5 to 1 across the
board.
Is that possible?
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, Rosanna interesting
another thing that I think might
wanna look at, you never know.
I get hired. I know nothing
about it.
Um, I would suggest maybe
Some teeth or
Or a stronger Madam Chair
Representative, I think the
other piece that we need to
remember is that there's going
to before they are actually
instituted. Um, the beach.
Madam Chair Representative, if
they wish to do so, yes. So
they're not required, Madam
Chair. Madam.
So Sunday comes slow day.
Madam Chair, Representative, I
decide.
And then all of a sudden,
I start recalling nurses, uh.
Do I get fined for that?
Representative, um.
So I would think of all, if
there is a mash to phone numbers
and nurses that we can also call
and ask to come in. So it's not
Unthinkable that I know if I was
sitting at home because that's
how nurses respond.
are represented by.
Nurses
Family and I
But I'm just saying
hypothetically.
I wouldn't know how to run an
emergency room if somebody, but
I'm saying is.
I'm not gonna get fined if I.
You know, I
I have a big hospital in
Albuquerque. All my nurses live
in the far south nurse.
Am I gonna get fined for that
because I made the decision to
send them home.
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
hospitals have to submit
staffing plans?
That it's semiannual.
Um, staffing committee.
And, and Madam Chair
Representative to all, thank
you, Madam Chair.
Um
The only reason I, I remember
hearing.
The
couldn't meet with
together.
Who does that.
And that's, I'm sure, Madam
Chair Representative, is there,
is there a committee now?
Uh, Madam Chair.
Director of nursing
putting the stuff in
Madam Chair Representative once
the committee is established,
then that person would send it
to the statewide committee.
Madam Chair Representative, so
there's, there's no requirement
for staffing report
that hospital, um, does their
own.
And it's
Madam Chair, Madam Chair.
It is a very, very important.
I'm just concerned that
This is gonna harm the rural
nursing homes.
going to harm
Behavioral health and some of
the rehab, you know, it's easier
to recruit in. I have serious
concerns. That's what's gonna
happen.
Some of these issues. Thank you,
Madam Chair. I appreciate the
time.
Of course,
Representative Chavez.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, I think.
Representative Martinez asked
most of my questions.
Um let me just double check.
There was one question I had and
I saw.
Um, in the language, you guys
did state that you are creating
waivers for critical access
hospitals.
Um, as well as rural hospitals.
But why not include all the
hospitals, um, being able to
request a waiver. Why only those
two?
Um, Madam Chair representative
in some way can um not
necessarily request a waiver,
but there are considerations in
terms of and that's um out in
the document that I gave you is
also in the bill, but there are
very have to meet the ratios and
then again, it takes into
consideration, you know, car
accident, example, epidemics,
endemics, all of um.
They are given some
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative.
I think we could be a little
more specific just in case it
doesn't fall into these
circumstances. Um,
But I believe.
Make sure.
He asked all these questions.
Yes, he asked most of my
questions, so you guys made a
good, I don't know which one of
you made um.
A good example of a comment
saying that.
Patients aren't turned away, but
they're sitting in the emergency
room or in the hallways, um, due
to the nurse shortage.
So I guess my comment is, I
mean, we know there's over 8000
vacancies for nurses right now.
Um
And that's just going to happen
more and more if we're waiting
for nurses with this staffing
ratio and I just don't think.
We're going to get nurses that
are wanting to move to um New
Mexico, maybe perhaps in the
city, but I don't know about the
rule like uh representative.
Um, Paul said.
Everybody's not fighting you out
of college.
Um, or nursing school to move to
a rural New Mexico, so that's my
concern, um, and I guess I just
wish our emphasis emphasis would
be an increasing nursing grads.
Rather than
Looking at mandating ratios. And
so that's something I think that
we should have looked at more. I
have um.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um
Uh, first of all, uh, Madam
Chair and Representative, I just
wanted to thank you for all of
your incredibly hard work on
this.
Legislation and all of the
negotiation, um, with all of the
stakeholders, they know it's
very complex issue and certainly
something that's.
Uh, we've been discussing for.
Many years and you've made such
incredible progress.
Um
Madam Chair, and Representative,
I just had a couple of technical
things that I think are.
Uh, left in clean up, I think
the total number of items I have
is 3 items that I just wanna see
if perhaps could.
Consider them as temperature.
Absolutely. OK, thank you, Madam
Chair. So, um,
First on page 4.
Um,
The health care authority is in
this.
Staff and and a non-voting
advisory member, so that's page
and um.
Given that the healthcare
authority has the licensing and
regulatory oversight of
hospitals, Madam Cha I'm
wondering if.
Um, it makes sense to have the
healthcare authority actually be
a voting member and serve as the
chair.
Madam Chair, Representative, I
think that's thank you, Madam
Chair, so.
To achieve that.
Madam Chair, would you like me
to go through the other
technical issue also, and then
do.
And and then make a motion
regarding the amend an amendment
or. Yeah, I think that would be
helpful. OK, thank.
OK, and then.
I items are on page 10.
Um, on page 10 line 7.
So, so one of the things in this
legis in the substitute is that
you have removed.
Ratios for unlicensed employees,
so the ratios are for licensed.
Registered and licensed nurses.
So, Madam Chair, uh, it seems
that.
On H10 line 7 and unlicensed.
Continuing on to the next line,
employees needs to be removed.
Section
Madam Chair, would that be a, a
friendly amendment? Madam Chair
Representative, yes.
And then, um, at the bottom of
that page.
Madam Chair, just going back to
the role of the healthcare
authority on line 25.
Um
Uh, the report, this is the
semiannual report.
Completed by the hospitals.
Um, should be also provided not
just to the statewide advisory
staffing committee, but also to
the authority,
yes, I would agree with that.
OK, so that those are the,
that's the substantive
explanation of those little
technical things.
Is that the totality of your
suggestions.
So, um, let's talk about how
we'll do the process we've done
this before as well, but let's
get consensus around the
amendments so that the guidance
as to whether they would be
accepted in a second another 4
sub on Friday.
We hear it on Friday, it will be
simply to adopt it, that's, I
think we've handled it that it
this way, so go ahead. OK. Thank
you, Madam Chair. So amendment.
One would be on page 4.
Line 19 to strike non-voting
advisory.
And then I'm paged, uh, I mean
page 4 line 20.
Same page, um.
Before the period insert and
serve as chair, so it would read
one member shall represent the
authority and serve as chair.
And then to fully execute that
then on page 5.
Line 16.
Uh, I think we would strike.
Uh
A chair
And other so that it would read
the statewide staffing advisory
Committee shall elect annually.
Officers as the committee
determines to be necessary.
So it'd be striking and I'm
sorry, page 5.
My bad, page 5, 16. OK.
So that deals with the chair
issue and then.
Um, Madam Chair, Madam Chair
Representative, so you're
striking, um, she elect annually
other officers.
I mean, you're striking a chair
and a chair and other.
OK, OK, got it. All right,
striking a chair and other, so
then it would read shall elect
annually officers as the
committee determines to be
necessary.
Madam Chair.
Since, since we're.
Um
Making the the representative
from HCA.
chair shouldn't that language be
kind of clear here.
Officers other than the chair.
I'm something like that.
Chairs representative. So as far
as the pointed.
Being always representative of
healthcare.
And there is no election.
Um, that was the original
alternative.
But if we're saying that the, I,
I hear what you and I, I, I
would dare.
My, my, just my question.
Having the perpetual
As the healthcare authority
designates that we're.
We may need to.
I I like simplicity, but that's
just me.
Um
Representative Hall, I know you,
I, I don't want anything.
Yep, thank you, Madam Chair.
Along those very same lines, I
mean, when we talk about.
I asked Representative.
Ackman B Hill
I didn't know the healthcare
authority is appointed by the
executive branch.
Is that correct? So this chair
would come off of the
Authority and would be
appointed.
By the authority
So would it even an election
process even be necessary for
the chair?
Or am I
altogether, so it'd be an annual
appointment by the executive
branch.
Yes.
OK.
Thank you.
So, so I think.
Madam Chair too.
Representative Martinez's point.
Mr. Webb
Uh, maybe the amendment on page
5.
Line 16 is uh just striking a
chair and.
So then it would read the
statewide staffing advisory
Committee shall elect annually
other officers and then.
Going to page.
Page 10, lines 7 and 8.
We would strike and unlicensed
employees.
And then page 10, line 25.
For the period insert.
That the report is delivered to
the statewide advisory staff and
committee.
You, I have questions about your
proposal.
Forgive me, I'm going back to
the chair question, um.
As I'm looking through like you
that the chair would be the, the
annual appoint.
Um, I know that 4 members shall.
through
Having some
That would have
their own.
Madam Chair, uh, representative,
that was basically a good
question.
hospital staffing committees
with regulatory oversight do?
Um
So Madam Jared, add to that,
that is what I know. Sorry.
Um, while we were talking, um,
while you were talking, sorry,
um.
I, I think I hear that. I'm just
curious as to why of that.
Um, role is, um.
Is the what the the I think the
only answer I have to that is,
is, uh, they wanted to ensure.
That
Um, this
Committee doesn't fall into
conflict with the licensing and
regulatory oversight duties that
the healthcare.
I, I'm not, I'm not familiar
with all these stuff.
And I'm just curious
I think, I mean, that's fine so
long as we run.
Um
When you're far away from
directly.
Speaking to my fault, madam. No,
I'm just saying, OK, got it.
Um, yeah, I think that's.
OK
Um, everybody heard that we're
not gonna vote on that, but I
want you to know. Yes, we'll
bring it back as a point. We'll
finish our conversation, but you
know.
I'll confirm that with you, rep,
that it's only those changes
when you present them for.
CS and we'll pass it out or not
pass it out of committee as the
boat determines on Friday, OK,
but let's have more conversation
about the uh CS.
As appropriate, is that is all,
is that all? OK, very good,
um, representative Ree.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'll be
brief since I think almost all
my questions were asked, but and
I know we did.
Um,
only issue just repeating again,
Madam Chair, I'm really
concerned and the the waiver
attempt, which it's the main
language in there that if
certain things were, you know,
um, you know, even shell for
they're able to demonstrate
wrath.
Um
So, you know, I would ask you to
to think about that. I'm sure
that's not a friendly amendment
that you want, but that's, that
is the concern for having your
drive to Lubbock or Amarillo
every time we're in that
hospital, I would just ask that
you consider maybe that be here.
Thank you.
Thank you um representative of
Beta.
Bringing us back, I can see that
you do understand how important.
Concerns that were raised.
Excuse me.
Um, and so one of the things
that
Or your students said.
That's not
dressed completely. I have.
Alamo, Laguna Amo.
And then the hospitals that
pulling from.
If we're pulling nurses
fromelweek, the smaller
hospitals and in my district
might face.
My face, uh, a shortage are
still not receiving adequate
care, but I do see that there is
more that, um, I did have a
question.
I understand we don't, the state
does not have jurisdiction over
tribal clinics or in in health
service facilities, but would
there be an opportunity to
invite them to the table and
perhaps have a position there
because what we do on the state
side does impact our citizens
who live in.
Madam Chair Representative, I, I
think that the meetings are
going to in terms of the
rulemaking and we have the
opportunity to comment, um, I
was on the Senate Memorial 5
Task Force. We also did our
meetings via Zoom.
Representative
I
Appreciate that response and I
think it's important so today
we're considering about.
Rural
Madam Chair,
Thank you, madam. OK, and then,
uh, my last two questions are
earlier you had talked about
how.
guidelines and rules about
different staffing ratios.
Um
Madam Chair Representative, I
can't compare urban hospital to
a rot.
Um,
anyone else
say something.
I didn't look at you.
All right, um.
So where we're at now is.
We have a handful of um specific
I guess I would conclude they're
mostly technical, some cleanup.
Um, those will be incorporated
as you agreed to in a news
committee sub.
Whilst
And, um, no public
good thank you.
Right. Next and last item is.
House bill.
13.
Oh, OK.
I understand there's an
amendment, so we'll pass out the
amendment.
Madam Chair.
Ready on the floor is yours,
representative Hoffman V. Hill.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair, members of the committee
trying to pick the energy up a
little bit here, um, we are here
to talk about House Bill 13,
otherwise known as the power up
New Mexico Act. Um, we do have
an amendment, Madam Chair, the
22 number last 3 is 2.
And this amendment, Madam Chair,
uh, just make some technical
fixes to language as requested
throughout our continuing
conversations with the public
regulation commission.
Do you want to explain kind of
the overarching does that work
for you, representative?
Absolutely, madam. I'm sure that
works so.
Um, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I think that this
bill is best explained, um, kind
of going through and and telling
the story of my involvement and
how I got into working on grid
modification, so, uh, Madam
Chair in my past role as the
chairwoman of the House Trans
Committee. I started working on
a lot of issues as they pertain
electric vehicles and um, you
may remember Madam.
members of the committee that
um the last federal
administration pushed a lot of
money through what we call the
National Electric Vehicle
Investment Act or Nevy, um,
which required placement of fast
chargers every 50 miles on, uh,
what would be 3 Interstate
highways throughout New Mexico
and and uh beginning to work on
that issue, Madam Chair, I
realized very fast that we.
had a big problem and that New
Mexico's electric grid was
nowhere near.
Capable and then, um, I started
digging deeper, Madam Chair,
and, um, started really doing a
lot of research on the status of
New Mexico's grid and how
woefully insufficient it is to
support us, um, there's only
2.1-ish million people in the
state of New Mexico, Madam
Chair, and, um, our electric
grid is, um, I know that many of
us stories of our constituent.
She wants
Not having access to power at
all, um, for instance, on the,
the Navajo Nation, um, and this
is an issue that, um, quite
frankly, Madam Chair and my now
7 years in the legislature, it
has um become, I think the
single most important issue that
I have ever worked on, um, and
that is because the status of
our grid and our need to mo is
foundational to pretty much
everything else that we are as
the legislature, so, Madam
Chair.
Um, you wanna talk about
economic development, there's
another bill, I think it's in
the Senate talking about site
readiness they commercially, um.
Commercial properties that are.
Open and available and ready to
support businesses that might be
interested in moving to New
Mexico, well, and in
augmentation aspect to that bill
because it requires again
expansion and modern
modernization of our grid to
support.
These sites, so, um, that was a
bipartisan, um, bill, madam
chair, as was proclaimed by
debate on that and I also want
to um talk a little bit about
another basis for the station
plan, which was brought by
Senator Pat Woods, and
essentially what that does is
again modernizes and augments
our grid, so, and it requires
our public utilities, that's why
I want to make that very clear,
Madam Chair.
Um, to start submitting plans to
the PRC electrified
transportation, one of the
biggest, if not the biggest
sector in terms of um, Senator
Woods started making our public
utilities submit and um so that
we know how it is we're going to
support the transition to
electric vehicles and so on,
what power up New Mexico does
is, um, essentially expand the
scope of that beyond trans that
we do, um, at this moment I want
to take, I I I want.
Um, on my right is I keep on,
um.
There's another Michael expert
that I'm working with and I'm
trying to keep on confusing the
two. This is Michael Kinney from
um Western Resource Advocates
and to my left is Mark Trujillo,
and he is from IBEW, but um,
Madam Chair, I also want to talk
a little bit about the pro um,
we convened about 9.5, 10 months
ago, and we have, um, who have
been participating in the
process to put together what is
now power up New Mexico and when
I talk about stakeholders, I'm
talking.
about anybody who could possibly
have an interest in this issue
and grid modernization and
expansion and augmentation, and
I do have to tell you, Madam
Chair, I've never been involved
in an issue where I have, um,
heard from and gotten support
from.
Both people on one side of it,
let's say, um, NRDC.
And then on the other side of
it, which is, you know, some of
our oil and gas producers in the
Permian Basin. And to, to me,
Madam Chair, belies the issue,
um, well, it could only be one
or two things either this, um,
Bill, Bill really isn't that
important or um it's more, it's
so important that it is a common
sense policy change that we need
to really um.
Think about and be mindful of
how we're going to accomplish
right now in this moment in time
in the legislature because my
past some really great laws that
do limit, let's say, our
emission, um, but at the same
time this bill is is about
economic development and how
we're going to bring in
diversification to our revenue.
So Madam Chair, members of the
committee, that's kind of.
How the the bill came to be,
there are, um, 3 very important
things that the bill sets out to
accomplish. The first thing that
it does is it requires, and
again, we're just within the
scope, so anybody that is
subject to the public utilities
Act, and anybody that reports to
the PRC.
Um, so it requires our, the
acronym is IOU or IOUs to submit
what's called plan, um,
typically does is tell the PRC.
Here's the status of our
distribution network here is how
we're going to do it, um, again,
we have been working with the
PRC quite a bit, they've been
one of the, they themselves are
just finished a um.
Uh, rulemaking.
Uh. For their own grid
modification grid modernization
rule, um, and we are um.
Legislation tracks quite a bit
with what it is that they're
doing, however, um, I would say
that our process laid out here
is actually truncated and a
simplification of the PRC
process in the way of New
Mexico, um, the second thing
that it does is it also requires
those and so essentially we have
already passed laws that limit
carbon emissions, set goals, and
so and trying to get our
utilities to where they.
have to be in law, these BEs
will tell the PRC how do you
switch again, this is not about
how that energy is distributed,
um, so it is.
Talking about how our utilities
will get more distribute more
energy from sources that you,
um, and then the other thing
that this does is it uh puts
specific workforce, um, measures
in there and to ensure that we
are adequately identifying,
training and paying our work for
many years into the future, um,
and again, it's working with our
PRC to modernize.
Some of their procedures we can
um.
We can allow and empower our
utilities to tell us where they
need to augment and modernize
the grid so that we can do help
economic development throughout
the state.
But, um, also help go back to
the whole reason why I began
this whole thing, which was, um,
making sure that for me
personally, it's very important
we have an electric vehicle, um,
charging grid infrastructure
that works.
Um, and is robust enough
vehicles, so, um, I will pause
there, madam.
So.
amendment does. Sure, madam
chair, and continued our
conversations with the PRC
again, it's been very important
to us that our process models
what they've been mod as much as
possible. It does, um, change,
move out one of the dates, um,
for submission of the, the DSP
plans. So originally we were
asking that, um, submission be
accomplished by December.
of 2025, um, and again, it also
just um change some process
points with the PRC and um it
also requires that the
beneficial electrification
plans, um,
be filed in conjunction with
other plans that the IOUs have
to submit, um, and that writers
or increases in um.
Um, going to affect 30 days
after the filing this amendment
also um can the effective date
for those writers, um.
An association with a companion
changing dates for submission of
these things to the PRC and um
how they're going to be able to
act on. So um will take up
adopting the amendment after we
hear from public comment, um,
those in the remarks to about a
minute.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Gerald was seen vice
president, regulatory strategy,
External Affairs at New Mexico
Gas and I'm also a registered
lobbyist for the company.
I want to acknowledge the
sponsor's efforts on this bill,
but I am here to speak in
opposition to House Bill 13. A
major focus of the bill is
beneficial elect electrification
defined in Section 2 as and I
quote, converting the energy
source of the customer's end use
from a non-electric fuel source
to a high efficiency electric
fuel source. It does tend to
enable timely planning and cost
recovery for increased electric
demand in grid modernization,
and we have no issue with that.
However, HB 13 directs that
electric utilities file plans to
achieve beneficial
electrification and to recover
costs for what is described as
voluntary customer adoption of
measures to achieve beneficial
electrification. This implies
the cost for somehow persuading
our customers to abandon their
current appliances would be
borne by or subsidized by
electric customers. That also
means consequences consequences
for those who count on us for
reliable energy because those
who choose to remain in our
system would, as a result, a
more.
that.
OK. Has raised, um, I'm
assuming.
Yes, I'm in.
I am in support
um anyone else wishing well,
anyone wishing online to speak
in opposition.
OK.
Um
Those in the audience wishing to
speak in support.
Please step forward and please
let me.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I'm Charles
Goodmacher speaking to you on
behalf of Healthy Climate in New
Mexico for whom I am a
registered lobbyist. I want to
thank the sponsor for this
excellent bill.
Research shows that breathing in
particular matter, a byproduct
of many fossil fuels that can be
replaced with electrification.
Does lead to a range of negative
health outcomes, including
cardiac events, respiratory
issues, such as asthma and even
premature death.
These negative health outcomes.
Disproportionately impact a
range of marginalized groups,
seniors, minority groups, and
those of lower socioeconomic
status for our health, for your,
for mine, and for the next
generations, please pass this
bill to help improve the grid.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, John Lipshutz
with the New Mexico Federation
of Labor. We also stand in
strong support of this measure,
aside from building critical
infrastructure that will help
power our state. Um, we also see
this very much as a job creator,
and one that will provide good
high paying jobs, uh, so for
that reason, we urge your
support.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Jim
Dehorddin. I'm the executive
director of New Mexico, with
over 60 members.
We're in the midst of a profound
change, we're transitioning to
100% carbon-free electricity
generation.
You can generate your own
electricity at your home or
business. And we're also in the
early stages of a huge growth in
demand to EVs, building
electrification and data
centers.
This bill addresses this new
future with
Distribution plans that are now
going to be required by investor
owned utilities and hosting
capacity analysis, which allows
us to measure capacity on our
distribution lines has
alternatives to expensive grid
upgrades, including flexible
interconnection.
Timely energization to promote
economic development.
workforce.
This legislation is not perfect.
Our organization was very
disappointed that the virtual
power plant section was
a power pilot program. Thank
you.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair. My
name is Bernard Treat. I'm
registered lobbyist for Xcel
Energy or SPS, and good
afternoon to the committee
members.
My comments I don't normally
read, but they're about a
paragraph longer than my memory.
Uh, holds up to, um, we provide
electric service for about
140,000 customers in eastern New
Mexico.
We stand in support
Of HB 13 and we thank the bill
sponsor. We've been working uh
with them for months now, um,
our service territory is
experiencing higher growth in
other parts of the state and
we're looking to support
legislation that will help us
get more time with electric
service to our customers, our
primary support for the bill is
due to the economic development
advantages it will provide in
attracting new investment to New
Mexico.
Provides a more streamlined
distribution system, planning
approval process via an MPRC
rulemaking, allowing customer to
engage sooner than current
approval process.
Allows for pre-ordering of
transformers and other
equipment, thus reducing delays
in energization.
Thank you. All right, online.
Oh, I'm sorry, one more. Sorry.
Madame Chair and committee
members, my name is Lexis Menna.
I'm an attorney and policy
director with the Natural
Resources Defense Council and a
lifelong New Mexican.
Enter DC is eager to support HB
13. New Mexicans deserve
reliable and up to-date grid
access. We believe that this
legislation provides a pathway
for the economic infrastructure.
And growth that New Mexicans
need to keep up with growing
demand.
We also commend Whip Hockman B
Hill for the diverse stakeholder
process that.
was in that was convened in
crafting HB 13. Please vote yes
on economic development and
infrastructure for New Mexico.
Thank you.
Alright, let's go online. I'm
gonna limit it to 3.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. New Mexico's
economic growth requires timely
access to electric service.
Individual drivers, truck and
bus fleets, and other businesses
are transitioning to zero
emissions but needs sufficient
power to install and operate EV
charging stations, for example,
as buildings, manufacturing and
other industrial activities
electrify, we have to ensure
speedy and efficient electrical
connections.
This is an economic development
bill, please vote in favor.
Thank you.
2 more, Michael Barry.
Good afternoon chair members of
the committee. Thank you for the
opportunity to speak in support
of House Bill 13. My name is
Michael Barrio and I represent
Advanced Energy United. We are a
clean and national clean energy
Industry Association.
We are um a national clean
energy industry association with
over 100 members across the
source and technology spectrum.
And we strongly support this
bill, um, it ensures that
electric utilities engage in
proactive, transparent
distribution system planning to
meet growing energy demands,
reduced delays and support
economic development has has
been um previously um suggested.
Um, utilities planning ahead and
pre-ordering critical equipment
means that uh prevents
unnecessary wait times for new
connections and sturing
businesses and communities can
access power when they need it,
which drives our economic
development and growth.
Uh, we urge, strongly urge your
support for HB 13 and appreciate
your time.
Thank you. And one last.
Thank you, Chair and committee
members. My name is Athena
Christodoulou. I'm an energy and
environmental engineer and a
longtime EV and solar owner.
Thank you for elevating the
efforts of New Mexicans,
including the IOUs via the ETA
to um clean up their air for
your information, infrastructure
in the IOU area is already
covers 80% of EV use as we can
just plug into a regular outlet.
I am glad that we're emphasizing
the transition to
Carbon free, I've already done
it since 2023 for our clean air.
planet for future generations.
Thank you.
Um, thank you, that concludes
our online but um.
Back to the sponge.
I'm
Thank you, Madam Chair, yeah,
just to emphasize, um, it was a
a very long but rewarding
process, 60 stakeholders
together, including affected,
um, none of whom, uh.
Opposed the bill at this point
in time with and um I just wanna
take a moment to thank everybody
who was a part of that group,
and I feel like again, um, you
never have a perfect bill,
especially one of this size and
scope, but um, we did our best
and I'm incredibly proud, um, of
all of.
opposition to adopt, don't see
any that you have.
I have Representative Reed while
we've got a good start here.
Representative Reeve. Thank you,
Madam Chair and Representative.
First, I want to thank you for
sitting down and going over this
very complicated issue with me
and uh so I've been.
Trying to understand it, talk to
other people.
And I got my $720 electric bill
two days ago and I started
going, wow, OK, what's going on
here? And then I, I started
thinking, um, Madam Chair and uh
representative, it just, it does
seem like a lot of, a lot of
these bills are are coming back
to consumer, you know, the, the
average, so I wanted to kind of
talk about.
The cost, um.
For the
I get the, um, but I think Madam
Chair and everybody probably in
this committee understands why
they're coming in to their
customers and Arabs and things
of that nature. Madam Chair,
they're gonna get their money
back through.
The consumer would would that be
just a fair statement.
Um, madam chair represented a
statement, but if there's a
time, um, at the beginning, we
have a choice structure we do
not have a choice and that we
have to upgrade our grid. We do
not have that choice. We have to
do it as a state, um, otherwise
I would, I would submit to you
the cost of not doing it would.
Well overwhelmed the cost of
doing it, so there's that, um,
the.
The ability to use a tariff
rider or a base rate increase is
a mechanism that would allow the
IOUs to recover costs for good
expansion. However, through
wonderful um terms like
economies of scale, uh, the more
we modernized a grid and the
more people we reach with that
grid, the more people we pull
into that grid and the more
people we have that are
utilizing and drawing and as
those costs are actually going
to be, they will be driven down
so um, while.
there may be an upfront cost,
uh, we have lots of real world
experience that tell us that,
um, in in us actually our
predicted of scale.
Madam Chair and Representative,
um.
I, I appreciate wanting to, I'm,
I'm one of those people that
always a little bit of a food
prepper too, I'll just admit I,
I see, I see it coming someday,
but.
How far out is this project
you're trying to do down the
road.
That, but I'm concerned about is
we're asking everyday workers
now, to kind of cover the cost
of what someone possibly 15
years down the road, however
many years it might take for
this project.
Come to the light or to to be
something that's usable.
Are we, we're now asking them to
pay for something that is gonna
be down the road here to use.
Does that make sense? Madam
Chair representative, uh, madam
chair representative, it does,
um, so in some states where
we've already seen large scale,
and I hate to keep going back to
EVs, but that's just what I've
specifically studied, but like
for states that have adopted.
Um, legislation similar to this
one and have seen a growth in
EVs they've seen the cost
drivers come down almost
immediately and all of these
projects, um, are on, we're
asking them to be on 5 year
timelines, but many of the uh
utilities have been wanting to
expand the grid, take for
instance, what's happening in
the Permian Basin. A lot of our
producers down there are renting
diesel generated diesel powered
generators just to.
get the power they need to power
their equipment on a on a daily
basis, right? And so, and that,
as we know, contributes quite a
bit to our budget, so, um, they.
Our our utilities are prevented
from ordering transformers,
which at this point have a 3
year wait list, right? So by
eliminating those bottlenecking
and um um.
Truncating the PRC process, it
forces everything to quicken and
um, we will see these
investments right away and right
away, and so I came years your
bills are gonna go down, but the
more we enable the utilities to
be able to expand and to
modernize. can deny that, I
mean, I think.
Um
I was told that P&M for that
basically, you know, their
utilities prices have been
steadily.
Just every day pretty much pays
to.
saying that it has to be done at
some point, but it.
It's just so hard in the time
we're in right now with
inflation just suddenly know
that most likely I believe we
will go up.
But um
Let me just ask you about the
transportation that.
But
I'm looking at your beneficial.
Electrons other than
transportation, and so I'm
trying to see, uh, Madam.
What is there regarding in there
or how does that line up with?
The talk of Madam Chair, the
reason why it's excluded is
we've already accomplished the
EP and so, um, we've already
amended New Mexico law to allow
for um TEP to allow for and
require TEPs to be filed with
the PRC, so I'm sorry,
So those are specifically
excluded because we've already
taken care of that and we're
already getting um data and um
knowledge back as it relates to
those.
Today and um to also just touch
a little bit more amount so
that's the beauty of being
involving the PRC statutorily,
that is actually one of the
things that the PRC is tasked
with is protecting the consumer,
the PRC is prohibited from
adopting any tariff fighters or
they feel would be overly so
having that process built in,
um, is another way that we are
ensuring that we are not going
to have cost overrun. I know
there.
already
We're all struggling to pay for
having the PRC as a stopgap to
this process will really ensure
that, um, you know,
affordability first and foremost
and last inflation, especially
for these types of of projects
going up every year, it will end
up costing us.
Uh
Tremend a tremendous amount of
money in projects and we just
take them last us 10 times more,
so it's we're actually saving
money by doing it this way and
right sizing together a
modernized grid that can um be
sufficient for years to come PC.
I thought I read the file a plan
in this.
Um, madam chair Representative,
we're asking the PRC to do a
rulemaking which would um
pertain the utilities are the
ones who have to file the plans
and we are asking the PR, it's a
rulemaking process to develop
rules that will be probably um,
who helped you draft, you said
there's so many stakeholders,
um, who actually, Madam Chair
and representative was the group
that actually helped you draft
this bill. Um, madam.
Chair of Representatives, so we
actually had a um stakeholder
letter that we had a bunch of
people signed, but um, Cher has
prohibited outside materials
being passed out, she, she does,
she doesn't like them and so we
want to make sure the chairs I
do that with everybody.
So, um, give us one second and
we can pull up and this is just
the people that signed on the
stakeholders again, we we had
over 6, I can probably limit it
down. What's the NRDC, um, the
national natural resources.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
they are an environmental and
environmental organization and
they can surrounding climate
change. OK, then they were,
weren't they pretty big? Would
that be fair? Madam chair
representative, um, they
skeleton of this bill, if you
will, was brought to me by NRD
several other states. They
economic development office
issue came to the same
realization that I did when I
was working with grid charging.
Structure, um, piece, which is
like right now, so NRDC and
directly through uh. OK.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and just
I'll get to my kind of last or
you just defining beneficial
electrification.
Converting the energy source of
a customer's and use from a
non-electro high uh to a high,
so non-electric fuel source is
gonna try to get like get away
from gas stoves, things that are
just representative, so yeah,
beneficial electrification and
how we from energy sources that
produce high energy sources that
do not, and so that's beneficial
Word to use is high, what's high
efficient man represent or
representative, uh, Madam Chair
uh representative all I will
answer the rest of that and then
I'm gonna call you, but, um,
Madam Chair Representative,
quite the contrary, nothing
about this program forces people
to.
Um, you will be able to keep the
appliances that you have in your
house, voluntary program.
However, you want to get a more
high efficiency, um, uh, type
stove or or appliance in your
house and just Madam Chair on
that point before we move over.
So does that mean that?
My electric bill will go down if
I chose these.
These different types of items
like is there a benefit like, am
I gonna get some incentive?
to do that, Madam Chair,
representative. Madam through
this bill, there are other
incentives that um do exist
either through the federal
government or, but some of our
utilities, like, for instance,
PNM has a program in which they
allow.
Madam Chair and Representative.
Um, so high, high efficiency.
Referring to the fact that
If you're going to move to an
electric source, you don't want
to move to them.
The minimum of fit like electric
source so uh when we think about
your air conditioning system,
the goal isn't to move.
From an inefficient system to
another inefficient system. It's
to move what would be
And the case, for example, your
furnace, which is maybe
operating at 80% efficiency.
To a heat pump, which would
operate at 300% efficiency.
So on a, on a per unit of energy
basis.
It's a more while your
electricity bill might increase
slightly.
It's offsetting your gas use. So
your gas bill would go down
because it's
Taking the place of that. It may
not entirely replace your
furnace, but it can.
Do the majority of the work.
I like a little complicated for
me, but uh.
Representative Sapansky.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um, one
piece was there for beneficial.
Electrification program costs.
Why that was specified why the
amount um.
And it says no less than 10% of
customer electric bills.
Or electric public utility
retail revenues.
Uh, from customers eligible for
beneficial electrification
programs as determined by the
commission, so that lines 18,
curious like why.
I don't know I and and you know,
I don't sit on energy and I
don't read all these bills
always.
Um
But I'm just curious why that
was set in the bill as opposed
to allowing the address that.
Um, Madam Chair, um.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
uh, have some jury for
apologies, um.
This part of the, the bill.
Kind of mimics what we see with,
with energy efficiency in terms
of
How for these programs and that.
You want to establish, in this
case, a floor, have some
expectation of what the
utilities.
Should, should plan for as
they're crafting this. And what
the commission would think about
when they're doing the
rulemaking for what those plans
are.
Um
But to leave kind of the, the
rest of that up to commission
determination.
So
The floor is is in there just.
Thank you. Um,
Does that mean in the energy of
statute that there was also
this.
Percentage set, is that, is that
what my understanding what you
just said correctly.
Um, Madam Chair, majority floor
leader, yes, um.
The energy efficiency has
different percentages, um, it's
a 3% floor.
energy efficiency very helpful.
Um
And so basically this program
size is less than floor for this
program is actually less than
what we currently have set for
for energy.
Uh, Madam Chair, House Majority
so how does that
um.
So when the PRC sets rates and
I'm looking at the FIR and.
You know, they have this
requirement to set rates that
are just and reasonable.
How does this interact with how,
how do, how are they going to
juggle the.
Direction that they are
receiving.
When they're trying to set the
rate, what's a reasonable
payers.
Um
How, how does that work, Madam
Chair, and House Majoritylo
leader. So
The utilities will propose a
budget.
And the commission then has to
consider, so in this case, these
are 3-year plans. So what is the
program cost over that 3 years.
Um.
And
You know, the commission is well
equipped to determine what is
adjusted and reasonable rate
over a three-year period. Um,
and so,
You know, we, we're not here to
Get out in front of their
Expertise and say what what is a
reasonable rate increase.
Um, I, I just say for
An example, uh P&M's current
energy efficiency plans.
Um, have about a 4% impact. And
so,
You know, the commission found
that that level, given all the
benefits that it generates is,
is, uh. Um, just kind of a
general, but
You know, of the ratepayers that
these costs are.
Spread across.
You know, what percentage of
those are?
Commercial versus residential,
is it uh and.
Are those are these costs sort
of.
Um, and I'm the cost recovery
for
In this case, you're talking
about, um, it would depend on
what's being proposed statute as
proposed would direct.
Residential and the option of
proposing industrial and
agricultural. So how those costs
val the commission shall
evaluation program maximizes
electric public maximize
electric public utility and
customs to provides every
affected customer class with the
opportunity to re compliments
applicable local county, state,
and federal incentives or tax
credits for similar measures for
is reasonably expected
productions 5 include program
funding, designated forreed
reductions in greenhouse gas
emissions and avoided cost of
greenhouse gas by the federal
government, provided that the
shall not be less than those
adopted by the assessment of
global I think we get it.
Yeah.
Thank, thank you, Madam. We're
very helpful, um.
And
So in this scenario.
You could propose or utility
would propose.
Beneficial like electrification
program.
Improvements, some sort of grid
modernization project or
something like that.
And they would also propose how
that.
How they would from whom they
would recover. Is that part of
their filing.
Yes, as long as it takes an
account that 2.
Thank you very much.
Representative. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Representative experts.
Um
This bell seems to start with
the premise.
Companies have
Maybe their due diligence on
that.
Is that, is that
Or my maybe taking that out of
context. I just feel like by
forcing the state to regulate.
Our utility companies, it puts
us in a precarious position as a
legislature as we're now, we're
now setting rates.
For the citizens that because
the utilities.
have not addressed that.
Madam Chair.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
no, not at all, um, I would
submit to you that.
Because regulations and how PR
the PRC has been asked to
evaluate these issues in the
past, um, they have been placed
in a position where it's really,
really hard to make these
augmentations in a way that
time, so it's not that they're
not doing their jobs, it's that
there are certain um regulations
that already exist that have
gotten in the way, um, or our
relics of a previous the PRC.
There are rule as it stands now
was designed to lessen the use
of electricity. However, with a
heat pump, it uses more
electricity, but it's actually
more efficient. So what we would
be doing with this bill is
allowing the PRC to develop
rules that would modernize this
way of thinking, so that we can,
um, again maximize.
Cost recovery for the
investments we're asking them to
make, but by no means are is the
legislature ERC that's the exact
opposite.
Madam Chair,
Maybe it's my ignorance of the
system. It just seems like.
Anytime the legislature passes,
is this will be a law.
And it would be a cost.
That the citizens of the state
of New Mexico and we're putting
the PRC. Now they have to say
something. I understand the need
for, I do understand the need
for grid.
Um
This probably should have been
thought out way ahead of the.
Passing of
Energy Transition Act, which is
water under the bridge.
But
Now we're looking at the chicken
versus the egg argument. We also
have no generation to meet.
The grid
As we currently know it.
It's we talk about the eastern
side of the state and the
northwestern part of the state,
we're experiencing brownouts for
the first time in the, in the
history. I grew up there for 62
years, because there's no power.
We talk about efficiency.
Gas for us, natural gas,
propane, whatever is.
When it comes to cooking, when
it comes to almost anything 100
times more efficient.
Um
Then where we're at now.
Technology may be changing.
My fear is when we force this
down people's throats in the
form of legislation.
Their experiencing the cost. So
when we buy stuff.
Uh, in advance like uh
Transformers, for instance.
If we buy those transformers in
advance, we're charging the
customers, the citizens of the
state of New Mexico who do pay
their utilities.
The costs in advance.
How do we
I'm gonna put you in a tough
spot, representative.
I've got to go back if this
passing you I have to explain
the constituents, this is for
your good.
I mean, you understand my
quandary?
Um, Madam Chair representative,
so I understand your quandary,
but I, I think the answer to
your, we absolutely as a
legislative body have to
consider the cost of gras and
what will continue to happen if
New Mexico's grid does not serve
all of the citizens not ever had
access to electricity.
Um, and so we will end up.
What's unfortunate, Madam Chair
Representative is we're going to
have to spend money on this.
Whether we like it or not. And
so the question is.
Let me give you kind of a
metaphor.
If you have a car and you know
that the tires are worn out on
it and then you're gonna at some
point have to replace the tires
and spend some money on it.
Do you want to replace the tires
at this point where you still
have an opportunity to save the
car, or are you gonna allow the
tires to wear out to the point
where you can no longer control
the car and you hit a patch of
ice because you didn't make the
necessary investments at the
time, you had the opportunity,
so I mean it it's tough, Madam
Chair Representative, I
understand going to cost money.
Almost everything that we do as
a legislative body costs money,
um, that's.
That's why we're here on the
appropriations Committee, but
again, um, we.
Have to be strategic want to.
Make the hard decision now with
the promise that it's gonna sell
lives markedly later or are we
going to kick the can down the
road, so that maybe it's not,
but maybe the next guy City or
the next guy after him, who's
gonna have to make that hard
decision and go, so either way,
um, yeah, either way.
Hear what you're saying and I
appreciate your argument. I
still contend, Madam Chair, that
We're removing
We're removing the customer's
choice on this altogether. This
is uh.
And I know it's our job, but
where do we draw the line of
becoming
State
Where we're regulating
everything for everybody to make
their lives better.
Um
I just don't know. I mean, I
understand both sides of the
argument.
I mean, I'll, I
lose sleep over things like
this.
Just passing this on and I, I
understand it costs money. I
don't know, I, I've got to
listen to this, Madam Chair, but
it's, it's a, it's um
This is quite a, quite a, quite
a a quandary.
For me, uh, so I, that's all I
have for now, ma'am.
And Representative Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh,
representative, I think most of
my questions have been answered,
so.
Being that this is clearly.
Complicated, seems a little
aggressive. Was there any
alternatives considered it.
Is there anything else that can
be done other than.
This all or nothing. Yeah.
Um, madam, laugh a little bit,
but that what you have here is
the result, um, that many.
That
Every single process, um, this
was our best effort to put
together a bill that we've, um,
it seems you're just now being
given a lot, but, um, you've
been and been through and
putting this together, um,
that's why, um, you know, you,
you've had.
If you call uh folks working
down in Southwestern corner.
Again
That's not why our constituents
put us to account.
The fact is possible and again.
There are others who have seen.
They're into your office, but
again, it's just.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative.
In, in that.
Or I guess on that note.
People have paid down after
we've done this in other states.
When I guess, could we start?
Charging, do we have to wait for
the project to be completed
before we increase.
Prices for the customers and um
I guess that's my first
question. My second question is,
um, seeing that other states
have done this.
How many years later do you see
prices come down.
On average.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um, and
the all of the deadlines for PRC
has to take in these them and
then they make a decision and as
part of those plans, the
utilities will request either
again a tariff, um, and again,
and I don't, but again, the
quicker we do this.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. You and
the representative will be
happy, um, but I, I'm, I'm just
curious about a few things.
Hopefully, it doesn't take a
long time. Can you tell me how
the trade port is gonna
What it is and how it's going to
benefit from this.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, so, um, the
essentially kind of an economic
hub that um.
envisioning like 40.
Um, and it will be a commerce
corridor, um, it's and they can
Thank you for that, um, Madam
Chair Representative.
Also curious, you talked about.
Um, electric generation without
car.
What does that look like?
Um
Um, New Mexico is incredible.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. I, I would.
I would think that the more we
look at wind farms, the more we
realize how in inefficient they
are.
Um, so I would hope that we
would look at other means.
Nuclear
Nitrogen
Um, I'm, I, I am across the
board.
OK
For me, that fine solution.
But I'll move on.
Madam Chair Representative, you
talked about the PRC what they
said.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative
Um
So it's just kind of reading up
on.
He
To retro
From gas.
I
Upwards of
2
100 $0.
Um, these grants that you talked
about.
How close to $20,000.
Regardless of the source of
energy, it could be nuclear, um,
solar, wind, they all utilize
the grid, they all have to go
through a grids go.
Thank you for that. That makes
me feel.
Much better.
When you and I sat down, we, how
important.
Modernism and I am completely on
board with that.
Um
Uh, just with my.
Because I love to cook.
I love my 5 burner stove.
I
Love how it cooks my food. I've
cooked on electric.
Um, my, my last question because
um,
What is
Um, Madam chair, uh.
Uh minority whip Martinez.
I could go into it very quickly,
but that entire section has
been. That's I wouldn't call
them brownie points
of this.
Well, I'll talk to you about it
offline.
Thank you.
I, I do appreciate the answers.
I do appreciate the
conversation.
And I appreciate the fact that
you're still
Honestly, I have a lot to learn,
so we'll leave it at that. OK.
We are very quiet meeting on
Friday. That's good
I
Is that it? Does that include
the floor? Does that include the
floor too? Yeah, oh,
So, a, a few questions I keep.
Hearing discussions about our
gas stoves going away, and this
is a critical issue for me, um.
It's not compelling the.
Disappearance of gas. Am I
missing something, Madam chair,
um, I I.
Love my gas stove, I, I think
there's nothing that cooks
better than a gas stove, and
there's no portion of this bill
that would ever force anybody to
let go of their gas stove and.
OK.
So, um
Talk to me about grid modern,
um, the sources of energy, um,
truthfully. So tell me how this
is gonna support rid
modernization, because I think
we're at huge risk, frankly.
Um
Not to get back to the subject.
I'm interested in, but I'm going
to AI sucks out a lot of energy,
a lot of electricity is needed
to generate the high computing,
you know, all the high the high
energy computers, so is this
bill gonna affect our ability to
improve on our grid capacity, or
is it simply moving us from um
kinds of um and uh fuels, carbon
free energy.
Um, madam chair.
Absolutely yes, turning.
Madam Chair. So the distribution
system.
Peace the first section of the
bill.
is moving us from a place where
we are now, which is, we have an
opaque process, the utilities.
Or reacting as demand.
Comes onto the system. They
can't.
Adequately plan for it. So when
you're talking about data
centers,
These plans would be a place
where in a
Transparent process before the
PRC.
Other stakeholders, they can
show where they expect.
Data center loads to come
online.
Um, and what they're going to
need to meet that demand.
Um, so whether that is a new
transformer.
Or to upgrade the lines. It has
nothing to do with the actual
electrons flowing through the
system uh grid is, is being
thought of ahead of time, as
opposed to reacting I don't know
if any of you know how much
power DC fast charger takes, but
it is a tremendous hold by Navy
in the federal government to
place one of those every 50
amount of power and so this that
would allow us to.
Be able to do that and plan for
it. Now we've got this is how we
get there.
Thank you for that answer, but
I, what I'd like to understand
better, OK, so the utility
product company is gonna put in
a plan, who's gonna hold their
feet to a to the fire to ensure
the plan is implemented,
assuming that plan even includes
a um, thank you, Madam Chair.
Um,
So they have to file a plan with
the plans. I've seen a lot of
plans. And then in their annual
reports they have to file that
follow up from those plans. So
it's not just, we did a plan, we
asked for money and you never
hear from us again. Um, there
are, they have to produce
receipts, you know, these, these
are not just uh
Trust us at our word and believe
us that the lines are in place.
There there are mechanisms here
that the PRC will review what
has been approved in those
plans.
Uh-huh.
And
The enforcement mechanism for to
ensure that the grid is is um
modernized. Um, Madam Chair, um,
so every utility is an act.
Well, not every, um, there are
some utilities that are not
including what the county of Los
Alamos, so we're talking about
and in that law there are very
specific, uh, mandates that
those utilities have to meet, so
there's cause of action if they
do not meet those mandates.
Um, there could be standing for
someone who says, hey, you upped
my base rate, you filed a plan
that said that you were going to
augment this um infrastructure
in this way, you never did.
And I legal liability there as
well and the PRC also.
Yeah, I'm gonna support the
bill, but I think it's a stretch
to our, to pass on house bill.
have emotion.
To to for a due pass on and uh
made by Representative Romero
and seconded by Representative
Babeta, which you call the roll.
Yes, thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Abeta.
Representative Chavez.
No.
Representative Hall. No.
Representative Hoffman v. Hill.
Representative Martinez.
Speaker Martinez, yes.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative Reed.
Leader Sapansky.
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
No.
Madam Vice Chair.
Madam Chair, yes.
Madam Chair, you have a due pass
on House Bill 13 is twice
amended.
OK, you have a due pass. We've
completed our agenda yet again.
We're doing really well, guys.
Thank you.
Um, we're, we're adjourned.
