Representative Armstrong I'm
here.
Representative Cook here.
Speaker.
I am here.
Representative Eli your.
Representative Lewis.
Representative McQueen.
Here.
Representative night.
Your.
Representative Rehm.
Representative Townsend Here.
Representative Alcon.
And Representative Lewis.
Madam chair Chasey.
I'm present we do have a quorum.
Okay.
Let's go ahead and begin with
Representative Romero Senate
Bill to.
Thank you madam chair thank you
members of the committee before
us today is Senate bill to which
was reviewed by our our full
Senate where Senate Judiciary
Committee the purpose of this
bill is really two fold so we're
in the special session is been
called
and one of the primary reasons
is to legalize adult use
cannabis in partnership with
that we feel strongly that
Senate bill two leads that
charge by automatically
expunging records of those who
have been in possession of
cannabis should we legalize this
it is extremely important that
we do not continue to
criminalize those and continue
to have records on the books for
those who would be absolved of
essentially something that is
now legal we don't this is that
sort of a unique situation and
that many times we may we rise
raise the the levels of
criminality or lower them this
however because we are going
from taking a substance that is
currently illegal to legal is
automatically expenses those
records we passed expungement a
couple years ago in our state
this just means essentially that
the public cannot access those
records meaning that if there's
a public facing website like NM
courts or county website those
records are no longer available
as they would be automatically
expunged in addition because
we're seeking to find new
business and job opportunities
through the creation of the
cannabis regulation act and in
addition finds that folks who
have may have had a criminal
record in the past may want to
seek out a license.
For employment in our state that
that that have prevented
criminal record should not be a
barrier to entry in applying for
those jobs so were at
additionally in providing a
means for folks to be able to
apply for a license to do work
in our state one in five jobs in
our state requires a license
meanwhile one and three New
Mexicans have a criminal record
so we don't want that to inhibit
those who are seeking that
upward mobility the ability to
access a license we provide a
means in order to do that so
really this is a two fold way
for us to.
We provide direct access to
justice and indirect means for
being able to find upward
employment and in addition with
in addition to creating a brand
new industry with that so this
really leads the charge again
this is the and the importance
of expanding these records is is
the primary purpose for this
piece of legislation and we look
forward to expanding for
questions and with me madam
chair members of the committee
is Megan Dorsey serving as our
expert on and for it for any of
the criminal law questions we
make received today thank you
with that will stand for
questions.
Do you have any what distortion
like to say something at this
time or she just available for
technical.
I believe she's available for
technical questions so okay just
go ahead and proceed thank you.
Let's go let's go to the
audience and I would like to
hear from those in opposition to
the bill first and you will have
one minute to speak if you wish
do we have anyone in the
audience in opposition.
Sandy has raised how about in
support of the bill.
So you'll have a minute and a
half to speak.
First I have Kim Chavez Cook.
Go ahead ms Chavez Cook.
Gabby Gabrielle.
We having a problem.
Madam chair this is up to them
I'm not a co host otherwise I
could allow them to speak but I
don't think they've been she's
been allowed to speak well I got
her thank you she is talking
permitted now madam chair thank
you I was just on muted this is
Kim Chavez Cook with the law
offices of the public defender
thank you madam chair thank you
members of the committee I do
stand on behalf of the public
defender with in support of this
legislation certainly that the
need for the passage of that the
companion bill would be a
prerequisite to this to this
taking a fact but it certainly
would round out and sort of
complete the picture of what's
that cannabis regulation Act is
intending to do by giving people
an opportunity to move forward
in their lives after system
involvement related to offenses
related to cannabis that would
no longer be crimes going
forward in addition to that the
portions of the bill that relate
to economic opportunity and
people's ability to be gainfully
employed and and receive
professional licensure are
really critical to the reentry
and reintegration process for
people who've had system
involvement and for those
reasons we stand in strong
support of this legislation
thank you.
Thank you did you see our cut
and I'm from both features.
Your next go ahead.
I don't think I have the
capacity to on to
I don't think I have host duties
yet.
I apologize madam chair I was
trying to make you a co host
when I have my timer going it
I'm I can't do that so you're
almost now.
Thank you.
It's going on this preventive.
All.
It is yes.
Go ahead.
Sorry madam chair I was still
muted good afternoon my name is
that the second amendment and
the policy director gold futures
we stand in strong support of
Senate bill two asked the
legislature considers policies
to legalize recreational
cannabis it's absolutely
critical that we focus on the
deep impact and harms of the war
on drugs to communities of color
many of our communities have
been criminalized in
incarcerated for their substance
dependency when they could have
been offered support and
resources
we have worked with
Representative Romero and of
radio Sanchez over the years on
the specific provisions are an
occupational licensing how we
get people back to work after
incarceration and we're excited
to see that included in this
bill holding employment holding
a job is one of the most
critical factors in people being
able to move on with their lives
after incarceration and a really
big factor in reducing
recidivism so we support this
bill and encourage the committee
to do the same thank you so
much.
Thank you very much I don't see
a all star and I called instead
of texting because I know you're
driving and it would be easy.
Okay.
I think we're ready to go back
to the committee.
Let me check to see who was
first on that list.
First I have Representative.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair representative Rick
Romero a couple questions.
for small on page two of the
Senate Judiciary Committee said
the.
At the bottom convictions for
crimes that is not job related
for the position in question and
consistent with business
necessity what does that mean.
Madam chair representative this
is essentially that was and a
change to this bill to be
consistent with the EEOC laws
federally so essentially they
the records or the convictions
of a crime that's not related to
the profession that somebody's
applying for
and consistent with the
necessity to keep them away from
that profession that's
essentially what we they've ever
amended the bill to be able to
be consistent with EEOC laws so
there's not an artificial bar
from being able to apply for the
job but the board has discretion
in order to make the decision
about whether or not the
position in question would be
consistent with the necessity of
keeping them away from that work
or allowing them to be licensed
and network.
Madam chair representative
Romero so the board would make
the determination about whether
or not it was quick job related.
That's correct
Madam chair representative this
would be essentially a up to the
I have regulations that sorry
the board who like who allows
for those to be licensed to
determine any candidate that
would not be qualified based on
a prior conviction
for that for that work.
And madam chair representative
Romero job related is not the
crime was committed on the job
but that the crime is somehow
relevant to the job they're
seeking correct madam chair
Representative so for instance
if there was a situation where
someone is seeking an accounting
license for instance and they
had committed accounting fraud
previously and that was the
conviction the state they
applied for a new license the
board would then determine
likely that that would be barred
from being able to be licensed
in that field.
You madam chair is everywhere
what does the phrase consistent
with business necessity mean.
Madam chair representative again
that's coming from federal law
so essentially it being it being
broadly worded essentially looks
set how that the job would
function and of course if it if
it prohibits them from
continuing to do business in the
way that they would need to as a
licensed professional then they
would be if that was any way
compromised then the board would
have the discretion to prohibit
someone from receiving that
license.
Thank you madam chair Meryl I.
Information I think that the
verbiage in there is a.
No need at this.
Madam chair representative
Romero on page five of the body
and it talks about filing a
single petition.
When we talk about the spending
big automatic.
It is automatic is is it up this
is a question is it automatic
once someone asks.
What do you have to file a
petition no madam chair
representative you would not
have to file a petition it would
be automatic in that if you were
essentially committed a crime of
possession of cannabis that
would be on the books which
would be rectified should the
cannabis regulation act passed
that is no longer a crime and so
therefore would be automatic
without needing to petition the
importance of this is just
making sure that those are
there's no red tape and a strict
ensuring that if something is
now legal we would not expect
anyone to have to petition for
that process that would be
automatically removed from the
public facing websites.
So then chairs everywhere this
petition language.
On page five and section four
relates to.
Existing other law and not.
If I may that the main thrust of
the bill in front of us I mean
we're we're tinkering with some
other expungement provision that
required a petition and that's
why that language is showing up
that's correct expungement in
our state Madam chair
representative isn't quite what
I think many folks think of what
it might be which is like the
destruction of of a record we
keep all of those records in our
state however the way this works
out is that essentially it's
automatic from any public record
or review availability would
still be available to the courts
to any background check and
Sandra
but this essentially would not
be available for public review
so so just to clarify how are
expendable works that's what I
understand I'll allow
Make and Dorsey to respond if
I'm if there's any technicality
I may have missed.
Madam chair representative
Romero I don't believe so I
think you accurately recited
Law.
Thank you okay.
Madam chair sent Romero on page
seven and.
Thank you at least one other
location.
Section five hundred new
material it talks about
something that is no longer a
crime or that would have
resulted in a lesser offense.
Will be expunged.
But if it's a lesser offense
it's still crime right so why is
that getting expunged.
Sorry madam chair representative
here on page seven line.
Well several lines but in
particular at one sixteen okay.
My question is if it would have
resulted in a lesser X. offense.
Okay I get that but it's still
on the fence so why are we
expending that.
Madam chair representative thank
as I've reading through this
just to clarify the question so
it essentially if the act was in
effect at the time of the
offense and this was a quicker
if it if it was subject to the
cannabis regulation act anything
that is now legal in their
whether it be it whatever level
of the sense that is now
absolved is is now legal my
reading of that is that anything
that whatever the bar is for the
the high fence or lower fence
there are there if there if it's
now a legal
situation that they wouldn't
those would all be expunged from
Martinez late FF I'm reading
that correct I don't know if
Megan has a some a different
read if she can clarify that
line.
Thank you madam chair
representative I think that's
mostly accurate I think it might
be helpful to think of a an
example to put to wrap our
brains around if it is a
complicated area.
A specific section
Representative McQueen is
referring to.
I think the easiest example to
consider is where somebody may
have previously been convicted
of a simple misdemeanor
possession of cannabis of Matt
might wanna and where under that
cannabis regulation act that
would no longer.
See a crime that's easy that
gets expunged however if we're
talking about a situation where
but now in question that would
reduce the crime perhaps without
any to a misdemeanor or from a
misdemeanor to a penalty
assessments our lowest testament
we don't want the remaining
rushes to unfairly in late this
panel teas and the consequences
that the facing having been
convicted after the passing as
if the R. H. and so the intent
of this section is to make sure
that those records which did not
accurately reflect what would
happen under current law.
Okay mentors as someone is
shuffling papers or something
it's making it very difficult to
hear.
Mr Garcia I don't know if that's
you but possibly is.
So my question is and I think
you touched on it.
And I you know don't know the
ins and outs of the current
current lawyer the different
levels of the senses but if
something was.
Tell me and under the new law
would be a misdemeanor that
misdemeanors K. explains to even
though it would still be a
misdemeanor under the new law.
It is.
Madam chair representative
McQueen I understand your
question now I can understand
easily thank you yes I think
that that is correct that is an
accurate reading of the section
that that the incorrect data
would be expunged and I
understand I think we're kind of
goes to students that what would
have been a valid misdemeanor
convictions stay on the person's
record.
And.
I think that was sort of a
policy decision saying that I
don't know how that would be
accomplished because it have to
be a substitute leading which
would not which would I think
require involvement of the
prosecuting entity as well as
the defense attorney and
possibly the judge where is this
process contemplated as for
automatic expungement which is
supposed to be at less expense
up to the party to first not
what is being subject to review
in other places of the bill we
do talk about it in a slightly
different terms when we're
talking about we follow
sentences where person can be
three designated
so the the sentence could be
reduced if they were serving a
year and it really should only
been six months they can
designated staff etcetera.
It cost me Representative
whatever the noise is it sounds
like someone's eating velcro.
It is like so I I I I cannot
really understand at all
I don't think make it your fault
madam chair
But I don't maybe someone is
like using a headset or your
piece that's scraping against
something.
I'm.
Now.
Madam chair and Mr speaker
members of the committee I could
not see anyone besides ms
Dorsey's microphone on it so it
maybe it is her headphones if
there's a way to feedback now
I'm not sure I apologize but I
am trying to keep tabs on it
from the back in and I don't
see.
Where the source of the noise
might be coming from.
I'm happy to try to log off and
log back in and just see if
maybe there's something wrong.
Madam chair actually make and if
you have headphones baby just
try plugging those and do you
happen to that right nearby.
Just to prevent whatever sound
is coming through.
Eating velcro is very
descriptive.
What.
Mr speaker that is very
creative.
Leave the best service public
when we use our skills to create
rich visual landscapes in the
minds of our.
Of our building tinfoil rubbing
against itself right with tiny
animals doing that that was the
visual I got from the sound Mr
speaker.
Okay can you hear me now.
No more velcro.
Hopefully not.
I apologize madam chair members
of the committee for that
technical difficulties
That's what we're talking about
Madam chair representative
McLean I I believe what I was
trying to communicate is that I
think you're reading of this
particular section of the bill
is correct that that
but what could have been
potentially considered a valid
lesser conviction would be
expunged under this section the
policy reasoning behind that was
to most efficiently correct.
Records that are wrong however
there is a process that does
allow for the prosecuting entity
to object so if by chance they
wanted to do like a substitute
plea I think that that would be
possible
however I also think that this
if this is a policy decision
that this committee chooses to
disagree with.
It is the decision that the
lesser conviction should stand
in the expungement shouldn't
happen in its entirety and
instead just substitute reading
should be put in place I think
it would be possible to re craft
the language to show that it of
the lesser redesignation stays
in place but we would need to
keep in mind that that would
necessarily create additional
work certainly for the judiciary
and possibly for I would just do
that that person involved maybe
a defense attorney and and a
prosecuting agency.
So madam chair Representative
Romero and sourcing
The language right below the
state automatically so.
I I don't.
I don't know what the process is
for someone to object but it
would appear to be automatic
and is there.
That
possibility of the.
So you you're convicted of a
third degree felony under the
new law you might be a fourth
degree felony.
And that is a lesser offense.
What would still get expunged.
Thank you madam chair
representative McQueen.
I am trying to think through so
the the answer to your question
of course depends upon exactly
the language that is ultimately
passed in the cannabis
regulation act and I say that
specifically because as far as I
can recall and and
Representative Romero please
correct me if I'm mistaken I'm
there are no such.
Reductions in penalty in the
cannabis regulation Act
essentially like I I can't think
of any
cases where we were reducing the
level of penalty it's either
just completely eliminating
things as a crime or making them
a penalty assessment or a civil
infraction so I don't believe
under the way at least that
house bill two is currently
drafted that that is possible
regardless of the language in
this bill
but that being said the sure
madam chair and representative
if the version of house bill two
that we have seen does not stay
the same in in any form in it
doesn't reach the governor of
perhaps the Senate version of
the bill were to pass I couldn't
answer that accurately.
That's my read as well madam
chair representative that we
don't create any new crimes are
lower the crime thresholds and
anyway.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Romero and Mr
Garcia.
Next it looks like we have
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair
I agree with the rules
Representative McQueen.
And I would be concerned with
expanding.
Who complete records where I'm
it's simply a reduction
in the
Crime and what my question my
first question would be you
following up on on that line of
questioning what would happen
the people who are currently
incarcerated for that offense.
If that record gets expunged.
So madam chair representative
they would be released if they
were applicable Lee reviewed and
went through the process of
possible release the if there's
no longer a crime committed and
that record is automatically
expunged we would expect that
they would no longer be and the
state's custody we're not
talking about the
That type of thing we're talking
about a reduction and so they're
they're in their cost rated for.
X. Y. Z. crime and for whatever
reason we STRUZZI to make that a
lesser crime.
If that record gets completely
expunged then that person gets
released from jail because
there's no record for the
conviction is that correct Madam
chair representative.
Madam chair representative I'll
defer to me again on how that
process would work.
Thank you madam chair
representative Representative
Nibert it did take a step back
before answering your question
directly just because I want to
make sure everybody's on the
same page at about the two
different processes this bill
contemplates
the the process for expungement
and dismissal or reduction of a
sentence for somebody in jail
although inter twined it to some
degree there separate and so the
one that when we were talking
about people that are currently
incarcerated serving a sentence
whether it be on a solely
cannabis related crime or on a
multitude of of crimes of
varying degrees the the process
necessarily must start with the
recall faxes you're not using
that term anymore with the
dismissal of the sentence and
that's the first step so first
we're talking about somebody
like that we would be looking to
section six of this bill
and under this is the section
where there is an ability for
the
the prosecuting entity to object
and and for that the courts to
weigh in and it's precisely
because of this issue that
you're identifying that there
will probably be individuals who
are serving sentences for crimes
in excess of what is no longer
illegal under whatever cannabis
regulation Act bill is passed it
one is passed and so what would
happen is for example when I
think is it is an easy example
that we've been using let's say
that somebody is serving a
sentence because they were
convicted of a felony marijuana
possession that under the
criminal it cannabis regulation
act would no longer be illegal
and they're also serving a
sentence for burglary crime that
has nothing whatsoever to do
with cannabis well.
The first under the dismissal of
sentence section for
incarcerated persons on page six
the first thing that would
happen is that only the
conviction related to the
cannabis charge would be
dismissed and that conviction
being dismissed would result in
and termination of the sentence
any sentence specifically
related to that charge however
the conviction for the burglary
would stand in its entirety and
so would it sentence and so
that's where we come into this
possibility for redesignation of
sentence them if the person was
serving the maximum sentence for
both crimes and let's say
they're both fourth degree
felonies to each one with
eighteen nine well than the
eighteen month portion of the
sentence that was attributed to
the cannabis charge would be
done they would still have to
serve eighteen months for the
burglary and whatever probation
and parole period followed the
second step would be then moving
to the expungement of the
records.
And under the process is
delineated in section six and
also referring previously to
section five the only the
records related to the cannabis
section would be expunged so all
of the pleadings that have
associations with the burglary
charge would remain on the
record and the the cannabis at
pleadings would be sealed which
we know is expungement.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Mr Garcia what's her when we
get off the grid cannabis thing
because I'm I'm much more
worried about other things and
they have their cannabis aspect.
You if someone were convicted of
a crime.
And at the time of their
conviction it resulted in acts.
And for whatever reason.
We as a legislative body change
that crime to make it.
Hello Sir.
Offense.
And it's now why.
And that person is incarcerated
if it gets completely expunged
does the person who's
incarcerated not have an
argument that there is no.
There's no.
Reason to keep me incarcerated
because what I did has now been
expunged it can't be used
against.
What the.
Madam chair representative yes I
I understand exactly what you're
saying and in this scenario that
you're describing that would not
be covered under this
legislation because this
legislation is only tied to
crimes that are no longer the
legal under the cannabis
regulation act so if down the
line the Legislature were to
decide to say that a burglary is
no longer a fourth degree felony
we think it should be at a
citation that should be just a
fine will this bill that we're
looking at today would have no
impact on that
So it only relates to cannabis
activities.
maybe madam chair of the
Representative I should ask a
question at the beginning
because my reading of this bill
indicates it is much broader
than cannabis it does more than
just simply expunged records for
cannabis there's a lot.
Madam chair representative can
you referred to us where you're
reading that words everything
and not just cannabis.
Very section we were at which is
that the section six Hey.
Which member are in contact with
on the top of page seven.
It says.
With thirty days following the
effective date of this section
correctional fills the solely
etcetera then talks about no
longer crime.
Percent of the provisions of the
cannabis regulation act this act
and then there's this big work
called for.
And that word tells me that it
can be something else for that
would have resulted in a lesser
offense if that act been in
effect at the time of the
offence shall do these things
including expunge and so.
Let's not talk about cannabis
let's talk about other crimes if
if that the time of the
conviction.
They were convicted of acts.
And now it would have been Y. a
lesser offense because we change
the law does that person do not
have an argument that they can't
be held in jail.
Because their conviction for
crime acts has now been expunged
even though a conviction under
crime why would still carry some
sentence that may allow them to
be in jail for maybe a another
year.
I read this is Sam insects funds
and I think that's exactly what
the representative from
Dallas States always staying is
that don't we have a problem
with that in this legislation
abstract.
Madam chair go ahead make and.
Madam chair representative at
thank you Representative Nibert
I absolutely understand what
you're saying and I agree that
that would be a problem if that
were the way this bill was
drafted and I say that because
in conversations with the
sponsors of this bill it was
made very clear to everyone in
the working group this bill was
only ever intended to address
cannabis.
Contact that would no longer be
legal under the cannabis
regulation act no intention to
touch any other crimes ever and
so with the way that I so I
think that we agree in terms of
policy and what we're trying to
do and perhaps that we are
disagreeing right now in terms
of the way that this language
and specifically the punctuation
is drafted to effectuate that
and so if the language of this
section would need to be
modified to make it clear I'm
not sure that that would be a
problem but the way that I am
seeing this and the way that it
was intended by the tractor is
that these commas so let's see
here for looking at line fifteen
a person is currently which in
which a person is currently
incarcerated for FINS that is no
longer crime presented CRA.
Or that would have resulted in a
lesser offense if that act the
cannabis regulation Act had been
in effect at the time of the
offense which means that only
crimes under the cannabis
regulation act that would have
resulted in a lesser offense at
that time is all that this would
be covering and that was the
intent of this legislation and I
believe that that is the way it
is dropped.
Where you're using the word act
madam chair or restore C. as a
reference to the act not the act
of the perpetrator yes I would
feel more comfortable if the
words for that would have
resulted in a lesser offense if
that act ban in effect at the
time of the offence stricken so
it just says that is no longer
crying percent of C. R. A. shall
notify the court thank you
convicted persons case may be X.
one
I would have a problem with that
board or whatever resulted in a
lesser offense of that act been
ineffective the time of the
accounts
I was pleased to hear that I
wasn't the only one confused by
that and have the same concerns
of the other representatives.
Express the and so you have to
address non
Criminal lawyers.
Something like that up in the
letters probably something that
needs to be done about it.
Matt and before we move on madam
chair representative I I thank
you I think we finally connected
here and I apologize I just
don't want to move on just yet
because I think you might be
correct and in that the way that
I was reading this if you look
at the word act in line eighteen
it is a lower case eight so you
were thinking you're reading
that to be the act the
defendants and I was thinking
upper case a meaning the
cannabis regulation act and so I
agree that if we capitalized act
in that sentence perhaps we
would then be on the same page.
While we're the act.
The if we made incentive it
saying that acted that the
cannabis regulation act again
perhaps.
Tells me that it's the action of
the perpetrator not a statute
and madam chair representative
Nibert I see where you're coming
from now it took me awhile to
get there with you but I see
what you're saying and I think
that is a technical error not
the intent of the bill.
But I I certainly shouldn't be
speaking for the sponsor.
Madam chair representative yeah
I mean if it clarifies that we
can just dump tail the intent
that we've been discussing this
back and forth if you wanted to
capitalize the a or if we wanted
to insert cannabis regulation
act to clarify I think that
would be friendly.
We're we're.
This is the only applies to
cannabis but I'll leave that get
brought up to you guys what you
want to do with that because my
amendments don't get past so
let's look at section four.
just talking about X. funding.
The assessments under the
criminal code.
Yes my my.
Question is is several fold
number one.
Would be if you expand your
penalty assessment do they get
their money back.
Madam chair representative I
don't believe so that's not
standard practice.
Representative Meghan shaking
her head madam chair so it's and
now they don't have the money
that Madam chair representative
no because I always argument
that is in you and you would
look the definition of it I'm
committing a criminal record
expungement Act which is not
delineated in the bill but it
referenced in the short I don't
under that act expungement and
we need basically for no
publicly acceptable record there
it is the devil remedy only
designed to protect protect
somebody's record there is no
monetary there's no the
possibility for monetary gain or
or any other remedy under.
My second question
Madam chair representative would
be.
Do we even need to have that
addition of penalty assessments
that are as part of the
expungement.
Our our penalty assessments.
Generally.
You know if I go pay my speeding
ticket I I just have a hard time
figuring out how that's going to
it to affect you so currently
assessment doesn't seem to me to
be a significant item but the
I'm I'm not familiar with this
area of law and so it just
strikes me as as this we worry
about penalty assessments.
The question.
Yes if you want a specific
question why do we need to prove
penalty assessments in this bill
so madam chair representative I
think we're just going to the
thoroughness of understanding
what we are looking at and in
the cannabis regulation Act and
just being really clear that we.
You know if there was a penalty
assessed that we address that in
this bill as well all L. defer
to make an.
Madam chair representative that
is correct however in addition
to that at penalty assessment
for cannabis related crime and
proved to be a barrier for
people seeking licensure hope we
come about corrected under the
L. I. but also for security
clearances at that with you want
three parents work at and your
lad or at Landel and prepare in
law enforcement related activity
at least within that yeah I
anyways and that cannabis
infraction of any kind on your
record we problematic people
politically.
I also return contact limit your
doctor at the lady to get and
federal benefit but I I'm not
positive about.
Where two things number one.
This section cited section
twenty nine dash three eight
dash four is not a section
that's devoted exclusively the
campuses.
Madam chair representative it is
exclusive to cannabis.
Are you with I'm sorry which
section are you in.
Wanted thank you for your bill
sites section twenty nine dash
three eight dash for.
And my question is is that
section of the statute so we
related to the issue of
cannabis.
Madam chair representative I
don't believe this is because
it's already current law Madam
chair representative it's not so
we related to cannabis in this
section no.
B. rejects.
Reply is generally.
The assessments under the motor
vehicle code.
For the first sentences under
the motor vehicle code can be
expunged if you go through this
process correct.
That's correct madam chair
representative.
And that would apply to.
Not just cannabis related
The assessments but any penalty
assessment would not.
Madam chair I I'll defer to make
it on that question.
Madam chair representative fiber
it would like to know the answer
to your question is yes however
I would like to explain that a
little bit and this section that
we're looking at here on page
five at the action for which
does refer to the general
excitement act and this is part
of an amendment that would put
on in the Senate Judiciary
Committee.
At my doctor's also.
Okay Megan okay but I found it
that I'll get it right and this
is part of an amendment that was
put on the internet it is very
and at the.
Address.
At thank you for your that are
not related thank cannabis
regulation act that is correct
but yes.
Section of border has to do with
a completely different process
that I'm aware but this is about
the current law where by
somebody if the court would find
any kind of record and the
latest action where we're
talking about in what is now
infection I think I'm interested
in record and the level of
incentive incarcerated person
both actions are only related to
automatic appropriations I
think.
In the.
In the language of the bill.
madam chairman Representative Mr
Garcia it says that we're going
to expunge the assessments.
For violation of the murder
motor motor vehicle code in the
motor vehicle code.
As much as as I assume doesn't
have anything to do with
cannabis number one but number
two.
I I just.
I understand expungement for
felonies misdemeanors many
violations of some ordinances
but a penalty assessment test I
I am totally confused as to why
we're going.
Why why that language was even
added to to this bill I I I
just.
I I just don't see the need for
what the real result of.
Goes down healthy assessments
under the vehicle motor vehicle
code I mean you look up my
records and you see how many
speeding tickets I've gotten
what happened to our
yeah am I haven't paid too much
attention to that so
I would assume most people don't
R. and yet
we're we're putting something in
statute the to to explains those
records and and to a certain
extent.
As an employer.
If I'm hiring drivers for my
business I'm going to want to
make sure that they
Then I have a good feeling of
what there are driving record is
and of course funding those
records I'm not gonna have a
good feel for that so I I I just
don't see the need to have that
language in this bill and I
don't think it accomplishes any
of the purposes for which you
all are arguing
What this bill is needed and and
I can support if we think that
other I could probably support
the rest of it because I agree
with you let's explains of the
cannabis stuff but you
Representative both are on the
bill we just I don't.
So those are my comments
madam chair thank thank you
Representative thank you Mr
Garcia.
Thank you.
Next we have Representative all
clue.
Thank you madam chair just got.
Yeah
so normally.
Representative.
Madam chair.
Somebody inside the system
matter one on.
The
card to it usually Kerry's.
Other sentences with the
process and a pair for the early
on and on and on and on.
So we're going to explore.
Are we going to explained
everything that went with that
K..
Madam chair representative only
just it is subject to the
specific act any crime that we
now made legal that's currently
on the books that is now a legal
Act
that we we will remove the the
intent of this bill is to remove
the record of that crime so
anything that was is now would
not would be made legal by the
cannabis regulation act is no
longer crime and therefore yes
in those those specific related
crimes would be removed anything
unrelated to the act would not
be removed.
Okay so I I mean the the
possession of drug paraphernalia
which is what carries with it
Mrs with intent.
To distribute so those.
Stay on your record but the
position of the very one that
would go away.
Madam chair representative so
depending on the intent to
distribute that you just
described that would likely
those are still and without a
license even in the next bill
use you would have to have a
license in order to distribute.
Madam chair representative we
explained you records from
before to date okay.
Yes we're exposed to we're not
talking about what happens after
we pass this bill after with
bass house house bill two we're
talking about before that that's
what we're expanding in my
correct that's correct.
Senator.
Okay so.
And before that's on the record.
Who is going to come in full of
the silicone there will be no
record.
Of anything having to do with
cannabis but if it was related
to it and there was another
charge along with that charge
that other charges could be on
the record.
I'm chair representative yes.
Even though madam chair the
initial arrest us for the
possession of marijuana.
Madam chair representative yes
if it's not a legal act still
illegal.
Okay but.
Like I said before madam chair
normally they come in in in bad
to stay don't they it will.
The court normally does see a
criminal complaint was just for
one just a charge of possession
of marijuana go to the court
that group complained that
Stuart three years two to five
or six or seven or as many as
that officer can figure out how
to charge so you can get some
kind of conviction or her so we
came to conditions.
So that is my concern that then
now if I go to and course dot
com the only thing that will be
gone is the possession of
cannabis and that's it but
everything else will be there.
Chair representative
understanding your hypothetical
if yes I believe so if it was
paraphernalia related I believe
in our ended cannabis regulation
Act that's no longer crimes well
but if you if your medical
caring person already than we
should have already expands that
exemption.
Thank you thank you madam chair
that's the only question I have.
Sure I move a do pass the Senate
Judiciary Representative Eli
yes I was here can you hear me.
Can you hear me.
Yes there you go yes I'll second
that motion.
We came through.
We have a motion for
representative Ely road to pass
on Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill two
as amended.
The vote is now open just
kidding will the clerk to call
here madam chair.
Montr AS not been amended not
that I know of.
What it was amended in the
Senate yeah so I'm not in not
here I was just giving the bill
titled so if we didn't touch it
okay.
Floor amendments madam I
apologize Mr chair.
Right Mr Garcia what was I
apologize madam chair that the
record at that committee is that
for.
The committee that the
yes I think I said that but.
And then it was amended on the
Senate floor.
Okay it wasn't it's we have a
drop box Senate floor
amendments.
And then the LFC even sent a new
FIR at three o'clock for a
little just before that was
reflective of the Senate floor
amendment that was adopted.
Okay okay that makes sense and I
don't know how many for
amendments there were madam
chair to claim.
Readers okay always talk about
twice and thrice to I don't know
what else but we just say as
amended okay.
Okay I'm not changing after all
these years.
Able to court please call the
roll.
Representative Alcon yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Cook.
Speaker if all.
Yes.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Lewis yes.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative Nibert.
Think we lost him I'm
Representative Rehm.
Representative Rehm.
Representative Townsend.
Representative Townsend.
I'm.
Yes.
Madam chair chasing yes.
We have eight in the affirmative
one in the negative and then I'm
not sure if the others agree
would be absent or excused I
think we lost them right now
unless they have.
Some.
Our technical difficulties
please mark them absent.
Okay we have a due past
Representative Romero thank you
very much thank you madam chair
thank you members thank you
everybody do we have any more
bills we have to hear this.
Sheila Lewis thank you so much
Gabrielle show we could have
done this without you.
Thank you.
As much taking about at almost
four PM rather than to A. M.
today.
My goodness that was not fun.
I think everyone everybody see
on the floor.
