Representative McQueen.
Here.
Representative Nibert.
Your.
Representative Rehm air.
Representative.
Second I'm sure.
Representative Lewis.
I think that in.
I am present we do have a quorum
I'm going to be participating.
The vice chair is going to share
that meeting for the most part
and I think we're ready to begin
with a roll over from I can't
remember what day we heard it
Representative starting.
Chair let's go ahead with you
thank you and representative of
the vice chair will be chairing
Ezzell.
Thank you I have this Madam vice
chair I I have the same
of expert witnesses you we have
not you know.
Thank you Representative might
you name them out loud again so
we can confirm they're in the
same with us thank you madam
chair I'm Richard Valerio Munoz
kabel Julie Garcia and I believe
Rachel cuddles with.
In the same again.
House bill two hundred.
One twenty.
Thank you this is a rollover
from sometime earlier in the
week with Representative setting
up a house bill one twenty
eight.
but.
George I might we can we confirm
when we have those experts in
please I see it all the added
okay good so there's four of
them right Richard I ideal
Rachel gradual.
RTS kabel and Julie Garcia I
still don't see Marty just give
L..
I'm here.
Yes thank you thank you for
raising your actual handed this
to the guys yes.
Okay Representative may you
please explain what you're
bringing us today you want the
two oh two number for the yes
okay it's two two zero zero four
four point one.
And I'm bringing the committee
sub for House Bill when twenty
eight as and.
vice chair madam chair I should
say I move the committee
separate options for discussion
purposes.
Thank you.
Representative setting might you
please explain yourself and I do
want to share for people
listening that because we've
already heard public comment on
this bill today we are going
back to public comment but
discussing the subject that
you've brought for us today.
Thank you madam chair do you
want me too so everybody does a
little different you want me to
read what the changes are or how
you want me to do it.
Representative why don't we
start with you giving us the the
discussion of about what what
the substantial changes are
within this up and then
potentially if committee members
want more details or to focus in
on specific parts of that will
address that during committee
questions.
Okay most of most of the changes
were madam chair the changes
were
to the concerns of the the
committee
mostly helpings reinvestigate it
and we brought in instead of
being specifically brought in
specific articles that would
pertain to any allegations or
pertain to the
and the specificity of what we
wanted to look for I don't know
if I can really explain it very
well because
the discussion was between all
the lawyers so I felt like
going over it might be the
easiest but maybe that.
Madam chair please do not
appropriate Representative
Sarinana or if you'd like one of
your experts to be part of
presenting the committee so to
just let us know one second
Representative it looks like one
of our analysts has a hand up.
Yes madam chair guy David M..
We have summarized all of the
revisions to the committee set
up and the bill analysis that is
in the chair file and is it
would
help the committee I can
summarize those changes pretty
quickly.
Representative right to you if
one of our analysts highlights
those changes share it thank you
I can I can return from the the
the.
The committee so but sure that
would work.
You're the first change is on
section one eight two eight on
page two lines eighteen to
twenty three which provides the
applicants to a public school
must provide a written statement
describing whether the applicant
has ever been under
investigation for or has been
found to have violated any state
or federal statute relating to
child abuse or neglect sexual
misconduct or any sexual and
fans including those offenses
prohibited in chapter thirty
various articles that are
described in the criminal cold.
Unless the allegations were
false or unsubstantiated and
that was a amendment approved by
the speaker a similar amendment
is made in section one eight to
be on page two lines twenty
five.
The twenty four to twenty five
and on page three line so one
two three what also requires the
applicant to provide this a
public school with the written
statement whether the applicant
has ever been under
investigation for found to have
violated any ethical rule or
policy approved by a former
employer.
Similarly section one B. two
eight.
And one B. to be found on pages
three line twenty three to
twenty five and on pages four
lines one to two and lines three
to seven and the type of written
statement that must be provided
again tracking the sections of
the criminal code.
And the the type of statement
that the former employer must
make to a prospective employer.
The other area that had been
raised by Representative the
line was section one G..
On page five lines thirteen to
fifteen that previously talked
about acting in good faith that
section was completely struck in
the committee substitute the
language now reads when a
reference on a former current
employees requests the employer
shall respond and provide the
requested information pursuant
to subsection B. of this section
it's very simple.
Section three F. I under ethical
misconduct is deleted as being
duplicative and finally
Representative night bird had a
concern about that language in
the sexual misconduct in section
three are on page eleven that
didn't include any communication
that appears so in the committee
said stick to that definition is
completely deleted.
And that is all the revisions
that are made in the committee
substitute.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you.
Representative setting and is
there anything you are any of
your experts would like to add
before we go to the committee
madam chair I can ask the
experts anything that like to
add.
Madam buster madam chair this Mr
ask avail yes Mr go ahead yes of
the thank you for the the time
here.
This is obviously very important
piece of legislation with a lot
of work and it really heightens
the standard of disclosure for
applicants and school and school
districts in the employment
process we have the right I
would the committee had a very
good discussion and I think to
summarize the the points that
were raised by Representative
Eli Representative Nibert and a
solution proposed by the speaker
of the house in that discussion
led to what I think now is a
much better and stronger bill a
much tighter Bill and basically
the focus of which I can even
narrow what was just presented
the focus is now on what really
should be disclosed in terms of
certain criminal violations and
that was a little bit of a
broader and we've tightened it
now to identify certain criminal
statutes in addition to
violation of school policies
we tied the legal responsibility
for the school districts to
provide references that was a
point raised by Representative
Eli in the final I think concern
the truce was replaced by
Representative Nibert was this
kind of a catch all definition
of ethical misconduct that the
PED of could could later
identified Representative virus
point was.
We either define ourselves
support pointed to the PD and I
think upon reflection it was a
good point that you raise so I
think this really has taken a
very important one of the most
important pieces of legislation
to protect our students and
really made it better and there
is a lot of work on that went
into it but a lot of people but
I think it was all rooted in the
comments brought before the
committee earlier this week so
thank you.
Thank you Mr us and what you
just introduce Juergen addition
for part of our audience sure I
am the general counsel New
Mexico Public School Insurance
Authority and with me today is
executive director Richard but I
DO and also Julie Garcia deposit
associates who does a lot of
work the schools has been a very
important part of this
legislation as it goes back to
the house memorial fifty seven
task force so like to recognize
them as well make big important
this.
Thank you stated Representative
are you ready for us to go to
committee that yes thank you
madam chair.
Thank you
I am looking committee.
I don't see any hands yes.
So if we don't have any further
discussion what is the pleasure
of the committee Madam chairman
of that hi do not pass of house
bill.
Twenty eight.
And a do pass of Judiciary
Committee substitute for house
bill one twenty eight.
We have a motion for
representative Ely and a second
to from representative Nibert I
believe.
Yes thank you Representative
thank you.
I have and and wants to make one
question are Madam chair
representative be like could we
say that you have a do not pass
on house bill one twenty eight
is amended.
Yeah that's a good catch thank
you very much yeah I I would
like to reform minded motion to
reflect that thank you thank you
thank you Christina all still
second.
Thank you
the clerk might you please call
the roll.
Local.
Yes.
I'm.
Representative Nibert yes.
Representative Rehm yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
You have.
In the affirmative zero.
Representative you have a due
process on house bill on the
house Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill into
any as amended madam madam vice
chair I could just out reference
to
Representative Sarinana shot
expert Marty just put all your
daughter's doing a terrific job
of the legislature thank you
very much.
That is good to hear thank you
that is the and Representative
thank you for your patience as I
still I'm learning up and
getting used to Cherry so
thank you for your patience as I
stumbled through these and
public to teachers around what
we get it right thank you madam
chair can I just say I want to
thank Representative Nibert and
Eli and and speaker and madam
chair for other input and Marty
and Mr ask about yours too
because you've made it
definitely made it that much
better bill so thank you thank
you and thank you for all the
good you're doing to keep kids
safe in New Mexico.
Next on the agenda for today we
have house bill two hundred
Representative McQueen will you
be presenting that today are you
ready on that bill yes chair I
am ready I have a two experts
who hopefully are in the
attendees list commissioner
Harry brown and professor Denise
fort.
Okay let's get these folks in.
What.
Representative McQueen thank you
have your experts in for today
are you bringing us any
amendment to committee
substitutes.
Madam chair I'm not okay I
haven't Mr Representative
McQueen please proceeded The
presentation of your bill thank
you madam chair.
Chair members of the committee
house bill two hundred is water
transport projects in New Mexico
unit fund hi this is both in
investment bill any fiscal
responsibility.
It clears the way to invest
eighty million dollars in
southwest New Mexico.
Thank you Katrin grant the doggo
including the counties.
So in two thousand four under
the federal airs on water
selfless act.
New Mexico was granted the right
to use fourteen thousand acre
feet a year from the lower.
I'll be very clear that it's not
a water right.
By New Mexico.
It's actually a water right
owned by
Going up already
Madam chair thank you.
So it's fourteen thousand acre
feet Arizona's water and it's a
common misconception that it's.
Oh my goodness is a fourteen
thousand acre feet of New
Mexicos water and we have to do
everything possible to capture
that and use that but not only
is it Arizona's water but for us
to use it we have to pay.
So there is it's called the
exchange feed every for every
acre foot we take out the Sheila
we would have to pay Arizona so
we have the right to use that
water.
If only we can figure out.
And to date we have spent
fifteen years and fifteen
million dollars trying to figure
out how.
And we have nothing to show for
that effort nothing.
There is no viable project to
divert the water from the liver.
Input and social use in New
Mexico.
Unfortunately.
There are people who are still
trying.
In what this bill does it is put
an end to that.
and that's why I say it's a
fiscal responsibility bill we
should stop throwing good money
after bad.
And we should take the money the
sending unit funding all
explained that is second in
invested in southwest New Mexico
as we have a right.
Yeah I think an obligation to
do.
So under there is no water some
intact there is a.
The deadline that was extended a
couple times and ultimately
extended to December thirtieth
twenty nineteen.
Mexico had to come up with a
record decision which is part of
the process by the end of twenty
nineteen.
If we did that in addition to
the unit fund we would get an
additional information just at
fifty six million dollars to
construct the New Mexico units.
The central Arizona project
which is essentially a human
person.
That deadline came and went.
That money is gone fifty six
million dollars is gone it's not
coming back.
But they're still PED million
dollars in New Mexico units
Fund.
Which under federal law we can
either use the bill The New
Mexico unit.
But that's not gonna happen.
We can invested in southwest
Mexico.
In this bill is simply
exercising that choice to invest
that money it directs the I just
seek to consult with the water
transport to pick projects for
that region the water transport
is sort of our.
R. X. thirties in water projects
I mean if you look at the
membership of the water trust
board it's different agencies
it's tribal members it's
Members it's how we water
projects in New Mexico.
Secondly the bill direct directs
the icy not to use the money on
New Mexico units of the central
Arizona project.
Because we tried that and it
didn't work.
So I I I would be very clear
that.
We've already reached a decision
as a state.
That there will not be in New
Mexico you that there will not
be here with version.
And that decision.
Was it in a more metal or
conservation decision.
So there are some people like
myself who frankly think this
water is better used in the
river and the river is a.
He first brought in an outdoor
recreational asset and we should
keep water in the liver.
But that's not the basis of the
decision of what was was made.
The basis of the decision that
was made was an economic
decision.
S. scientific position.
There is simply no way to
economically get the water out
of the look.
And that effort has been
abandoned by all but a few
stalwarts.
It is time to move on.
And with that manager if I could
I'd like to give commissioner
Gary Graham a chance to make a
few comments in professor for.
Is a former member of the water
trust board and she's here in
case we have any questions about
that.
Thank you Representative Mr
brown go ahead.
Thank you very much good
afternoon madam chair committee
members as mentioned my name is
Jerry Brown I'm a second term
county commissioner in Grant
County and I want to start by
making perfectly clear that I'm
here representing my own views
not those of the commission the
commission has not taken a
position on H. B. two hundred
and in fact the commission has
been a member of the captaincy
since the body was created.
Today on usual position of
advocating for the replacement
of a local body the cap entity
with the statewide body the
water trust board to provide
input into decisions about local
water projects.
Like to cover three points that
from my perspective.
All of them from my perspective
as an elected official from the
four county region that should
be benefiting from this fund.
First the consulting group the
body that is going to provide
input to the Interstate Stream
Commission on these water
projects does not have to be the
capital city the captaincy is
asserting that it should be that
body but it doesn't have to be
under federal or state law.
Second the consulting group
should not in fact be the
captain to T. in third the
consulting group should be the
water trust board.
So on that first point it should
be noted that the Arizona water
settlements Act mentions the cap
into need by name twelve times
but every mention is in the
context of building funding
operating maintaining and
replacing a diversion project.
We're the bill mentions non
diversion projects funded by the
New Mexico unit fund it does not
mention the captivity it leaves
that up to the state.
Governor bill Richardson
nominated a group of the year is
the southwest New Mexico a
stakeholders group to take on
this role thank you.
Two thousand and seven.
And
That is not clear that the
captaincy is excessive group to
that organization and even if it
were what the government gives
the government may take away and
it could be given to somebody
else in Representative McQueen
this bill says it should be the
water trust board and I agree.
On the second point the
consulting group should not be
the cap entity as someone who
has observed the cap entities
operations closely for the past
six years it's clear to me that
the cabinet he should not be the
group to provide these
consultation services.
Kevin he was created in twenty
fifteen with the joint powers
agreement that made clear the
group's only purpose was to
design build and operate a
diversion project it was so
widely understood that this was
their purpose the three of grant
counties municipalities
Silvercity Baird and Hurley
chose not to become members of
the cabinet he specifically
because they wanted to avoid any
possible entanglement with the
financial requirements of
building a diversion project.
More than three years later the
members of the cabinet need
amended their GPA to add the
purpose we're here to discuss
today funding non diversion
projects.
But they maintain to the
construction of diversion
projects as their top priority
both explicitly by saying quote
that the construction and
operation of the New Mexico unit
that is a diversion is and
remains the highest priority and
quote.
Implicitly by prohibiting the if
they put this in the revised GPA
the prohibited funding any non
diversion project until after a
record of decision was obtained
from the secretary of the
interior for a diversion
project.
That record of decision that
will never come AS
Representative McQueen noted
they miss their end of twenty
nineteen deadline they've lost
the construction funding they've
lost the chance for record of
decision without going to a
whole new need but which of
course would take a whole lot
more money.
What is going on at this point
the capital D. is considering
amending its GPA yet again to
deal with the fact that they
missed that deadline and to make
themselves in charge of funding
non diversion projects this is
an effort to retrofit a
structure designed for one
purpose into a different purpose
entirely in my experience that's
a bad strategy in this case is
inefficient and likely to be
unfair.
Why inefficient.
Well just look at the last six
years spending almost fifteen
million dollars in five years
pursuing diversion projects the
from the get go.
Pretty obviously going to be on
affordable and if they had done
their job well the could figure
that out at most within two
years spend much less money.
But they have members who are
dead set on making this happen
and they kept going kept
spending money on on engineering
projects.
And in the end we have nothing
to show for it as Representative
McQueen noted.
Why unfair.
Because the composition of the
captaincy is biased this is a
crucial point there are
representatives from groups with
only a handful of members that
have personal interests in the
outcome of these spending
decisions.
This may have been appropriate
for designing a diversion but it
is not appropriate for the task
now at hand members would be
evaluating and ranking projects
that benefit their organizations
alongside others that will not.
Representative small dish
associations are given equal
weight to those from entire
counties.
We're concerned about the health
and welfare of tens of thousands
of residents there are no
representatives of other water
using groups in the captivity
such as rafters outfitters and
guides rod and gun club's and
wildlife conservation groups.
In each existing member of the
cabinet he has veto power over
adding any new members.
Just how difficult it might be
to achieve a balanced
representation of stakeholders
on that captivity was made
abundantly clear by Mister
Howard Hutchinson statement that
the most recent meeting of the
group.
Quote the whole purpose end
quote of the Colorado River
basin protection act in the
Arizona water settlements Act
which she loves together he said
is quote diversion and storage
for New Mexico water users the
beneficiaries were supposed to
be the water users on the healer
in San Francisco rivers.
In New Mexico this is not the
statement of someone who's
looking to work with other users
and reach compromises for the
general welfare.
The second that those are the
third point that the
consultation group should be the
water trust board is more
difficult for me to make frankly
I spent a while hoping we could
do something locally.
We have a long period of pulling
together for our common good to
great journey reasonably been
combating COVID all sectors
pulling together supporting our
local hospital.
But the issue of water
development has proved every bit
as contentious as we all know it
can be over the past decade
participating in this issue has
often felt like part of the
family that's tearing itself
apart.
Just as a neutral family
counselors often important for
resolving those kinds of issues
I have reluctantly concluded
that we need a neutral expert
body to evaluate the many water
proposals that are competing for
that eighty million dollars.
Sad to say trust in the process
the cap into the proposes to
implement has been severely
undermined and I fear that us
gets to make the difficult
decisions choosing among
different projects with
beneficiaries in different
counties and in different
industries will only exacerbate
the situation.
The water trust board offers the
best alternative to this
continued into family fighting
it's not made up of local
shareholders I'm sorry
stakeholders which is a shame
but at this time we need an
impartial body with experience
in evaluating water development
proposals to save us from
ourselves.
Thank you madam chair very much
for this time.
Thank you we'll go to professor
fort.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I I'm out of this
really respond to questions or
just I did serve on the water
trust board for eight years
under governor Richardson and I
I'd say it's something the
legislature created in two
thousand one to really pull
together the analysis of you
know capital projects and the
water transport is developed it
over the next nineteen years
stated in in a way that's really
impressive and I I say this with
a lot of years are looking at
state government it's it's got
forty pages of analysis done for
projects which are divided into
different categories it's a
transparent process so you know
people who want to find out
what's going on with the
proposal that's been made into
so this through the New Mexico
finance authority of which it is
part
And that just to address I guess
one comment that's been made it
has
it does differ to regional water
the Legislature provided that it
would defer to regional water
planning decisions and so in so
far as there is to it we
regional water plans that
address some of the projects
that are brought before it it
will take into account the
regional water planning
decisions
and and and I think with that I
I would just say that in my
experience it it has brought to
the legislature good projects
that have been evaluated on
their own terms depending on the
type of project that they are
it's risk right forward a list
of the legislature seems to have
found a reliable guide to the
kinds of water projects that
serves.
New Mexico's interests and those
of the region in question.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative McQueen anything
else before we go to the public.
However right here from the
public manager thank you so for
those of us joining today yes
zero we are first going to share
a poll that you can participate
in indicating whether you
support or oppose house bill two
hundred after that.
Leave this up for about fifteen
seconds.
After that we will go to the
audience joining us yes soon and
today will be started it with
the we'll get started with the
folks who want to speak with
questions concerns or opposition
to HB two hundred so if you'd
like to speak at in opposition
to HB two hundred first you can
raise your hand so it looks like
with us today we have lots of
people waiting in about
Okay we have
About sixty New Mexicans
weighing in about eighty percent
of those are in support of this
bill house bill two hundred
about twenty percent are in
opposition so again we're gonna
start with the opposition we
will speaker by speaker announce
your name you will be given
permission to speak on our end
and then you'll have a one
minute to make your comment
before you are muted again so
again well name you have your
time will screen you'll see the
timer on your screen and then
you will be muted at the end of
that minute so today we're going
to start with Oscar cincin.
I am support I didn't.
I had a time okay go ahead and
lower your hand Oscar and we
will come back to when we get to
the other side of this Howard
Hutchinson and.
Very well thank you madam vice
chair members of the committee
my name is our attention St I'm
chairman of the San Francisco
solemn water conservation
district.
The suggested amendments that of
are curved up on page three line
time team and following.
Contradicting intent and
purposes of the Colorado basin
project act as amended by the
Arizona water settlements Act.
On one hand of the amended
legislation says it is to abide
by the federal legislation and
then does just the opposite.
The primary purpose of the A.
WSA as amendment to the Colorado
River basin project Act is to
provide additional water from
the central Arizona project to
remedy the unfair adjudication.
Of the human San Francisco
rivers in the Supreme Court case
of Arizona versus California.
Thank you Mr Hutchinson we next
have hated and forward.
And please introduce yourselves
as well.
Good good afternoon madam chair
and committee members can you
hear me I yes go ahead.
Thank you very much I am taking
forward catching County
commissioner district three
within catching County are small
villages and entities have
meaningful and essential water
improvement projects range
ranging from distribution to
treat to fire protection support
none of these villages are
entities have the infrastructure
dept of engineering or technical
expertise to meet the barrier of
entry the water trust board
demands in their project
application process it must be
made clear the water trust board
will hold an overview each
project to their own application
criteria which are defined in
here to a fully equipped and
funded building this apology
standards we are definitely a
handicap under H. P. two hundred
and I hope that you vote against
it and in support of the I. S.
C..
Next we have the address.
And indeed the dentist.
If you're with this.
Okay and then if you're still
interested in talking with your
hand that they will come back to
we're gonna try Tiffany we that
a.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you for allowing
me the opportunity to comment
this afternoon my name is
Tiffany Rivera and I am the
registered lobbyists for New
Mexico farm and livestock bureau
we stand in respectful
opposition this afternoon house
bill two hundred we support the
efforts of the local affected
stakeholders who intention it is
to acquire and put to use for
the benefit of the interested
parties as much of the remaining
eighty million dollars available
for water related projects and
studies New Southwest Mexico.
A major concern we have with the
legislation before you is the
provision which transfers the
consultation authority for
expenditures from the New Mexico
unit fund to the water trust
board this actually filing the
intent of the Arizona water
Madam.
The original intent of the
actors to find this authority to
regional and in southwest New
Mexico further we are also
concerned with transferring this
authority to the water trust
board because there is no
representation from southern New
Mexico.
Thank you for the opportunity to
comment.
Thank you and we're gonna try
Anthony again Anthony if you
like to speak go ahead and I'm
yourself and give us your public
comment.
Okay can you hear me this time
yes I can yes we can go ahead
and any.
Yes my name is Anthony to get us
on the executive director of the
Mexico captains T. in previous
year the list some Cisco water
commission and I'm not
necessarily here to oppose
utilizing The New Mexico unit
fund for non unit projects as we
have already passed an
amendment.
More joint powers agreement to
remove any obstacles to fund
these projects they had to go
back to our members for
certification now.
Basically two hundred is the
best way to provide of course
the same bility to southwest New
Mexico of what we're is the
regional support with the
exception of commissioner brown
commissioners and now passing
opposition resolutions to.
The AC two hundred as well as in
the state Dinning county passed
a resolution opposition.
And we also have four members in
the house of representatives.
That Representative southwest
New Mexico who haven't signed on
or in my conversations are not
supporting this bill so I
certainly don't support this
bill.
Thank you for waiting and next
we have Pete Domenici junior.
Good afternoon madam chair can
you hear me OK.
Yes we can.
Thank you hi Representative The
New Mexico cap and you can have
for about six years.
Of I'm only gonna speak to one
issue which is the legality of
of designating the water trust
board as the successor to the
southwest New Mexico water study
group.
That that action by the
legislature.
Isn't very serious consequences
for the future of that these
these alternatives.
The federal law requires that
there be a successor to the
southwestern Mexico water study
group the key word and that is
southwest New Mexico water study
group the water trust board is
not a southwest New Mexico water
study group in any way or form
there is a true successor which
is the cap initially which
succeeded the hill San Francisco
Commission which actually
consulted on the projects that
are taking place thank you.
Thank you next we have need a
hand.
Good afternoon madam chair can
you hear me yes go ahead.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee thank
you for the opportunity to
comment on H. B. two hundred my
name is Anita hand and I'm a
commissioner in catching County
the purpose of the Arizona water
settlement act was to provide
additional water from the
central Arizona project to
remedy the unfair adjudication
of the heel and San Francisco
rivers of which four thousand
acre feet of water is dedicated
to catching County catching
County passed a resolution in
opposition to this bill at our
February eleventh commission
meeting.
Catching County has a vested
interest in the water and funds
allocated and we have the
responsibility to ensure that
both are utilized to their full
potential H. B. two hundred
removes representation of duly
elected local officials and
takes counties out of the
decision making process for
these reasons and those
previously stated catching
County opposes this bill and ask
Miss committee take into
consideration the authority
under local government and vote
now thank you.
Thank you next we at Karen
calling.
It's it's is it like to make a
comment we've given you
permission to speak but you need
to onion here and.
Sorry it is not before the
committee.
And this is this health I think
that is the reason I I could
reiterate within said before but
all those the correct
and we are that makes sense the
committee vote no one is that
thank you for.
Next we have Michelle frost
Maynard.
Thank you madam vice chairman
and members of the committee my
name is Michelle Maynard and I'm
speaking on behalf of New Mexico
cattle growers in New Mexico
workforce we stand opposed to
half bill two hundred house bill
two hundred transfers decision
making from locally elected
officials that if the US state
entities with no representation
from the southwest for quote.
For County thank you for the
plate additional burdens on the
rural community by having to
meet the criteria and policies
of the water we feel that it
should remain at the local level
for these reasons and reasons
previously state stated we stand
opposed to house bill two
hundred and thank you for your
consideration.
Next we have Billy Billings.
You madam chair can you hear me.
Yes go ahead hello.
Okay thank you I'm buildings I'm
a Grant County.
Sorry.
And judgment you start his time
over please of course you sorry
I'm grant I'm Gerald billing
some of Grant County
commissioner I was elected by
the Grant County commissioner is
to represent Grant County on the
New Mexico captaincy and I was
in January of this year
elected to serve as chair of the
New Mexico cap into the
The New Mexico captain V. has
just this.
Your staff a new priorities and
that is to work with the
Interstate Stream Commission to
amplify that implement local
water utilization projects in
the southwest planning region of
New Mexico which has been
mentioned as grant Luna Hidalgo
and catching counties which have
to.
Reiterate have no representation
on the water transport yes are
worried that the water trust
board
Is not only not the legal
successor to the state city
water group but is a bureaucracy
that is difficult to navigate
especially for the small
entities are counties and
municipalities that make up the
New Mexico cap into the.
And I do want to point out that
the New Mexico captain eighty is
made up of government
subdivisions counties
municipalities offer more for
county area so well what.
Thank you.
We are now going to focus lane
in in support of house bill two
hundred so if you'd like to make
a comment in support of this
legislation please raise your
hand now you'll have the same
one minute with the timer and
we'll call you when they went.
we'll start with again fuscus.
Our good morning or good
afternoon madam chair members of
the committee my name is get
baskets I'm a city council here
in Las Cruces New Mexico and
also the founder of the agency
that they are conservation
project which takes you
underserved youth out to the
healing every year I can
confidently say that the Sheila
is a refuge for southern New
Mexicans in fact it's one of the
crown jewels of New Mexico and
one of the last we for free
flowing rivers in the entire
southwest I have been watching
this project for the last six
years and I can confidently say
that the CAP entity has failed
the residents of southwest New
Mexico for six years this is
been a dysfunctional body
spending over sixteen million
dollars that could not been
spent on local water projects
that's been squandered the
majority of it sitting in the
bank accounts out of state
contractors and consultants
continuing to let the cap is to
control a W. as a funds to me is
simply irresponsible we should
protect wildlife recreation
cultural culture heritage and
spur economic development in a
sustainable way thank you so
much I'm in full support of HB
two hundred.
Next we have Allison Sylte wake.
Hello.
We can hear you okay great
thanks good afternoon madam
chair and members of the
committee I'm Allison civic
executive director of the helix
observation coalition based in
Silver City I'm here to speak in
support of H. B. two hundred
I actively participated in
Arizona water settlements Act
planning for more than fifteen
years and we now have an
opportunity to use the remaining
eighty million dollars in
funding.
In the New Mexico unit fund to
build secure water supplies for
everyone in southwestern New
Mexico while creating jobs and
ensuring our economic future
moving forward we need good
governance practice to guide
this process and we believe that
the water transport has the
technical expertise and the
policies and procedures in place
to advise the Interstate Stream
Commission on how to quickly and
equitably distribute funds to
eligible projects in southwest
New Mexico such as municipal and
agricultural conservation water
infrastructure improvements
water re use in watershed
restoration thank you very much.
Next we have Donna Stevens.
Good afternoon madam vice chair
members of the committee my name
is Donna Stevens and I'm the
executive director of the
upazila watershed alliance
watershed protection nonprofit
based in the cliff you avail in
Silver City I am speaking on
behalf of our approximately
three hundred members today.
Last week in the house and
committee hearing Representative
McQueen jokingly renamed house
bill two hundred as the enough
is enough bill.
After fifteen years and fifteen
million dollars wasted that's
exactly how we feel about the
process.
There are many we were the water
projects that could and should
be funded with the eighty
million dollars remaining in the
New Mexico unit funds we stand
in full support of H. B. two
hundred thank you.
Thank you next we have Greg
Peters.
I'm sure members of the
committee my name is Greg Peters
signed the public lands wildlife
advocate for conservation voters
New Mexico your stand in strong
support of HB two hundred.
Local communities and
conservation groups fought for
many years to get approval for
community based alternatives
that would provide a sustainable
water supply to the region
without diverting here with last
free flowing rivers in southwest
last remark was ensuring the
decisions about the NM unit from
dollars would be made in the
venue that's more responsive to
community needs to be two
hundred does this by designating
the water transport is the
entity to revise the icy unit
from each.
What are just for the impartial
body equipped with the necessary
expertise and good government
governments infrastructure to
equity fund local projects this
bill plus eighty million dollars
in southwest New Mexico will
achieving fairness and funding
decisions create local jobs
protect and restore limited
water supply getting one New
Mexicans outdoors stop the waste
of resources this bill makes
clear the field he with the
version is not going to happen
that frees up money to be spent
on critical water projects for
local communities speaker to
Pasco thank you.
Next we have Steve Harris.
Thank you madam chair I'm Steve
Harris director of the New
Mexico river outfitters
association in a long time
supporter protection for free
flowing a lot.
On behalf of New Mexico river
outfitters associations three
hundred outdoor recreation job
holders.
And nearly thirty thousand
annual river trip yes we're
proud to support house bill two
hundred and its suite of locally
generated and so far neglected
and underfunded drinking water
water conservation water re use
your gaze shin and watershed
protection measures.
I'll also open the observation
that I think I S. C. as well as
the local community should
welcome a more professional
partner in addressing real water
supply solutions thank you.
Next we have Oscar Simpson.
Oscar we have given you
permission to speak but you do
need to under yourself on your
end.
Thank you.
My name is Oscar Simpson
representing New Mexico
sportsmen and Rio Grande
indivisible we support H. B. two
hundred The New Mexico captaincy
spent several years trying to
figure out the feasibility of
diverting the water which they
couldn't and they wasted
millions of dollars.
We think the New Mexico
Watercrest board would be a
fireable situation to resolve
these issues and support and
supply drinking water for the
local community thank you very
much.
Thank you next we have Frances
Gonzalez.
Good afternoon
Good afternoon madam vice chair
committee members I'm on one
streams Apache ceded to check
out a lot of the progressive
caucus district twenty eight
coordinator for we take our
democracy on H. B. H. B. two
hundred directly affects Grant
County the mining district me my
family friends
as I support this bill because
accounts are currently and have
the we're directly need
assistance for their
infrastructure at a recent
meeting of the NM tap into the
committee still has not funded
there heard the water issue
water provided by the local
copper mine used temporary for
the town early once the money
stops so water the town will be
greatly affected the Powderly
needs help now on their visa
assistance to maintain and get
the treatment plant up to date
please make sure to vote passed
and thank you to the sponsors
and co sponsors as our our.
Some house district twenty
twenty nine they are poles this
so please motor do passed thank
you.
Next.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is can't Salazar I'm a lifelong
resident of New Mexico and and a
founding board member of and
show a spandex enjoying camping
hunting and the outdoors we
stand in strong support of house
bill two hundred.
For two to three reasons I
because everybody's been
mentioned all these things
already but water is precious
now in a time of drought and we
need to secure our critical
water supplies at this time with
with projects that are on the
ground the waste of funds that
are going on in the last six
years the sixty million dollars
lost is a shaming should have
been put to good use this will
also this bill also will create
jobs in our area And and I urge
your support for this bill thank
you.
We have a crystal Cairo's.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee we
appreciate the opportunity to be
heard.
Shy number ten.
To my we trolled she does see
had and that.
My name is Joe signs I'm of
course spring's Apache
descendant I'm also council
member for the chair cow Apache
nation I'm also an owner
operator will force outfitters
I am here today to speak on
behalf of the Jericho of
patch nation regarding our
provisional territory.
As the original water protectors
of this country the nation
strongly the chair called Apache
nation strongly urges you to
vote yes on H. B. two hundred
today to designate the water
trust board as the successor to
the southwest New Mexico water
study group.
And prohibit the expenditure of
unite of unit funds for any
healer river diversion project
U. K..
Thank you.
We next have Amigos bravos or
someone signed up as a cause
problems.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is chose to pay I'm I'm the
executive director of Amigos
problems were statewide water
conservation organization now in
our thirty third year
like many others across the
state we watched in dismay as
the capita is spent millions of
dollars on useless and.
I'm going schemes for healer
diversion that we're never going
to come to fruition we do think
that this move to.
Divert if you will the water
money to the water trust board
is going to be good governance
and appropriate we supported do
pass on house bill two hundred
thank you.
Next we have my us flowered tea.
Yes good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee I my
aching fire TV are wild New
Mexico organizer with the Sierra
Club Rio Grande chapter
representing over thirty five
thousand members throughout the
state and we fully support H. B.
two hundred this bill ensures
that a qualified unbiased and a
burst water trust board
identifies and recommends water
projects to the Interstate
Stream Commission equitable
equitable creates jobs and
benefits communities and the
environment in southwest Mexico
for too long the New Mexico
captain Energy has ignored
considerations for much needed
water infrastructure projects
and this bill ensures that
eighty million eighty million
unspent federal dollars are no
longer we stayed so we think the
sponsors for this bill and thank
you for the opportunity to
speak.
Next we have Carol and food
chili.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Carolyn through golly a long
time resident of the Silver City
area and I stand in strong
support of HB two hundred when
deciding your vote on this bill
please keep in mind that we are
now living in addition a new
time a time when human caused
climate change is altering our
planet the science is clear and
in it indicates a hotter drier
southwestern United States and
in the long run will not be a
benefit to anyone in light of
this we must wisely protect and
distribute our water
appropriately and justly so that
the greatest number of people
will have access to this water
and will benefit from a secure
water supply your vote in favor
of HB two hundred will enable
the greatest number of New
Mexicans will have a chance for
a self reliant Water future
thank you.
The next three have Garrett
David Clawson.
Good afternoon madam chair
members committee care about a
cost and from New Mexico wild
I have been asked to read an
official statement from the Fort
Sill Apache tribe.
The Fort Sill Apache tribe
supports H. B. two hundred
person to to preserve
significant cultural historical
sites of their cheer Carl your
call Warm Springs Apache and
substratum.
Actually the tribe wants to note
that the water trust board has
multiple tribal representatives
well the cap entity does not
thank you very much.
Next we have someone on an anti.
Yes thank you madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Andy Payne I strongly support
H. B. two hundred I live in so
we're sitting at watch the
captaincy closely since it was
first established and have
personally attended many of the
meeting.
They have demonstrated
consistently they are not
competent to manage public money
is spent fifty million dollars
on the narrowly focused project
to divert the river.
Absolutely nothing to show for
it with these appalling results
the captain of the should not be
allowed to become the successor
group with the authority to
manage the eighty million
dollars that are left years our
walk settlement act.
In contrast to water trust board
has brought representation
experience and expertise to
distribute funds to worthy water
projects please pass each B. two
hundred thank you.
Next we have done Robert.
Good afternoon committee members
for the record this is Dan Roper
with trout unlimited and I just
want to make a couple brief up
points on behalf of our members
of the first is just our support
for the healer river when I talk
to our members whether they're
in Albuquerque or towels or in
the four county region of
southwest New Mexico they all
share really do respect I would
say a reverence for the healer
region and at the heart of that
is is a free flowing in the
river and east fork in the
middle fork and a west fork and
all the tributary streams that
really the heart of this place.
What I think makes this a good
bill however is the water
transport I think it be hard to
find a better entity in New
Mexico to advise I just see on
water projects like this it's a
board with diverse perspectives
it is the experiencing capacity
to take on this task and it's a
trusted entity on both sides of
the aisle thank you.
Next we have done it while it
Ortiz.
Thank you chair committee
members can you hear me.
Yes we can go ahead and begin
your.
My name is Janet wallet or tease
a retired professor from western
New Mexico university please go
to do passed on house bill two
hundred commissioner Harry
Browne all the others speakers
has brought up excellent points
I have lived in the southwest
for over thirty years and have
raised my family here over the
last ten plus years I've
attended countless meetings and
debates fruitless debates and in
the I. S. C. and the New Mexico
pap Energy in the discussion of
a W. a state funding.
There are diverse community
projects that are shovel ready
to provide jobs economic
development precious water to
our four county area the water
trust board is most competent
diverse and experienced
government agency that will be
able to objectively evaluate
community water projects and
offer their recommendations to
the reform die Essie for the
common good of thousands in the
southwest The New Mexico cap is
not a state is not is a very
narrow stakeholder group and we
need help from the legislature
to move forward thank you so
much.
Next we have liana because the.
Can you hear me.
Yes.
Thank you I'm Mr chairman of the
committee my name is Lee Annika
studio I the deputy director
with conservation era with cover
I stand support strong support
the bill for all the reasons
previously stated thank you.
Thank you next we have Britney
Fallon.
Good afternoon this is Britney
Fallon policy director with New
Mexico wild given the economic
crisis and climate crisis it's
really important for us to get
this money out to communicate
communities fast to build
critical water infrastructure
which includes the agricultural
sector and this will also create
jobs in rural counties but to do
that we need the professional
expert competent water trust
board to make recommendations
without risk of conflict of
interest and to the benefit of
all four counties not just a few
interests I also want to note
that several terms of water
trust board members are up in
New Mexico wild as well as other
organizations are advocating
with the governor's office to
appoint Healy region
representatives to that and to
teach should this bill pass
thank you very much.
Next we have Deborah damac.
Good afternoon I am Deborah mac
I'm a member of the bill be
whitewater club an organization
of recreational boaters the
river is a treasure in a
valuable resource to southern
New Mexico for the wildlife
wildlife depended on the river
as a recreational resource for
boaters fishermen and families
simply looking to enjoy the
outdoors and for the people of
Southern New Mexico for home the
rate the healer river and its
surroundings have deep cultural
significance I fully support HB
two hundred and I just this
committee for two passed thank
you.
Thank you we have Steffi wise
bird.
Hello
representatives and madam vice
chair I am the board member for
three fifty New Mexico and our
rural advocacy group we're in
organization addressing climate
change New Mexico is the most
water vulnerable state in the
nation and so we support the
local residents and long time
New Mexico river guides and
experts like Steve Harris who
really know the land and water
very well and when they tell us
there are much better ways to
spend the eighty million dollars
and to keep the healer river
flowing we support them so we
hope that you vote yes and do
passed to aids bill two hundred
thank you very much.
Thank you next we have Judy
COVID.
I can afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee and
Judy Calman I'm The New Mexico
policy director for the Audubon
society I'll be very brief and
just say that the healer region
is extremely important to birds
and also to R. thirteen thousand
members in New Mexico HB two
hundred will help insure that
scarce water stays in the river
and that this decisions about it
are made wisely by the best
available science and my experts
we hope you'll pass it and thank
you.
Thank you next we have Stewart
what's.
Still if you're interested in
making a public comment we've
given you permission are into we
do need to to unmute sorry.
You madam chair and committee
members my name is Stuart what's
a longtime citizen in New Mexico
live here in Albuquerque New
Mexico and retired professor
your tend to go I support house
bill two hundred I want to leave
what money is available to those
who specialize in water projects
leave leave the expertise to the
water for transport and I scored
the past speakers and I hope
that you all will support house
bill two hundred thank you very
much madam chair.
Thank you next we have someone
signed in as other landed
progressive caucus please
introduce yourself by name when
you get started.
Thank you madam vice chair my
name is Cheryl Harris and I am
the chair of the Adelante
progressive caucus of the
Democratic Party of New Mexico
the views size of state today
are the caucuses views not that
of the Democratic Party and they
are my own personal views I'd
like to start with the really
quick story in nineteen seventy
my husband and I took our one
year old son on his first
camping trip and we chose to go
down to the healer from
Albuquerque where I was born and
raised we spent over a week and
the healer hiking and again said
it was the crown jewel of New
Mexico I couldn't agree with him
more that week's vacation was
the most and chanting of my life
and I thought this is the most
beautiful place in New Mexico we
fully support the bill house
bill two hundred and we feel
that the water trust board is
the best manager thank you.
Thank you next we have norm
down.
Thank you madam chairman my name
is norm gone.
I'm a retired licensed water and
wastewater engineer.
The New Mexico unit of the
central Arizona project has
never been feasible.
Countless failed alternatives
evaluated achieved public cost.
Demonstrate the absence of
feasibility to develop these
federal water rights.
Federal water rights.
Surely proposed diversion
concepts of failed despite
overwhelming bias in favor of a
diversion project.
Enough is enough.
Many communities in southwestern
Mexico need help with our public
water systems.
Please director manning eighty
million be expended to help
communities build real feasible
projects please go to do past
for H. B. two hundred.
Thank you.
Thank you next we have right.
Good afternoon madam chair and
committee members I stand in
full support of HB two hundred
as a resident of Luna County and
damning I've seen the need to
continue.
To upgrade our old local
neighborhoods who have been
neglected for quite some time
due to the fact that there were
there was never any real plan
when they were working towards a
diversion so at the time is now
to go ahead and do these old
neighborhoods there's who
story issues there's water
issues L. dot hill Dogo county
currently is awaiting a water
treatment plant for god's sake
who and and R. good deals like
being we are all being held
hostage because there's no real
plan so you know having the the
water trust board take over I
feel bill fully confident that
they're going to do the right
thing with the eighty million
dollars and start
allowing the budget to go to
local communities and not just
one you know of project that's
going to help a few individuals
in the burden valley so please
vote
for House Bill two hundred do
passed thank you and next we
have Leo Burnett.
Good afternoon madam chair and
committee members my name is
Leah Barnett I serve as the
greater you are campaigner for
WildEarth guardians and we stand
in support of house bill two
hundred for all the previous
stated reasons thanks so much
thank you I'm I'm the last time
they seized Representative
machte aber I believe I've heard
from you but if there's someone
else that that name that wanted
to make a comment go ahead.
No I've already spoken but thank
you for asking appreciate that.
Representative McQueen anything
you like to offer to the
committee before we go for
questions.
Thank you madam chair I did want
to touch on a couple comments
that were made of Mr of Domenici
said that the federal law
require requires us to consult
with a southwest water study
group
I will be clear the federal law
doesn't doesn't say any
southwest lower case southwest
group this is the upper case
southwest water planning now
the.
The southwest water study group.
That's an entity or it wasn't
entity it's long since the fall.
It doesn't exist anymore there's
going to be a successor there's
not there's no.
Guidance on how that successors
me.
The water trust board is very
appropriate successor and then
beyond that.
Money is there are comments
about keeping the decision
making local.
Well the decision maker under
federal law and under this bill
is there State Street Commission
it's not this group whoever it
is it's the I. S. C. and I C.
will consult with a group and if
we use a lot of trust for the
has abundant
Expertise all the local
governmental units will be able
to propose their projects to the
water transport so they'll be
plenty of local and but and
there is also a common I believe
us from that catching County
commissioner about the size of
the projects
I'm my understanding is the
water trust board currently has
projects ranging from a hundred
fifty thousand to five million
dollars and you know expense it
gives you a sense of the scope
if there are smaller projects
you know I'm sympathetic to that
and I certainly think we can
work with the water transport to
make sure that they are they
have a process that's
appropriate for this community
because keep in mind this eighty
million dollars is for the
southwest region it's for the
four counties it doesn't get
spread out throughout the state
or anything like that it stays
in this region.
And we want to find a way to
best invested in that reason so
in that region so that's
certainly something we can work
on thank you madam chair.
Thank you we'll go to the
committee now I see first of
their hand up is speaker Brian
Egolf.
Thank you madam chair can anyone
hear me.
Yes we can go ahead okay great I
want to.
Chairman between for bringing
this bill I.
I agree it is long overdue I
want to.
Want to mention that to star my
comments that I've been involved
or around or aware of.
This issue in a cabin in the.
And the possible diversion here
for many years
Primarily through my work as a
private lawyer one of the
leaders from norm gone with my
client when we.
We have to do Interstate Stream
Commission under the Martinez
administration for.
Violating the open meetings act
and how they were.
I decided to spend some of the
money that we're talking about
today on engineers and contract
in violation of the act.
And so I I thought I'd mention
that.
I I have been a private lawyer
in this specific matter in the
past the my representation is
over it has been for.
I can timely
I wanted to make a couple points
in impairment claim has been
actually just made a couple of
them about it maybe might bear.
To the committee budget just to
reiterate that under the federal
law in under the state law
passed the lines with the
federal law the settlement act
state what kind of our.
Correct the decider this money
is spent is the Interstate
Stream Commission.
The joint powers agreement
between the Education Commission
and pap entity.
Hearing indicating that that did
not.
I have the force of law.
It's always subject to revision
or termination of the decider
under the federal law is the
Interstate Stream Commission and
build a change that.
The.
The past several years and we
heard this in the comments from
the public several years fifteen
million after million after
million after million.
Dollar spent on consultants and
engineers and attorneys.
After the Mirage.
And memorize Madam chair
representative claim is.
A a false notion that somehow
the state of New Mexico.
Under the Arizona water
settlement act was going to be
able to get its hands on.
Somewhere in the neighborhood of
the fifteen thousand acre feet
of water from the river pretty
Terry the Colorado.
Revert.
And
that notion is been fall from
the very beginning because.
Mr Chairman claim is pointed
out.
If.
I
had been feasible.
Every drop that we would have
taken out of the river and put
to use in New Mexico one we
would have to pay.
Money Senator project to
compensate them for use that
water we would have we would had
you beginning to actual
consideration to the you are
Indian Arizona to make sure that
our use did not have a
detrimental impact on their
ability to walk the river.
Three listed that we would never
be able to own the water.
It was in the bill we have the
ability potential for.
Clear that a given version was
not feasible.
we stopped.
Austin said.
Gonna be expensive.
This is going to be having a
result in no addition to our
state water rights portfolio
going forward.
That we were the first.
Water user can be cut off and
has shortages in the idea that
there would be water every year
was I think I've absolute pipe
dream and it was.
It was depressing it was.
Rating to be.
In depositions in the case that
I referenced before five years
ago.
The documents that were saying
this project is impossible.
The ability to being ignored
and.
Preceding.
Afif Mirage that we had fifty
thousand acre feet of water yes
there for the taking.
And we call this bill you know
the enough is enough bill.
Main point is that a great
nickname this legislation
because we have an opportunity
to stop.
We need money.
On a Mirage and instead put the
money to use the routing real
people.
In real communities right away.
Eighty million dollars spread
across the four counties in
southwest New Mexico will go a
long way.
To help improve the data project
help improve the municipal water
system in Silver City.
To help farmers.
Through the efficiency of their
irrigation equipment to create.
I think you have benefits that
are environmental and economic.
And
that alone is a great reason to
support the bill but we also
knew we heard from the public.
this idea that the CAP entity
the central Arizona project
introduce it in New Mexico.
is.
Either decider or.
All but also the idea if they
have any interest in pursuing
projects.
other than that moraju diversion
I the even if support.
I don't think from the COVID to
her today I don't think at the
local governments are passing
and I certainly don't think from
the.
Five year track record of the
captivity if they can point to
anything to give anyone
confidence.
If they will proceed with gusto
with all deliberate Hey to.
To project you need for counties
other than trying to find some
way to delay dragging it out
pray for a new administration.
Who would somehow try to attempt
to divert the liver.
And madam chair in that is what
I fear is the is the plan is
that.
If it happens he can obfuscate
and delay long enough.
they may have a new governor
that would want to pursue some
diversionary projects on the
left.
In the longer we delay in
getting the money spent helping
people.
The.
That you know unfortunate
potentiality in the future.
so I think this is the bill is
long overdue that's not a
comment about why a why we
didn't have it before I'm is
required here I want to suggest
also
Madam chair of the they can the
committee considered amendment
and I think.
chairman between would have
language for how to do this.
But I certainly think that.
amending here.
That.
To make it clear that the unit
frontier.
Money.
Not only that it not be used in
it be prevented from going
toward a diversion project which
is in the bill in its current
form.
But if we make it clear that.
Uniformed money not go to the
tap into the.
Any further any longer.
They've had their sixteen
million dollars to spend.
Have you heard from the public
comment we have nothing to show
for it.
And if we're not pursuing a
diversion he'll which is a good
thing.
I I struggle to see why we
should be continuing to.
I have cap in any fund.
Yeah I would say why we should
unit fund your fun money.
Go toward the cap entity I don't
know madam chair and chairman
between if you've got.
I think gestione on an amendment
we could do.
All right now if you do I'd be
happy to consider it.
But I I I certainly think that
this is the.
Great opportunity.
Do you have a real and immediate
help to the people in southwest
New Mexico with their water
needs right away I think we
should do everything we can to
get this bill to the governor's
office as quickly as possible.
Chair representative we do you
have a suggestion or reject
talked about what we might do
with regard to that amendment.
Mentors health it's been
suggested that in addition to
clarifying that the money will
be spent on the New Mexico unit
that we just language so also
prevented from going to the the
CAP entity us so they don't.
Continue to.
seek funding from the AC.
It is in discussing that whether
that was needed or appropriate
it was the issue was raised that
we haven't.
Discuss it with the Senate
sponsors of this bill and I
would like the opportunity to do
that so perhaps we could hold
off on doing that and consider
that
I think it's over to the Senate
side.
Okay.
You madam chair that that's all
I have I appreciate appreciate
the community attention thank
you.
Thank you next we have
Representative Eli madam chair I
was looking to see if there was
any further discussion if
there's not all moving to pass.
I just thought handle up if
you'd like we can take that
motion and then continue
discussion please thank you
madam chair you Representative
Nibert.
Thank you madam chair just a
couple questions on this.
If I heard the
The message of the people who
spoke in favor it sounds like
the idea is to.
She the water in the river yeah
and to not allow the versions
for beneficial use in New Mexico
and I was wondering is there
are.
Any ability.
For the state of New Mexico.
To monetize the value of that
water with the state of Arizona
warns that the debt issue.
Madam chair representative.
Madam chair representative I
heard it.
I think that was an idea at one
point you know the idea.
But.
The idea of getting Arizona to
pay us.
Not to pay them to use the water
in the idea is is fraught with.
Logical fallacies including
that.
Presumably Arizona's not stupid.
And they're not gonna pay us
until we can actually divert the
water which we can't is we're
not gonna spend a hundred
million or one estimate was a
billion dollars to build a
diversion structure and the
other is that every time we use
the water we actually have to
pay them.
The this exchange costs and it
just.
I think there were you know the
public gold at the end of the
rainbow and that was one way it
was going on because the that
was one source of gold and it's
just I think it's illusory.
Well the.
Chair representative of the idea
of that we have the.
You so Weigle ability to tie.
What that term fourteen thousand
acre feet of water.
That's.
Rivers and then put it to our
some beneficial use New Mexico
that that should have some value
even though we have we may have
to pay Arizona to do that I
think there is on a has proven
themselves
as a state that is always
looking for sources of water and
and willing to face some fairly
significant sums for that water
and not only that we would be
taking that water off the board
so to speak our should have some
value to a statewide carers are
yeah and so
I just your list building they
are to the.
Our debate and to the statements
of people that we're advocating
for dance the this the idea that
forty thousand acre feet of
water has as in my by some value
and that the state of Arizona
all ought to be willing to to I
yes on ongoing basis for
keeping that water in that river
system because I can guarantee
you.
By the time it gets of.
Very far in the Arizona.
that water is is all consuming
wait wait you're on interstate
ten between Tucson and Phoenix
are you all I did drop of water
in the river.
And so that water is being
utilized by by people in Arizona
and I would think that this so
this bout Water would have some
some value to them on all will
all going basically and there's
nothing in this bill the are you
yes even allows for for those
negotiations to take place.
R. I just I.
Water being a limiting factor
particularly and in the great
southwest is.
Something that the can generally
be models are so that that's the
only question mark I have
brought chair representative
thank you for your answer.
Thank you.
I don't see any further
discussion we do have a motion a
depressed motion for
representative Ely.
Do we have a second
Also get.
The second from representative
Armstrong.
There any further discussion on
this bill.
Okay Madam.
Click may you please call the
roll.
Local.
Yes.
Armstrong yes.
Representative Cook.
Representative Cook.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Representative McQueen yes what.
Yes.
No.
Representative rain L..
Representative Townsend.
Thank.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Yes.
Yes three now.
Thank you by a vote of eight to
three you have a do pass on
house bill two hundred.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee and
everyone from the public who
participated today.
Representative Eli you still
have your hand up was there
something you want to say on
this.
No.
I'm sure now sorry about that
thank you Representative McQueen
and so many members of our
public weighing in.
With that next on our agenda we
have house bill thirty eight.
I believe that's Representative
Chandler to present with us
today do we have this we already
have her.
In our panelists list
Representative Chandler you
ready and hospitality yes madam
chair I have some others with me
Representative Roybal Caballero
is my co sponsor in addition we
need Tracy McDaniel admitted as
well as parylene Massey I
believe there may be one other
person and they can help me
remember who that is Jeanne ham
and handwork.
Okay and Susan Ragan.
Okay we may need to review a
couple of those names or of
course madam chair Susan Ragan.
Jean Harn wick and with.
Need in and tearing in.
And Tracy McDaniel madam chair
I'm here Representative Chasey
waving at us thank you.
And we have Susan Ragan do we
have but three of Representative
road right yes I see here as
well it looks like we're ready
to get started representatives
if you like to do that thank you
very much madam chair this is
house bill thirty eight the paid
family and medical leave act and
if I may madam chair defer to my
colleague Representative or the
copier to lead and then we'll
have some other presenters if
that's alright and I'd like to
close in the presentation.
Thank you for laying it out for
us.
Thank Representative everybody
got my edit to get us started.
Your.
Here again my name is appearing
and I don't know how to make it
disappear.
We currently have a
representative here named on the
screen as our our lead analyst I
think it's still so if we get
her name right thank you.
Representative.
Thank you so I'm thank you madam
chair and thank you members of
the committee of brings back
good memories to be before the
Judiciary as many of you know I
serve my first maybe what six
seven years was Representative
belly sale and on and on madam
chair Chasey on this committee
for many years so I'm glad to be
here so madam chair and members
of the committee Representative
Chandler Representative set up
the line come before you today
to present house bill thirty
eight which establishes the
family and medical leave act and
creates the paid family and
medical leave trust fund is a
non reverting fund in state
treasury.
And madam chair and and
Representative I want to point
out that under the act that
we're proposing employees or
self employed individuals would
be eligible for up to twelve
weeks paid leave during any
twelve month period.
In the act also provides
compensation to individuals to
take up to twelve weeks leave to
bond with the child.
Excuse me and you new to the
family or leave related to a
serious health condition of the
employee or family member to
guaranteed continuing employment
after that leave.
And madam chair and members of
the committee family member is
defined very broadly to include
virtually any person whose close
association with the employee is
the equivalent of a family
relationship.
What I'd like to point out
briefly madam chair and and
Representative is a couple of
points and that is that.
I like the fact that the bill
has a delayed implementation.
Three years and this is in order
to give employees and employers
recovery time from the impact of
the COVID crisis as we all know
we've been navigating through
this comment right crisis and
we're all going to need in a
couple fronts trying to re route
so that's why we are covered.
Following many of our bills
relief and recovery because we
do need that recovery time and
that's so very important for our
discussions today and also madam
chair and
members of the committee I think
that it's also important to note
and I'm going to read from a
quote on that came from our
national government and it says
that fifty three million people
provide unpaid care to family
members and most do so while
keeping their full time jobs yet
the vast majority madam chair
don't have access to paid family
and medical leave.
So we need to be able to support
our care giving and our care
givers and that's why we feel
very strongly about the time is
now.
The time is urgent to have paid
family and medical leave act.
And we hope that
We can answer all of the
questions is the I know you will
have and I look forward to
entertaining those questions and
I'll go ahead and turn it back
to Representative what I'm I'm
sorry I think you mentioned that
we were going to go ahead and
call upon our own expert
witnesses to vote with a few
words and I'll go ahead and ask
Jean
At least we always mess up
everybody's names and not
intentionally but I forgive me
it's Eugene hammer.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Jane
hammered I'm in A. A. R. P. New
Mexico volunteer advocate thank
you for the op or too needy to
testify today on behalf of the
A. R. P. New Mexico.
As you may know A. A. R. P. is
the largest nonprofit
nonpartisan organization
representing the interests of
them Americans age fifty and
older and their families key
priorities for our organization
this year include helping
support New Mexico's working
family caregivers we strongly
support H. B. thirty eight the
paid family and medical leave
act the COVID nineteen pandemic
has shone the spotlight on the
need for New Mexico's workers to
take time away from work because
of their family care giving
responsibilities or their own
health care needs it is
imperative for New Mexicans to
have the ability to care for
themselves and their families.
Please note that a a RP New
Mexico has been part of a broad
based coalition that has been
working on this issue for the
past several years seeking to
ensure that we get it right for
New Mexico HB thirty eights
delayed implementation timeline
and amortization of cost show
that our coalition has worked to
address the concerns of New
Mexico workforce solutions and
the business community we
encourage you to join us in
supporting this important
legislation thank you.
Thank you next madam chair I
will call on Susan Regan.
Representative madam chair
committee members I want to
thank you for taking the time to
hear us I'm gonna comments by
trade I work at UNM group
business and economic research
in the last couple years I have
worked with the paid family
medical leave act collision to
find a model that demonstrates
the collection of premiums as
outlined in the bill that is
five tens of wages by the
employee importance of wages by
the employer a will create a
trust fund to pay out claims
that would be solvent annually
we included in our model the
thirty six million dollar start
up investment that would be paid
back five years over five years
old we included in the bill and
on going administration costs
for New Mexico department
workforce solution of five
billion dollars we looked at
yearly increases of population
employment wages claims and
inflation
we also added that delayed
implementation and we've proved
show and that this fund set up
would be solvent over time
something that I was very
pleased with was to talk to the
bill writers and say yes we
should put in there a unit at
New Mexico Department workforce
solutions that would follow the
fund you're here to make sure
that it is solid.
And then finally as an economist
I just want to New I've reviewed
poverty data over my entire
career in this bill is one that
truly addresses multiple areas
that can move the needle on
poverty in New Mexico first by
providing parents paid time to
spend with newborns helping
provide better child development
outcomes the most critical time
in a child's life and second but
providing workers monetary
support
family medical situation and
allowing them to have better
employment ten year over time
both engines instances are
better social outcomes that lead
to better economic outcomes
madam chair thank you for your
time and I'm available to answer
any questions thank you.
Thank you and thank you madam
chair New Mexico called upon
Carolyn Massey.
Thank you.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee
Representative Chandler and
Representative Representative I
could be at a
hi my name is Carolyn Massey and
executive director for the
southwest women's Law Center and
we're here today to answer any
questions that you may have I do
one then at one thing one major
thing which is that we have the
law center and the paid family
medical leave coalition which is
made up of twenty seven
different organizations we have
met with different chambers of
commerce is to ask for input and
for their support on our bill
and one of the and comments that
we have received from them is
that they like the
considerations that we have made
for New Mexico businesses and
small businesses.
We do understand that difficult
position because of the COVID
nineteen environment this past
year but we have as miss Reagan
to set included a delayed
implementation and this bill so
we have also included
contributions from the employers
and the employees of so and the
reason for that is so that the
paid family medical leave trust
fund which this bill creates or
will create would remain solvent
so thank you madam chair I'm
here for questions if there are
any thank you.
Thank you.
You madam chair one final expert
witnesses Tracy McDaniel.
Representative madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Tracy McDaniel I'm a policy
advocate with southwest women's
Law Center before coming to the
center I had I've worked since
two thousand one in maternal and
child health network and
internet partner violence sexual
violence with victims of those
forms of violence also as a
birth doula and most recently I
spent five years leading a
community based collective
impact coalition focused on
improving well being for young
children and their families The
New Mexico in that role I spent
a great deal of time researching
population level data on child
health outcomes as well as
evidence based interventions to
improve those outcomes
When I looked at.
Million medical leave as a
health intervention it was just
remarkable you know it regular
checkups vaccinations on time
improved breastfeeding
initiation and duration improved
maternal well being decrease
reports of intimate partner
violence in the first year of
life decreased risk of child
abuse going into the second year
of life dad to take paid leave
time off to bond with their
children report feeling more
connected more bonded with their
child and also when the parents
returned there are more likely
to be more engaged and have
higher morale at work.
And so when I learned that there
was this effort to bring up a
family medically program to New
Mexico I just jump right at.
turn down the opportunity to to
take a lead role in that and
then through that.
Through this work in in the
eighteen months that I've been
working on this I've also
learned of the other kinds of
health outcomes the increased
there's a home usage among
elderly folks who have care
givers taking paid leave
quicker healing from surgeries
are serious health conditions
and then also that people are
more likely to seek treatment
early in the disease progression
which maybe means that they're
less likely to have to leave the
work force permanently on
disability be able to take care
of condition earlier on so paid
family medical leave creates an
infrastructure to help New
Mexicans insure economic
stability and support healthy
families and healthy workforce
so thank you for your
consideration thank you for your
time and I look forward to your
question.
And madam chair before I turn it
over I just want to say publicly
again thank you to all our
wonderful experts and of the
best massive broad coalition
that has worked tirelessly to
bring an end to improve on the
bill that we're presenting to
you today and it which
Representative Chandler will go
into detail on and I just want
to say that my involvement I
have been a human resource and
employee relations director as
part of my profession and I've
had the opportunity to oversee
many paid family medical medical
leave policies and programs
around the country in my working
employment in my professional
career and I will say that it is
one of the most respected most
are well utilized
not at all abuse benefits that
is afforded to employees across
the board and employers in all
of my work experience have
commended having such on
policies and programs available
to the employees because it has
led to happy workforce
productive workforce and
everyone benefiting ultimately
the families and our hard
working on.
Employees across the board so
thank you for the opportunity to
address you today and I'd like
to go ahead and turn it over to
Representative Christine
Chandler thank you madam chair.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you panelists for the
information that you provided to
the committee I just wanted to
share with you madam chair and
the rest of the committee and
the public why I am so
interested in why and why I
agreed to sponsor this bill a
couple of years ago was my first
bill in the legislature and I
was very excited for this reason
the structure I think is
innovative.
And it's it it is done in such a
way as to keep the costs of
ended individual employers and
individual employees down and I
say that because.
By requiring all employers to
participate we we are able to
keep the costs down with a very
small fees on both the employee
earnings and the and ploy
earnings and it's it has a
structure.
That really must be all must be
respected in order to be able to
maintain the actuarial for the
funds if that's the right
terminology but this is all
based on on information that
bureau put together and helped
us come up with a scheme that
would allow the fund to
support applications from
individuals who need to rely on
the program and I think that's
incredibly innovative way to do
it it does not put an excessive
burden madam chair on any one
employer so someone like me I'll
give you an example I never took
time off from work almost never
never took more than a week or
two I took vacation was never
sick but someone like need madam
chair would be contributing into
the program my employer would be
contributing into the program
and that helps support the needs
of other employers and other
employees who who who may need
more time off and I happened to
so that's kind of the structure
and I think it's it's it we
really must respect kind of how
it's all been constructed
because it's it's really each
piece is needed to make the plan
work so I just want to emphasize
that the other thing I want to
emphasize is I know employers
are feeling stressed right now
very stressed with the pandemic
and the economy being on stream
for the last year because of the
pandemic the couple things I
would like to point out of
course we have the delayed
implementation I don't think we
can stress that enough the other
thing is New Mexico the state of
New Mexico in this legislature
and this governor has stepped up
to support businesses to help
make their way and I also say of
course the federal government.
In the last two special sessions
I think we passed close to a
billion dollars in funding
packages with the aim of aiding
businesses in the state in
addition in this legislature I'm
anticipate we are just pass
speak very often I just passed
the two hundred million dollar
grant package that will help
support businesses
there are plans to infuse over
three hundred million dollars
into the unemployment trust fund
to help but businesses soften
the blow on businesses as that
trust fund will need additional
additional monies and I know
there are other bills presently
making their way through the
legislature in the Senate and
the house that will provide
additional funding support for
businesses so I don't think I
can
I think we just need to keep all
of those things in mind we are
supporting businesses and we are
recognizing with the delayed
implementation the idea that we
are easing easing we are
recognizing their concerns and
we are adjusting to those
concerns madam chair there is an
amendment and I don't know when
you would like me to talk about
that but I will do so at your
convenience.
Thank you Representative given
that some of the public me shift
or want to weigh in on what that
amendment is
I would like to hear it now do
we do we have a we have a motion
to move that for discussion.
Sure.
Thank you Representative Eli
representatives please tell us
about your amendment thank you
very much madam chair in the
amendment number is point two
one nine eight six six point one
and I guess I in a way this this
ammendment derives frankly from
Madam mostly from conversations
that I had with members of the
business community the chamber
and others and so on the first
page there is reference to the
right rail road labour Act and
exempting employees of the
railroads and frankly that's in
federal law but the unit you
possess Pacific asked that we
specifically include that
exemption in the bill and we we
did that
then on the next two pages
almost three to two and a half
pages up to page three.
that's frankly mostly what I
would consider cleanup language
most of that language derived
from conversations I had with
the A. T. and T. lobbyist and
they were very helpful actually
in providing.
Clarifying words and language
and clean up so we were very
happy to accept those those
suggested amendments also on
page three number of paragraph
thirty one this was a suggestion
of some of the attorneys who sit
who
recommended that we use terms
like reasonable instead of in
good faith so that change was
made and lastly madam chair on
page is page three going on to
page four.
There is a printer preemption
clause that was
Requested of us by the New
Mexico chamber of commerce we
work with them and went back and
forth with them on language but
this language on preemption
represents our combined to go
she Asians and what it
essentially says.
Preamps is localities
municipalities and counties from
enacting their own paid family
and medical leave act
legislation or ordinances or so
on we've you are this this
program as a statewide program
it really would not make sense
to have local programs such as
this madam chair and so that's
pretty much the content of the
amendment thank you thank you
I'm so we're going to go to our
public tuning in and joining us
on soon today just for folks
that may be in our committee for
the first time we're first going
to put up a poll and if you'd
like to weigh in you're welcome
to indicate your either support
or opposition for house bill
thirty eight I will put that
pull up in just a second after
that we will move to public
comment starting with opposition
and then moving to folks and
support but judgment you share
that with us now.
Thank you it looks like we have
about forty five people weighing
in today eighty percent of those
are in support of house bill
thirty eight about twenty
percent in opposition also we
are going now to public comment
will start with participants who
want to weigh in today in
opposition to this bill so again
if you are in opposition to HB
thirty eight as amended and
would like to speak you'll have
one minute we have a timer up
you will be
given permission to speak to
them platform you'll need to
unmute yourself and then at the
end of your minute you will be
muted again.
We ask people to be concise and
to try not to be repetitive as
we still have a long day in
front of us we're going to start
today with Ruth Porter.
I'm.
You madam chair members of the
committee I am report that.
I am the NATO two preschools and
small business owner
you know we are surviving in the
funding make and thank you for
For all the consideration of the
small business sector.
I believe that these deal is to
be thirty eight will be
apartment tour small businesses
especially ones that we have we
at hi at fifty or less
employees.
We love our one employees with
the budget from the would help
anyone during the enrollment so
when they have medical and
emergency but I think these
would be our.
Where are we going to be closed
a like for example if you page
for uses that they can they can
leave for any of the individual
related by blood don't actually
need the.
Association with the employee
what about you so also the
mystic from the thank you bye
enough family member nations.
Do you really like the fact I
want to commend to your matter
all who is going to do not go
home the employee and thank the
need to think at all the are the
best and closest to our school
open and thank you Mr.
The last thank you.
Diana so that'll is next.
If you'd like to make a comment
we've given you permission to
speak but you need to on me it
on your end.
Members of the committee and
madam chair this is Dennis a
bell and I'm and MPAJA intern
and I support house bill thirty
eight thank you.
Thank you so much
next we have Jack bent.
Thank you madam vice chair and
members of the committee I'm
checked that with the New Mexico
business coalition we represent
hundreds of businesses
throughout the state and
thousands of followers with due
respect to the sponsor and the
hard work I this is been put in
this bill
we oppose it because there's a
R. there's already a.
Hey sick leave by an employees
but employers and employers
don't want any sick people work
up plus there's already federal.
Medical leave act in this could
cause conflict we believe incur
costs even double compensation
for employee which just isn't
fair of and we think twelve
weeks I eighty four days is
excessive.
Of and lastly.
there's no appropriation was
service bills we respectfully
oppose thank you.
Thank you for waiting and next
we have Ashley Wagner.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Ashley
Wagner from the New Mexico
chamber of commerce I want to
start by thanking Representative
Chandler Giuliana coop and many
others are met with us over the
past year on this issue a couple
of areas that we think need to
be clarified in the bill are
regarding existing collective
bargaining agreements and
existing employer plans under
section thirteen we're concerned
this section does not adequately
protect the parties in the
collective bargaining agreements
I would result in automatic re
openers for collective
bargaining agreements across the
state.
We would also like to see
clarifying language in section
four G. regarding existing
employer programs many of our
members have programs that are
more generous than the benefits
outlined in the legislation and
require less of the contribution
from employees but those
benefits may be structured
differently we believe there
needs to be clarity in this
section so that we don't
incentivize players to scrap
their existing more generous
plans we believe there is a
compromise approach that the
chamber could support and we
hope we can get there on this
bill thank you.
Thank you next we have rob
black.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is rob black
and I'm the president CEO The
New Mexico chamber of commerce
at the state chamber we
developed a set of principles
for a statewide paid family
medical leave program that we
could support after sharing
these principles with
Representative Chandler we were
very pleased at any of our
concerns were incorporated in
the draft before you we think it
is really is a thoughtful bill
one of the principles that was
not fully included as the
program be a hundred percent
employee funded similar to
Connecticut's model well this is
certainly our preference at a
minimum would like to see a
program that exempt small
businesses from paying into the
program which both Washington
state and Oregon to Washington
exempt employers of fewer than
fifty employees in Oregon exempt
employers of less than twenty
five I've we discuss these
options with the bill's sponsor
we believe there is room for
compromise and path forward but
we have not been able to receive
information consideration of
bureau regarding ask for
actuarial analysis we'd like to
see that analysis as it relates
to reducing the budget eight or
ten weeks and how that affects
the the the program in the
actuarial as well as an increase
in perhaps to point six for the
employee contribution similar or
again.
Thank you your time at the lapse
next we have Sherman McCorkle.
Thank you I am sure Matt
McCorkle with the Sandia science
and technology part I've worked
in job creation for over forty
years in New Mexico and today
I'm speaking on behalf of the
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce.
Following one of the most
difficult years ever for small
business this legislation
represents one of the many bills
this session that adds new
mandates new regulations and new
costs on New Mexico job
creators.
Sherman are you done.
I'm sorry.
Is every just say this bill it
adds.
So much cost that we urge you to
exercise restraint we plead for
you to exercise restraint it
does require businesses to pay
twice once into the fund and
again in the testing operations
thank you thank you.
Next we have Jason Espinoza.
Madam chair members the
committee Jason Espinoza state
director with the national
federation of independent
business I'm going to
respectfully stand in opposition
and we do appreciate your that
Representative Chandler the
other sponsors for for
continuing conversation with the
business community however we do
remain concerned about the
impact specifically on small
businesses under the federal
family and medical leave act
only employers with more than
fifty employees qualify because
of the recognition of the
potential obstacles that a small
businessman counter with losing
an employee for a long period of
time unlike large corporations
which employs hundreds of
employees that can be
restructured cover agency duties
small businesses may not have
the same luxury because of that
small business may incur
additional financial costs are
recruiting selecting placing in
training temporary workers to
cover the duties really urge the
committee to consider including
a provision that would allow
small business to draw from the
paid family leave fund or other
state revenue source to assist
in covering this is additional
cost this will create a true
partnership between employees
employers and the state of New
Mexico to ensure that we're all
in this together thank you.
Thank you next we have Pat
block.
Okay good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee and
Sanchez I'm Pat block registered
lobbyist for the New Mexico
retail association are we do
appreciate the previous
amendments they are moving the
bill in the right direction we
still do have a couple of
concerns and ideally the more
this bill can align with the
federal FMLA the better it will
be for our members who have
outlets in multiple states then
you're not trying to decide you
know fifty plus different
systems across different states
we also are concerned with the
fairly expansive definition of
family member
and the couple of the changes
that would get us more in line
with the FMLA would not change
the intent of the bill in my
opinion so I don't have time to
describe those here today but I
will reach out to Representative
Chandler on Monday go over those
with her to see if there's any
opportunity to make some
adjustments between here on the
floor thank you for your time.
Thank you next we have through
the point I believe you've got
already Roose but if there's
someone else at that number you
haven't had a chance let us
know.
Why are the why and I'm sorry
you wanted to stay at I'm
hopeful as the be all thank you
I'm next we have Walter Bradley.
Thank you madam chair waiting
this water Bradley and I
represent very farmers of
America.
we are respectfully opposed the
legislation as it currently
stands first many of the reasons
of already been spoken to up to
the the main issues that we
would like to present is the
cost of the unemployment
insurance increases not just in
this one it's also in the.
The bill to make up the the
losses that hasn't happened
another major concern is that
with our businesses you we have
an employee that goes off on
family leave.
Are we end up having a far are
somebody to take their place
because we can afford to be
without that spot and one of the
employee comes back we have to
put them to work and then we
would have to dismiss the other
employee and now we're playing
more unemployment insurance
there's no answer for that that
we've seen in this bill we
respectfully are locked work
with the sponsor to make it
better built.
Thank you next I have a loop in
a modest but the names coming up
twice so whoever yeah they've
been about is that C..
Go ahead you've been of this.
Good afternoon.
yes you might have to to turn up
the volume on I'm listening so
that we can hear you.
Yes.
Okay.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is open about
just I'm vice president of the
New Mexico jocular Association
and the owner of the children's
garden child development centers
in Los crucis I appreciate the
sponsor being in this idea
forward I'm not disagreeing with
paid family leave.
I believe it is it is needed but
I don't agree with the
legislation being presented
today my Senators and talker
centers across the state receive
ninety percent of operating
budget from child care
assistance contracts currently
there's no money in the current
budget to increase contract
rates.
I don't know how my centers and
others will pay the employer
contributions to the fund one of
my Senators alone will have to
pay approximately twenty
thousand dollars into the fund
on an annual basis plus added
payroll expenses I simply don't
have twenty thousand dollars to
pay into the fund unless.
Early childhood education
department increases my contract
rates it's not a good time to
place additional financial costs
to New Mexico businesses that
are financially strained from
the COVID nineteen pandemic
thank you I'm I don't know if
someone else is signed in with
the same name we've been about
us but if there's someone else
signed in under the bed of us
here up next.
Okay and now we are going to go
to those with us participating
today and support of H. B.
thirty eight as amended I want
to clarify earlier was saying it
out loud as HB thirty eight been
a long week and then when I saw
the the timer screen go up I saw
that a on there remember that
this is coming to us amended so
HB thirty eight as amended
we are going to go to those that
want to speak in support at the
top of the list we have Jake of
the heat.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee I'm
Jake up the hill I am with New
Mexico voices for children and
we stand in support of the bill
we as a children's are based
advocacy organization have long
brought attention to the lack of
paid sick leave is just
something that needs to be
addressed it's particularly as
it pertains to child well being
know that
fathers and parents to take more
weeks off after the birth of a
child are more involved in their
infants Kerr kids whose families
have paid leave have higher
rates of immunizations and
participation well child check
ups and we also know that
there's disparities so workers
in low wage jobs which are over
represented New Mexico are less
likely to have access to paid
family medical leave so we
believe this is a a good long
term policy that would improve
the health of New Mexicans
particularly children and
address racial inequity so in
addition to all the the support
for businesses that have that
has already been moved through
we think this is a critical
piece of New Mexicos recovery
and with that we support the
bill thank you next we have John
live shuts.
Thank you madam chairwoman
members of the committee John
Lipschutz with The New Mexico
federation of labor AFL-CIO we
represent to add tens of
thousands of workers throughout
the state of New Mexico and
their families a number of which
are able to bargained for Peter
leave of some kind for their
families however we do believe
that copied Lee should be a
right and not a privilege just
to those who are able to bargain
for it and for that reason and
many others that have been
stated and will be stated we
stand in strong support of this
measure and thank the sponsors
for bringing it up.
Thank you next we have Janet
Williams.
Hi I'm Janet Williams president
of Santa Fe now Santa Fe
national organization for women
and we support HB thirty eight
families need the support and
it's crucial for the health and
well being of all of the New
Mexico families please vote yes
on HB twenty eight thirty eight
thank you thank you next we have
Jackie Cooper.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members my name is
Jackie Cooper I'm a volunteer
legislative advocacy chair for a
European New Mexico and today
I'm representing the two hundred
and forty eight thousand eight
R. P. members in New Mexico in
support of HB thirty eight
I'm a retired from a private
sector management and when I
looked at this bill I thought
it's a it's a good for business
bill that reduces turnover
increases employee productivity
thank you very much.
Next we have Richard Mason.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Dave Mason
of care the action committee of
the leader members the New
Mexico in twenty seventeen the
legal voters of the United
States join more than three
hundred forty organizations
representing a range of
demographic groups from more
than forty states to support
inclusive paid family and
medical leave policy interject
Eltern does that leave people
behind
signatories included advocacy
groups direct service
organizations and private sector
businesses we believe that the
H. B. thirty eight as amended is
consistent with that position so
we urge I do passed thank you
thank you next we have Erica
Davis Crump.
Hi madam chair members of the
committee happy black history
month an amazing job yesterday
on the floor
my name is Erica Davis current
in I am the co founder of the
New Mexico Black central
organizing committee and co
chair of the respective Mexico
women and families coalition as
a mommy of two to twenty majors
and the money to a special needs
baby.
who had to stand in the queue
for months and with my ability
age it was always really
imperative to be with my Littles
try to be there for them and
then also recognizing and
honoring the fact that New
Mexico has many
intergenerational homes meaning
Graham a great and see great
uncle all stay in one home and
many times first generation
college students are giving back
to the entire family paying for
apple thanks for co pays so this
would be so helpful in putting
the worker first in creating
morale and boost on Community
inputting New Mexico on the
forefront of something so
prepared it for families in this
inter sectional issue thank you
please support HB thirty eight.
Thank you so much we now have me
K. like a ghost.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members my name is
made Micaela Gaydos I'm a member
of the New Mexico working
families party I have always
wanted to be a parent and when I
got engaged I started saving up
all my paid time off as a small
business I work for an end is at
that time a small engineering
firm we did not qualify for
federal paid family medical
leave I was able to get up to
four weeks my daughter had
complications and I ended up
having an emergency C. section
after thirty two hours she was
wrapped up in bill court I was
rolled into the emergency room
crying I wasn't sure if my
daughter was going to survive
and I wasn't sure how I was
gonna recover when I needed
eight weeks I only had four
weeks I ask you to please bow in
support of HB thirty eight are
we need twelve weeks we are a
family centric state it is why I
moved back here to help my
family is part of our identity
and New Mexicans need paid
family leave lacked thank you
please go to support.
Thank you and next we have Carla
creating offered.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Carla
creating have for them the
policy associate for the center
for civic policy and we stand in
support of V. thirty eight this
legislation is important because
it is a worker and employer
centered economy recovery for
state that will help attract and
retain more workers to New
Mexico license likewise it
creates a pathway for low
workers low wage workers to have
access to paid leave which is a
self funding program this bill
addresses both short term and
long term events in workers
lives we thank the sponsors
especially Representative
Chandler and find that I get all
thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
Thank you next we have Marshall
Martinez.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Jim Marshall
Martinez and executive director
of the quality New Mexico paid
family medical leave as an LGBTQ
justice issue is a racial
justice issue and it is the
gender justice issue as LGBTQ
people we have been working for
liberation and justice for the
entirety of our movement and
that includes not just the legal
ability to have our families
recognize the actual ability for
us to choose when and how to
create our families we have not
achieved this basic equality to
form and shape our families if
we cannot afford the time off
necessary to create and care for
a healthy thriving family for
that reason we believe that paid
FMLA is a matter of continuing
the journey toward full equality
and full of iterations we urge
the committee support of this
legislation because LGBTQ New
Mexicans all New Mexicans
deserve access to policies that
truly allow us to care for our
families and allow our families
to thrive thank you.
Thank you next we have someone
on as fathers New Mexico and
make sure to please introduced
by name however speaking.
Yes hello madam chair thank you
very much and and
representatives of members of
the committee
I'm Johnny Wilson with fathers
New Mexico executive director
fathers New Mexico and fathers
New Mexico stands in support of
this bill we must invest in
healthy supported workforce in
New Mexico and New Mexico ought
to be positioning itself to
attract the best opportunity
entrepreneurs and professionals
in the future and this
legislation will help to do that
I just want to point out that
the
it was mentioned earlier that
this is also a poverty
alleviation in support of people
in poverty bill and it
absolutely is we work with many
families that are struggling
economically and this issue is
very much why they struggle
economically
and it is so it that we feel
that this is necessary in the
state of New Mexico thank you
madam chair.
Thank you next we have Catherine
Rosado.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you members of the committee my
name is captain Kirk Shada and
I'm a registered lobbyist with
eighteen tea and the
Representative Chandler stated
the amendments that we worked
with on perfectly and you know
we just want to extend a thank
you to Representative Chandler
she was open to discussion we
have many many meetings with her
around on the amendment that she
put forth today and we
appreciate her time and does
thank you so much.
Thank you next we have so yes
thank.
Good afternoon madam chair
committee members so be it thank
representing AT UW New Mexico.
At some point most New Mexico
workers still need time to take
time from work for caregiving
responsibilities are health care
needs.
HB thirty eight a would make it
possible for about forty percent
of those currently not covered
to fate take family leave and
keep their jobs studies show
time at home with young children
has been shown to decrease in
print and post natal mortality
rates hello all ill or injured
adults time to recover.
Give family members care giving
time it helps employers retain
recursion reduced cost of
turnover that can range from
sixteen to twenty per two
hundred percent of an employee's
compensation.
Delayed implementation allows
funding approval from minimal
economic impact aid W. New
Mexico supports passing the PMLA
study cited proved provided if
you wish thank you.
Hello next we have Griego hair.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee and critical care
on the board chair of the life
make here in Santa Fe well I
think is a nonprofit that
provides behavioral health
services to northern New
Mexico's most disadvantaged
services and strong support of
HB thirty eight I'm one of our
biggest concerns is that our
clients I'm often have mental
illnesses that require mental
health treatment for extended
periods of time and while we are
able to provide for Medicaid and
other forms of public assistance
low to no cost services for
their treatment a lot of times
they're not able to afford being
gone from work for the eight to
ten hours per week it takes to
go through treatment and so the
family and medical leave act
will take care of that we think
it's are really fair bill that
balances the responsibility on
both employers and employees as
far as the contribution goes and
so we strongly urge your support
thank you very much.
Thank you next we have Nicole
Martin.
Yes
madam chair and members of the
committee the new miss more and
and and the community members
and to a territory which is
Albuquerque New Mexico and the
enhanced.
I don't know what the AGL
consider young but my parents
are twenty years old and they
had me and then had two more
children and my dad was the sole
provider and family financially
but my mom is there for us
emotionally and
We lived in multi generational
so that was the only way that we
were able to like have a good
life
and I know that most community
the members deserve paid family
medical leave no matter their
circumstance on Monday
begin their families
that you support each be thirty
eight.
Thank you.
Thank you next we have John the
money in Sanford.
Chair and members of the
committee thank you my name is
Joan the money in Sanford and
executive director of the New
Mexico religious coalition for
reproductive choice as a faith
based organization we support
the inclusive definition of
family in this bill is in line
with our New Mexico values and
as an organization that works
for reproductive health rights
and justice we support any
measure and all measures that
provide support and resources so
our New Mexico families can
trials but also as a nonprofit
organization we're a small
business and we can't afford not
to have the support.
with one of our team had to take
parental leave we did the right
thing and made sure that she
could take some time off but we
didn't have the resources to
replace to hire a temporary
worker to replace her and so
this would really help us
and we can't afford not to have
it thank you very much in next
we have Michael's pervert
McQueen.
Thank you madam chairwoman
members of the committee my name
is Michael Sperber McQueen I'm
speaking as an individual this
afternoon I'd like to thank the
sponsors for bringing this bill
forward because it is one step
towards having the kind of
family and medical leave
policies in place in the United
States that most first world
countries have it doesn't get us
all the way there.
As a point of comparison twenty
odd years ago one of my close
colleagues and his wife had a
daughter.
And after the mother took her
twelve months parental leave my
colleague took his twelve months
parental leave so that the first
two years of her life their
daughter had someone at home
full time.
Twelve weeks compared to twelve
months seems very modest but
it's a step in the right
direction I'm also very happy
that there's an often for the
self employed.
Please vote to pass on this
bill.
Thank you next we have on the
just and on.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of committee my name is
address that are now and the
executive director of a late.
We have members across the state
who are essential workers who I
also child care workers and
we're also for parents and
families and taking care of
loved ones and we support this
bill one the definition of who a
person can care for is brought
just and and its diverse much
like our families are also being
the fact that many of our
members have been working on the
frontlines throughout this
pandemic many have contracted
COVID nineteen we don't know
what health issues are going to
come up down the line and having
this kind of safety net for
people which provides extended
care twelve weeks of of being
able to take time off is very
important and for those reasons
and many others we support we
stand in support of house bill
thirty eight as amended thank
you.
Thank you next we have Susan the
bay.
Thank you madam vice chair I'm
Susan Loubet a I'm the executive
director of the New Mexico
women's agenda it's a coalition
of organizations and individuals
that work on women's issues
we've been working on this issue
since two thousand and two and
supported this issue and
especially because it results in
healthy employers and then
healthy employees of one thing
the other states that have
passed this
Measure have found is that
fathers end up spending more
time with their families after
this sort of legislation is
passed and we want to thank the
sponsor the Sanchez especially
for making this a priority and
we urge you to vote yes thank
you.
Thank you next we have Stephanie
Welch.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Stephanie Welch and I'm an
attorney with the New Mexico
Center on Law and Poverty.
We support this bill because we
know that most of us will
experience a serious health
condition or extended care
giving responsibilities and we
will face impossible choices
between our families well being
our financial security and our
jobs federal leave guarantees do
not apply to most employers in
New Mexico and even the covered
workers they provide only on
paid leave this state program
would help ensure that we all no
matter what our family looks
like and no matter the size of
our employer can take the time
we need to meet health and
family needs you would support
workers economic security by
allowing them to meet care
taking needs that getting a pay
and benefits promote gender and
racial and gender equity because
workers of color are less likely
to have leave and because women
are being pushed out of the
workforce by care taking
responsibilities and create a
more level playing field for
businesses of all sizes thank
you.
Thank you next we have Karen
what lock.
Madam chair members of the
committee this is Karen would
walk with the national
association of social workers
New Mexico chapter and we stand
and strong support and would
like to thank the sponsors for
bringing this bill the pandemic
has brought attention to many
issues we face as a society sick
leave being at the top of that
list many essential workers had
to go had to go to work while
sick or whether families were
sick because they did not have
the sick leave and if they did
not go to work they would not
get paid we support this bill
for many reasons but it be one
tool to help lift these families
out of poverty thank you.
Thank you next we have the
number please though do little.
you said it very well thank you
chair and committee members my
name Justina Christodoulou and
I'm the political director for
the Adelante progressive caucus
and we are in full support of
this bill for all the you
mentioned comments and reasons
at a before and I do want to say
that this is really a step in
the direction of making this for
the people and that it now we
are ready for business and
considering people and profit so
thank you so much for bringing
this forward and and please pass
it.
Thank you.
Now have MaryBeth cell.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members my name is
merry bustle I'm a teacher in
Rio Rancho
And I'm coming to the new
parents I'm a little emotional
just hearing the stories I mean
I've had coworkers who are
coming to work while they're
receiving treatment for cancer
they have dying spouse's parents
they have sick kids that they
have to send a day care because
they don't have a choice and
it's heartbreaking
my first daughter was actually
born in August and me my husband
went back to teaching three days
after she was born
we were eligible to share twelve
weeks of unpaid definitely Lee
but as I'm sure you're all aware
educators are not well funded
and we could not afford to make
it by without our paychecks we
were actually grateful that she
arrived during this health
crisis
but how sad is that and how many
people do you know that could
afford to take unpaid leave
especially during a time of need
if they have bills piling up.
The support HB thirty eight a
thank you SO much.
Thank you next we have Cat
Sanchez.
Madam chair and members of the
committee thank you for the
opportunity to be here and
support my name is Cat Sanchez
policy associate with both
futures from Los crucis
supporting families and their
ability to care for family and
chosen family during their time
of need is a cornerstone of New
Mexico HB thirty allows for New
Mexicans and their families to
thrive we urge Committee support
and HB thirty eight thank you.
Thank you we are done with
public comments
Representative this is there
anything else you'd like to
offer before we go to committee.
Madam chair now we're happy to
answer any questions and help
illuminate what the bills all
that thank you madam chair.
Thank you first up we have
Representative Rehm.
You madam chair and
Representative Chandler at thank
I read this and I think that it
is a good concept but I kind of
disagree how it's being
implemented as we heard a lot of
the businesses were concerned
about it and I thought I have a
couple other up you know
Ways maybe we could do this is
so madam chair and
representative Trent Chandler my
first question is what if we
created if you will some
insurance pool something similar
to a four oh one K. E. that the
employer he could.
Are contribute to and just use
the money out of that and then
we cut out the employer so would
just be between them for the and
this insurance pool if you will
that we've created.
Madam chair representative of.
As a person who's pretty
familiar with four oh one cut
type K. plans which is what I
think kind of you're talking
about Representative and madam
chair
it's very hard to get consistent
contributions into such programs
I worked madam chair for a very
large employer and those kinds
of contributions are voluntary
Cadena and often they could not
sustain some fortunate but on
are often Representative and
madam chair they could not
sustain
You know what a steady stream of
of income into the plan this
plan miss madam chair and
representative is kind of like
an in state insurance scheme
like you just described it
creates a trust fund they're
very small fees placed on the
employer and the employee and we
all share the responsibility for
supporting families and through
this methodology thank you madam
chair and wrapped.
Madam chair and representative
and all the other ideas that I
had is when you look at the FIR
there speaking of a hundred
million dollar cost is and I
believe three or five years I'd
have to look at it and I was
thinking perhaps if you made
this plan we're there was a tax
incentive to the organization
that adopted policies similar to
your legislation.
Madam chair and and
representative for that concept
raise before madam chair and
representative I think that
would create not they would not
create a comprehensive system
that would support all all
working New Mexicans and that
miss madam chair and
Representative is our goal and
as to the cost we can find
additional information on that
if madam chair so desires we do
have Susan Ragan here who has
done the actuarial and has a
different take on what the costs
are for the program.
We use but we see issues with F.
I. R..
Madam chair and Representative
Chandler if I can take you to
page three of your sub.
And
I'll wait for you to get
Madam chair representative
you're referring to the bill
itself we don't have a sub it's
house bill thirty eight as
amended okay okay yeah I have
okay then that's what I have
okay so page three.
And I think this will be at the
bar at the end of flying for
we're we're it's
talking about the employee the
definition of an employee I was
wondering if you would be
receptive that we had at the end
of subdivision of the state
working forty hours or more per
week.
You know so it applies to full
time employees.
Madam chair representative I do
not believe we would be amenable
to that change I think you're
aware that often there is
concern that employers.
We've heard and I'm not going to
name any big box names madam
chair or Representative often
just worked their boys just shy
of that forty magical forty
hours so that the benefit
programs that are often required
to forty our employees are not
provided and I would be
reluctant to do that thank Madam
chair representative.
Madam chair in the
Representative Chandler let's go
to the bottom of page snacks.
And I see number one.
Is speaking about public and
private employees who are
subject to state jurisdiction
except those employees who are
ordered by the United States and
then we go to paragraph to
anyone this contracting in the
state and you know every.
I don't know for every five to
seven years maybe seven to ten
years there's a discussion about
closing the base here in New
Mexico and we're have the
heavily reliant on
Those bases for employment.
I'm worried that that is going
to affect the overall cost of
their operation in New Mexico
and may of may come in to
hurting or adding to the
discussion of closing the base.
You see my concern by chancer
dot.
I'm madam chair chair
Representative not to be
disrespectful but I I think that
would be a minor consideration
in the boat of base closure I
think larger geopolitical and
national of drivers usually
address that madam chair
Representative.
Madam chair Representative
Chandler.
The C..
We're age twelve now.
One of the things are you I had
a concern with is that number
one it's kind of F. one I was
wondering if maybe we should put
something in there not including
overtime pay you know so we're
looking at what you make.
As a regular work week not our
our work week that has over time
Hey but that's.
As a suggestion to you know I
don't know if you want to
mandate that way or not.
And I think I've got one other
question let me see here.
Seem to.
Lost the place but one of the
things so madam chair and
Representative Chandler I was
thinking about is maybe in the
statute we put the.
The replacement employee that
they hire have the higher we
recognize them as a part time
employee.
And not subject to our
Point meant budget you know
their their term is just while
this regular employee is out and
can be dismissed without.
Costs at the end of that.
And with.
Madam chair if it's the chairs
desire for me to react I will
and
my response to that that was an
interesting point that was
brought up in the public comment
that I that was the first time I
had heard that I'm happy to look
into it I'm not sure madam chair
that that would be an
appropriate thing to put into
our bill but perhaps in other in
another provision in law but I
would point out the employer
might have the option of hiring
a contract employee and and I
don't know how that plays into
the unemployment benefits
program I know something about
unemployment benefits but I am
by no means madam chair
and representative of an expert
interesting concept I can't I
can't respond definitively at
this point in time on that
particular chair and
representative that I may just
quickly clarifying that those
are those are things and thank
you for bringing them up
Representative Rehm but those
are things that are generally
worked out in between employers
and employees and within
personal policies and within
bargaining tools and other means
by which employers and employees
work together in on working
through their policies and
procedures so it's something
that already is being done and
and I anticipate will continue
to be done wants it mean there
it's being done right now so
those are the those are
relationships that belong to the
employee and employer and and
not really in the realm of us
making those types of mandate
certificates I think that that
the employers would really
appreciate a sleeping those
things as ways in which
employees can address with them
on in their employment
relationships thank you madam
chair and thank you
Representative.
Thank you.
Madam chair and representatives
I don't think that the
employer has the option once the
individuals been employed and I
can't remember what the time
period is then they are eligible
for
unemployment if they're
dismissed.
Anyway that's all my questions
and and thank you.
Thank you Representative Rehm
before public comment we did
move for discussion and
amendment us so we'd like to go
back to that now before we
continue the discussion
Representative Chasey.
Thank you madam chair I move we
adopt the amendment.
All second that manager.
We have a motion from here to
see and the second from
representative Ely before we
continue on the bill is there
discussion on the meant the
amendments.
Representative Freeman not sure
if I saw your hand go up again
or if it was still up in need of
discussion on the amendment no
yes your hand again
Representative it no it that
you're has gone Representative
review.
Thank you for all the high fives
are presented.
Representative Nibert do you
have discussion on the amendment
I'm seeing a shaking had no from
representative Nibert.
Is there any opposition to this
amendment.
I see some faces coming on
camera Representative Armstrong
others please pick up a raise
your hand.
Okay no opposition to this
amendment you have an amended
bill will go back to discussion
on the bill and next we have
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair.
Couple questions the.
I think one of the.
People are commented against the
bills kind of hit the nail on
the head with the right now is
not the time to impose
additional burdens on small
businesses and and certainly
I'm very sympathetic to that
because we have a number of
small businesses and in our town
who are.
Questioning whether or not they
can even continue at this point
in time and have been acting
legislation even with the.
The lady up programs are I thank
you is this baby seven on Masser
but all right Sir
I'd like to move over to page
twelve of the bill.
So that I can.
I understand the the
calculation.
Under.
Program which is lines nineteen
through twenty four on page
twelve.
It talks about the basically
vaccine now the doctor more
generously.
So my question is so madam chair
and.
Representative.
What.
Under current.
What is the maximum amount of
leave compensation that one
could secure under your all.
I'm Madam chair representative I
am looking at page twelve and
are you talking about paragraph
want just one madam chair.
Yeah three yes I need to twenty
four.
Okay thank you for that
clarification madam chair
representative I'm going to ask
one of our experts to answer
that question if I may madam
chair I don't know if ms Regan
would be the appropriate person
or agency McDaniel.
I'm is Regan I see you raising
your hand so if you'd like to
start with that representatives
and if needed will go to miss
the annual as well.
Madam chair and representative
I'd be happy to answer this
question we put in a Max wage
and the reason we put in a Max
wage was to make sure that very
high wage earners didn't deplete
the fund
Certainly we have more.
Madam chair.
Miss Reagan I understand the
reason what I need is a number.
Okay.
Adam chair and representative my
pleasure the Max wage that we're
looking at would be sixty
thousand which is what we put in
there average weekly way their
weekly wage is one thousand one
hundred fifty four dollars their
weekly replacement would be nine
hundred and twelve dollars and
then anybody making above sixty
thousand would also receive the
weekly replacement of nine
hundred and twelve dollars.
Thank you madam chair there were
a lot of numbers are and I just
need one member so madam chair
most right now.
What is the maximum about weekly
we station today.
That would be paid to a worker
under paragraph three of this
bill.
Was that the nine hundred twelve
dollars was at sixty thousand
dollars sure it's not the sixty
thousand dollars madam chair and
representative it's nine hundred
and twelve dollars a week.
Okay so.
And madam chair in terms of
dollars per hour would that be
approximately.
Twenty five dollars per hour.
Madam chair Representative this
agency Regan could answer that
question please now it's more
than that okay.
We're gonna let me pull up that
I'm just doing the numbers on
the calculator just a moment
madam chair all of our neighbors
just as well so.
We'll we'll double check
everybody's map.
Madam chair I will not be able
to add double check anyone's
math.
We have dueling calculators
Madam chair this is Reagan madam
chair the hourly rate is twenty
eight dollars and eighty four
cents an hour okay so so madam
chair this right under the
current conditions.
Someone earning twenty eight
dollars and Alcon cents per hour
that would that would be the.
Why that which they are maxed
out even though their
contributions are supposed would
where they are reflect payment
into the fund of greater than
that will not.
So madam chair and
representative as the
calculations are currently done
the answer is yes however I have
also done in the model where
they don't and tribute above
that and the fund would still
function in the bill a lot
tighter but it would still
function fine.
Okay so so the maximum that that
one.
Can receive will be nine hundred
twelve dollars per week under
this.
Find and.
Actually.
I'm not sure I'm not sure.
Well I think that's that's my
calculation there the they.
The way this works.
Is that everyone gets to get a
hundred percent of the minimum
wage and that only sixty seven
percent of their actual.
Hourly.
Right.
When those two combined.
That is what they're
compensation would be up to the
five hundred twelve dollars
per week if I understand
paragraphs one two three
correctly you by looking at that
right.
Madam chair representative I
think you are in news Regan will
correct me if I said incorrectly
that you're correct that.
Yes you must have a right.
Madam chair yeah the
Representative.
Yes.
Why.
For for me right now is.
I understand what we're trying
to do.
I'm a little concerned about how
we get there but I'm more
concerned about the messaging
that's going out to our small
businesses right now.
And.
I think they're going to
perceive this is just the other
Extraction of
money from them that the some of
them can't afford at the present
time and and thank
Help all the people at commented
it yeah because that
the only others.
Question that I have madam chair
and Representative is.
If this bill becomes law.
Won't that provide a
disincentive for employers to
have a bore robust
we've policy and what are they
all just want to go under the
provisions of this bill and.
In essence while the state
already takes care about what
we're going to do.
Madam chair representative it's
a little bit of speculation but
let me share my perspective
having worked for a very large
very generous employer with very
generous employment benefits
the large employers in the state
who have the ability to offer
more generous programs such as
this are often recruit at least
their professional staff from
across the country and they are
driven by markets that are not
not not New Mexico Center
necessarily and so I think it
will have very little impact on
employers who are
of the type that I'm referring
to and small employers are and
medium size employers which is
what is predominates in our
state.
Don't have the ability to offer
a program such as this or their
own internal program that's
nearly as generous I would also
point out madam chair and
representative there is a way to
exempt yourself from the program
if you can show us substantially
equivalent and so on and so I'm
sure you're aware that
Representative because I know
you read these bills with a fine
tooth comb.
Madam chair representative of
that that was my point is
you know for four the big
employers are recruiting
nationally
For instance by law firm would
not be affected by that's where
we're more generous and we're
having to compete with a lot of
other folks and so we have an
employment factored so that is
more generous than what I see
here but but I'm I'm more
worried about the the smaller.
Small businesses that.
Are not in the financial
condition of many of our bigger
employers and and maybe our
employers they compete on a
national basis but but basically
our our mom and pop shops around
the state that are barely
hanging on right now and if they
did have a more generous our our
provision
You know they're looking at
every effort right now just to
just to survive and I'm
wondering if this would create
the incentive for them to
Senator well the state now has
that program we're gonna have to
start deducting.
point four percent of your
Jack to to workforce solutions
or whatever they are yes and we
have to do that work and
for getting and you'll get
you'll get these benefits and.
At the end but it's a start and.
Even though they were maybe
either officially or generous or
in practice for jet stream
because I think a lot of our our
mom and pop shops small
businesses around the state well
they may not have an official
policy that would be more
generous and in practical terms
because people have
relationships are built with
their particularly there are
their valued employees that they
may very well find
time off with pay that that they
don't have to provide and so I'm
I'm a little worried about that
but I'm more worried about the
message in two thousand twenty
one the legislature would be
sending to our small businesses
around the state are those that
are just barely hanging on or
maybe those that are going to be
lucky to survive.
You're more months of not having
their doors open for limited
open and I'm just really
concerned about the message
we're we're Senator all thank
you madam chair and
representative for going to the
numbers and and I appreciate
that that helps me understand
in terms of dollars what will we
do work thank you.
Thank you Representative Nibert
next we have Representative
chair Chasey.
Thank you very much madam chair
I'm.
I just have a few questions it
seems to me that
There are.
Representative Chandler and my
doctor coming out okay maybe
some really
Favorable to the business
community amendments to the bill
that we have adopted now right.
Madam madam chair yet those were
amendments I worked with the
business community on I think
they've you them as favorable
for sure thank you.
You know I I hear what
some of the criticism that might
my committee members and.
I'm.
Mentioned about messaging to the
community what I interpret this
is with a three year
implementation messages.
We're not gonna do this to you
right away at on the heels of
the pandemic or when the
pandemic isn't even.
Yet.
Behind us so and would you agree
with that madam chair
representative Chandler
madam chair and madam chair and
absolutely and you know it yes
yes I totally agree with that.
Because if if we were going to
say okay guys this is that
starts July one and then.
I think we are.
Perhaps sending the wrong
message because we have.
I know I have looked to other
countries in this world and and
bill.
Yes I guess that.
That businesses and families and
communities we're better
supported by the government.
So that people did not.
Become desperate and they
weren't maybe homeless or they
weren't suffering so much the
health disparities that we have
in this country and I wish that
we did that more so that we were
not
Causing people to feel Sir in to
be in such despair.
You know I.
Really my heart goes out to
every single.
Governing body that had to
impose restrictions on either
the city or the county or the
state.
For the country we didn't do it
much as a country we did it at
by state so I mean anybody who
thinks that governor whether
it's the Republican governor of
Maryland or the democratic
governor in New Mexico has
enjoyed doing this to.
To
Businesses and restaurants and
schools and yes.
If you just must be crazy that
nobody wants to do things like
this this is been
herbal situation.
We don't want to compound that
for our small businesses
especially here in New Mexico we
don't have a lot of big
employers so I really I really
appreciate the three year
Grace period and the of the the
phase in to the planning the
other thing that I wanted to
mention and you may or may not
know this but one of my
constituents said gosh you know
why don't we just make it simple
like in Arizona they have on
what age.
This.
The the at a rate of one hour
earns for every thirty hours
worked and then Colorado it's
one hour for every thirty hours
worked but
And their employers with you
your employees that don't have
to find it but.
I don't doubt that those are
cooperative ventures.
I don't know if you can confirm
that or not it just seems to me
that this approach is to.
Why to recognize that.
The employer wants these people
to keep working for him or her
the people want to keep working
for the employer so they both
contribute and the state
supports that in the process.
Do you know anything about the
other ones where it's just a
straight you have to.
Thank thank you madam chair and
thank you madam chair for that
question and it allows us to
kind of talk about the
difference between a straight
sick leave policy and a paid
family and medical leave policy
and I think madam chair and then
chair what you're referring to
is just a straight sick leave
policy people accrue this
program is really a leave
program designed to address sort
of long term needs such as
caring for a child or parents or
where you have kind of a chronic
illness where you need to take
off chunks of time over a period
of you know intermittently over
a year it and it does madam
chair for clarification it is
very similar to the federal
court federal family leave act
but I would point out and
clarify the fit the federal law
is not a paid leave programs it
some of the commenters mentioned
that madam chair mentioned I
want to clarify for everyone
that is not a paid leave program
it's just a requirement for
employers over fifty with over
fifty employees that they allow
people to take time away whether
they have sickly stored up or
not that's what the differences
and I hope that helps.
I thank you madam chair and
representative and I keep
getting mixed up so I have so
that is why it.
That's the uniqueness of this
bill this program because this
is for a new or extended period
of time would you madam chair
and representative would you
just comment briefly on why you
use the family definition you to
it because I know there were
some common and yes I have but
it being rather.
Yes madam chair and then chair I
mean I think we all need to
acknowledge that our society is
not what it was like maybe when
I was growing up or when you
were growing up and people had
Different ideas about what
constitutes a family and in our
society now there are many
different kinds of relationships
partnerships
Mexico help habitations you know
living arrangements that
are the essential if a quick
alone of a family and that's
what this bill recognizes and I
think it is in keeping with our
times that we have a broad
definition family because I
think that's how society views
are views that definition now
madam chair and madam chair
madam chair primate just add to
that because in New Mexico Madam
chair and madam chair we have a
strong rich cultural diverse
communities across the state we
have not been a communities in
American communities we have
native American communities and
with the strong cultural
communities yes
it's part of our our families
tradition center cultural
traditions that we don't look to
outside sources.
Often times because we can't
afford it we don't have the
affordability but more
importantly it's our traditions
to take care of our family
members madam chair madam chair
on we would thank very.
It we we pull together all of
our family resources in order to
take care of whatever family
needs extended family needs
there aren't we would thank you
very long and hard and often
times very difficult in a
different way if we had to go
outside of the family and the
extended family to care for each
other and so that in our state
probably in every state but more
than and and other states
because of the strong cultural
family traditions it's it's
important for us to have
extended the definition to to
respect and honor the traditions
that have made our state what it
is and so thank you for the but
that question to a very
important question madam chair
madam chair.
One final question madam
chairman Representative Chandler
you want to comment on the size
the best chances and the
inclusion on that every single
even the smallest employer on
yes madam chair and madam chair
As I said in my opening comments
this is a structure you know it
it relies on having a certain
number of employees in in the
program having a certain number
of employers in the program
otherwise it doesn't pencil out
now
so that's why at this juncture
we have included all all
employers regardless of size
because it pencils out in terms
of how we can maintain the trust
fund and offer the benefits to
all employees.
Thank you very much
representatives that and thank
you madam chair that that's all
I have to.
Thank you next have
Representative ever Armstrong
thank you madam chair is a small
employer who would have to
participate in this I moved to
pass.
We do passed motion.
William Armstrong in a chair I
believe.
Yes and believe from chair of
Chasey.
As.
Senator as amended yes.
would you pass on page HB thirty
eight then there
I see no further discussion on
this bill.
But the one second because as
speaker enough.
I'm not sure if you meant to put
your hands up but we can't hear
you if you're trying to offered
anything.
Speaker can you hear me hello.
Go ahead okay the measure I
played well yes for the bill
Committee did come up several
times you during the.
debate in this committee the FIR
shows a.
Very significant general fund
impact.
and so we are going to have to
be.
Sending this to the
appropriation committee you know
pursuant to rule eleven dash
one.
So I did want to mention that I
mentioned it to the sponsor you
yesterday or the day before so
as we move to the next
committee.
and I I want to mention it here.
In the hopes that the advocate
in the Sanchez can.
Thought to how to either get the
F. I. R. revised so that we
don't have the.
You know we have scores of
millions of dollars in general
fund impact either you know
through a revision of the
Alice's at the LFC.
For now to see whether Medicaid
but we do
yeah we we had to do this on a
few these bills this session
where the if I were the bill to
denote an appropriation but the
analysis when it's done you
reveals the general fund impact
so we're gonna have to do that
and I thought I was pretty much
that now so that the sponsor the
advocate could start the
conversation about how to
address handled FIR thank you.
Thank you I'm seeing no further
discussion clerk to call the
roll.
Representative Akan.
Yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Cook.
Mr speaker yes.
Representative Eli just.
Representative Lewis yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative.
No ma'am.
Representative Rehm.
Ma'am.
Representative.
Representative Townsend.
Representative Chasey.
Yes yes.
Madam.
Yes ma'am.
You have yet to.
And then.
Eight to do you have a.
Eight the thirty eight amended.
Looking appropriations thank you
very much madam chair and thank
you committee it was a really
good conversation I so
appreciate it thank you thank
you madam chair and thank you
members of the committee it was
a robust and very necessary
conversation thank you so much
yes.
Madam chair.
If you're if you're still
hanging in there.
I'm I I I'm just really happy to
be.
one agenda item today I also
last on our list today is house
joint resolution nine with
representative Allison.
Hello Representative welcome to
House Judiciary might you have
other co sponsors or expert
witnesses that will be joining
us today.
Yes ma'am
madam chair.
Sponsor is set right there with
you Christine Chandler I'm glad
that you warmed her up because
she's going to be helping me a
lot.
And my expert witnesses are the
deal or do it secretary John
Salazar and also from the staff
of agency okay.
Seraphim over.
Those two will be our expert
witnesses
we bring to you this afternoon.
House resolution nine and if I
read the title it's going to
explain it more than I could.
The title is proposing to amend
article nine section fourteen of
the constitution of New Mexico
to allow public assistance in
the development of
infrastructure that allows
essential Helsel electric
internet natural gas water and
waste water connection to build
missiles upon the an act meant a
majority vote of the members
elected to each house of the
legislature of implementing
legislation.
I might have to have.
My co sponsor jump in soon
because for some reason around
this time I start losing my
voice.
I'll try to go.
Keep going as long as I think
you can hear me.
Okay the.
What
would do is place a ballot
question before the voters at
the next regular election
whether to amend the anti
donation clause in the New
Mexico constitution to allow the
state to invest resources in
ensuring access to pay for basic
infrastructure for all New
Mexicans that is basically the
recap of at this time.
Maybe we'll ask my co sponsored.
If she would like to add
something else.
thank you notes and thank you
madam chair.
Thank you thank you madam chair
it's a pleasure to be a co
sponsor with Representative
Allison I I think this might be
our first bill together so it's
it's been fund an interesting
experience this bill is partly
stems from some of the work we
have been doing and exploring
options to improve broadband
across the state and internet
service and also madam chair I
believe I believe ours are
experts will be able to address
that but one of the problems
that was brought to our
attention as we've been studying
the broadband problem Madam
chair is that the state feels
very constrained and what they
can do in terms of direct
investment in the infrastructure
associated with expanding
broadband into people's homes
directly especially those homes
that
you know our our income
challenged in and have other
disadvantages such as being very
remote and so on and so that
that's what started the dialogue
and then of course all of us
know how that we are one of the
poorest states in the union if
not the poorest state in the
union and this will give greater
flexibility to provide support
to the lower income families
With that you know essential
utilities and that was that's
that's really the reason and
driver for the for the bill and
with that we're happy to answer
questions.
Thank you reps are we going to
hear an introduction or any
comments from your expert
witnesses at this point.
Well madam chair I'm not sure
I'm perhaps secretary Salazar
might just delay a little bit of
foundation briefly I know we're
getting into the later hours.
Thank you Secretary.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is John Salazar and on the
cabinet secretary for department
information technology I would
like to thank the sponsors for
bringing this bill forward
because it provides a framework
for do it.
To be able to expand broadband
services in the state of New
Mexico a little background on
broadband and the challenges
that we face in twenty nineteen
do it commenced the study on
broadband to really identify the
gaps in broadband and develop a
strategy on how we re more
broadband in New Mexico in this
study it was determined that a
hundred and twenty six thousand
residents and businesses do not
have internet in the do not have
internet because there are no
facilities that run in nearby to
that it was also determined that
there's an additional seventy
thousand residents and
businesses that are underserved
what does that mean underserved
means that the folks do have
internet but they do not have
adequate speech that would allow
them to participate in and soon
activities such as this as well
as teleworking and remote
learning.
In order to address the you know
hundred twenty six hundred
ninety thousand folks that
require internet.
What was determined is that the
state needs to make an
investment and broadband in New
Mexico and that investment needs
to be about a billion dollars to
be able to meet the gaps are out
there.
The investment covers three
different technologies number
one is staying fiber to the
premises second one is being
fixed wireless out there in the
third technologies utilizing
satellite.
so we've been going down that
path trying to get facilities in
place in.
Legislative session twenty
nineteen.
Do it received ten million
dollars in their appropriations
for broadband services that was
grant money to ISPs to expand
services well that money set in
our budget for over here because
we really can do anything with
it technically when do it sure
services or products those
services or products the long to
do it they're part of our assets
the come into our general ledger
and we do appreciate that.
When we talk about rolling out
broadband broadband rollout is
really including partnering with
the ISP providers of of New
Mexico those be the sentiments
of the world Comcast I can't
take money for my budget and
give it to Comcast so that they
can make the fiber and stuff
that they're going home that's
against the policy so that's the
challenge that we that we face
going for we need to be more
profit in New Mexico we have a
strategy of how are we going to
do that that strategy includes
bringing federal funding in but
we need to have matching state
funds to to well to meet the
requirements of the federal
guidelines and we also have to
work with the ISP providers so
that we have going forward I'm
gonna turn it over to our
general counsel she can talk
more about the legal issues so
thank you madam chair committee
members.
Thank you Secretary go ahead.
Are you it looks like you're
still on mute.
Are you thank you madam chair
and members of the committee as
a secretary explained do it has
been working towards finding
solutions to the broadband gap
problem in New Mexico and one of
the most efficient
a motion that we have identified
is to partner with private
internet service providers who
already qualify for federal
funding and then offer funding
that would just covered the.
The portion of a project that is
not already paid for with
federal dollars so for example
There are a number of federal
programs pursuant to which
private companies are able to
get anywhere between seventy
five to ten point ninety five
percent of a broadband
infrastructure project covered
were paid for by the federal
government and those are
generally project is going to
rural New Mexico.
but if the federal definition of
a rural so if.
It's mostly based on density and
not so much on poverty levels or
anything else and so in in this
case with out of the ten million
dollars for the secretary
mentioned we have been able to
use three point four million of
that appropriation and by
supporting projects that are.
Large would not impact you know
largely
funded by federal
Dollars we have been able to
obtain effectively almost twenty
million dollars worth of
infrastructure for New Mexico
yeah by only putting down three
point four million of the
state's money however of course
because because of the
impregnation calls but we
certainly have many many valid
applications and many valid
purposes to serve because of the
because the context of you know
broadband and the fact that
we're actually providing state
funds directly to private ISP
providers there is always the
threat of litigation we have
done extensive analyses we have
discussed this with other
agencies and we feel comfortable
confident that the state is
receiving something in return
for a working restaurant meaning
that these are projects that are
going into communities that.
Probably need the definition of
emergency information clog
because there's no rural New
Mexico has the highest poverty
levels in the country and we
looked at other data sensor data
including no school free lunches
are free lunch programs and many
of the counties that we have
invested in you know that
there's a hundred percent
participation in either free or
reduced school and program
having said that it is a novel
legal question whether or not a
community or county can be
treated as indigent as a whole
Committee indignation.
So because we're talking about
million dollars being invested
into infrastructure the threat
of litigation and the federal
potentially court could disagree
with us and find that we wearing
right violation of the
immigration calls and then we
would be required the state
would be required to call back
millions of dollars from from
private companies very few
providers local providers that
insignificant.
Right that is
constantly present basically
because again these are issues
of first impression for New
Mexico for the New Mexico courts
but again this is the most
efficient cost efficient way for
New Mexico to try to bridge the
broadband gap because again in
exchange for three point four
million state dollars we're
getting almost twenty million
dollars worth of not providing
for broadband infrastructure in
rural New Mexico into other
through the
Representative apparel solutions
that we have identified are to
allow IT providers based on our
review powers
I'm sure many of you know that
do it on about a hundred and
five hours that are used for
public safety radio
communication and we could you
know we're exploring allowing
I see providers and also so
phone service providers we face
in our powers that would allow
them to broaden their areas of
coverage but again because of
the the reality of the market
that we're talking about
If we if we were required to
to to charge it rent for that
space probably few if any are to
be provided with because of when
our offer because already
equipment it would need to go on
the towers cost hundreds of
thousands of dollars so we want
to create incentives for
providers to going to a
community that they haven't gone
into already here because there
is no return on investment and
the final project that we have
identified and we would like to
pursue but again we cannot
really do so because of the
impregnation limitation is for
communities that you have
broadband infrastructure and
that where services are
available many residents simply
cannot afford market rate
broadband costs were certain
that service fees or cost of
service several years and so.
Another project to do it would
like to explore is for us to
provide wifi mesh Services to
families you know right now
we're only exploring serving
students because of course
education because you're going
to
create basically an exception to
the information for but you know
how Covid has students they may
not have been tomorrow and vice
versa how who doesn't have
students in today may have
students at a later point and so
we would like to be able to
explore our without the threat
of litigation against hanging
over our projects the
possibility of providing free
wifi services to residents who
may or may not need more
stringent definition of
emergency but for whom broadband
is still at market rates anyway
is not affordable and therefore
they're left out of of all the
services that can be done online
currently during the pandemic
and then when the of course the
pandemic.
Thank you and with that we're
available to answer questions.
Thank you so much for all that
context is much appreciated we
are going you I'm here.
This is systems that we're
asking for it will not only
cover internet but in addition
to that they will cover
infrastructure such as water
wastewater natural gas
electricity and the I'm gonna
use the example of of.
The Navajo Nation with the onset
of the pandemic.
It reveals a lot of
infrastructure needs throughout
New Mexico but I will use the
example that we experience on
the Navajo Nation.
When the.
Pandemic said in one of the
first things that they said was
constantly wash your hands.
That is easier said than done
when most communities on our
nation we're not able to
constantly wash their hands when
they had to haul water each
state and they did not have
running water running hot water
to wash their hands and do their
laundry and stuff like that and.
Most of the areas also revealed
that they did not have adequate
electricity.
They might have had electricity
but they did not have running
water.
In some places they had running
water but they did not have the
waste water system.
M..
When the second suggestion from
the department of health was to
social distance and try to stay
home that was another item that
was easier said than done.
On the nation we travel long
distances to get our grocery and
because of the limitation of
electricity not all homes have
refrigerators so they have to
make the trips into the.
Watertown's to get there
replenish their food supplies
more frequently.
And then the third suggestion
that the delays had west let's
close the doors and let's get
all the students to do online
schooling again most of the
places did not have adequate
internet.
So immediately all right off the
bat our students were of left
behind.
Prior to the pandemic I used to
see a lot of our younger people
hang around or at least that's
what I thought they used to
spend a lot of time at the
McDonald's and the burger kings
and the fast food places are you
know tucked in the corner and I
would I always was curious why
they spend so much time at the
fast food places I found out
that they were doing their
homework because that was the
only place where they had
adequate internet some of these
children the ones that can drive
themselves have to be driven by
their parents at least so forty
miles one way to get to reliable
internet.
And as we of the reason why
another reason why I'm using
this example was because I think
the Navajo Nation had the most
of media attention that you a
lot of attention to some of the
The shortages that we have.
When we started talking about
that we found that the the slack
of infrastructure.
Did not only affect the Navajo
Nation but it also effective.
Various areas of New Mexico
particularly in the areas of of.
The communities of color so.
Sample that I share is not just
a I'm Navajo simple other
cultures had experienced the
same thing so for that reason I
feel that was I feel that this
amendment to the the
constitution is necessary.
Thank you madam chair and I'll
ask my co sponsored Curiel thank
you.
Thank you representatives and
experts I'd like to see if we
can go to a public comment now
what we're first going to do for
the audience that still with us
and participating and do is put
up a poll in which we ask people
whether they are in support or
opposition to this how straight
resolution we're considering if
we hello.
Just.
It looks like we still have a
few people with us and all of
those that are doing about seven
people today and in support to
this house joint resolution we
are going to public comment now
if there's anyone that is in
opposition and did not
participate in the poll I'll ask
first if you're would like to
speak in opposition to H. J. R.
nine please raise your hands
now.
Not seeing anyone we will go to
those in support if you'd like
to speak in support of H. J. R.
nine please raise your hand.
Okay we have our time we're up
on the screen you will be given
permission to speak and then
muted as your time elapses we'll
start with mark Fletcher.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I'm Marc Fleisher
registered lobbyist restricted
when communications.
I sit in front of my computer in
support of this house joint
resolution I would like to read
a short statement from John but
all the CEO sacred wind
communications as was not able
to log on this afternoon.
Sigui communications is met with
several rural towns and counties
regarding their interest in
developing broadband networks
for the citizens under a public
private partnership with anti
donation clause comes up in
every case is our experience no
one wants to pursue the issue
unless there is a clear legal
path to forming such a
partnership we believe an
amendment to the constitution is
appropriate and necessary
removing all doubt about a local
governments ability to partner
with a broadband provider in
owning all or part of the broad
we're broadband network
sequentially Education supports
passage of house joint
resolution number nine thank
you.
Your next we have Karen Witt
lock.
Madam chair members of the
committee Karen wedlock with the
national association of social
workers New Mexico chapter.
We stand in strong support of
this for so many reasons we
appreciate the the bill Sanchez
and their recognition of the
importance of infrastructure
broadband and water and
electricity and being able to
address this with this one bill
will be very will be extremely
helpful to many populations
throughout the state and we
recognize that there are many
avenues to many different things
but the anti donation clause
I've notices session keeps
coming up so I'm glad that
they've taking a look at that as
well thank you very much.
Thank you next we have ten
Baker.
Thank you madam chair and the
committee my name is Pam Baker
I'm United States navy submarine
veteran and I am here to
represent both the New Mexico
democratic veterans military
caucus and the baton chapter of
the American veterans for equal
rights we stand in strong favor
of H. J. R. nine.
So that we can have the
infrastructure necessary to
support the rural communities of
New Mexico in particular
broadband which would provide
access to telemedicine.
Access to D. O. H. vaccine
registration application and
access so that our fellow New
Mexicans could attend a meeting
like this.
With that said thank you very
much for all your work.
Thank you and last on the list
we have heavy.
Thank you thank you Medina
doctoral one of the seven
members of the public still I
get in there I came to support
HB thirty eight eight thank you
for proving more I stayed and I
read the state are not
I'm totally disgusted supportive
up.
As a former librarian who worked
for the New Mexico state library
I know how important broadband
deals.
And as someone who believes in
social justice and equal access
to the essentials of life for
everybody in the state.
I think what something that.
Supports essential director
central household services for
everybody is fantastic.
The needs internet electricity
gas water wastewater all those
things so thank you for putting
this out there that I trust
it'll cost.
What.
If you.
No more.
from my public participants will
go back to the the Sanchez
quickly is there anything else
you wanted to respond to add
before we turn to committee and
saying shaking heads madam
chair.
Just a comment.
Okay
We talk about thriving economy
our state can have a thriving
economy that works for everyone
if so many New Mexicans are
suffering from the.
Basic infrastructure so with
that madam chair I hope for the
positive thank you very much
madam chair thank you
Representative we do have lower
hands raised so far we're gonna
start with Representative you
like.
Thank you madam chair so I'm
going to say this very often but
I love this house joint
resolution I really do for
variety of reasons
Representative Allison said it
incredibly well that the
pandemic really exposed the flaw
in what's happening with our
infrastructure in New Mexico
particularly as it affects our
native American communities our
rural communities this is the
kind of change that really
brings together rural and urban
communities that's the first
thing I like about it it's not.
A Republican Democrat issue it's
really about basic needs of all
our communities the second thing
is is that you know I have just
this week I got from the ethics
commission I I was asking
questions related to the anti
donation clause and I got eleven
pages back.
I mean I've been a lawyer for
thirty something years and it
was so confusing by the time I
got done with it that I'm not
surprised to do it is concern
about doing anything without
getting sued
we have to do with the the
entitles you because has a good
purpose behind it as far as
corruption is concerned I get
that but what it's become is
this roadblock to better public
policy and again I go back to
Representative Allison something
about what my colleague said in
terms of the impact it's not
just broadband and of course
broadband is huge because we're
talking about things like
education health care merchant
C. services business development
but it is also things like clean
water and and and waste water
things that in my community we
take for granted but not in and
not clearly not the Navajo
Nation where we saw the pandemic
exposed all the failures the
infrastructure this has created
an unsustainable bureaucracy and
I'm thrilled that you're
bringing this hi this is the
first chance I really had a
chance to look at it and I'm
very appreciative I really don't
have any questions so that I
don't usually do that I usually
have questions but in this one
instance I just think this is
just need to apply to both
program here thank you madam
chair thank you next we'll go to
Representative McQueen.
Thank you madam chair the Madam
chair of representatives I I the
unlike the Representative Ely I
do have a number of questions
I I read the bill and the it is
interesting it was present
primarily as broadband bill but
when I read that my first
thought was the Navajo Nation.
and not broadband but.
You know I appreciate that my
first question is this is only
apply to the state.
In could the local community a
city or county with a fall under
this would they be able to spend
money on these kind of projects
or this is only the state.
Thank you for the question
representative madam chair.
Thank you for the question
Representative this covers the
rural areas of our state because
we experienced similar or
parallel deficiencies in our
infrastructure.
Madam chair.
Madam chair representative also
I appreciate that the state is
the whole state but my question
is the the spending it your
reference is nothing in this
section shall prohibit the state
from expanding state funds so my
question is if a county or a
municipality want to expand
local funds.
Could they do that or would they
still be prohibited by the
indignation close.
Hello my of those technical
expert to answer that
Mississauga thank you madam
chair.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative I thank you
very quick questions
I think you may be right is
written it may leave out.
subdivisions of the state and
perhaps.
Perhaps in amendment should be
considered because I believe I
want to speak with the
responsive but I believe the
intent is to take out the
services from the entire scope
of the indoctrination closing
you're right that more than just
the state covers local
government as well.
That's all I can say on.
So so madam chair an expert and
I would note that we need do you
see that Representative Chandler
has our hand raised I'm not sure
if you want to add something on
that point before we go on
thank you I thank you madam
chair I did and I will tell you
madam chair and representative
we intentionally left it to the
state
there was some concern about
opening we wanted to make sure
it was narrow enough to a lot LA
any concerns in terms of the
opening up the anti donation
clause and the concern being
that local governments this
wouldn't be as useful tool
anyway.
Thank you
for the clarification what what
was going to say was the.
The provision it's amending
begins neither the state nor any
county school district or
municipality.
So so it is I I think by the
turns more limited
and I I guess I can imagine
situations where a local
government unit would be
interested in.
Funding something like this so
that's worth considering let me
let me just another I guess for
the technical question all my
questions or technical I mean I
understand what you're doing it
and I I appreciate and support
that I
The way I the way I read it is
the.
We we passed the joint
resolution.
The joint resolution goes to the
voters if the voters pass it
that comes back to the
legislature we enact enabling
legislation relation to
implement it.
And.
Right so far yes and and then.
Once we have implementing
legislation.
Does any project they come back
to the state to be approved.
So how that works.
Hello my co sponsor.
Madam chair and Representative
Representative I think that is
how it would work because the
way that a on a joint resolution
is enacted it does require
enabling legislation as one
would expect madam chair and it
does find that they will be
state projects approved by by
law so I would expect that those
would be provided determinations
or at least appropriations
through the legislative process
Madam chair representative.
Well.
Madam chair representative
Chandler that that was gonna be
my next question is approved by
law is that.
Is that a standalone bill is
that the appropriation in the
budget is that a capital outlay.
The capitol late since that goes
into a bill gets passes that
approved by law.
Madam chair representative I
think it is approved by law.
I think it is I mean it's past
their votes the governor signs
it Madam chair representative I
think that's the law.
Okay thank you for that.
Two more questions that I think
the first is one when I when I
first read this I sort of
imagined.
you know with the distribution
line.
Whether it's water or
electricity or internet and then
be able to use this to connect
households off of that
distribution line.
But this this could potentially
be used to build that
distribution line as well so you
we're not necessarily talking.
couple hundred feet or a quarter
mile or you know whatever to the
closest distribution line you
can read distribution line.
Ten miles down a country road to
reach someplace that otherwise
otherwise would preach that
correct.
I will the first eight sponsor.
Less yes otherwise.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative in the
Opening sentences we set that
all the connections to build
missiles so I think that would
answer your question.
I would just my co sponsor to
answer most questions please.
Thank you.
Your voice is going Cali Madam
chair representative I think it
does anticipate potentially that
we now madam chair and
representative that there are
still many places in the state
where where individuals lack
essential.
Critical services and I'm when
I'm not just talking internet
I'm talking running water waste
water all and those sites of
things and this will give the
states the flexibility to
develop programs to support all
all of those kinds of situations
and provide the state the
flexibility to do so.
Madam chair representative
teller thank you for that.
My potentially last question is
whether it's the running line
ten not ten miles down country
road or a couple hundred feet
across the lot to a house.
Once it's built who owns it.
You
madam chair Representative I
think
we first thing to remember we're
gonna be having implementing
legislation so some of those
kinds of issues madam chair and
representative could be
addressed through the
implementation implementing
legislation but I think
potentially the the land owners
of the land upon the owner of
the property of to which the
pipe is attached to run through
it could become the owner that's
the that's the point of the
partly the point of the anti
donation clause adjusting how we
think about these things to
allow for the state to support
individuals who need this kind
of assistant and allowing the
the pie thing or whatever to
attach to the land.
Madam chair of the resentment
and thank you for that in you
know I appreciate that we're
along the road long way from
the staff and the grounds are on
power lines and stuff in there
there's a lot to be figured out
but it does raise a bunch of
simply complete questions I mean
I know from personal experience
when my house when we're having
phone trouble yeah the question
was was it on our side of the
system or the company side of
the system cruise like come up
out and check if it's on your
side of the system again
ability.
Well I'll really one big bill
now so I mean it Sir the
ownership the maintenance that
kind of thing or something to
figure it out
I could certainly see situations
where you would want a county or
even school district to be able
to participate in this but then
I can also see situations where
you know a developer comes in
and
you know some municipalities guy
have this you know fancy
Development and convinces the
city council that the city
should pay for all the water
what's in the development you
know and you see stuff like that
in the end that's sort of why we
have the anti defamation because
of the fact that it's limited to
the state and the fact that it
at some level has come back to
the state.
I think is is probably a good
thing all the the.
You know funding stuff like this
your capital outlay
That kind of gives me the ****
so I I really appreciate this
bill
In particular like as it applies
to some place like the Navajo
Nation you can really get things
with this bill I and I I thank
you all for bringing forward.
Thank you.
Speaker egolf.
It.
Used to perfect you need.
Your.
Seems to drop we'll go to
Representative I've gone speaker
if you still want to weigh in
these major hand again
Representative I going
it's.
Thank you madam chair
Representative I am this is this
is something that I've been
looking at forever and ever
especially when it comes to
infrastructure especially the
and other areas of the Navajo
Nation that I represent.
My question to you is this I
understand on the Senate side.
There is a sin bean worked out
as.
Two one eight and to broadband
throughout the whole state.
Senator a.
Michael but the.
As a bill is working in that
area to where they want to put
X. amount of dollars into
providing broadband throughout
the state.
So they can think of doing
something like that why do we
need a constitutional joint
resolution.
Miss madam.
I'm sorry I'm I'm get a little
point to myself madam chair.
Representative
so of.
My understanding of Senator
Padilla is fund of bill is he's
creating some sort of fund
I would point out to you
Madam chair and representative
that of there is a house bill
ten ten which is a broadband
bill as well and it derives from
working with
secretary Salas are and others
on his staff to determine how
best to leverage state funds and
this was one of the suggestions
as you may have heard secretary
Salazar expound on earlier madam
chair and representative it they
feel the department feels very
limited in its ability to invest
directly in.
Programs and infrastructure
using state monies because of
the the broad scope of the anti
donation clause and I think
that's a fair statement and
madam chair if if you would
indulge just like I believe
agency of our our attorney from
from the Department can speak to
that point more specifically.
Thank you madam chair
representative yes we do have
the we have reviewed every
broadband related legislation
and the indignation Clause
trump's all of them so no
statute of course can go around
the indignation clones so no
funds provided under statute can
go from the state directly to a
private entity which is the is
the internet service provider
without violating the the
indignation for and that's why
the funded for have you are
referring to Representative that
fund would allow do with this to
give money to local governments
municipalities counties are for
their Representative project was
was mentioned earlier how those
local governments will then
legally provide that money to
internet service providers for
actually restructure you can
clear and potentially would be
unconstitutional if we don't
have this this exception to the.
So this because with cover you
know in which trump any other
questions any other nation the
federation.
Share a representative
Representative to use
nothing is that simple in our
area.
Capital outlay J..
Emendations basically what it is
that they ask for funding and we
find money in so that they can
run the water and sewer and and
make conditions on to a whole
look using capital outlay money.
And then goes to a private home.
Basically
On reservation land so in that.
We are on if we are as The New.
Representative Chandler will let
the.
Mr.
Is equal and.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative so the Indian
nation close.
There's not a lot of fire to
other sovereign it only applies
to private citizens and you know
without knowing more about the
specific situation that you are
expecting if funds are going
directly to a medical nation
that's outside the scope of the
institution cost because Navajo
Nation is not a private entity
or private person.
Nation for prohibit you from
giving me money because I am a
private person but not an
affirmation of the whole not
another state agency not the
federal government not a member
tribal communities that is.
Chair and representative in the
US and those kind of clear my
mind of the the new museum peace
of mind is thinking about is is
the the end result is it does go
to basically the chapters.
Okay I know the server nation.
But it ends up being and in a
private home.
In a home that is individual
owns or as part of the nation so
that is my problem the other
thing that I have no question in
mind this some of the request
and I know that probably
Representative Allison has
probably had some of this
chapter houses I or something to
plan brochure well in my area.
Well as soon these.
Just ask for money for
broadband.
Capital outlay.
So.
Okay for me to do the pueblo of
Zuni but it's not okay for me to
enter the.
To give you know what I was.
Invoking you thank you.
Given
you know from ten million
appropriation for broadband our
rural expansion we have given
over two million to the pueblo
coach coaching team directly and
we're not discussing the funding
to the because that's completely
outside we can do that really
under under the integration
program of course we've had
another appropriation ten
million dollars for broadband
projects on the number of nation
there's also no indication
programs there the way we do
face the problem is when we want
to work with private internet
service providers who want to
serve our rural communities but
cannot invest in the committee
for the infrastructure
themselves because they will not
recoup that investment so they
go to the federal government get
about eighty percent of the cost
of the project the forward but
we felt federal dollars then
they come and ask for the state
to cover the remaining twenty
percent and that is the
uncertainty we even though we
have arguments for both that we
are serving the images which is
an exception in the state is
receiving consideration in
exchange which is which fixes
are part of the invigoration.
Entirely.
These questions have not been
answered by a court there's also
the threat that we may be skewed
or we may have to claw the money
back yes it's very specific to
fund going to a private company
thank you going to market value
wise would not Sir and those
people would otherwise remain
serve because today they are.
Thank you thank you.
Madam chair and Representative
said my mind at ease knowing
like can do whatever I wanted to
however I do it thank you I will
go to the speaker.
Thank you.
I'll go and we have again
speaker even up you hear me now
okay.
so I very much support the the
idea any effort.
I want to.
Yeah consider to suggestions
that he might make this stronger
to see how the Sanchez might
react one.
Is.
We doubt in house bill eleven.
With an issue.
In the lead actor that talked
about the legislature needing to
approve.
Each state project.
And that is also contains a
provision about counties and
cities.
Routing project that that's not
relevant here I think it would
be important to delete.
From here the send you line
twelve on page six.
Thank you know if you were law
online fifteen.
because I don't know that we
want to have this in the
constitution.
because it depends on how the
has the term state project yes
the fine.
And I don't know that we want to
have every project to do it
might want to.
Engage in a complete having to
come back and be specifically
authorized by the legislature
yeah we do have to do that yeah
just keep in mind our water
trust where projects have to
come before the legislature
every year to be authorized
specifically and that puts it at
about an eighteen month delay on
everything water trust board
wants to do.
And so I think we either should
delete that or.
Change online thirteen.
I think my second preference
would be to change the shall
online thirteen to may.
but I I think we're better off
just deleting that whole
provision I I don't think it's
necessary
the implementing legislation can
do that even if it's not in the
constitution I just I don't want
to hire hands which I I really
think that we should take that
out
and
the.
I just you are my are very
recent experience a hassle Levin
makes you think that that that
limitation that we shouldn't put
in there and then second.
I would suggest that on page six
line eighteen after they were
domicile.
I would add a comma in the words
or other.
Service as provided by law now
thank you know fifty years from
now.
What is going to be considered
essential we never even imagine.
yes of the building that houses
from satellite you know it you
know right but I think we should
add after the redomicile madam
chair
a comma in the words for other
services as provided by law.
Madam chair on that.
Enter your muted.
Representative McQueen thank you
thank you madam chair Madam
chair of a sticker egolf when
used when you started to recite
the second amendment I thought
you were going in a different
direction which I would also
like to bring up but should your
or other services B. before to
be connected to domicile does it
it modify those services yeah
you're right yes yes manages to
be line seventeen after the word
services that that's correct
that's correct.
I try to do this on my phone so
I'm.
made that mistake you're
absolutely correct madam chair
representative we will be
afterwards Services.
Yeah comma or other services as
provided by law.
It's.
You madam chair I'm curious what
the budgeting about those two
proposed amendment.
Sanchez.
Your.
Thank you ask my co sponsor but
I think this is a friendly
amendment yes
Madam chair I agree I think both
of those suggestions are
improve the bill.
Madam chair could we
I want to make you know I this
committee did a great job of
making sure we send yeah very
clean legislation out
because sometimes our friends in
the Senate have a hard time
understanding at separately
written amendments.
so I would I would suggest that
if if if there's agreement on
the on a few minutes and I'll be
glad to restate them that they
be compiled into a Judiciary
Committee substitute.
that will proceed.
Forward
That we don't have you know the
the the resolution and into tag
along in separately stated
amendment so madam chair and
Representative Allison
Representative Chandler the
amendment to the motion would
be.
To strike.
Beginning online online check
eighty six line twelve.
Strike.
Beginning of the word do.
Through that period.
On page six line fifteen.
That would be a member once
again page six line twelve.
Right beginning at the word the.
Through that period online
fifteen.
Number one the number two.
After the word services online
seventeen to page six line
seventeen after the work
services.
Insert a comma.
And the words for other.
Services.
And determined I'm sorry for
other services as provided by
law.
So again eight six one seventeen
afterwards Services insert a
comma.
In the words.
For other services.
As provided by law.
Mr speaker Representative before
we proceed might have staff
would be back what that proposed
amendment was to make sure we
have captured it in the way that
it was intended.
We have one of our analysts that
was documenting that our other
folks that could read that back.
Allen.
I believe what the speaker was
proposing is that we can you
hear me that we do see us to
going forward and amendment one
on page six line twelve.
Right the worried Donna and
continuing through the period
online fifteen.
Right.
Okay I'm amendment to.
page six line seventeen after
the word services
insert a comma and then the
words or other services as
provided by law.
Sorry I don't have the bill
right in front of me so I is
there a period after law.
No Ellen and madam chair Ellen
you got that exactly right yeah
and we don't need to.
Actuation afterward locket
continues with the word I'll be
connected to a dollar.
Okay great all right yes thank
you very much and you're you're
envisioning a substitute is that
correct.
Madam chair Alan yes please.
Okay thank you so much.
We was there other points you
wanted to raise I know
Representative McQueen said he
also wanted to speak to
something related to
know chair that Netanyahu's my
comments
and so I would make those two
men in the form of a motion I'm.
Okay.
I just need your help we all
learn of it you name them as
amend or they were to set up a
lot is amendment one amendment
to but is it a single motion on
both of on on the series of of
of amendments that you've
brought before the committee.
Madam chair would make you to
distinguish.
Thank you do we have a
discussion on this motion what
we have a second from
Representative Eli thank you
Representative thank we have
discussion on this motion madam
chair if I may.
Representative McQueen madam
chair I could bring this up
later but since we're tinkering
with the language.
And hopefully figure you all can
hear me I wonder with the first
suggested this ammendment he was
the calm after the word domicile
in the direction I thought he
was going in was addition
addressing domicile because as
worded like you could Ryan
You can't run wire down to the
school just not domicile.
And I wondered domicile is
overly restrictive I mean I can
understand there being some
nervousness if we open it up to
commercial establishments but
you know schools community
buildings townhall stuff like
that those are domiciles.
I wonder if we should dress
that.
Madam chair on that point we can
already do that right with
capital outlay it to them
government a government that
thank you Mr speaker thank you
madam chair thank you.
any further discussion on the
amendment.
Okay seeing none.
let and is there any opposition
to the amendment.
The Indians going up any nodding
or any other indication of
communication through the.
I'm so would it then be
appropriate to say you have an
an you have an amended house
joint resolution nine.
Are you I'm trying to think now
I am yes madam chair help me
out.
I think you can say the
amendment is adopted by the
committee the the issue is
is my understand correctly we're
going to approve the committee
sub on Monday because it's still
going to pass just as deep
reported out just just fast as
if it were have been passed
yesterday okay.
In my correct Mr speaker.
Medicare yeah however the
committee wishes to do it yeah
it's fine if we.
do it Monday afternoon we could
have a committee report Tuesday.
And vote on it Wednesday.
Well if.
In the Senate session I think
what.
That we're that's what I was
looking at I know in the house
were in session madam chair and
Mr speaker on Monday and will be
at the top.
Committee reports but will be
doing the same on Tuesday and so
on Monday after the session so
after three o'clock we have a
bear of an agenda but we can
approve the committee stab at
that time.
So essentially we would roll
this over now with the
understanding that that's how
the committee since going to
read okay.
Okay.
Thank you thank you madam chair
thank you sponsors thank you.
Thank you Representative
Chandler and Allison.
Thank you.
Madam chair looks like we made
it to the end of our agenda then
now that are
knows exactly what they're going
to do and prepare committee
senator action on a.
This will be our last early
evening committee members out.
Were they trouble.
This we're not putting our house
Judiciary Committee until after
the floor session what I'm going
to do is let all of our sponsors
now that
you know we're not trying to be
backed up and we spent a long
time with bills because we want
to make them as perfect as
possible so I'm going to ask
them to please limit their
testimony on the bill and and
and asked it to be more R.
Representative would usually not
the first committee so that
people have an opportunity you
know two eight I'm really in the
first committee and and we'll
get public comment over with a
little bit faster.
The space.
The reason we're all.
Related to this the US I'm late
yesterday afternoon we got the
stops for two.
Madam is the it may not be here
and I'm sitting.
We heard most of it madam chair
speaker does still have.
And I'm for.
Okay.
Your most of it yes.
We're gonna be more.
That had the pandemic.
Well I'm going to prevail upon
the Sanchez to do that.
Where we're ready to go ahead
despite you did all the work
today you can tell people
finished
Mr speaker one last chance did
you mean to have your hand up Mr
speaker with his hands floating
and no ma'am no ma'am I'm sorry
I am a delinquent hand lower.
Hearing today and our
constitution meeting is
adjourned thank you everybody.
