Madam Chair, you have a quorum.
Uh, good morning, everyone. We
had a late night last night, and
we have an early morning this
morning, so bear with us. We're
gonna try to get through our
entire agenda. Um, first item on
the agenda is Senate Bill 507
firearm licenses and transfers,
Senator Cervantes.
Of course.
Thank you. Uh, Madam Chair, and
I am a concealed carry permit
holder. I do believe it's very
important for those of us that
are responsible gun owners to
distinguish ourselves from not
responsible gun owners and then
from criminal gun owners and the
concealed carry, I think is an
important part of that by
requiring training,
demonstrating proficiency,
classroom learning of the laws,
etc. with this bill intends to
do is to do two things, which is
to increase the penalties for
not um concealing or having a
concealed carry permit while in
fact having a gun on your
possession.
And I'll stop there for a moment
because I think that when we
talk about gun violence, we're
oftentimes very focused on mass
killings and assault weapons and
things of that kind, but the
reality is that most gun deaths
and violence occurs on Friday
nights at somebody's house or,
or at a party or uh kids are
showing off or bringing a gun to
school, and I know this has
touched some of the lives here
very closely. That's where the
gun violence takes place for the
most part. So the goal here is
to uh discourage anyone but
young people in particular, but
anyone from uh
Treating guns is something
that's a toy or a play or a
badge of courage or something
you take out to Friday night and
Saturday night parties. So we're
increasing from a petty
misdemeanor to a misdemeanor,
the carrying of a of a weapon
without a concealed carry
permit.
And to facilitate that and to
get that idea out into the
public. We're also making it
easier in some respects to have
a concealed carry permit. So as
a concealed carry permit holder
when I took the original course,
it was 15 hours. It's an absurd
amount of time, you said, Madam
Chair, I hope you don't mind me
sharing that you've discussed
this with your husband who said,
I hope you don't mind me saying
that he's a permit holder and uh
you can't talk about a gun for 2
days. Uh, there's not enough
law. We ended up the the the uh
instructors ended up stretching
as best they could any kind of
content to meet.
hour requirements, but it's,
it's an unnecessary burden to go
in and learn how the gun
operates, learn the laws of the
state and federal laws, and then
to demonstrate a proficiency. So
we've reduced the hours, we've
reduced the requirements for a
renewal course, um, and, uh, the
again, the goal I'm repeating is
to make sure it's really
encourage people to have a
concealed carry permit, uh, and
so we've done that in a number
of different ways in the bill,
but fundamentally that really is
the summary of what the bill
attempts to accomplish.
Thank you, Senator. Let's go to
the audience, those with.
In opposition to the bill,
please approach the gentleman
with um the microphone.
All right, I don't see anyone.
Those online wishing to speak in
opposition, please raise your
hand.
OK, I see 11 hand raised, um,
John.
Thosen
Yes, madam chair, committee. My
name is John Felson. I'm the
district 7 director for New
Mexico Firearms Institute, or
excuse me, New Mexicohooting
Sports Association.
Uh, I'm against this bill for
several reasons. A lot of what
has already been discussed in
previous committees, but what
this bill will do is make it
real hard and real complicated
for reciprocity.
Again, there's no need.
To take this any further than
our current laws, a concealed
carry permit should be good in
other states, this bill will
help make ours less available.
To other states to to utilize.
It's just another attack on
legal gun owners will have
nothing to do to save criminals
or to prevent crime.
It's just another law-abiding
citizen takedown. Thank you.
else wishing to speak in
opposition online, please raise
your hand.
I don't see anyone, uh, those in
the audience wishing to speak in
support, please approach the
gentleman with the microphone.
I don't see anyone, um, those
online wishing to speak in
support, please raise your hand.
All right, um, Meredith Ma.
Um, Madam Chair, members of the
committee.
Meredith Macon speaking of New
Mexico and the.
You're breaking up, you're gonna
association of you. Oh my gosh,
um.
Meredith, we're having a hard
time.
Let me try again,
um, can you, yes, better.
now, um, I'm speaking on behalf
of the League of Women Voters of
New Mexico and the American
Association of University Women
in um in support of this.
Important legislation firearms.
Thank you very much. Thank you,
Meredith. Um, anyone else
wishing to speak and support,
please raise your hand.
All right, I don't see anyone
else. You can go back to the
sponsor, um, Senator, do you
want to supplement, um, before
we go committee? I'm not bad,
I'm sure, but I think the fact
that if I can just note that
usually when we have a gun build
vi vicious and vigorous uh
polarization on the issue in the
committee debate and discussion,
the fact that we have relatively
little here, I think it reflects
the fact that we've maybe found
a sweet spot where this is what
I call a carrot and stick.
There's something that that I
think got enthusiasts will like
and there's
Things that I think that gun
enthusiasts might otherwise find
um something they wouldn't like,
they wouldn't like increasing
penalties for lack of a
concealed carry. So as a gun
owner, I, I've said many times
before, I think it's incumbent
on us that our gun owners to be
the leaders of reasonable and
responsible gun laws and so it's
interesting to me always to see
who who's for and who's against,
and here you're not hearing a
lot one way or the other, but we
are changing gun laws and I
think maybe that's because we
found the sweet spot.
Thank you, Senator. Um, I have
Representative Romero and then
Representative Reeve.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. um, Senator, Chairman, um,
And experts, um, I'm, I'm just
curious, so I saw some of the
new material and terms and
conditions. Um, and I know that,
um, the Department of Public
Safety is not here who
administers this program
overall. Um, my understanding
from some of the um work through
the interim and some of the
previous bills that we've had
related to uh concealed carry is
that the program at DPS um was
underfunded and perhaps
understaffed.
Um, and I'm just curious from
your, from this, the addition or
subtraction of duties of built
in this bill that you foresee
how, if you have, have had any
um conversations with them about
implementation, understanding my
understanding was that there was
a backlog of permitting issues,
and they hadn't been uh
revisited. There were folks that
hadn't um necessarily, uh,
refiled for their permit and yet
continue.
to have one despite because,
because there was a lack of
interaction between the
department, so I'm just curious
if you had that, any sort of
feedback on this from them.
So Madam Chair and my chair, and
we've not had any participation
in any of the hearings from DPS
in opposition or would be
expressing any of your concerns
and I'm not um familiar with
anything that's come up in the
budgeting process where they've
indicated that this is a program
that's underfunded.
I do think that it is important
for you to emphasize the point
you're making, which is, again,
the goal is to try to ensure
that people want to be
responsible with guns, are able
to get a permit and if there's a
backlog and there's a delay,
then sometimes their initiative
and their enthusiasm for doing
so follows along the way and
I'll just tell you that when I
pursued a concealed carry
permit, some of my friends said,
Why bother? The penalties of
petty misdemeanor. So if you're
carrying a concealed weapon
without a permit that the
penalty is so inconsequential,
it's not worth the effort.
Of taking the weekend and the
class and the trains and the and
the costs, and so that's part of
why we're increasing the
penalties here a little bit, but
you're right, we, we, as I say,
have to do our job to process
this quickly so people are again
encouraged to be responsible.
Senator, my understanding was
just the opposite actually that
once you had a permit, so nobody
ever sort of followed up with
you. You were issued one. There
was a lack of oversight as to
any of the qualifications
required, um, and that sort of
Overall, the system was, it was
not really working as intended
to have that sort of permitting
ability for us to understand
that there was a level of um
rigor around being able to have
um a curing of a firearm, um,
but I'm, I'm not opposed to the
bill. I'm mostly just trying to
understand if, when implemented,
what the implication would be
understanding that there were
some issues that that were had
there. So, um, thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Reed. Thank you,
Madam Chair, um, senator and
expert, um, I just had a
question. um I actually like
this bill. I do think that class
is kind of long, um, I've taken
it in this little long for your
whole, but my question was more
on the refresher, taking away
the refresher part of the
course, Madam Chair and senator.
I'm, I'll just say I'm not one
of those people that goes to the
range every weekend, you know,
and gets my hand on my gun all
the time and I tend to
often shouldn't be saying this,
these are the refresher courses
a time to kind of, you know, get
re familiar with my handgun or
whatever it is, um, I'm pretty
updated on the laws. Most people
aren't very updated on the
changing laws, so what's kind of
the thought process behind
taking out the refresher course,
even if it, you know, what is
it? I think it's like a computer
test and then a a arranged test
if I remember, uh, Madam chair.
Ma, I'm sure it's a good
question and um if I can be very
honest with you, the, what we
probably should be doing, but
I'm not prepared to take this
battle on today is, uh, we
should probably make it akin to
driver's licenses where the age,
the age of probably have some
relationship to the requirement
for refreshers, so if you, if
you qualify it in my age should
I really continue, continue to
have a concealed carry permit at
85 or 90, um, and so, but I'm
not prepared to take on the
AARP.
Everyone else, yeah, too, but,
but this, this doesn't have an
age component. I think we should
probably do that in terms of
refresher, but in terms of, of
demonstrating the continuing
proficiency, there is still a
renewal requirement you have to
resubmit, um, fingerprints if
necessary, driver's license
updated and updated fee, but in
terms of retaking the
coursework, you're right, that
we've eliminated that again the
goal is here is to try and keep
people in place, you know, I'm,
I, I, it would be interesting
and I don't have the data for
you to figure out how many
people get a
still carry permit and then
allow it to lapse. I think I
think that's probably a
substantial number, particularly
with the points made by
Representative Romero if, if the
department's not processing them
quickly, people will just fall
out with,
and for senator. I do, I do
agree I think people do let them
lapse. I like that extension on
the uh period. It's just, uh, if
I don't know if you've taken
that test then that refresher,
it's kind of hard. I mean, you
have to sit down and really pay
attention to it, but I just, I
just worried that people aren't
updated on the law to
you know, what they can and
cannot do, but I, I do like to
build that was just my only
concern, and I was just curious
also kind of a DPS had weighed
in on whether they felt that
they.
Material done within, you know,
the amount of time needed of the
reduction in the hours on the
regular part of the class, I'm
sure.
Madam Chair, I'm just confirming
in response, um, I, I would
consider it a favorable
discussion and perhaps an
amendment on this committee to
require again recoursing or
retraining or requalification on
a range. I, I would entertain
that. I'll just listen to the
debate and see what everyone
else is. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, um, I have
representative Chavez and then
Representative Sapansky.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator. Um, I loved my
class, I'll just say I can still
carry and when my daughter went
to get hers, and I just needed
to do my renewal. I, I did the
entire class, so to me I, I
enjoy it and I'm like Andy, I go
to the range probably every
Sunday afternoon to relieve some
stress and practice my targets.
Um, I do have a question though,
um, I heard the comment, is this
gonna affect our reciprocity in
other states, and what did he
mean by that?
Um
Madam Chair, so let me just take
your first comment if you
wouldn't mind. So, um,
I uh, I may, I may have enjoyed
the class a little less than you
because, of course, I'm the
sponsor of Fre, for example, the
red flag law on the seven-day
waiting period and so forth. So
naturally when I walk in that
classroom, I was a popular topic
of the discussion in the
classroom uh why uh Senator, are
you doing all these terrible
things to us gun owners, um, but
it was mostly in good nature,
um, but I, that might explain
why I enjoyed the class a little
less than you did, um.
Uh, representative, the question
you bring up is gonna be a good
one. I think we're going to hear
a lot about that in the coming
maybe year or two I'm hearing
that at the national level the
new administration and the
Congress being what it is, that
there may be efforts to try and
even adopt a state or national,
uh, reciprocity or national
concealed carry laws that would
recognize those things. Um, I, I
think that it's important that
what we do retaining here is
that that any transfer of a
license from another state has
to meet New Mexico requirements
and qualifications, we should be
the master of our own domain.
And I'll just tell you, for
example, in Texas, I think
there's no permit even required.
So we were just saying we're
gonna lower the bar to any other
state, then the risk perhaps of
you as a gun owner, you may not
like California's, uh, laws, uh,
and, and would not want New
Mexico subject to maybe
California and New York law, so
I think we should remain the
master of our domain, as I'm
repeating and, and um what we're
seeing in here is you've got to
be hard in Mexico requirements,
and then we'll transfer your
license anywhere else as long as
it's as strict as ours or
stricter.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair,
Senator, but can I still go to
Arizona and have reciprocity if
our laws are
Weaker in a sense, I guess with
our requirements. I, I guess I'm
not sure what his comment is. So
I understand they could come
here, we have our own laws and
requirements, but what about
steaks that may have stricter
guidelines.
I think that would require me to
address each and one of those
other states and see what their
laws are and um I, I can't tell
you what Arizona requires if you
bring in a concealed carry
weapon into their state within
New Mexico concealed carry
equipment, but that should be
Arizona's determinant
determination. Arizona should
control.
Whether they recognize in New
Mexico reciprocity and um and
I'm told that DPS has, uh,
according to Brandon, um,
Cummings DPS has done that
analysis already. They've done,
I think as a survey of other
states and have determined which
states meet or exceed our
qualification requirements.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair,
Senator. Those are all the
questions. Thank you, uh,
Representative Sapansy.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Good
morning, Senator, uh, Brandon,
um,
Uh, I mentioned this in the
previous committee and I just
want to mention it again, um,
and it kind of connects to
representative Reeve's comments
about the lack of refresher
training, which is just that uh
Have a family member with
concealed carry license and the
The training, um, that they
experienced was incredibly poor,
um, and individuals pass to
did not meet the basic
qualifications laid out in the
statute as is, um, and I don't
wanna go through all the
details. I shared that in the
previous committee, but, um, you
know, I think, uh, reducing the
number of hours may
Actually cut out the amount of
time that people can spend, uh,
Dispensing in accurate legal
advice and, and, you know,
creating hypothetical scenarios,
um, but, you know, this is still
the basic, uh, you know, ability
to complete the, uh, there.
And actually hit the targets as
required, etc. um.
is important and and wasn't
adhered to. Now I have heard
from constituents since that
hearing that there are some
better courses, um, in, in one
of them mentioned the course in
Los Alamos, um, as well, but,
you know, I think we we need to
have an auditing of these
courses, um, because, uh,
Not just because of the
responsibility of having
concealed carry licenses also
because we grant exemptions to
concealed carry license holders
in many of our statutes and, and
in many of the uh requirements
that we impose on people who
don't have that concealed carry
license and so I found uh that
experience to
Or the, the recounting of that
experience to be really
disappointing. Um, so, Madam
Chair, I, I would also support,
um, at least including the
refresher training, because in
the event that someone attended
a course, um, as was described
to me, it would be nice that
maybe they would go to a renewal
course that was a little higher
quality. Um, so,
I don't, I'm not at a point
where I can propose the
amendment, but it, and I know
Senator, you and I had a good
discussion, um, with Madam
Chair, the, the last committee,
so, but if you'd like to respond
to that, I'd be happy to hear
that. Thank you, Madam Chair. So
Madam Chair, the, the language
that would deal with that is on
pages 6 and 7 of the original
bill, so you can look to that
and um I wouldn't, I wouldn't
disagree, and as I said, I'm,
I'm open to entertaining a
couple of things. One, as you
mentioned, the number of hours
and whether the hours is
excessive or not, uh, right now
it's 15 hours the bill.
take it down to 6 hours that
I'll be honest with you is
something that we could discuss
here and that I could certainly
be reasonable about changing
that, uh, the, the difference
really was, I, I really do
believe one day is an adequate
amount of time again, I had to
do a full Saturday and then part
of a Sunday, um, and again, the
qual qualification on the range,
uh, for those of you gun owners
or or even you can imagine is a
10 minute proposition, really, I
mean, the only reason it takes
more than 10 minutes because you
got your whole class standing in
line waiting to go before.
you, but, but the actual hitting
of the targets are pretty
modest uh requirement. It's the,
the, the distance is not uh far
the target is large and uh it's
pretty hard to fail, although
I've been told people fail, uh,
but, but that part of the
examination or qualifications 10
or 15 minutes at most. So in my
class, we spent an hour talking
about you'll forgive me for
being sounding sexist and trying
not to do that, but we spent an
hour talking about purses, um,
that women could buy.
that we have uh concealed carry
um components to them or, or
holsters or leg, uh, you know,
clothing that is conducive to
concealed carry. I mean, it, it
was to the point of absurdity,
really, uh, and you can
understand that if you
understand the function of a
gun, the you can teach somebody
how to use a gun and in an hour
and probably do well and then
you're right, there was a
component to the laws, and that
was an important part, I agree
with you. That was a really
important part of the class, um,
which is again where I became a
target.
a class.
If I could interject on page 6.
I mean one fix might be just
adding back that paragraph if
you want to take a look at that
while we talk some more.
That makes sense.
Mhm
And what's the difference?
Madam Senator, we're looking at
page 6.
Uh, subsection F, but we're also
looking at page 7 subsection 8,
and perhaps you are your expert
could.
described the difference between
those and, and what would be the
appropriate adjustment.
Thank you man. It's a good
question and it seems to be
inconsistent, right? It seems
like this, but this is again
existing law, uh, which, which
my solution was to strike it
all, um, and, and that is one
solution, but if that's too
blunt an instrument, if you
will, then we may want to go
back and and re-establish it,
either one of those two
provisions or sections, but
you're right, um, reinstating
subsection F would be something
I would consider to be
constructive amendment, um.
And so with uh age, but I, I
think doing both of them
probably doesn't doesn't work
well together. Uh, if I may,
Madam Chair, may I refer to Mr.
Cummings? He may, he may be able
to expand on that, Louis.
Yes, yes, we're also whispering
amongst herself, trying to find
a constructive suggestion,
Senator, Madam Madam Chair
Representative, um, on page 6 is
for a renewal, which would have
been under the previous every 4
years when you renewed your
license, the refresher course
referenced in paragraph H on
page 7 is a mid.
Byson's refresher.
So right now, this statute
requires you to do a refresher
course in every 2 years, or get
your, go through the training
course to get your concealed
carry in the first instance,
your refresher course two years
later, to a larger renewal.
For slash refresher course on
the 4th anniversary, so it has
refreshing courses every 2
years, and they're more
substantial on the 4th
anniversary of your initial
license.
So Madam Chair, I think, I think
if I understand what the
committee is suggesting, I think
the, the
way to do this is to
re-establish subsection F and
leave subsection H on page 7
struck, um,
And that would mean that you'd
have to retake a course every 4
years. You could change the 4
years to another time component,
but what we have right now is
the notion that you're gonna go
do a a a gun essentially
proficiency, if you will, every
2 years and then, and then the
only thing we do is require you
to send the certificate to the
state demonstrating you did so,
but I don't, I don't know the
stages going around.
And suspending or revoking
licenses for people who don't do
the two-year proficiency
certificate, um, but the, but
they, they do require it right
now when they do the renewal
every 4 years, so that, again,
that the committee may decide
that 2 years or 4 years or
something in between our or what
is it gonna be our wishes the
legislature. Um, well,
representative Sainski still has
the floor. Madam chair Senator,
uh, we were just discussing and,
and would love to get the
committee's thoughts on
Uh, in the senator's thoughts on
Reinstating, um, however,
Um
I would prefer that it be 2
hours. I would prefer that it be
2 hours every 2 years.
As opposed to 4 hours.
4 years.
Uh, Madam Cherry, and, uh,
Senator.
We're on page 6.
It's, it's struck now.
Page 6F it's struck.
On that point to Rome on the,
um, so Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Spanski, Senator,
um, I think have to item 2 would
be sufficient because age if we
go back to it would be the area
with which we would perhaps put
in the language for how the, the
two hour course every 2 years,
um, and we can keep 3 struck
out, um, for that certificate of
completion because it does
conflict with if we wanted to
have that refresher course.
page 13, um, on the license
renewal section, the new
material.
Um, item 2117 through 19 talks
about shall not be required to
complete a refresher of firearms
training course to renew the
application. So, I think if
we're gonna fix that also 22
points on that. There's no fee
structure if we, if we could
keep stricken out, so we have to
bring it back.
Um, I feel like from 8 to 2, and
then if we could also um figure
outage. That's my suggestion.
not entirely clear as to your
what are we keeping, what are
you proposing to keep in lines
13 through 18.
Awesome.
Including the fee because,
including the fee, OK,
including the fee and then keep
number 3 stricken and then we
can work on bringing back item H
on page 7, a licensee shall
complete a two-hour refresher
firearms training course, 2
years after the issuance of the
original or renewed license, so
certainly that that um meets the
demand of what representative
Sapanski was talking about.
Lepansky was talking about.
Um, and perhaps the rest of it
makes sense as well, um, to, to,
to keep based on the principles
of what the department does.
Anyone else want to
weigh in on this discussion
about these two paragraphs and
how they interact, and of course
the center you may weigh in as
well.
Then Madame Cherry would also
recommend striking the knot on
page 13, line 17.
Because it, it would conflict
with this bring the bringing
back of this language.
Madam Madam chair, I'll
entertain all those as
constructive discussions again
the, the hour and the renewal uh
number of years where they're
really something that I look for
the committee to weigh in on and
I'm, I'm learning, of course,
maybe not surprised several
members of your committee are
concealed carry permit holders
as I am, and so, um, we'll leave
it to your experience in doing
so whether the number of years
and the number of hours are
matters for us to decide as
policy maker.
Representatives of Pansy still
has the floor.
Um, Madam Cha and Senator, I
just had, I, uh, agree with, uh,
Representative Romero's
suggestions. Is there a part in
this where, where does it state
the term of the license or the
length of the license. I just
wanna make sure we
have that still maintained that
existing language.
And
See if I can find that.
I know, I know there is at least
realize there's regulations
because we probably we authorize
them to promulgate rules as well
too. I'm looking for that and
you'll see the page where it
says per to rules adopted.
Um, I'm looking for anything in
the statute that says how long.
Uh, uh, so I've got a citation
for you. I don't know if it's in
the bill 29-19-3.
And, and it's a 4-year license
which is again why we have that
4-year renewal requirement. I
think it's kind of
kind of self-evident when you
say you've got to renew every 4
years, but we we don't say
explicitly in this area of the
law, it's only valid for 4
years, but we say you have to
renew it every 4 years, so it
kind of has the same effect. OK.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh, and
senator. So that's not being
modified by this bill so I
assume that's why it's not here
so that I think, I think the
amendment then would be correct.
Thank, thank you, Senator, Madam
Chair. So let me repeat what
I've heard and then someone can
help us formulate a motion to.
and that is on page 6, we go
back to F which is now stricken,
but we're going to reinstate
lines 13.
Through 18, um,
Putting a period where the
semicolon is now and then
straight, leaving the rest of
the strike so that and would be
stricken still on laying 18 and
entire paragraph 3 on that same
page, correct? um
representatives, Madam Cherry, I
think we do need to uh add the
end to the end of uh line 16.
And let me ask you a question
about the, the fee structure,
which we're not done.
Apologies.
Um, and then we're going to
reinstate paragraph H is what I
heard. And then we are going to
on page 13, um, online 17 strike
the knot.
OK. And I'm, I'm doing this in
part for our staff so we can get
the amendment correct. Um.
And, OK. So,
There are people on
Bored with that. I'm, I'm seeing
as do people accept that as an
emotion.
Do you want to make that motion,
Representative Romero, uh, yes,
madam chair, um, so the motion
is um to amend page 6 lines 13
through 18.
Adding the word and.
So adding back all of the
language.
Including an and at the end of
line 16 in keeping, uh, then
adding a period after the word
fee.
And then on page 7 lines 3
through 10, um, reinstating all
of that language and then on
page 13 lines 17 strike the word
not, and that's the motion.
Do I have, um,
A second on that motion to
amend.
think people are still
cogitating, do we, do I have a
second? OK, thank you. We have a
motion to amend. Any questions
about what it is, just in case
people are confused.
Looks like people understand the
emotion. Um, is there any
opposition to adopting that
proposed amendment.
I, I, do you have a question?
OK.
Madam Jara,
so we're going back to basically
the original.
Language and senator and expert
then do we.
Change it from a petty to a
misdemeanor.
Well, wait, wait, wait, we
haven't adopted the motion. Have
we adopted if you want to raise
a different issue. That's a
different issue. So on this, on
this wait, wait, wait, we have
we adopted any opposition to
adopting the motion to a man.
There's no opposition, OK, you
haven't amended bill. So I, I
apologize. It's all right. We're
all a little tired today. So you
have a question on a different
aspect. I, I, although I will
say I'm skipping over
representative Martinez when I'm
going to you, so why don't I go
to you and then, OK, all right.
He's on a call.
Madam Chair, Senator and expert
Mike, my only comment there was
if we're basically going back to
the original language.
Then
we truly see a necessity to
change it from them.
OK.
To, uh, all misdemeanor.
Because we're
We haven't really made any big
changes. We, we have some of the
new material transfer license
from another state and then the
new material where it can be to
where you can carry a gun and
where you can't carry a gun.
But those, the two we just
changed back in the original
format seemed to have.
I don't know, I, um.
I'm sorry.
Yeah.
So we're the only other change
is the 6-hour course.
That's still, and we're not
going back to the.
2-day course, right, Senator?
The, the, the hours for original
qualification would change from
at least unless you all lament
otherwise, we go from 15 to 6
hours. So that, that I made,
Madam Chair, I may just take
minutes, uh, you know, represent
while I, I didn't go through
every change we're making, but
there, there are some other
significant changes. So for
example, principally um on the
first page we're changing the
caliber requirement under the
existing law.
If I had a higher caliber than.
Uh, we're taking that out
because everybody qualifies on a
45, candidly, right? I see
everybody nodding their head.
There's no reason you'd ever
want to qualify on something
less, right? Um, the, uh,
section 2, we, we recognize that
a, um, if you look on page 2, we
added a lawful permanent
resident as a, as a person who
qualified for concealed carry
because they can only go a
lawful permanent residents
allowed to purchase and own a
gun, they should be able to get
a concealed carry permit, but
the existing law says you have
to be a citizen, you shouldn't
have the same.
You don't need to go through
everything, thank you. Thank
you, um, uh, Representative
Hall, have you had your answer,
um, resolved, a question
resolved.
I, I believe so, ma'am.
Thank you, the
petty misdemeanor the
misdemeanors were still in the
bill, so just clarifying cause
that appeared to be your
question. Um, anything else,
representative Paul, before I go
to represent Martinez? No,
madam, OK, uh, Representative
Martinez.
men chair and senator.
The amendment took care of most
of my questions, um,
But I do.
I do have a question about
oversight of the courses, I
mean, is there not a uniform
course across the board because
like Representative Chavez, I
really enjoyed my class.
It was, it was engaging, it was
formative
um.
So isn't there uniformity on.
One
Course itself.
Or does each.
The
his own.
So Madam Chair and
representative, that's a good
question, and I wish that I was
addressing that with some
legislation, the session I'm
not, but you'll see if you look
on page 8 of the bill, you'll
see the existing language that
specifies what is required from
the course and it just reads
that um that proved firearms
training course, generaly of
course is certified or sponsored
by federal or state law
enforcement agency a college, a
firearms trade school or a
nationally recognized
organization, all as approved by
the department. So right now we
delegate that responsibility for
DPS.
decide who meets whatever
standards they have for the
training of the course, we don't
specify in the law what the um
essentially the characteristics
of the course maybe other than
the language I just went through
to you, um, and that may, there
may be some point in time to
doing so. I've not heard uh in
the presentation of this bill
elsewhere that the courses have
have uh been inadequate, but
there's no doubt in my mind that
you leave to teach.
For example, each private
company is doing a training
course, they're going to come up
with their own content and so
forth and then have DPS approve
it.
I think Madam Chair and Senator,
I think that would be it, um.
Um
Interesting buildup to present,
I just think that there should
be uniformity across the board.
If we're holding people to a
statewide standard.
Um, what is taught in these
courses, I think should.
reflect that. I think it's great
that we kind of
give a general requirement in
statute.
But maybe DPS by rule.
Good, uh, I mean, I, I, I, I
really don't like the.
The rulemaking and the amount of
bills that I've seen that leave
everything to rulemaking, but I
think in this case,
Uh, DPS might want to look at
that by rule.
Because I think there should be.
Some type of uniformity.
Because the class.
what's offered to you should be
the same class that's offered to
me.
Those, those are
My comments, um, well, uh,
interestingly, it might be a
subject for CCJ this um summer
center, obviously you're
chairing it as we move forward,
but um it would be, I think,
interesting for those of us to
get an overview about how the
department handles this program
and and so on, so, but of
course, you know, we definitely
would be moving forward, we
could have some conversation
about that potentially. So any
other comments or um requested
changes to the bill.
Before we move forward on a
motion.
Absolutely,
Jennifer for a second time. I
was just, um, when we added back
item 8, we were only in, in that
section, this was only about
lost or stolen licenses.
If the intent was to have a
two-year renewal at refresher
course after 2 years, we would
need to also have that in the
license renewal section in
section 7 or or um on page 4 by
next said it was stricken, the
refresher are we probably wanna
put that back in as well. If you
notice the title on section 3
there. It says, I think that's
part of the problem, um.
So why don't we just put that
language back in, meaning
license renewal, refresher,
firearms training course dash
and why did we add in issuance
lost or stolen license.
Yes,
yeah, 100%. So I, I, yeah, I
would recommend that. Then if it
clarifies the necessity for the
two hour, 2-year course as a
blanket for the license renewal
and
I, my question is whether or not
section 7, it would dovetail
with section 7 on license
renewal and perhaps our experts
can weigh in on that.
Um, I'm, I'm not understanding
this statutory construction.
Madam Chair, uh, Vice Chair, so
if I understand what you're
suggesting for two different
places. So on page 4 you're
suggesting that we change the
title, uh, to recognize the
amendment made here, which I
think is consistent that is a is
a good suggestion, um, and so
the language that's shown to
strike on page 4 by 19
reestablished, you get on those,
on those two lines, that's the
first part of what I hear you
addressing, is that right?
Yes, yes, and I'm curious
person. I'm sorry to be
interjecting, but we are trying
to resolve the problem. Um, you
added um lost or stolen license,
implying that this provision
only applies to a lost or stolen
license, and I'm assuming that's
not correct, am I? That's
correct. You're right. All
right, so what I hear, um,
representative Romero saying is,
I don't think we need to have
this appeal in back in, but we
do need to put back in on my 19
renewal, um, refresher.
firearms training course, put
all that back in, right? And
illuminate what was added
issuance, loss or stolen
license.
I agree. OK, so that in the
terminology of Chairman
Cervantes is a constructive um
proposed amendment.
I don't know if any of your
committee get that well it's an
inside joke between the senator
and I, so let's not share that
because we have to have our
little inside things. um,
so all right. Um, does everyone
understand what uh
representative Romero is
proposing.
I don't see anyone, so is in the
form of emotion, her motion is
on line 19, reinstate, um,
renewal, refresher, firearms
training course.
And eliminate on the online 20
issuance lost or stolen license,
OK? That's the motion, is there
a second.
All right, so we have a motion
to amend. I just repeated it
about 2 times, um, is there any
opposition to that motion.
I don't see any opposition to
the motion, so we've amended it
again. Um, is there any other
proposed amendments at this
point so we can move forward.
OK. I don't see anyone wishing
to make any additional changes,
um,
I, I just want to say I
appreciate this bill. I do think
it is an improvement on the
process that we have been
implementing on these last
several years with concealed
carry, um, and it, it strikes a
good balance of.
some ease, but also some, you
know, um, strengthening, I would
say. So with that, um, I'm
looking for emotion.
How to do pass, do we have a
substitute?
Um, yes, there is a Senate
Judiciary substitute.
We dig back. So I guess I do
pass on.
No, no,
no, it, it's just a do pass as a
twice twice.
Yes, OK. We have a motion for a
due pass as amended twice, is
there a second. OK, we have a do
pass motion on Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 507 twice amended, uh,
would you call the role. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Representative
Babeta.
Representative Chavez.
No.
Representative Hall.
No.
Representative Hoffman B. Hill,
yes.
Representative Martinez.
No.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen. Yes.
Representative Reeb.
Yes.
Peter Sapansky, yes.
Madame Vice Chair, yes, Madam
Chair, yes. Madam Chair, you
have a due pass on Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate Bill 507 is twice
amended.
Very good, Senator. Thank you
committee members. Do you want
to go right to the next bill?
Yes, please. We are now on
Senate Bill 318 firearms and
unfair trade.
And the senator the floor is
yours again.
Thank you again another
discussion on how we begin to
address gun violence. In this
session, we have already
presented the governor. She's
already signed a law that makes
it unlawful to possess a weapon
conversion device you all heard
them referred to you uh
generally as a glock switch. Um,
the, um, that, that legislation
again criminalizes the
possession of the device, the
principal goal of this bill is
to criminalize or not
criminalize, I'm sorry.
provide for civil liability for
the marketing and manufacturing
and sale online of these
conversion devices and they're,
they're easy to find and, and I
can give you the website so you
can look them up while we're
talking here, but there are a
number of websites where
manufacturers are selling
conversion devices, not only for
handguns, but also for rifles
who will convert them into an
automatic weapon.
And the goal here is to, to
bring an end to that online
marketplace to do that.
We have to thread a very uh
difficult needle.
The Congress has enacted law
that makes it uh somewhat
challenging to sue the
manufacturers of guns, but
Congress, even in, in adopting
that immunity, if you will, over
that level of immunity to
manufacturers left open some uh
opportunity for exceptions and
this bill is intended to try and
get within that exception. The
exceptions that Congress left to
us is when there is a state law
that would be essentially in
conflict with that immunity, and
so we're doing that here in the
unfair Trade Practices Act.
Unfair trade Practices Act goes
back to the 1960s and was really
the principal consumer
protection law in the state of
New Mexico. It applies to all
sale of goods, goods and
services, and makes it uh and
opens to civil liability, makes
it unlawful. The unfair,
unconscionable, deceptive,
misleading practices in the
connection with sale of goods or
services, so much of the act is
already existing law. We're,
we're adding a new, uh, you'll
see enumerated list when you
look at the definition of what
is an unfair deceptive.
practice, you'll see that in the
existing law there's 20 or so
paragraphs where we've said in
the past a certain conduct is
within this act. We've added to
here the manufacturer and sale
um of these conversion devices
and we've also added language to
try and address the fact that
these are being sold typically
through third party uh marketing
and online services.
To do that, we have to assure
that there's jurisdiction in the
state of New Mexico, so you'll
see language in here that
assures and confers jurisdiction
in the states so that, that if
we were trying to sue someone
selling or manufacturing these
devices, we can do so in New
Mexico.
Um, Ms. Cummings can probably
explain if you all want to know
more detail about that, but
these parts are generally um in
his example and we have handouts
if anybody's interested
afterwards to see what they look
like, but they're, they're just
in, in his examples here, there
are manufactured in China, but
sold by online marketers here in
this country, and again, I could
give you a website so you can
look them up right now and
you'll see all number of
different conversion devices
that tell you not only what they
look like, but how to install it
and how to convert essentially a
firearm into an automatic
weapon, so when you look at the
language we're adding to the
unfair trade practice is
important is that we're, we're
making unlawful, um, the, the
knowing component, right? And,
and the conversion of creating
an unlawful weapon under federal
or state law. An automatic
weapons are unlawful to
manufacture or bait right now
under the federal.
but people are easily able to do
so with these, these types of
devices, so.
In addition to that, we are also
increasing the penalties under
the Unfair Trade Practice Act
across the board. Those
penalties have been in existence
since 1967, I believe. I looked
this up for our presentation on
the floor, you could get a
6-pack of Pepsi for 29 cents in
1967, and a pretty nice uh
convertible Corvair for about
$3000 and these penalties have
not been updated since that
period of time, so we're
updating those as would apply to
any unfair or or deceptive trade
practice and uh in our prior
amendments have you I hope
you're tracking.
commitments are, our amendments
on the floor substantially
reduced what were originally
penalties in the bill, so we
have very large initial fires
penalties uh in the range of
$250,000. Again, the goal is to
send a clear message that we're
not going to tolerate these
devices being sold in, in New
Mexico online or otherwise, but
we've substantially reduced
those penalties to uh 10 $30,000
in different applications. So
that's, that's the principal uh
change that was made in the, in
the floor amendment, and that
was candidly made as.
result of my meetings with some
of the people representing the
industry. We thought the the
penalties would encourage
litigation.
Um, the, the debate in the
Senate has the Senate floor was
turned into a lawyer bashing, so
let me just address that head
on. um you don't need to we can
stick to the bill. Well, I'll
just tell you I'm sure I've
never brought an unfair trade
practice claim in my practice,
it's not what I do. This is not
a Joseph Cervantes make money,
Bill, um, contrary to whatever
happened.
So
That that is the bill will stand
for questions.
OK, so, um, let's go to the
audience, uh those wishing to
speak in opposition to the bill
approached the gentleman. We're
going to limit it to 5 people,
uh, one minute each.
Thank you. Good morning, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
My name is Julie Meade. I'm
general counsel for the New
Mexico Department of Justice,
um, as the chief enforcer of the
uh unfair Practices Act, uh, the
AG felt it was necessary to
point out some concerns with
Senate Bill 13 of particular
concern is the amendments of
318. Amend the civil
investigation
demand provisions that to
require them um to be disclosed
pursuant to Ibra and.
ver y
These processes and the
documents received are currently
confidential. This we believe
will significantly impede uh the
Department of Justice's ability
to carry out its enforcement of
the UPA. It would be problematic
because we often seek sensitive
information from the CIDs in
jeopardizes potential
investigations of targets if
they are made aware of uh the
investigation because we've
issued a CID to a third party.
Uh, if companies know that their
materials are subject.
to Ira and Private litigants,
they are going to resist
complying with our enforcement
tools of the CID, this will
certainly result in having to go
to court to enforce the IDs more
regularly, and New Mexico
Department of Justice commonly
is involved in multi-state
investigation.
Thank you.
All right, um, hello chamber.
Good morning, chair members of
the committee, Alison Riley,
public policy director for the
Mexico Chamber of Commerce,
standing in opposition to Senate
Bill 318.
This bill imposes a liability on
marketplaces for third-party
seller conduct, treating them
like retailers that choose to
sell firearms. A marketplace
that merely provides a platform
for listings would be held
jointly and severely liable for
the violations involving
firearms and the related
accessories, holding these
marketplace is liable,
disregards their role as only
the facilitator.
They'll also excessively extends
the definition from individuals
selling goods and services to
include every product on all
marketplaces in New Mexico. This
expansion threatens to subject
online marketplaces to an
unmanageable array of
liabilities. These provisions
conflict with.
s of internet liability and risk
disrupting a vital service for
New Mexico's buyers and sellers,
and for those reasons, we
respectfully oppose. Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. Um, my
name is Keith Gardner, National
I'm with the National Shooting
Sports Foundation, where the
manufacturers of ammunition and
weapons, uh, the trade
organization for them and we
stand opposed to this. If this
actually was about the switches
that were discussed. We actually
stand in support. We supported
it when it was criminalized. We
don't like them any more than
anybody else, but the truth is
this bill goes much further. And
so it's important to read what
is in, what's actually in the
bill. Language is not tight.
We've seen language in
California. Can't believe I'm
endorsing that.
We've seen language in
California that goes after this,
it's very specific, very tight,
where it, it actually goes after
specifically what they're trying
to do. Here there's very broad,
you don't even have to show harm
in certain cases. You don't even
have to be the individual who's
harmed in the act. There's,
there's a very loose amount.
We're seeing litigation already
in the city of Santa Fe right
now, an individual locked in
past their background check, and
was refused the weapon because
the dealer was concerned about a
straw purchase. They were buying
it for somebody else.
The individual left, filed a
lawsuit, or um
Thank you.
Thank you,
Madam Chair.
All right, uh-huh.
I don't see anyone else in the
audience, um, those online,
wishing to speak in opposition,
and I'm going to eliminate to 3
people. So, um,
Jeremy's Stanford.
Yes, hi, thank you. I, I've done
research on this bill and
I think it could face
significant legal challenges on
constitutional and statutory
grounds. It's likely a violation
of the Second Amendment. The
Commerce Clause, and the
supremacy Clause of the US
Constitution, as well as the
right to bear arms and due
process protections under the
New Mexico constitution.
Additionally, it could conflict
with federal laws like the
protection of lawful commerce in
Arms Act, and the communications
Decency Act, making it preempted
and unenforceable. These issues
could run into the bill
unconstitution.
and illegal if enacted.
Thank you. Um, next is John
Folsom.
Yes ma'am chairing committee. My
name is John Felson. I'm
District 7 director for New
Maxville Shooting Sports
Association.
This bill started out as a glock
switch, and a glock switch only,
supposedly, which is already
illegal by federal law. Nobody
can own one right now legally,
so there's no need to duplicate
that.
This is a backdoor attempt to
make it easier to put businesses
out of, out of business. Our
small businesses, including our
gun stores will suffer greatly
from this. If this bill were to
be passed, for example, a New
Mexico law-abiding citizen would
no longer be able to purchase a
handgun, cause after all our gun
stores are put out of business
because of this ridiculous bill,
we won't be able to buy a
handgun cause we can't go out of
state and buy a handgun.
Again, we are a law abiding
citizens. You are ruining.
The opportunities for liability
or for law-abiding citizens to
be able to enjoy the shooting
sports of New Mexico.
This will be a horrible bill if
passed, I can't believe it's
made it this far, please do not
pass this bill, protect our
small businesses and our thank
you.
Um
Lorenzo Soto and that will be
our last person online.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee members for the
opportunity to testify. My name
is Renzo Soto. I'm here in
respectful opposition to Senate
Bill 318 identify your
association, sir? Yes, ma'am.
I'm here on behalf of TechNett.
Thank you and uh we, we are in
opposition due to the expansive
liability it places on online
marketplaces. We share many of
the same concerns raised by the
chamber already. I'll just add
that as it's currently written,
the bill encompasses a wide
range of websites, including
those that don't primarily serve
as
online marketplaces like online
community forums as well as
marketplaces that simply acts
like a classified listing where
they would have no knowledge
that a violative sale may happen
offline. We also share the
concern that it extends
liability to essentially all
products and we believe that the
negative impact stemming from
that will ultimately impact
consumers and businesses in New
Mexico in terms of higher costs
or worse, a disruption of
services. We continue to
respectfully ask that online
marketplaces be removed from the
bill to ensure that businesses
and consumers are not.
negatively impacted. Thank you
for the time. Um, thank you. All
right.
Those wishing to speak in
support of the bill.
Who were in the audience, please
approach the gentleman with the
microphone. Thank you, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
My name is Natasha Ming. I'm a
registered lobbyist for
Giffords, Gabby Giffords' Gun
Violence Prevention
Organization. Um, we think the
sponsor for bringing this
forward and all the hard work
that he and Brandon have put
into it for years, and we stand
in full support. Thank you.
Thank you. Anyone else in the
audience wishing to speak and
support.
I don't see anyone, um, those
online wishing to speak and
support, please raise your hand.
OK, I see 2 hands raised, um,
Janet Williams.
Hi, this is Janet Williams with
the National Organization for
Women, and we strongly support
this bill and thank the sponsor
for bringing it forward. Thank
you.
Thank you. Um, Meredith Mason.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I'm Meredith Main
speaking on behalf of the League
of Women Voters and the
Um, American Association of
University Women, and we stand
in strong support of the the
sponsor has, and if there's
something that needs to be fixed
in this committee, I urge the
committee to fix it, but get it
to the floor, um, so that it can
be passed, um, we can always,
you know,
certain to throw the baby out
with the bathwater. Thank you
very much. Thank you, Meredith,
um.
Back to the sponsor, I will say
there is an amendment that was
handed out, that's an amendment
that I worked on. I did, did we
get a copy to the sponsor of
that amendment.
No, we need a copy to get to the
sponsor, please.
And I'm, I'm not trying to
insert myself, but I wanted
people to know that I think um
at least one of the issues that
was raised will be addressed in
the proposed amendment.
The two. OK.
Anything you wish to add before
I go to committee. Madam, a few
things. First of all, we want to
have a strong cooperative
relationship with the AG's
office and so we want to make
sure that we're not doing
anything that interferes with
their ability to enforce the
Trade Practices Act of the Act
itself from its inception
realize on close cooperation
with the Attorney General's
office, so you'll see, I think
on pages 13 and 14, some some
provisions that that relate to
that and we should probably
address those concerns with the
AG's satisfaction. The Chamber
of commerce rose to argue, and I
think there's an important, uh,
Note here which is that what
this bill does is put New Mexico
small businesses on a level
playing field with online
marketers. The Chamber of
Commerce is really effectively
picking winners and losers
because they would suggest that
um in state, small businesses
who are here are subject to
jurisdiction of the state, but
Amazon and national marketers
are not, and I'm, I'm I'm using
Amazon, Amazon, there's no
evidence that Amazon has done
any selling of these products,
so I don't want to use that
name, but, but the suggestion
that Amazon should not be
liable.
Or any online market would not
be liable in New Mexico, but New
Mexico businesses should be
liable is the Chamber of
Commerce picking large corporate
interests over small New Mexico
businesses that I, I think we
should probably reject that.
The, um, Madam Chair, I think
the last thing I think that
probably merits some discussion
is again, every time I brought a
gun-related piece of
legislation, I've been told it's
unconstitutional to be
challenged on the Second
Amendment. So when I did a
background loopholes, red flag,
seven-day waiting period. Every
time I've done it, I've been
told I was going to be
challenged on constitutional
grounds, including the concealed
carry law and um 100% and, and I
don't say that to sound immodest
except to say that we're very
We're trying to be very careful
about not passing the laws that
that will be challenged
successfully. They'll be they'll
be challenged, no doubt, but
they'll be unsuccessfully
challenging. I'll just say, um,
I think I recognize where that
balance is at, we've had an
assault weapon ban that's been
of some interest this session,
um, I, I'll tell you I'm the
only Democrat who's voted
against the assault weapon ban
legislation because it's clearly
to be unconstitutional. So, I
think I recognize the
difference. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Oh, thank you. Um, I
don't know if people want to
hear the amendment I have or
people.
want to discuss it. I'm happy to
share with where it addresses
some of the concerns and then we
can, so, um, just, and I
apologize for inserting myself,
but it might help our
conversation. So if you see the
amendment that I handed out, um,
someone would move for
discussion,
so moved about, and it's um the
last three digits are 99.2. The
first one relates to a concern
that I have had, um, in looking
at this bill and the online
marketplace, um.
So I, uh, frankly agree with the
senator in terms of we live in a
world where people do a lot of
online purchasing.
And when we have not addressed
it in uh in the unfair trade
practices Act. My one concern,
however, is, and I have
discussed this with the senator
is if all of you in your
communities have individuals who
use Facebook and other
electronics services, but mostly
Facebook I'm whereas online yard
sales. So if you go online, you
can go to your Facebook page and
we have something called Los
Alamos online yard sale.
are individual like your
neighbor, you know, who is the
host of that online yard sale,
and their neighbors, usually
it's usually have to be a
member, but not always, and you
can post your washing machine or
your refrigerator, you use
refrigerator or your, I don't
know, blender, you know, all
kinds sometimes it's free,
sometimes it's for, you know,
very modest amounts of money,
and my concern was with the
definition of online
marketplace, that person could
be swept into this.
And I don't think any of us want
our neighbors being subject to
this sort of thing when
basically they're just hosting a
Facebook page.
Um, so my effort at um trying to
resolve that.
I uh amendment number one, so it
says page 4, line 16, um, after
the word, you know, the uh
semicolon and the word New
Mexico, I would add, but does
not include any person,
business, or other entity that
only offers classified
advertisements, and I would
point out, I think that captures
what I just described. It would
also, you know, um, I have an
online newspaper in Los Alamos.
It's a, you know, it's a small.
Kind of mom and pop thing where
I think the person has maybe 5
employees or something like
that, if that many, some of them
are part time. Those are online
ads that she runs, you know,
that for jobs or goods or
businesses and my hope is that
that would help resolve the
issue that I have raised, um, so
that's, that's one thing that
wasn't brought up, um, but I, I
just wanna, and I have talked to
the senator about, about it. The
other one is just a typo where
it should.
been an or and it's um uh olive,
it's just a typographical error
on page 6, line 16.
Um, you'll see it says of goods,
it should product or goods.
And
The um 3 is um paragraph 3 and
the proposed amendment that I'm
sharing with you. It's on line
24 and it addresses what I think
the concern of the Attorney
General was in terms of opening
up the attorney.
which I think is a very
legitimate concern on their part
to um IRA and making and
essentially public documents in
terms of their investigative
files and the like. So that one
would eliminate what was changed
there in terms of line 13, I
would put that language back in,
produced for inspection, etc.
And um of course strikes subject
to the inspection of public
records Act.
And that's essentially what that
provision does. It puts back in
the fact that the records are
confidential and not subject to
the public Records Act and my
page 2412 through
Yeah, that's essentially what
those all do. So lying
paragraphs 3 and 4 of the
proposed amendment that I have
would resolve the issue in terms
of the attorney general records.
Um.
So, I guess I will go to the
sponsor and ask him if this is
constructive. Those are
constructed, Madam Chair, and I
think you're right, they do
address the Attorney general's
concerns and the goal here was
to have, as I said, a
cooperation working relationship
with AG so I was not a reminder
of it.
OK.
Yeah, you're right on the other
and the other one is to address
your concern that you've raised
with me about classified
advertising, that's certainly
not the intention of the
building.
Does anyone have questions about
the
Um, amendment that I have, so
then we can talk about the bill
and its totality, if that works
for you, um, representative
Homan Beethoven.
Me and thank you for the
amendment. Uh, nice to see you,
Senator. So with the um proposed
amendment number one.
And the change of language not
does not put any person business
or other entity that only offers
class for advertisements. Would
that then change if that person
or business that normally does
just often classified advertise
it turns out they
It
Uh, end up selling a firearm or
some other um
illegal weapons, is that then
place them back in to the
definitions, the original
definition of
Well, the seller would still be
the seller. So what I'm going at
and I'm sorry if I'm
interducting, but what I'm going
after is just the person posting
the web page.
You know, who is like your next
door neighbor, but the person
who's posting the sale.
guns that might be illegal would
still be um subject to, um, you
know, potential liability,
um, the senator you agree
another way to think about this,
perhaps make it a little more
clear so the classified
advertisement, the person who's
posting that does not accept
payment. In other words, there's
not a financial transaction.
They're simply advertising a
good, as opposed to what we're
capturing here by third party
marketers which have, they have
a mechanism by which you are
transacting business and making
payments and so forth. That's
the distinction, and I think the
chair is concerned about these
classified ads are really not
creating an online uh financial
interchange, if you will, which
is what the third party
marketing does. Thank you, Madam
Chair, Senator. So really the,
the crux here is whether or not
the third party seller is um
benefiting financially in some
way from that transaction.
So thank you, that that
addresses my question.
got anyone else wishing to
discuss the amendment.
OK, um, I'm happy to entertain
emotion, Madam Cha I'd like to
move the amendment for adoption
in a second.
So we have a motion to um adopt
the amendment. Is there any
opposition?
I don't see any opposition, OK?
Um, now we can go back to um
discussing the amended bill, um,
I'm taking names. Anybody wish
to address the bill as amended.
OK, Representative Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you.
Senator, there's
There's always a lot of rhetoric
when it comes to gun bills, um,
so.
I'm gonna
Just kind of
simplify everything for my
uptake.
Um
There's a lot of talk about
third party and I don't see.
Third party defined it here.
Um,
the third party seller.
Can you, can you
kind of the
Thank you, Madam Chair. You'll
find that on page 5 line 15,
subsection J is the definition
of third-party seller.
That would be new language, and
I agree with the chair's
comments earlier. This is the
new marketplace, this is the
world we live in today.
Third party sellers online.
Thank you, madam chair. Thank
you. Senator, I skipped right
over that.
Um
So, uh, uh, you know, a lot of
people have called this the
Amazon bill, um.
So how did, how is this gonna
affect
Um
You know, Facebook, uh, I, I
always worry when I hear about
Guns being sold on Facebook.
It just, it's concerning.
But how does this affect
Um, Smith and Wesson.
You know, I, I get, I get emails
from SMW all the time, showing
me.
A new revolver showing me a new,
a new weapon.
How is it gonna affect
That purchase.
If I purchase directly from
them.
Through a website.
What's
What is this bill do to that
transaction?
Ma'am chair so I'm gonna refer
you to this specific session
that we were adding. So if you
look, um, I, I would walk you
through it this way. You look at
page 6.
We have
Page 6, which is your lines.
We have already an existing law
definition of an unfair or
deceptive trade practice.
That this is already all
existing law, you'll see that
continuing really on the next
several pages where we've, it's
a very long definition, but it's
existing where we've listed a
number of things that we have
said, this will be an unfair
deceptive trade practice, what
we're adding here is if you look
on page 7, we're adding a new
paragraph 2 says that the the
representation of goods and
services as legal to purchase in
New Mexico or the United States
when they are not legal to
purchase would be a false and
deceptive trade practice added
within the Act itself. So, so to
your question, the
West and is not misrepresenting
weapons as legal when they're in
fact illegal, then they're not
gonna be a concern to unfair
trade practices Act. It's, but I
will tell you that if you go to
DHgate.
On your computer or if you go to
Tu or you go to wish.com, or if
you go to Mainchina.com or you
go AliExpress. If you're go to
any of these websites right now,
you'll find these weapon
conversion devices that'll tell
you exactly how to convert your
handgun into an automatic weapon
or any rifle into an automatic
weapon. They'll give you the
parts to do it, and you can look
it up right now and find the
parts and buy.
So, Madam Chair, Senator,
With the
With the changes to the red flag
law, it makes those devices
illegal, so this is about
Buying those devices, the, the
Glock switch.
Um, is that what you're trying
to, to deal with here because
New Mexico has made that.
illegal, that device.
Is it the purchasing of that
device that then we
Triggers this law.
So, so man, I'm sure, I think, I
think said maybe I misheard you.
I think it's the red flag law,
so the red flag law, of course,
relates only to the uh process
and procedure by which
Uh, a, a petition could be made
to have a gun taken from someone
who may be in a state of crisis
or otherwise, so that's, that's
the red flag law, the bill that
we did pass here was your house
Bill 5, I believe I've got my
number and keeping them straight
at this point in time, included,
um, a, a component in there that
made it unlawful to possess a
so-called glock switch. We
didn't call it a Glock switch in
law we rightfully called it a
weapon conversion uh device
because it can, it could be any
number of different other
weapons that could be converted,
so we used to.
more generic term, but we've
made that illegal to possess.
Now, the goal here is to make it
civilly unlawful to itself in an
online marketplace and I've
given you some websites where
you go today and for $100 or
less buy these devices which
will convert.
The lawful weapon to an unlawful
weapon, and we're trying to stop
it.
I think yours were destroyed.
Oh, he's just, he just showed me
the prices.
for conversion but be happy to
give you the, the examples of
devices, the web pages where
these are sold.
I'm, I'm
Not an attorney and I've had
very little sleep and just a
half a cup of coffee.
Um
There's
I, I, I
Very simply, what, what are you
trying to accomplish with this
bill?
Because there's a lot of talk on
one side, a lot of talk on the
other.
Very simply, what, what are you
trying to accomplish with this
bill?
I'm sure there are there are
several things the bill began as
a genesis in my part when I
began to look at the federal law
that says gun manufacturers are
generally immune from soup.
Uh, Senator, I, I would, I think
all of us here have wrestle with
how do we begin to try and
address gun violence.
In our country and um some of
the criticism I the chair
discourages me from doing this,
but the criticism is always
lawyers, this is lawyers, and
I'll, and I'll just put it to
you this way. Uh, we used to
drive Ford Pintos and they used
to explode and kill people, and
Ford Motor decided that it was
less expensive to pay people uh
for deaths than it was to take
the vehicle off and redesign it,
and take it off the marketplace.
We use a product's liability
actions to address manufacturers
of opioids, uh, who knowingly
put those drugs out of the
market. They were legal drugs,
of course, and, and they were,
and they functioned as they were
intended, but the opioid
manufacturers knew they were
being abused and they were being
sold in an abusive way. We use
products liability cases to do a
number of things, and this is
trying to do that. This is
trying to use products liability
law to address this. I'll give
you the other example. I drive a
large SUV years ago, 10 years
ago, you all remember they used
to roll over the tires would
separate people.
We killed and we'd read about
them and hear about them all the
time. You don't anymore because
your SUV or mine has anti-roller
technology, the tires had been
remanufactured and redesigned so
they don't separate, and we're
not in every role over accidents
to crush properties. These are
all just examples representative
of the fact that I think that
one of the ways we're going to
address gun violence is to try
and have manufacturers make
safer weapons. They could not be
converted, um, and right now, I,
I'm inclined to believe that
Locke knows their weapon can be
easily diverted, and they're
probably doing nothing about it.
Type answers are appreciated.
I'll, I'll get shorter.
Thank you Madam Senator, so, so
this is the mechanism to be able
to sue a gun manufacturer.
Miss
Madam Chair and Representative
yes when they do when they
produce or misrepresent the
weapon or to produce a weapon
that they know is misleading
unpar or deceptive, yes,
mud said her, how is, how is
Lo misrepresenting.
The weapons.
Madam Chairman, I'm not making
that allegation or that
suggesting so much, but
certainly they do know that
there are devices that are out
there designed to convert their
weapons and the goal of this
bill is to try and encourage the
manufacturers to produce weapons
that cannot be so easily
converted.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator. Um,
I'll finish my coffee and listen
to the rest of the debate.
Um, Representative Kaufman v.
Hill and then represented.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator, and I too am
functioning on very little
sleep, and I have had a full
coffee, but it's not enough, so
forgive me. Um, Senator, I, I
appreciate, um, my colleague,
the minority whips.
Comments and, and the question,
I mean, are we
We keep on hearing about this
bill as the Amazon bill, the
Amazon bill, and so I think the
question I wanna ask you
directly, Senator, uh, Madam
Chair, is
Is this bill is this bill meant
to just curb the sale of these
types of firearms or, you know,
other illegal firearm related
devices, or is this bill
intended to um to capture those
types of sales, but in general,
essentially widen the net of the
unfair Trade Practices Act.
I'm sure it's the latter. I
mean, I'll be straight with you.
The, the goal of the bill is, is
that I articulated to address
these weapons of the sale of
these weapons, but admittedly in
the process of doing this, we
have to be able to deal with
things like jurisdiction, which
will open jurisdiction in the
state of New Mexico to all
online sales and online
retailers, um, and I can
understand where um you're,
you're calling it the Amazon at
the Amazon bill, uh, the bill
would capture more than just
weapons and, and, and I want to
be straight with you all about
that, but, but I think we
to be
Mexico.
And the reason for that is
because again, let me just give
you an example, if you, if you
buy something on Amazon, it
causes injury or harm, uh, from
my perspective, that's a
product's liability action and
in our current modern economy,
the seller of that product or
the people that are in the
stream of commerce, the chain of
commerce, if you will, um,
should have responsibility if in
fact that product does some harm
to someone, so it, it does go
beyond just weapons, to answer
your question. Thank you, Madam
Sharon. Thank you, Senator. I
appreciate your, uh, candid
answer on that. So
Um, then my next question, Madam
chair, Senator, is this imposing
strict liability upon these
manufacturers and or these, you
know, third party sellers on, on
websites and and whatnot,
e-commerce.
Some amount of cherry uh
representatives, so strict
liability and legal term you and
I are familiar with, and no, it
does not. The bill does not
impose strict liability, uh,
but, but it puts, uh, online
sales into the area of products
liability, and again I'm I'm
repeating a statement made
earlier, but if you're a small
business in New Mexico, you
produce a product or you sell a
product and it causes harm,
you're liable in New Mexico. Uh,
it makes no difference to in my
mind that if you're selling the
product into New Mexico through
a third party seller online, you
should be equally liable to New
Mexico businesses and.
again, the chambers picking
again picking winners, and
they're deciding that the
corporate people who are selling
online into the state should be
immune from liability, whereas
New Mexico businesses who are
selling the same product here
are liable. Thank you, man, and,
and thank you Senator. We're,
I'm gonna, I'm getting this
question from specifically is
page 17.
Um, some section D, proof of the
claim involving the
manufacturer, maring,
distributing, sale or offering
of sale of the firearm to start
device firearm, firearm part or
firearm accessory or other
unfair trade practice or
unconscionable trade practice
shall comply with the specific
requirements placed on such a
claim by the unfair practices
unfair Practices Act. Beyond
those specific requirements,
proof of monetary damage, loss
of profits are intended to
deceive or take unfair advantage
of any person is not required,
and to me, Madam Chair, Senator,
that's
a lot like strict liability.
Um,
yeah, so Madam Chair, you're,
you're addressing what is
already in the existing unfair
trade Practices Act, which is
there's, there, there is and
always have been what are called
statutory damages you are
familiar with that long lawyers
may not. So unusually somewhat
in our law, the unfair trade
practices has some incentives
for recovery even with the
damages may be considered
nominal or or minimal damages.
So then for Trade Practices, you
can recover actual damages or in
egregious case, you can recover
trouble.
Time sexual damages or
alternatively you can receive
what statutory prescribed uh
damages, and we do that because
there's an encouragement in the
law itself to to assure the
consumers will, will have the
remedies in court where
otherwise the proof proof of
damages may be difficult to
ascertain or minimal, um, so
like the, the good example I'm
told is the bill originated with
SETI back odometer readings,
what is the damage for setting
back an odometer reading.
That's the statutory component,
trying to be short but I'm sure,
but sometimes these are, these
are complicated thoughts, and
it's, and you're asking a good
question. Thank you, Senator,
and I, I'll be trying, I'll try
and be sure to, I'm sure, I'm
sorry. Um, so going back to
Senator, you, you and I both
know that we um really like to
talk about definitions, um, and
those definitions defined in the
law versus, you know, in terms
of art and so, um, how would you
say, how would you define Madam
Chair, Senator?
Both an unlawful sale as
proposed under under this law,
and um there's one other
question that I had. Well, let's
start with that. How would you,
how would you define an unlawful
sale on this house.
So Madam Chair, a representative
so you're asking about unlawful
sales under the Act and
Uh, historically, what we've
done is we've prescribed those
so if you look on page 678 of
the bill, that is all existing
statute.
It goes on to page 9. It's, we
have 4 pages of, of areas where
we've said these enumerated.
Acts or conduct through all of
what would now we'd be adding
paragraph 21, uh, to what is
already 20 programs. We said
each one of these is a an
unlawful or deceptive practice
in your, in your right
represents sometimes you and I
struggle to define things that
are hard to define. And so what
we've done historically is
because that's difficult to find
what is unlawful. We've said,
here's some things that we say
are unlawful, and we've done
that historically since the 60s.
Thank you Madam Chair and
Senator, um, and what would your
response be on, on a willful
violation. How are we defining
willful? Um, Madam Chair and
representative, there is a
definition. I don't have it
handy, but we can look it up for
you real quick. Willful if I, I,
I would rely upon the definition
of will for what's set forth in
our uniformed jury instructions,
which is used quite a bit to get
in various areas of civil law
and, and oftentimes in
addressing punitive damages, but
the, the courts have given us
definition of what is willful
conduct.
OK. And last question, um, thank
you, Senator and Madam Chair.
Um,
as it relates to just these
e-commerce platforms, even those
that, even though those that
would derive, you know, some
sort of monetary profit from the
offering of sale of these
devices, I mean, it just seems
like, um, not offering some sort
of safe harbor or
opportunity to correct once
they've been made aware that,
you know, such prohibited items
are being
Uh, put it for sale on their
websites. I mean, why, why not
offer at least the opportunity
to, to correct before kind of
subject subjecting them to, um,
you know, attorneys' fees,
costs, trouble damages, all the
rest that are and now higher
fines and penalties subject to
the unfair trade Practices Act.
So Matt I'm sure you'll see on
page 14 of the, of the existing
statute of the Unfair Trade
Practures Act, the legislature
has contemplated exactly that
circumstance. This is the
section of the law that relates
to the Attorney General's role
in some of these products and
consumer related uh actions, and
here you'll see that that
existing language, the attorney
General may enter into
agreements for the settlement
and disposition of some of these
claims, um, and you'll see that
all of that is contained already
in that existing law that and
we, and we've changed that.
Now by the amendment here to
assure that that the information
that's discovered and obtained
by the Attorney General remains
confidential as part of doing
so, but you'll see that um that,
that there's all of that section
I just referred to refers to
settlements made by the Attorney
general's office to avoid that
liability, uh, otherwise, uh,
representative, um, any, any
lawsuit as you're familiar with
anytime there's a lawsuit,
there's always the opportunity
to settle cases, in fact, I
think statistically more than
95% of all cases do settle.
Thank you, mentor. I'm sorry,
last question.
Here, Senator, and just for my
own notification, I mean, are we
contemplating and keep him
action here, I mean, are we
contemplating like a key tam
option? I mean, what, what, how
do you envision the process
being here between those actions
brought by the Attorney General
and those brought just by a a a
normal private citizen.
Madam chair, this bill would not
change how that structure works
already under the unfair trade
practices Act. This does not
really relate to a key action,
although I'm the person who
sponsored the New Mexico Fraud
Against Taxpayers Act, which is
essentially our keyam law, uh,
and for those who don't do this,
uh, key tam is essentially an
action that is brought by an
individual against really
against fraud on the government
to try and recover the the
damages suffered by the
government itself, but this
doesn't address keep down.
Thank you, and I, I swear, last
question, Madam chair, Senator.
So this doesn't contemplate,
then, I mean, why is the
Attorney general's office even
involved in this particular law
if we are.
Give remedy
to particular um plaintiffs that
are harmed by these selling
practices.
Madame Grohu, Senator Ribs, um,
hadn't slept either. But let me
give you the good examples that
come to mind, tobacco
litigation, uh, opioid
litigation, right? The Attorney
general's office are the lead a
tip of the spear in the opioid
litigation, um, and tobacco
litigation, and those are not
key te actions, there's not a
fraud on the government by those
actions, but yet the state has
incurred proven damages in those
cases, so, um, this, this
wouldn't involve Keam, but it
would still have a very
meaningful role for the Attorney
general to play if again.
had something like the um an
action in in those particular
cases. Those are all in my mind,
those are all products liability
cases effectively, um, and, um,
so.
Again, I've given the example of
automobiles, we can look at any
number of different things that
are products where the attorney
general has a role of trying to
attack uh attack the consumer uh
harm, but also this fair trade
price that has always had a
private remedy, an individual
can bring that claim in the
absence of the Attorney General.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Senator.
So this would be the same.
This wouldn't change any of
that. Thank you, ma'am. Sure.
Thank you. um Representative
Chavez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator. I have the same
questions about liability and
definitions that representative
Hoffman B. Hill had, so I guess
I'm still trying to wrap my head
around.
This. Can you give me an example
of past issues of unlawful
firearm-related commercial
activities.
That we're trying to address.
Madam Cherson, would I just give
you some websites which you can
go to right now and you can find
this from to my mind clearly
unlawful activity going on right
now under our nose right in
front of us. Go to those
websites, you'll find devices to
take a lawful weapon and convert
it to an unlawful weapon.
And that's the best example I
can give you. And so when people
are trying to relate this to the
Amazon.
So this would not affect, say,
The illegal sale, um,
A device.
Um
And then include the purse that
was carrying the device, and we
could now go after that.
When we're hearing people's
description of this.
Madam chair represented with the
governor's signature, it is now
going to be unlawful in New
Mexico to possess one of these
converted devices or the, or the
actually the conversion device
itself that will be unlawful to
possess.
This, this bill would make an
unlawful to market and sell
those.
Just the specific devices, OK,
so then would that affect these
individuals insurance and
bonding when we're hearing, um,
Members of the community or
store owners say that they're
not going to be able to be
insured any longer because the
premiums are gonna be too high.
Is that accurate? I'm sure I've
heard that argument by some of
the gun dealers and small
businesses in the state. I, I, I
would have to look at their
policies, so I wouldn't know
pine, but generally most of
those businesses call uh carry
what's called the CGL policy,
commercial general liability
policy, and those policies
generally have exclusions that
would exclude them from coverage
anyway, so my guess is they
probably don't have coverage
right now. And so the suggestion
that they wouldn't be able to
get coverage or it would become
more expensive. It's probably
spurious. Uh, they're, they're
probably are not insured by
that. Now.
I think they are, but they're
probably not.
OK.
OK.
Those are my questions, I guess
I'll have to go back and look at
the insurance. I just was
curious on that.
Question.
Um
Anyone else uh
representative all and then
Representative Reeb.
Madam Chair, senator expert, so
going back, um,
To your comment regarding
walk.
For instance, and I know that
this is
You're presenting this to go
after the the conversion devices
which I agree with.
In very specific terms, the
conversion device.
But if we look at going after a
company like Glock, which is the
number one selling probably
hanging in the world.
for a multitude of reasons.
And they never built the gun for
these devices to be built,
you're
Are you suggesting that they are
Liable because of what they
created can simply be converted.
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair Representative, I
don't, you know, um, what I
would argue is, um, let me take
you back to the Ford Pinto again
for the 4 Pinto functioned as it
was intended for it didn't
intend for it to explode and
blow up, but they made a
conscious decision not to pull
the product from the
marketplace, not to redesign and
not to stop selling the device
because they, they concluded
that it was less expensive than
the harm that it was causing,
and so, uh, I, I don't know that
Glock is aware of of some better
way to manufacture their gun,
but this would make it a lot.
if they knew there was a way to
do it or if they, if they
purposefully continue to market
and sell that weapon, knowing
that they had a a a condition or
a factor in the gun that made it
easily convertible. Again, we
referred to as a block switch
and I, I kind of hesitate always
to do so because it, it impugns
Glock and there may not be any
reason to do so.
And that's one of the concerning
things I have on, on
The language is fairly broad on
this, that, that we can go after
while it starts out as the
conversion device.
It seems like it opens it up.
Um, other liabilities.
Based on interpretation of this
act.
So it my concern is that instead
of focusing specifically on a
conversion device, we are
actually opening it up to
Uh, litigate a multitude of
different businesses across the
board, whether it be Amazon or.
are manufacturer.
Or a distributor, um, in the
state of
ambiguity, for instance, and
they distribute firearms to
dealers throughout the United
States.
Are they now liable?
For distributing the firearms to
the dealer who sold the gun, and
then the individual who bought
the gun, which is not converted,
and then goes online and finds.
One of these Mickey Mouse
devices which converts it are
all those people liable,
Senator, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, not unless they're,
again, manufacturing, marketing
and selling a device, knowing
that it's in defiance of federal
or state laws. The answer is no.
And I'll give you I can just as
an assignment, I'm sure um I
know you're trying to make
progress, but the representative
you're a gun owner, I trust and
and Zamai, you and I have seen
the redesign of firearms changed
dramatically in the last few
years in terms of the triggering
mechanism, in terms of the
safety mechanisms in terms of of
of the hammer, the way the
hammer is situated so that a gun
which dropped is not discharged.
have been a number of things
that gun manufacturers have done
to enhance the safety of
firearms in the in the years
that I've been alive, it's
changed dramatically, and I'm
sure you're familiar with and
seen those.
Man senator, it, it just this
concerns me when we open up.
Something like this, and we
look.
Broadly, uh, the Pinto.
may have been a
Uh, dangerous issue.
The the Glock in and of itself,
and I know we're not picking on
that, but pick any weapon
because I strike the fired
pistols in particular.
Bring a whole new dimension, I
think that's what you're
alluding to.
Um
But
When people willfully go out of
their way to try to convert
these guns.
That's
We already have laws.
to address that
I don't see.
How this is going to actually
stop.
And like in your opening
comments, actually stop gun
violence.
In and of itself.
Madam Cha, Senator.
I don't, that's not a question
that's my comment. And you don't
need to comment.
Uh, are you? OK, um,
Representative Reeve and then
Sapansy.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Senator.
I'm kind of going back to a
little bit about what my
colleague um stayed and we're
talking about Amazon.
And I guess I'm thinking
Emails I've received from my
local uh smaller gun shops, um,
in, in town and stuff and
So
So this bill would impact those
um independent New Mexico-based
sellers.
Who use Amazon though to grow
their business, would it not?
I'm not understanding, Madam
Chair and the senator of that
amendment covered that issue,
and if you could maybe address
that.
reference is Amazon. I don't
think Amazon sells firearms, uh,
I'm I'm not aware that they do,
but I, I've purchased a firearm
online. I, I've done it and, and
of course it has to be delivered
to a dealer in the state, and
they have to go through all the
paperwork and so through the
dealer and the dealer takes a
fee for doing so, but to your
example with Amaz Amazon, I
don't believe they sell weapons
fire.
Or a round chair um center like
any third party, I guess,
platform. I'm kind of concerned
about maybe Amazon was a bad
example. I'm not sure, but a lot
of these places just use it to
advertise and they're not
actually making any type of
transaction or anything like
that, so how, how would that
affect those people
I
Madam, if they're not, um,
facilitating a transaction or
making a transaction online, it
wouldn't be implicated. There
wouldn't be a sale of of good or
service, but in my own
experiences that I, I heard.
the weapon online and I was I I
went to a third party marketer
was out of state. Uh, they took
my credit card and I ordered the
weapon and they came in and it
was delivered to a dealer. Um,
and so if they were putting a
weapon into the stream of
commerce, and it caused harm in
New Mexico. Um, they could be
subject to liability, just like,
again, about any other product.
Price like really.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair,
Senator, also having a trouble,
trouble understanding how this
is gonna fix our problem with
criminals and having guns and um
That that's just something I'm,
I'm I'm having a hard time
dealing with all these small
manufacturers that I mean they
get hit one time with something
that they'll be out of business,
I think with insurance rates and
all the different things that
could happen, but
That aside, I just wanna kind of
go through just so I understand
the legal process here. So, if
you don't mind cause I'm not
familiar with the federal law
necessarily and so uh Madam
Chair and Senator, not, not to
belabor it, but so federal law,
um, can you kind of just explain
what federal law does and why we
need to change this state law in
order for you to accomplish what
you're trying to accomplish. And
thank you, Madam Chair, I
appreciate the opportunity to
come back to that because this,
this is where the Genesis.
the bill really comes from is
the recognition that the, the
Congress has adopted the
protection of lawful commerce
and Arms Act. It's called the
PLCAA, um, and it was passed in
2005 and it's designed to
protect firearms manufacturers.
And it limits civil lawsuits,
and it provides broad immunity,
but it includes very specific
exceptions, and my goal from the
very beginning of this bill has
been to try and fit with.
There's a knowing violation of
federal or state law, and that's
the exception. So there has to
be proof, there was a knowing
violation that was uh
representative Hope and B Hill's
question earlier is, where do
you find willfulness? Where do
you find knowing and as lawyers,
we try to define these terms,
sometimes it's difficult to do,
but we rely on courts and
precedent to do so.
OK, so you've gotta be able to
uh use this exception in the
federal law in order, and so
we've got to change our state
statutes to be able to
Or I get someone to sue. That's
exactly right. OK, so then if we
change it in the state law, um,
That would broaden. I'm just
kind of had a little chart I'm
looking at and make sure I'm
understanding this, so this
would broaden the scope, Madam
Chasenator of the inverter trade
practices.
By explicitly including the
firearms destructor devices
within the definition of goods
and services.
In that one paragraph that I've
referred you to, we're writing
back to the enumerated examples
of specific examples of what's
unfair deceptive practice, yes.
OK, and so then this will
provide the avenue that you
need.
Under UPA.
To be able to, um,
Basically deal with these types
of claims that exception under
the federal law, yes that's
right. And then it gets to the
penalties and the penalties, did
I read, are they 30,000 per
violation, um, I senator, Madam
Chair, so you'll find the
private their their private
remedies in sections uh 7 of the
bill. You can find those, I
think, on page 15 through 16.
And these again have been in
place since the 60s.
So we're increasing them and and
uh various applications, so
there's an application for
firearms, there's an application
for just general violations of
unfair trade Practices Act, and
then there are specified
circumstances, as I said
earlier, where the law where he
says there are travel damages,
the travel damages and the
actual damage just doesn't
change, so some folks said, oh
my, oh my God, it's good.
Under the existing law, it's,
it's actually up to actual
damages, so it can be
substantially more than $10,000
which is why you hear the
concerns about, well, we're not
gonna be insured and so the, the
liability right now is frankly,
it's unlimited. Uh, so we're
simply changing the statutory,
really a statutory minimum in my
mind, so it's the low, lowest
possible bar because under the
existing law you can sue for
actual damages and it could be
in the millions.
OK, and so then, uh, Madam Cha
Senator, that then the people
that we have that are gonna be
at risk under this are gonna be.
possibly or marketplaces, our
third party sellers or regular
sellers and then that will be
for willful non-compliance.
I'm sure a couple of different
parts of your question. So right
now, anybody who sells goods or
services is subject to the
unfair trade practices that I am
as a lawyer. Uh, anybody who
sells anything that we buy is
subject to this act, so this
doesn't change that at all.
Um, but, but it does increase
the minimum if all the statutory
damages substantially again from
the 60s.
OK, Me center, that's why people
are kind of like you were, I
don't know joking or whatever
saying it's a trial lawyers bill
type joking about it, some
people have suggested that's the
initiative here and I'll just
tell you that um that that's why
I listened to and heard the
concerns that we originally had
damages of $250,000 and they
made it a persuasive argument to
me which is that might encourage
people to bring claims simply to
try and get that level of
damages and so we brought it
down to $10,000. That's, I'm not
to make light of that, but um
It's hard to bring litigation
and justify it for a $10,000
award and go through the trouble
and expense of doing so, we've
even talked about that in the
context of workers' compensation
in this session. So if that that
if you're for $10,000 claim and
taking attorney's fees and so
forth.
I don't think it's gonna create
an incentive for many lawyers
that I know.
and manager and senator, are you
concerned at all about this
eliminating that commerce in our
state.
And senator.
Um, Madam Chariot should only,
uh, restrict or limit commerce
in our state for people that are
putting products in on the
marketplace that do harm and
injury to people, I think that's
a good thing.
Right, and, and so I guess I'm
still having this problem, uh,
Madam Chair and Senator
understanding how this is really
going to.
Deal with crime, which is I, I
believe the intent of this bill,
um, is to, to deal with crime
and people who are doing things
illegally. That's a problem that
I'm having, um,
Kind of following up on what my
colleague Representative
Martinez said in your line of
questioning with him, I just
It it makes me uncomfortable,
but I will continue to listen
and I, I wanna just get the
process so I understood the
legal process of it, so thank
you for making sure I was right
on that. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, uh, Representative
Sapanski. Thank you, Madam
Chair, Senator, expert, uh, just
two questions, uh,
First, on page 5, the changes to
the definition of trade or
commerce.
Could you describe why why those
are necessary and why the
current definition of trade or
commerce and I'm looking, it
starts on page 5 line 19.
Um, and continues on to the next
page.
Madam Chair, so most, most if
not all this language relates to
jurisdiction. Um, and right now,
Uh, this is a recognition that
we buy and sell our goods
online, and they come to our
state through.
packages that are delivered on
our front door, and the question
is should the should the
companies that produce products
that sell online and have them
delivered.
To our front doorsteps should
they be liable for those
products that really is the
fundamental question here and I
can understand why there's
opposition to some in the room
thinking you should not be
liable for that. The, the simple
fact that I, I bought a product
online and it was shipped by
them and it was delivered by
them and tracked by them and
brought to me at my front door.
They want to say they're not
liable for that. Um, I think
that's wrong, fundamentally, and
so that's defining the trade or
commerce in modern terms. We, we
live in a world we should
recognize.
that we operate in and to me
somebody um allowed me to buy
the product from New Jersey and
put it onto a FedEx truck that
they decide to do and UPS and
they ship it and they track and
I watch it on my phone and my
laptop, anxiously waiting for it
to arrive at the different
carriers. I don't know if I'm
the only one who does that, but
I doubt it. Uh, they, they're
processing all of that, the
delivery, the truck, the, the
shipper, all of that, and they
put it on my front door, and the
argument is they have no
responsibility for that, whereas
if you and I go down to
the local store and we buy it.
They are responsible for that.
They are liable for that. This
is, this is trying to recognize
how we, how we transact business
today.
appreciate that, Madam Chair,
Senator, um, but to be clear,
this is
stating that there's no
requirement.
That that arrives on, on your
front door or anyone's front
door in New Mexico. Is that
right? Or am I?
Reading item 2 of that list.
Incorrectly.
No, that's the right, you're
looking at the right place on
page 6, that's subparagraph 2, a
lot of this language comes out
of our jurisprudence for what is
personal jurisdiction, and I'll
just tell you this is probably
one of the more complicated
areas a lot, even today, and
even our United States Supreme
Court has vacillated a great
deal, uh, if you'd asked me two
years ago, I would have said the
Supreme Court makes it very
difficult to have jurisdiction
over foreign corporations in
Mexico. Foreign corporation
doesn't mean foreign in terms of
another country, it means a
foreign corporation somebody out
of state, another state, and the
Supreme Court used to be pretty
restrictive on that, but they've
just opened that up quite a bit.
And again, another auto
manufacturer lawsuit where uh
the, the Supreme Court said that
by putting a product in the
stream of commerce, in this case
in the Supreme Court case, it
was, it was automobiles, and the
question was whether a Ford
motor by putting a product uh a
vehicle into the stream of
commerce subjected for motor to
a liability in the state of New
Mexico. Ford said, we're not
liable. The fact that we merely
manufactured a Ford trucks in
Michigan and put it out in the
stream of commerce. We're not
liable for the.
harm that that vehicle caused in
New Mexico, the Supreme Court
has said otherwise.
OK, thank you for that. Um, and
then the second question I have
is
Regarding
in the definition of
Unfair unfair deceptive trade
practice, um, but it is on page
8.
Lines 5 and 6.
Um, could you describe, I, I am
not clear.
If this relates specifically to
the firearms or or what fit for
a particular purpose might be,
is that, um,
is stating that you can.
Us a particular thing to
Uh
I, I, I'm not sure. Could you
give me an example of that or,
or what?
What is the purpose of warranty
of merchant ability or fit for a
particular purpose.
So I'm sure the language you're
referring to is largely existing
law, there's some clarification
language that's being added, so
in the law of warranties fall
into two broad categories
express warrantors and implied
warranties, express warranties
is the one you get in a little
packaging and when you open
something up and it reads,
here's our warranties, and then
there are implied warranties.
The law says we're going to
apply certain things have a
warranty and and implicit
warranties include those that
are referred to here, merchant
ability and fitness for
particular purpose. Those are
recognized legal terms for
products like.
ability and they're, they're
difficult to define what is the
fitness for a particular
purpose, but, um, again, a, a
product is uh considered to be
merchantable or for a particular
purpose because we say you're
gonna use this device for this
purpose, and there's a warranty
implied by that. If you use that
device for a different purpose
that warranty doesn't exist. I
hope that makes some sense to
you, but, but you, um, if I use
a butter knife as a screwdriver,
um, that's not a merchant
ability or fitness for purpose
they don't sell, I do it. We've
all done it right, you use
whatever's handy at the time you
get a butter knife to.
Open a screw or something like
that, that's, that's an example
of a misuse of a product that's
not uh for a particular purpose.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. So you
are trying to get out if
Uh, something was marketed as a
screwdriver, but turned out to
be a butter knife when it was
shipped to you.
That that would be included in
this, and, and again that's
mostly in the existing that that
language is really, I would say
that's already captured in the
law, but it's a greater
clarification for those
warranties, those implicit
warranties. Thank OK. Thank you,
Madam Chair, Senator.
Thank you, uh, Representative
Romero,
do you wanna, uh, the issue, um,
that's been raised by the
Attorney General's office of
severability, and um so
representative uh Romero and I
were visiting a little bit on
severability, and we're trying
to come up with a suggestive
clause and so
feel free.
I do have a few questions after
this just to as a heads up, um,
so we were looking at some
severability language, um,
section 12.
28-9 has a pretty uniform, uh,
severability clause that we
think applies to um the changes
in this statute or the changes
in this act, um.
I'm happy to provide a copy of
that to the, to you is just the
uniform severability clause
we'll get you one. We have
multiple copies made. We've been
Googling on the internet trying
to find a an appropriate
provision that's um relatively
straightforward and not
multi-paragraphed in detail
about the constitution and so
on. So, um, staff will hand that
out and we'll get you a copy.
We're gonna adjust it, we're
gonna probably propose a couple
adjustments, but it gives us
something to look at.
Because it just, just reading is
very difficult. I've been handed
something by Brandon, so I think
I, I just want to get myself or
you're looking at page 24 of the
bill, is that
would be probably page 26 to
have a severability clause just
at the end, so section 13 would
be the amended in.
Um, have we gotten the senator a
copy? We need to get that one.
You do have
OK, great.
OK. So the idea here, um, just
on public affairs matters given
that this sort of encumbers what
the DOJ would be um asked to
sort of look at on severability.
It would just be a a
severability clause, the act,
the it reads it's one long
sentence, so forgive me. If a
provision of the Act would be
instead of changing or changing
a statue to the act of a
provision of the Act or rule or
its application to any person or
circumstances held invalid, the
invalidity does not affect other
provisions or applications of
the Act scratch out statute in
that or rule. It can be given
without.
I can be given effect without
the invalid provision or
application and to this end, the
provisions of the Act scratch
out statute again or rule are
severable.
It's a very standard sort of
uniform severability.
Language.
Is that a friendly edition. I'm
sure it's I would, I would
describe it as a um
constructive, but, but
marginally so, I mean, you're
adding severability language to
this act is what I hear you
proposing to a new section,
which I would say it's already
the law here, but maybe you're
being more clear in this by this
particular act, and I think
that's fine. I, I'm, I'm
resistant only because um and
not and marginally resistant.
I'm always looking for to put
less language in our statutes as
a lawyer I'm responsible for
knowing all of that in there.
We're, we're.
taxes so many laws these days
and they're very, the times very
verbose and sometimes can be
simplified or shortened, but
this is not gonna do any harm
and I would consider it
favorable that that your wish of
the committee, OK, so, um,
everyone, I think what um
representative Romero is
suggesting and and this is that
in part based on some text
messages I got from the Attorney
General's representative that
they were concerned that it
didn't have a severability
clause, should in fact something
occur where it's challenged, and
we have some issues and so on.
So, um, this is what you want to
repeat what you have a copy, but
we're modifying the copy a
little bit, um,
so, would you repeat that? Uh,
if a provision of the act or
rule or its application to any
person or circumstances held
invalid, the invalidity does not
affect other provisions or
applications of the Act or rule
that can be given with be given
effect without the invalid
provision or application to this
end, the provisions of the Act
or rule are severable.
Does anyone have any questions
about the language.
So
And, you know, essentially what
we're doing here is saying if
something's deemed um illegal
or, you know, that it shouldn't
affect other provisions if they
are severable from that illegal
piece, OK, so.
this law's challenge.
We preserving all the
appropriate other provisions.
That's right. That's the intent.
That's right. And I heard the
senator say this was a
constructive uh marginally
constructive, but I interpret
that to mean he's OK with it.
Um, is there somebody like,
would you like to make that in
the form of a motion
representing. Yes, madam, I'd
like to move that we and
whatever the appropriate titling
would be for new material for
section 13.
Perhaps just severability, yes,
um.
We would add in severability as
the title and then add in the
language as stated, um.
As multiple as I stated multiple
times. OK, so what we're
proposing is a new section 13 or
um it would be on page 26
beneath obviously section 12. We
call it severability, and it
would read as follows, if a
provision of this act or rule or
its application to any person or
circumstances held invalid, the
input validity does not affect
others.
Um, other provisions or
applications of the act or rule.
Given effect without the invalid
provision or application and to
this end, the provisions of the
Actor rule are severable. So,
um, I, you know, obviously we've
seen other severability um
provisions and other statutes.
I, um,
Any, any questions about the, do
we have a second on the
amendment.
second.
Is there opposition to the
amendment.
I don't see any opposition to
the amendment, so we have
amended the bill with a new
section 13 severability.
Right,
um, yeah, I can. Yes, uh,
representative from Mar still
have the floor. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Um, so I know we had a
late sort of analysis coming
through the Department of
Justice surrounding IPA and the
awareness of the unfair
Practices Act, and I was just
realizing that I'm page, um.
stricken language in the
addition of the Ira language.
Um, based on the, um, it would
be on page 24, lines 17 through
20.
Um, the concern by the
Department of Justice is that
This third party information now
creates um unfair advantage to
the litigants that may be.
Subject to this because they can
IPRA essentially the files of
the
Um, can we just look at that
language and make sure that that
was, oh, we took it, did we take
that was my amendment. Oh, OK, I
apologize, my amendment that
adding the word no if you
completely reverse the, the we
took out his amendments. OK,
great for that section, forgive
me. OK, great. OK, that's all my
questions. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Um, anyone else with, uh,
questions or comments, um.
Uh, one more if you don't mind,
yeah, a little bit, we'll go do
a 2nd round of one, yes,
go ahead.
Thank you for the, the grace,
man. I appreciate that
10, uh, an expert team to mind.
from these particular devices.
Uh, I've been told they can also
be done on the 3D printer.
So when we go after the people
who sell
deep renders night.
I, I, I'm asking that
legitimately I saw the roll of
the eyes, but no, you don't have
to apologize.
That
I'm curious, where do we stop?
With who we go after and in, in
this case with a 3D printer.
Um
be the people who
introduced the 3D printer would
they be libel, is that the right
term, Madam Cha? Madam Chair,
again, if you look at the, the
language we're actually adding
to the examples of what would be
uh under the act, you'll see it
on page 9. That would not be
annoying manufacturing
advertising, distributing, or
offering for sale a firearm or a
destructive device or a firearm
part of a firearm accessory.
Country law, so we look at that,
the 3D printer would not be
captured as uh the
manufacturing.
advertising, distributing of a
firearm or of a destructive
device or of a firearm parts a
firearm accessory, so the answer
to your question is no, 3D
printer would not be captured,
but you're right, you you can't
produce these devices to my
understanding on a 3D printer.
We'll keep them next.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
All right. Um, you know, I'm
just gonna make a few comments
before we entertain emotion. Um,
so a couple years ago, the
senator brought this bill
forward and um you know, there
were a number of issues that we
had and I feel that many of
them, if not all of them, have
been addressed and I've tried to
educate myself a little bit
about how the bill works, um, I
feel that it really is a very
appropriate and creative
approach to dealing with unfair
trade practices in the context.
The firearms, but also in the
context of how we do business
now in this country. Um, we live
in a world where many, many of
us rely on online sales.
Um, to a very large degree. I
must confess I do, and I think
the um senator's point about how
this act would apply to, you
know, uh, brick and mortar
stores in the state, um, but
there's not a clear um approach
to dealing with online sales and
what the senator's bill does is
do that because he establishes
an approach to established
jurisdiction over the over those
sales through the first part of.
his bill and then defines what
we're talking about in terms of
online sales, that I think is
really um the weight of the
world going forward and to
suggest we should not.
Address online sales really is
is eliminating a very large
percentage of what.
is happening in terms of
Um, trade in this country.
And it does in a way give those
online sales yet another unfair
advantage over our local
businesses that all of us
sitting here agree should should
we want to maintain and to be
treated well and support and so
on, but there seems to be a
great reluctance to talk about
online sales, so I, I um really
have spent a fair amount of time
trying to understand that I know
it's I I've had complex bills
and I know how hard it is to get
those over the finish line
because people are put off and
might be even a little
intimidated by the provisions.
I've been through that this
year. Um, and I would
Just
yeah, I think some of my
colleagues know what I'm talking
about. And uh I think it's
really uh uh really the right
approach to go. We, we made some
changes that I think uh help you
improve on the bill, and I
appreciate the senator's
willingness to take in our input
and accept those changes and
with that, I'm happy to
entertain a emotion.
Mad I'm sure I'd like to move it
to pass on um Senate Bill 318 as
amended.
Multiple times.
Do we have a second?
I will make the 2nd.
Would you call the role please.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Abeta, yes.
Representative Chavez. No.
Representative Hall.
Representative Hoffman B. Hill.
Yes.
Representative Martinez. No.
Speaker Martinez, Representative
McQueen.
Yes.
Representative Reeve, no.
Leader Sapansky.
Yes.
Madam Vice Chair, yes.
Madam Chair.
Yes.
Thank you, I know you're trying
to move on. If I can just make
one last remark, I know there's
a lot of questions about how
does this relate to crime? And I
would just suggest one thing to
you, particularly with
representative Paul on this
committee. There's nothing
that's more deplorable to me to
knowing that our law enforcement
are out on the streets and
they're outmatched and outgunned
by their adversaries and the
idea that that people that are
criminals on the streets have
automatic firearms and, and our
bat with our law enforcement, I
think is something very
important part of our crime
fighting initiative. So thank
you, Madam.
Thank you, Sandra.
We have next on our agenda if I
can find it, yes.
I'm sorry.
We are now on the Senate Bill
364 law enforcement
qualifications, Senator Nava.
I can
What.
Nova and Senator Brant. Good to
see you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members. We are happy to join
you all today, um, to bring
Senate Bill 364, which is a
bipartisan bicameral measure,
uh, co-sponsored by Senator
Craig Brand, myself, uh, uh,
Speaker of the House, Martinez
and other 15 members, and we're
really grateful to
Representative Andrea Romero for
helping us carry them to the
house. Madam Chair, members of
the committee, Senate Bill 364
recognizes that our immigrant
family.
members, neighbors and friends
are integral and valuable parts
of our community and our
workforce. It does so by
removing outdated restrictions
in state law and allows and
allows immigrants with federal
work authorization to be police
officers and sheriff's deputies
in our state.
This piece of legislation is
deeply important to me. And I'll
start by telling you how it came
to be into the in terms of
pulling this together.
My two siblings and I came to
this country in 1996 as
children.
We were undocumented until a
DACA came into place, which is
deferred action for Early
Childhood arrivals.
My brother Eric, who's 5 years
younger than I am, has always
wanted to serve in the military,
the work or the police force,
whatever it is. He underwent
ROTC and instead of the
Community College, then ROTC at
UNM. His dream was to serve the
community and to protect our
fellow New Mexicans. However,
under current law, only US
citizens can be law enforcement
officers in New Mexico.
Sadly, my brother left me in
Mexico and found a police
department that recognized the
value that he would bring into
this vital public service.
So this past November, my
brother Eric was admitted into
the Blue Island Police
Department as a cadet, which is
located in Chicago, Illinois.
He wanted to be here today, but
even with the ask of his sister,
it was not allowed.
Um, so that brings us to Senate
Bill 364, Madam Chair, which
expands eligibility for law
enforcement work individuals.
To have who have received work
authorization from the United
States Citizenship and
Immigration Service. That means
legal permanent residents and
DACA recipients like my brother.
They would still have to meet
all of the requirements and
standards qualifications to
become a police officer based on
their education experience and
character, of course, but not
their immigration stats.
That would open the door to more
than 51,000 more New Mexicans
who would now be eligible to
apply for law enforcement work.
These are individuals who are
desperately in need by our
police departments and our
sheriff's offices.
Their contributors each and
every day across our communities
and our districts.
This is the public safety bill,
Madam Chair. Public safety
starts with having police
officers in our communities
available to help and respond to
our residents' needs.
The Albuquerque Police
Department recently said that it
has 885 85 officers, but I have
to budget for 1200. Every police
department and sheriff's office
in the state and nationally have
a similar challenge. My brother
could have filled one of those
openings.
And he could soon be in an
officer who's going to
understand the cultural
importance of serving
communities in Albuquerque and
Santa Fe and across the state
who can talk to people in their
own language.
But instead, he's going to do
that for the people of Illinois.
I hope that today we take the
first step in addressing this
issue. And with that, Madam
Chair, I'd like to pass it over
to my co-sponsors.
Um, well, let's try to limit our
remarks because we're without a
very long, you know, I, I
appreciate your willingness to
share the floor, but why don't
we go to the audience because,
you know, all right, let's go to
the audience. Anyone wishing to
speak in opposition to the bill,
um, please approach the
gentleman with the microphone.
OK. Anyone online wishing to um
speak in opposition to the bill,
please raise your hand.
I don't see anyone, anyone in
the audience wishing to speak in
favor of the bill, please
approach the gentleman with the
microphone, and I'm gonna limit
it to up to 5 people, 1 minute
per person, please.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Leonardo
Castaneda.
Policy advisor with the Office
of New Americans for the
Department of Work for
Solutions, as you've heard today
and many times over the session,
there is a significant
And shortage across the state,
particularly in rural
communities, and this is a great
opportunity for us to address
that not with more money, but by
expanding our qualifications and
allowing uh work authorized
individuals who live in these
communities, who have families
here who want to make Mexico
their forever home to serve in
this incredibly challenging
jobs. These are folks who are
qualified, who want to do this
work and we would be remiss to
uh let that opportunity pass and
and have them leave to other
states.
work for or jobs that don't
serve the people of New Mexico
to this degree. So I hope you
will support this bill. Thank
you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, my name is
Marcela Diaz. I'm with the
statewide immigrant-based Worker
justice organization called
Somos Axion. We organize in many
counties, including 7 rural
counties in our state, what we
know is that New Mexico has one
of the lowest workforce
participation rates in the
country with worker shortages in
many high demand industries,
including emergency and public
safety services. This really
does impact rural communities
where many of our members live.
In 2005, this body allowed young
New Mexicans known as Dreamers
the opportunity to
Continue their education at
public colleges and universities
with in-state tuition and
financial aid. Many of those
students were able to get DACA
status or other forms of legal
status, and are now working in
crucial public safety sectors
such as healthcare, education,
and social work. It only makes
sense to continue in this
tradition to address the
statutory exclusions, uh, so
that immigrant workers who are
ready and willing to serve our
state and community in all of
these public safety capacities
can. That's why we support.
This bill, please pass it. Thank
you. Thank you. And yes, sir.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Eric
Masterson. I'm the fire chief
for Sandoval County.
As a member of the Fire Service
serving rural New Mexico. My
team and I see firsthand at the
how law enforcement shortages
impact the lives of citizens and
citizens of New Mexico.
Therefore, any efforts such as
this bill to improve the
recruitment of our law
enforcement partners. I
definitely support. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you. Um,
Those online wishing to speak in
support, please raise your hand,
and we're going to limit it to
3. All right. Um,
Ruby Rodriguez.
Ruby
You need to unmute.
Ruby.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Ruby
Rodriguez with El Centropodeaion
SB 364 is about the equity in
the workforce or t is facing
workforce shortage in many
industries, including
healthcare, early child
education and first responder
and emergency services. We have
workers who are able, able to
fight those positions, but we
must do everything we can we
can.
Eeliminate systemic barriers,
immigrants represents 11% of the
workforce. My son wanted to be
part of police since it has 18
to contribute to public safety
but has a permanent resident he
could. He had a wagers until he
became a citizen. I'm a proud he
just passed the application and
we'll soon be able to serve in
the police and in army. SB 364
addresses barriers.
that prepar to those immigrant
Nuevo Mexicanos like my son from
service or estate in the way
they chose. We urge you support.
Thank you. Thank you. Let's do
mar Jack Torres.
Ma.
We got you.
OK, um, it looks like we have
the chief chief um Jeffrey Farr.
Uh, good evening, chair. Um, my
name is Jeffrey Farr. I'm
currently the chief of police of
Blue Island, Illinois that Miss
uh Naba uh previously mentioned,
um,
About 2 years ago, we, we
started hiring dacos. We
currently have 7.
Um, on our, on our role as of
today.
Um, we did it because we found
it increasingly difficult to
communicate.
With the community that we are
supposed to serve. Uh, we had,
uh, probably 5% of our police
department.
that were Hispanic and even
less, uh, that were bilingual,
uh, since the introduction of
hiring of the DACAs.
Uh, each, each of them have
played a vital role in the
success of our police
department. I, I highly
encourage you to pass this, uh,
pass this law. Thank you.
Thank you, uh, one more, um,
Meredith information.
Madam Chair,
uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee. This is Meredith Main
speaking on behalf of the
American Association of
University Women and the League
of Women voters and we strongly
support this bill, um.
Camel bipartisan bill that is
for public safety and, uh, we
started years ago by
acknowledging the
Credentials of people in the
healthcare industry who are
non-citizens, and that has
worked out very, very well. Uh,
we have this public safety
shortage. I urge you to pass
this bill and congratulate the
sponsors. Thank you.
Thank you. Um, let's go back to
the sponsor, um, anything else?
I will just introduce my experts
if you don't mind, Madam Chair.
Jessica Martinez to my left. She
is with the New Mexico Immigrant
Law Center. She's a legal expert
with deep knowledge of
immigration and workforce
authorization process and
actually uh Chief Bar online
will also answer to anything
that if need be, and we'll
yield. I see, I understand now.
All right, uh, questions,
comments, motions, anything's
appreciated, but yes, sir, um,
Representative Paul.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
senators, experts.
Um
One of my questions, of course,
is, uh, my background's 30+
years of law enforcement, both
federal and local.
How do we address the background
checks of the employees we hire.
Who would be
Uh, that fall under this act,
they may be here.
Legally to work, but checking
the background of people who
enforce the laws.
is a whole nother program.
we send out people. So what's
the proposed?
Solution some who've been raised
here since children, it's not a
problem.
But if they're an adult and we
can't account for a large time
frame that, that could be a
problem.
Not necessarily handing
classified. How do we do that,
Madam Chair?
Madam Chair and Representative.
so to answer your question,
legal permanent residents, uh,
in order to maintain that
status, they have to not commit
specific crimes and, and so it's
a really um lengthy process to
legal permanent resident, and
then they have to maintain that
status, which would require them
to, you know, they would, when
you go through a background
check, they would be able to
clear that background check, um,
in order to maintain.
that status in terms of DACA as
well. There's also what have to
maintain all, uh, to maintain
DACA, they would not have to
commit any crimes as well as
specific crimes that are
outlined within that statue and
so they would go through the
process to do the background
checks like every other
candidate that is going through
the law enforcement process.
So Madam Chair and, uh,
Senator Representative expert.
includes, I'm assuming, and this
would be more specific to the
Chief in Illinois are you
conducting polygraphs.
Uh, as a matter of routine on
all your employees, uh, Chief
Chief far, did you catch um the
question.
Um, if you'd unmute, um, chief.
Uh, I do apologize. Yes, I did
hear the question. Uh, sir, I
can, I can assure you that every
applicant that goes through our
process is completely vetted.
They are subject to character
examinations, as well as
polygraph, as well as
psychological and as well as
medical, um, 11 unfortunate
thing uh that we have come
across with with the
psychological exams, uh, is not
a lot of DACAs are passing
those, um.
expect more have failed than
than passed. I, I don't have the
statistical data to answer as to
why, but, but I can assure you
that, you, you know, they have
not been hired because they were
not successful on the
psychological exam.
Thank you. Um, Madam Chair, and,
uh, senators representative and
expert. So,
Assuming, I, I mean, I don't.
The face of it, don't see a huge
problem with this.
Are they as a rule or people
that are here under this type of
uh.
Authorization by the government
working toward citizenship at
the same time.
They're doing this or are we
talking about people who want to
retain their.
Foreign country and be a police
officer in the United States of
America.
Madam Chair.
Madam Chan representative, in
terms of legal permanent
residents, they have
authorization to work in the
United States that doesn't
expire as long as they maintain
um the specific criteria. Legal
permanent residents depending on
if they were married to a
citizen or they've obtained it
through another, another form of
relief, they will be able to
qualify for citizenship within 3
to 5 years, so they're on the
pathway to citizenship in terms
of DACA, unfortunately the
limitation.
of DACA is that it's not a
pathway to citizenship. However,
they have work authorization to
work in, in the United States,
and they also have protection
against deportation to remain in
this country, um, and that has
been, uh, going on, ongoing for
the past 13 years. So because of
that limitation, this provides
an opportunity for those with
both legal permanent residency
and DACA to be able to qualify
to work um in this capacity.
So Madam Chair, the answer that
would be some, some would be
eligible, some wouldn't.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, representative Tomas.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, senators, uh, for
bringing this forward. I have a
lot of questions and since we're
here till one in the morning, I
didn't have time to do my
homework, but I guess my first
question is, um,
I thought it was illegal for
somebody that's not a US citizen
to carry a gun. So what is the
work around around them?
I thank you. I appreciate that
question. We actually have a, a
letter from the US Department of
Justice about this very issue.
There are exceptions to that,
and one is DACA recipients who
are certified law enforcement
officers may in compliance with
federal law, possess firearms
and ammunitions issued to them
by their employing government
agents.
Uh, department and for official
use in performing their official
duties.
Um, Madam Chair, senators, so
Do they
Lock it up, leave it at work.
How does that work? Cause I know
um I think I know where you're
going, if you don't mind. Um,
they could depending on
Uh, whether or not their job
requires that they be armed
24/7.
Or if only while they're on
shift.
So if it's 24/7, then they are
allowed to take it home, and
they are allowed to keep it if
it's only when they're on shift,
and they do lock them up.
Basically put him back into the
artery every day.
So they're they're allowed
within the
The duties of work cause right
now our law enforcement
officers, you know, take their
guns home, have them in their
vehicles, they take their
vehicles home and
And it would work just like any
other police officer currently
is they wouldn't be able to go
out and buy a weapon because you
have to be a US citizen to
purchase a weapon, so there's
and law enforcement their main
weapon is issued to them anyway.
They're not allowed to just go
out and buy whatever they want.
They would only be able to carry
those service weapon.
Madam Chair and representative,
I believe, and Chiar in
Illinois, it operates
differently, but he may want to
add as well.
Well, I, I'd like to try to
answer the questions to them,
but nothing beyond that. We have
like 3 other bills on our
agenda, so.
Did you feel like you got a
satisfactory answer. Sure.
Madam Chair, senators, then I
guess um my next question is how
many states have passed a law
like this.
Madam, uh, Madam Chair, uh
representative, 8 have
introduced pieces of legislation
for them, I believe, uh, have
actually implemented. OK.
Thank you, ma'am chair senators.
Representative Martinez.
Think
Uh, senators, I, I didn't get a
clear answer on the question
that my colleague Representative
Hollas.
If they're accepted in
Law enforcement agency.
Are they moving towards
citizenship.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Martinez.
It all varies on your steps.
There is not a one-way answer
for this because if I'm a DACA
recipient, I don't have a
pathway into citizenship. If I'm
a legal permanent resident.
I could, I, I will have a, a
pathway into citizenship. So it
is all reliant on a case by case
basis.
might understand that if you're
Do uh
There's no pathway to
citizenship? No, madam chair, I
representative unfortunately,
there is absolutely no pathway,
and I would advise for uh
because I know it's not known in
terms of the qualifications to
become a DACA recipient, but
those are the one of the most,
some of the most strictest uh
qualification requirements to be
able to qualify to be a DACA
recipient, so you would think
that they would, um, but there
is absolutely no pathway.
as of now.
Thing manager.
Thank you, um, Representative
Ree. Thank you, Madam Chair, uh,
Representatives.
Um, I'm reading this analysis
from DPS, um, and I noticed they
didn't stand up and um unless I
missed it, support this or not,
not. So if you had um
conversations with the
Department of Public Safety
because in their analysis, Medic
chair and senators, they do
express a lot of different
concerns, um, from background
checks, additional training,
certification costs, keeping up
with uh whether someone um work
authorization.
has expired, um.
The law enforcement academy and
different things that will have
to be done there, just a lot of
different things that could
impact them, so if you could let
the committee know what their
feedback was to you on this me
chair and um and and if you know
why they didn't speak in support
of this.
P
Mhm
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. We did not
connect uh with the department.
I saw a lot of shells, a lot of
ambiguity in that, um, analysis
and I think there are facts that
we're bringing to the table in
terms of states that have
actually done it.
I appreciate the analysis, but I
don't think it merges with the
passage of this bill, given the
folks who have been there, done
that, and the
severe rising crime in the
state, the public safety problem
we have, the lack of police
officers that we have across the
state, so I would.
Really drive us to the numbers
in terms of the deficit that we
have and the opportunity that we
have to make a difference.
And
Madam Sharon represent or
centers. I apologize. Um, I do
think that they're a big player
in this, um, and that they
should be brought to the table
and I it bothers me that we're
hearing a bill that deals with
law enforcement and all the
different things you have to do
to be a certified peace officer
of the state, and we did not
bring DPS to the table on this,
and so
That, that's a problem for me,
so I just wanted to state that
make you senators, I'm sure.
Anyone else happy, I'm happy to
entertain emotion, Madam Chair.
I'd like to make a motion for a
due pass on.
364.
Is there a second?
We have a Du pass motion on
Senate Bill 364 made by
Representative.
Sapansky, seconded by Speaker
Martinez, which you call the
roll, please. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Representative Abeta,
yes.
Representative Chavez.
No one I'd like to explain my
book. Representative Hall.
No.
Representative Hockman B. Hill.
Representative Martinez.
Yes.
Speaker Martinez, yes.
Representative McQueen. Yes.
Representative Reed, no.
Leader Sapansky.
Madam Vice Chair.
Madam Chair, yes.
Representative Chavez to explain
her vote.
Yes. Thank you, Madam Chair,
Senators. I know we had talked
when you were filing this bill,
um, and, and I was um asking you
questions then. I didn't have
time to do thorough homework,
but I've gotten a lot of emails
and questions, so I'm gonna do
my homework before it gets to
the floor, but I just wanted to
let you know that that is my
reason.
Great, thank you very much,
Senator Senators and
representatives. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you, members.
All right, we
Represented, I mean, excuse me,
we have next Senate bill 70 and
racketeering crimes, we have
Senator Brant and Representative
Cullen.
The floor's yours. Thank you.
Representative we appreciate uh
this getting scheduled, um, this
is a
Clean up and add to our Rico
statue. We call it racketeering,
um, it adds several crimes.
Doesn't raise any penalties,
just add some crimes to what can
be crime, uh, what can be
charged through it. One is
sexual exploitation of children,
uh, criminal sexual penetration,
criminal sex, sexual contact,
sorry, dog fighting and
cockfighting, bringing
contraband into places of
imprisonment and human
trafficking. We've pretty much
added the worst of the worst
crimes, uh, but some crimes that
we are seeing quite rising in
New Mexico, especially the human
trafficking. We want to make
sure.
We can go after the organizers
of those crimes, and that's what
this bill does.
Um, let's go to the audience,
those wishing to speak in
opposition, please approach the
gentleman with the microphone.
I don't see anyone, um, those
online wishing to um speak in
opposition, please raise your
hand.
Right, and this is opposition.
So, um, Daniel Parra.
Daniel are speaking in
opposition?
I'm gonna go to the next person,
John's iPhone. Are you speaking
in opposition?
Yes, that is correct. OK,
I'm regarding, uh, calling
regarding cockfighting,
cockfighting is the victimless
crime. Last year we killed 150
million chickens in this
country. Prosecutors and the
chief of police will point to uh
drug dealers, known drug dealers
that fight roosters, which leads
to the question, why have they
not been arrested? Are they
confidential informants?
This bill is also substantially
racist against Mexican
Americans, Hispanics, uh,
Latinos.
Because in Mexico, they have
cockfighting everywhere, that is
part, part of their culture.
They come here and now they're
going to be subject to to
felony, imprisonment, RIO.
Again, this is a victimless
crime.
Which does not belong in this
bill. John, thank you and um
just to clarify that I believe
the cockfighting was removed on,
it's in again. OK. All right.
Sorry about that. All right.
Yeah, well, it was removed and
then it was. We got your
comments. Thank you very much.
Um,
Let's see, um, next, Jessie, I
believe, Jessie, you have a
minute if you're speaking in
opposition.
On mute, please.
All right, let's go to Daniel
Parra.
If you're speaking in
opposition, Daniel.
Please unmute.
I'm sorry, uh, I
Apparently, there's some issue
in terms of them hearing us or
us hearing them. Let's go back
to the audience, those wishing
to speak in support of the bill,
please approach the um gentleman
with the microphone and
please limit your remarks to
about a minute and will take up
to 5 people. Thank you, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
JD Bullington speaking on behalf
of the Greater Albuquerque
Chamber of Commerce, which
supports Senate Bill 70.
This bill targets the leaders of
enterprises that are committing
heinous crimes. Specifically, it
makes it a crime to solicit or
coerce another person, including
a minor and being a member of or
working with a criminal and
criminal enterprise. We all
know, has been mentioned, human
trafficking is a growing problem
because of the organized
criminal development that's
involved.
racketeering statutes are
designed to go after these kinds
of organizations and these kinds
of people and prosecutors need
Senate Bill 70 to have a new set
of tools to protect the public,
chamber supports the bill.
Thank you. Yes, ma'am.
Chair and committee members, my
name is Grace Mon Irwin with
Animal Protection Voters, and we
stand in support of Cenel 70,
which adds dogfighting and
cockfighting to the list of
violations to our state's
racketeering law.
Incorporating organized animal
fighting into our Rico statutes
will align our state legislation
with what law enforcement
professionals here and across
the country have long known. The
animal fighting rings are
frequently part of larger
criminal enterprise that include
drug and arm trafficking, human
trafficking, money laundering,
and other illegal activities,
utilizing the Rico statute to
dispute these animal fighting
rings will enhance protection
not only for the animals that
are harmed and killed, but also
for our communities at large. We
urge you to vote yes on Senate
Bill 70. Thank you for your time
and consideration. Thank you.
Um, yes.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name's Dale
Wagner. I'm a deputy chief with
the New Mexico State Police.
Expanding New Mexico's
racketeering statute will
enhance the state's ability to
combat organized crime by
allowing law enforcement to
tolerate a
to target a broader range of
criminal activities tied to
criminal enterprises. This
expansion will improve a public
safety, increased coordination
between agencies and strengthen
the prosecution of high-level
offenders involved in crimes
such as drug trafficking, human
trafficking, and financial
fraud. State police strongly
supports this bill as it
provides vital tools to
dismantle.
d ang er ous criminal
organizations and target
upstream actors who often evade
justice. Thank you. Thank you.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the Judiciary
Committee. My name is Benjamin
Baker and I'm the public safety
advisor to our governor. I want
to thank the sponsors for their
willingness to undertake this
important work, and I rise in in
strong support of Senate Bill
70, strengthening the state's
response to organized criminal
enterprises currently causing
incalculable harm to our state
and its community members.
I will point out to this body
very quickly that the governor's
organized crime commission's
annual report to the legislature
identified human trafficking and
disruption of organized criminal
enterprise as a key
recommendation going forward
after analyzing last year's
work, we urged the support of
this addition to strengthen New
Mexico's public safety laws, and
we think this committee very
much for its.
I will thank you. Let's go
online up to 3, those in
support, and if you're not in
support, would you please remove
your hand.
OK. Um, Michael Moreno.
OK, we're talking about support,
Jesse, um, are you speaking in
support?
A please unmute.
I'm opposing the bill, we
already did that, so let's go to
the next person, uh, Larry
Sontag.
Larry.
Please, I'm here, Larry.
Larry
OK, for some reason there's, I
don't know what's going on. I
don't know if it's our end or
their end, but whatever, uh,
sponsors, anything else before
we go to committee?
OK. Um, I have representative
Reeb.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
Senator and Representative, um,
I like, I like the bill. I'm
gonna support the bill, but my
question goes to the cock
fighting situation. Um, I
noticed it was in the bill, it
was out of the bill, now it's
back in the bill, um.
And it's more so with the issue,
and I understand.
A prosecuted maybe one of these
cases in my career.
And it was for individuals and
it was an undercover sting
operation, I believe, by the
state police and we ended up
having 4 Mexican national or
illegal immigrants, I believe,
who, who basically were
charged with a petty
misdemeanor. So cockfighting is
a petty misdemeanor. And so,
like, I kind of understand the
big picture, the crumbs you have
in here are pretty big crimes,
um, so I, I'm just concerned
with the penalty of, of
cockfighting being a petty
misdemeanor.
Um, and then jumping it into
this huge realm of of
racketeering where maybe there
should be more of a focus on if
we need to raise the penalties
of cockfighting to some type of
felony, so that then we could do
conspiracy or or different
things like that. So, um, it's
more a penalty issue of jumping
or petty misdemeanor crime into
a racketeering crime, so I sure
if you could kind of address
that senators.
Madam Chair, uh, and I'll just
introduce myself quickly. My
name is Rob Hart. I'm the
director of the Governor's
Organized Crime Commission and
the WDA the 2nd judicial. Um, so
currently the way the
cockfighting law works is it
does become a felony after the
3rd offense. So it, the way that
the racketeering statute is
written, it's only for felony
offenses. So it's only going to
get to the level if you were
charged with racketeering and
cockfighting after you've
already been charged and
convicted 3 times of cocks.
fighting. Then it becomes only
at that point could the state
then bring a chart. OK, thank
you, Madam Chair, and, um,
expert.
And represent how many
Are we seeing across the state
because I, I've been doing this
28 years and I, like I said back
in my early in the 90s, I think
is when I saw my one and only.
Is this an actual big problem
we're having in our state, Ma,
Senator, expert.
Mat chairs representative, um, I
think we were one of the last
states to even criminalize
cockfighting, so it's, I won't
say it's a new law, I think
it's, it's been over 10 years
that it's been a crime, but it's
probably not something that's
been charged frequently,
especially given that it's
certain regions of the state
where it's a bigger problem,
right? With this bill aims to do
is give tools to prosecutors and
law enforcement that when they
End up in that situation, and
they come across an actual
criminal organization, right?
We're talking at the level of a
criminal organization when it's
in this bill, that they have the
ability to charge racketeering.
And the whole point is that you
shouldn't be able to be running
a criminal business and making a
profit, right? That's what
racketeering is different than
the crime itself. So I would say
that while I don't think DA's
offices are gonna tell you
they're drowning and
cockfighting cases, that it is
culpable conduct, and it lends
itself.
automatically to that criminal
enterprise that we want to curb
and be able to go after. OK, and
so,
um, chair and
Um, Senator and Representative
and expert, how many
cases have we seen in New Mexico
that could have been charged if
this bill was structured with
cock fighting in it, uh, to
where you could get a criminal
enterprise, um.
I just haven't seen any really,
so I just, I'm just curious.
Mount.
Representative, um, I don't
know.
Now it is a crime here.
It leads to or is usually
involved in a lot of other
crimes.
Um, you know, the, the federal,
you know, law enforcement, you
know, recently.
Uh,
Reed 34 individuals from across
several states.
And the charges.
Included criminal conspiracy
involving illicit drugs,
firearms, money laundering,
cockfighting, and attempted
murder.
So it usually
In this kind of a situation is
going to be something that's
much more involved than just the
cock fighting itself.
OK, thank you for that. Um, that
chair and center representative,
so the federal authorities were
the ones that actually
prosecuted that in that
situation, yes, and, and
federally, you know, we may only
call it a misdemeanor.
study.
Federally, it's a felony.
So I, you know.
We we actually saw in our last
committee people coming and
admit to federal crimes, federal
felonies. It was not a very good
idea. They, they should have
gotten attorney's advice before
they came.
All right. And then, um, OK, so
then Madam Chair and expert and
representative senator, so it
has to be a third offense, and
then it's a felony, and it would
fall under here. Do you have
statistics on how many um people
have been prosecuted for felony
cock.
Got you,
madam, no, I don't.
OK, thank you. I, I'm gonna
support the bill. That's just my
one concern. It just seems like
a, I understand that the idea
around it, um, and it sounds
like the feds could prosecute it
if that was a situation, but it
just is really low penalty. um,
and it's not.
be included with all these
major, major crimes, but, um,
thank you very much, Madam
Chair.
Representative Martinez.
Ash an answer.
OK, wow. Um, any other questions
before we hear a motion?
Happy to hear emotion.
I know we're all tired. Mo do
pass.
We have a motion for a due pass
on Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 70,
OK, uh, made by Representative
Martinez, seconded by
Representative Chavez, which you
call the roll please. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Representative
Abeta, yes.
Representative Chavez, yes.
Representative Paul.
Yes, and I'd like to explain
that as well.
Representative Hoffman B. Hill,
yes.
Representative Martinez.
Yes.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen. Yes.
Representative Reed, yes.
Peter Sapansky, yes.
Met a vice chair, yes.
Madam Chair, yes. Representative
Paul to explain his vote.
Thank you. Um, yes, not a
problem. I would suggest.
If we're going to do this to
really make it effective, I'm
assuming racketeering laws are
similar to federal RICO
statutes.
Why not a man
Our current cockfighting
statute.
Just something.
Just as something to suggest
because the way it sits now.
It's leaves it open to a lot of
interpretation. So thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you. uh, thank you,
centers. Thank you, uh,
representative.
OK.
the moment we've been waiting
for Senator Maestas.
Uh, yes, and we are on Senate
Bill 155. Thank you very much,
Madam Chair, Honorable member,
Senate Bill 155 amends our
embezzlement statute.
And would
make it clear to all prosecutors
and judges in the state that
That the embezzlement uh crime
should be charged in the
aggregate.
Uh, if somebody steals pipe or,
you know, somebody embezzles
rather 5 different occasions.
That that should be one crime
which would add up the total
value of that embezzlement and
would be punished appropriately,
it would ensure that there's not
multiple cases and multiple
courtrooms with multiple DAs and
public defenders assigned, it
would allow uh an accounting of
the full victimization of that
nonprofit or small business or
whatnot and ensure that uh
that they're swift and certain
justice and restitution paid to
the victim in this case.
If it, uh,
The aggregate would be 12
months, Madam Chair.
And it would only relate to one
specific gift victim and if
they're in the event of a of a
of a serial emb investor that
has multiple victims. With that,
I'll stand for questions. Um,
OK, those in the audience
wishing to speak in opposition,
please approach the gentleman
with the microphone.
I don't see anyone. Those in
online wishing to speak in
opposition to the bill, please
raise your hand.
Don't see anyone, those in the
audience wishing to speak in
support of the bill, please
approach the gentleman with your
with the microphone and.
You know, it's a one minute
thing.
Thank you, Madam Chair members
of the committee, JD Bullington,
speaking on behalf of the
Greater Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce, which supports Senate
Bill 155. This bill is similar
to legislation passed in 2023
that allowed aggregation of
retail theft charges, and that
new law is working. Albuquerque
Police Department reports that
they have charged over 100
repeat offenders under the
aggregation of retail theft
provision, and year to date
starting in November,
Albuquerque was down in
shoplifting for the year.
overall.
Whether it's stealing a physical
item or embezzling funds from.
or private account, it's theft.
And unfortunately, in New
Mexico, we've seen embezzlement
in some pretty high places in
the chamber urges you to support
this bill.
Thank you.
This is in support. Thank you,
Madam Chair, for seeing you
here, Kim.
Um, there's no neutral line, so
I, I just decided to choose
support for fun. Um, thank you,
Madam Chair, members and
committee. Kim Chavez Cook with
the Law Offices of the Public
Defender. We don't actively
support this change because we
don't believe it's necessary. We
do believe the law already
allows for this is an
inappropriate cases and I did
want to just flag for the
committee, um, to consider that
this is a.
step away from the common law
doctrine of the single larceny
rule that um generally applies
to theft cases, so we do, um,
you know, have some questions
about the need for this
legislation, but, um, we also
don't think it's going to have a
significant impact either way,
so no opposition. Thank you.
Dale Wagner again, state police,
uh, state police supports this
bill as it would enhance law
enforcement's ability to address
embezzlement crimes,
particularly those occurring
across multiple events.
It would allow for higher
charges against individuals who
regularly engage in
embezzlement, closing a loophole
exploded by professionals.
Criminals who deliberately still
amounts just below felony
thresholds to reduce their
penalties.
By ensuring the fenders are
charged appropriately for their
crimes. This bill would
strengthen the public safety and
target repeat offenders who
commit organized crimes. Thank
you.
members of the committee,
Benjamin Baker, uh, worked at
the governor's office. Thank
you, uh, Senator Maestas, for
your sponsorship of this bill
fairly quickly want to um invite
the committee to think about how
long embezzlement and
aggregation of embezzlement may
not seem like the the flashiest
thing under the sun at the
opportunity during the period of
my career to investigate and
participate in the prosecution
of an over $300,000 less than
one year period embezzlement
from a McKinley County family.
The impact of that crime was
devastating, and I will tell you
it took the
investigators and the
prosecutors, uh.
Uh, we had to move mountains in
order to successfully prosecute
that case in a way that was
commensurate with the real felt
impact that the victims
observed. We think this is
meaningful work and we thank
this committee for its
deliberation on this. Thank you.
Thank you. Those online wishing
to speak in support, please
raise your hand, and I'm going
to limit it to 3 people.
I don't see any hands raised.
Answer anything before we go to
committee.
Thank you, madam chair. I
believe this has been the policy
of the legislature for some
time, believe it or not, in
2007, the statute read each
separate incident of
embezzlement or conversion
constitutes a separate and
distinct defenses. There was the
Senate Bill 162 was passed,
which took those words out.
But, but it didn't make it
crystal clear that that all of
them should be charging
aggregate, so there's multiple
jurisdictions doing different
things. We want a statewide
policy.
Uh, representative Reap.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair and
Representatives. So basically we
can just do an honor between
date and then put them all
together and do the the felony
or whatever the Madam Chair
Representative, when you say we,
the state, yes, the state
prosecutor can put, put it
together if there's maybe 5
petty misdemeanors that are
unimportant, you put them
together, it might be a
misdemeanor or 4th degree,
it'll.
Incentivize the investigation
and the prosecution of equal to
the harm and a manager
representative you said this, it
can be multiple jurisdictions.
Did I hear you say that or does
it have to be thank you, Madam
Chair, uh, Rose and I brief.
You couldn't prosecute in
multiple jurisdictions, but we
want all the judicial districts
in the state have the same
public policy, some prosecutors
aggregate them, some prosecutors
don't, and we want a policy of
aggregation. Thank you, and I
think what it's important to
note on this bill, which is
good, is it's very difficult
often to know when someone's
skimming off the top or
whatever. It's difficult to know
the date that that actually
happened, you know, because it's
just happening so it's often
hard to charge each one
specifically and then you end up
with all these petty
misdemeanors.
Uh, whereas if you can aggregate
them and actually just do an
honor between date and it makes
the prosecution way more simple,
so I, I really like this, so um
thank you for bringing this
bill, a representative. I'm
chair.
Thank you. And uh Representative
American.
Thank you, Madam Chair. My only
question is about Double
jeopardy, um, when we're talking
about aggregation and how we
deal with previously, um,
Yeah.
Adjudicated crimes, I guess it's
the only word I can come up with
right now cause my brain isn't
working, um, how do we sort of
look at the aggregate for
previous crimes and, and
deal with deal with double
jeopardy. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
No, that's a, that's an
important concern. Usually it
usually the the victim realizes
that there's been an
embezzlement, you know, the
accountant finds, finds missing
funds or whatnot.
And then they kind of do an
internal audit whether it's
sophisticated or not.
And then they report it, so
there's a lot of time from the,
from the actual.
Action until discovery and then
investigation and then, and then
the criminal charge. So by the
time the criminal charge rolls
around, they've kind of figured
out how much money was, you
know, the person's been fired,
whatnot. They've kind of figured
it out. I, I, I find it, I think
it would be difficult to find an
embezzlement action.
After the fact, but if, but if
that were to occur, that would
theoretically prohibit that,
that one act to be included. So
I think uh I think uh
The prosecutor is
And the investigation is sound
and the defendant is free from
any double jeopardy, uh.
harms.
Oh, thank you, Madam Chair, and
then just so with that, if, if
it was happening in multiple
counties, who is the charging DA
if it was an aggregate.
Um
Madam Che I don't I'm trying to
think of a victim that would be
in multiple counties.
Uh, obviously if it was
different victims, it'd be a
different a different charge,
but on like similar to uh
restraining order or kidnapping
or a crime that that is in
multiple jurisdictions. I
believe all of them would have.
Uh, jurisdiction to bring the,
the crime, to bring the charge
rather, but, but that would be
up to.
The prosecutor and
As to whether or not
that
I think it would, or or it would
be brought by Madam Chairs
Romero and the uh principal like
if someone stole from like 7
alls or not.
Maybe it would, um,
go to
I think either all 7 would have
jurisdiction or
The corporate office. I
I would defer to the other
prosecutor in the legislature,
but
The is unclear from what I'm
hearing. Yeah.
That, that may force uh that may
force Madam Char and Meadow to
have two different charges.
And so, or drop one for the
other, frankly, that would be
the more logical thing and I'm
just curious, Madam Chair, just
in how it's interpreted if the
DOJ was the sort of, you know.
As a, as a multiple county
entity, would they get involved
if it was systemic, but
throughout the state or
something like that, just
wondering like how that
jurisdiction would work. Thank
you, Madam Chair in the little
metal, the uh, the, the, the
attorney general would have no
broader authority than a local
DA, um.
So I think uh one of those 7
also to DAs would probably take
the case and uh and and plead
the others out or include if
they were unable to include the
other crime.
OK. Looking forward to how this
is implemented. Thank you.
Anyone else? uh, Representative
Paul.
Oh, I'm sorry, it looks like you
were. I'm just gonna
do pass. All right, we have a
motion for a due pass on, let me
find, make sure we read it
properly. Um, I actually just
sent a 155 as um it has an A,
was it a oh, it was amended, as
amended. All right, I by
representative Hall, is there a
second?
seconded by Representative
Romero.
Caroll, please. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Representative Abeta.
Yes. Representative Chavez, yes.
Representative Paul. Yes.
Representative Clarkman B Hill,
yes.
Representative Martinez. Speaker
Martinez, Representative
McQueen. Yes.
Representative Reed.
Peter Sapansky, Madam Vice
Chair, yes.
Madam chair. Yes, Madam Chair,
you have a dope on Senate Bill
155 as amended.
Last item on our agenda is SB
375.
Um, I believe there is an
amendment floating around. If we
could make sure we get that
handed out.
Yeah, I, I, I think I can handle
it, Senator. Thank you so much,
Madam Chair, Honorable members.
We really appreciate, uh, your,
your, your late night and your
early morning. This is Senate
Bill 375. I'm joined by Cabinet
Secretary, Alicia Chafoya
Lucero, um, who is the head of
the Department of Corrections.
This deals with probation
reform, which the state is in
dire need of this does uh
5 things. Number 1, it
eliminates parole costs. We all
have learned through through our
sister states that assigning
parole costs is.
It is bad public policy that
someone who's integrating back
into the community is better,
better left spending their money
on restitution, child support,
counseling, or, or household
amenities, uh, given our, our
large coffers of DOC is willing
to absorb that that limited
parole cost. Also, the case
loads of probation officers many
times gets overblown. We want to
create a system where if someone
has a caseload of 100, they're
focusing on that 20 or 25
persons.
that that are a bigger threat to
public safety, a higher
probability of recidivation, so
what this does, what it would
create a good time for
probationers so that low level
probationers would receive good
time and be able to uh
Be get off probation, uh.
Uh, 2.5 years in as opposed to
the 5 years out that most people
are facing on probation. Um, it
would also, um,
It would also allow uh
It would also allow the
Department of Corrections to
administer good time in.
In a much easier way, uh, and so
when someone gets sent to
prison, they would have an
assumed kickout date that if
they programmed and received all
of their eligible good time, the
prisoner, the family, the
victim, the, the, the
administration would have that
date, and then it would be
calculated ongoingly and that
date would move out if there was
a lack of programming. We think
this would keep correctional
officers safer, that this would
be a more for a more proactive
inmate and make it just easier
on you.
Everybody to calculate the math
of good time, it would not
change.
Anything other than how it is
calculated, and then we uh we
wanted to create a big, a big
stick and a big carrot, remember
those big carrots on Land of the
Lost.
We, uh, the policy also includes
good time for parole, the
original bill said if you got uh
remanded on parole, uh, you
would do straight time, that,
that's, you know, kind of too
big of a stick and we're, we're,
we're grateful to the leadership
of this committee, so we would
ask uh that uh that the
amendment be considered uh that
if someone gets remanded back on
parole, they serve the same
calculated good time eligibility
as their original crime. With
that, I'll turn over to the
secretary.
Madam Chair, uh, members of the
committee.
I believe that Senator Maest has
covered everything that needed
to be covered. He explained the
amendment as well as the bill,
and so I'll be here to answer
your questions. Thank you. And
just for clarification, um, I
had conversations with the
senator and we talked a little
bit and the secretary a little
bit about this issue because it
was being raised by some of the
stakeholders and I think um we
came to some understanding, and
so it's my understanding, the
amendment that we just handed
out is, is uh 07.1.
My understanding is that this
amendment is um amenable to the
uh sponsor and the secretaries.
Is that not right? Arguably the
friendliest amendment ever,
really.
Oh wow. Well that, that's
amazing. All right, so let's go
to the audience, um, and those
wishing to speak in opposition
to the bill, please, um,
approach the gentleman.
Those online wishing to
Uh
Be in opposition and getting
really tired here, please raise
your hand.
Don't see anyone. Those wishing
to speak and support please
approach the gentleman with a
mic, and please limit your
comments to uh one minute or
less.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, I'll be very
brief. My name is Douglas
Carver. I'm acting director of
the New Mexico Sentencing
Commission.
And when the Sentencing
commission considered this bill
and legislative committee
meeting. There was a unanimous
vote in support of the bill, but
one quibble some had were about
this provision that has just
been amended, so that makes it
even better, members, thank you.
I know.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Kim Chavez
Cook with the law offices of the
Public Defender and as was just
stated, we did have one
hesitation about this bill,
which has now been addressed by
the amendment and so we do stand
and support. Thank you.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Monica. I'm the New
Mexico State director of the
Fines and Feees Justice Center.
Um, we ask that you support this
bill, specifically the probation
and parole, uh, fee elimination
portion. Um, most people that
are involved in the criminal
legal system can't afford basic
necessities, let alone pay for
their criminal legal costs, um,
by eliminating these, these
fees, you're essentially putting
that money back into the
community and into communities.
where it matters most, where
people can actually focus on
their rehabilitation, uh.
Paying for basic necessities for
their families, and of course
restitution. So we ask that you
support this bill. Thank you.
Thank you, uh, those online
wishing to um speak and support,
please raise your hand.
I don't see any hands raised.
Let's go to the committee.
And um I'm happy to entertain
emotion. Yeah, yeah, I, I know a
motion to discuss the amendment.
So, OK, yeah, are you on the
amendment? Oh, very good.
Thank you,
Mare representative, just so I'm
understanding the amendment, um,
it's taking.
OK.
go back to it like not to be
awarded.
OK, so explain.
Explain to me um on this place
if
If somebody
Um, has a parole revoked and
they go back to prison on a
crime that was generally an SBO
crime.
Is that addressing that issue or
not, I sure.
Representative.
Madam Chair Representative
Reeve, it is. Uh, so what we
were doing initially was to say
that if you returned as a prole
violator of any type, you would
not be eligible for a good time
at all. And now what we're
saying is that if you return as
a provi violator of any type,
you will be eligible for a good
time, but in line with whatever
offense you had before, so if
you were serving a nonviolent
offense, you'd receive that type
of good time and if you receive,
if you're on a violent offense,
you would receive that type of
good time as we discussed
previously the way
that the law is written right
now, serious violent offenders
actually received double the
amount of good time they were
eligible for previously, it does
correct that problem. OK, that's
thank you Madam Chair. I just
wanted to make sure that it
wasn't taking that we discussed
this bill and I like everything
about this bill, but I wanted to
make sure we, we were actually
still keeping the crime with
whether or keeping the crime
with whether it was an SBO or a
regular good time crime. So if
they go back and it was an SBO
they will serve that 85%.
OK, perfect. Thank you, doctor.
Any further discussion of the
amendment.
OK then.
We have a motion to adopt the
amendment as your second.
OK, we have a motion and a
second to adopt the amendment.
Is there any opposition?
I don't see any opposition. You
have an amended bill on Senator.
Um, now let's go to the bill
itself, any further discussion
on the bill itself as, excuse
me, as a mental.
I'd like to move it to your pace
of a 375 as amended.
We have a motion for do pass on
Senate Bill 375, as amended made
by Representative Romero,
seconded by Representative Hall,
which he calls a roll. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Representative
Beto.
Yes.
Representative Chavez, yes.
Representative Paul. Yes.
rips in apartment B, yes.
Represented Martinez.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen.
Representative Reed, yes.
Leader Sapansy, yes, Madam Vice
Chair Romero. Yes.
Madam Chair, yes, Madam Cha, you
but do pass on Senate Bill 375
as amended.
Very grateful members, Madam
Chair. Thank you. Um, so we're
about to adjourn and I'm leaving
it to the call of the chair if
we're going to have any more
meetings, but I do, since I'm
not sure, I just wanna thank all
of you for really being like an
awesome committee. um, every one
of you has been a productive
member and a pleasure to work
with and I've enjoyed it
tremendously and I'm looking
forward to a productive
relationship moving forward and
Anyway, so thank you all for all
your support, really.
