Representative McQueen here.
Representative.
Here.
Representative Rehm.
Representative Townsend.
Mr speaker.
Mr speaker.
Can we see the email.
Representative.
Quick look.
Representative Townsend.
Thank.
Here.
Representative Townsend is here
he just was muted okay.
What what.
Our madam chair.
And president.
Chair Micaela outlook it's.
Thank you.
Okay so here's the plan for
today we we just have one bill
but I think it's going to take
us awhile I want to offer
everyone the opportunity to be
heard and.
What we ordinarily do if we're
in Santa Fe in our committee is
the rooms filled up and I say
please raise your hands if
you're here and support this
legislation and people raise
their hands and then on the
other side I say and who's here
in opposition we do the same so
what we are able to do now and
some of you may have been in
committees that utilize this
tool is we can just take a call
on those who are present among
our attendees and say.
Those who are in support please
press yes and those who are in
opposition please press now and
we're going to do that first and
then Representative right now
but.
Then I don't want anyone in the
attendees to raise hands yet.
Do the voting first.
And I will announce when to
raise your hand.
My intention is to give.
Each side no more than forty
five minutes and ask each.
Occur to limit comments to one
minute we're gonna have a timer
well the president on the screen
so everybody will know exactly
how much time you have left.
And my if we do this right then
shortly after three o'clock will
be ready to go to the committee
for questions probably about
what it will take a five minute
break.
And then we'll go to the
committee for questions and out
of the deal with the
legislation.
So at this time Deborah my think
we're ready for the pole for
those in favor of house bill
seven please vote yes and those
who are in opposition please
vote now.
So I think everybody can
probably see the results and I'm
not sure if the attendees can
see the results but we had sixty
five.
In favor and sixty six and forty
three in opposition.
With that I am now going to
The sponsors of the bill.
Explain the bill and then we
will go to the audience for
comment.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee I'm
grateful to be here with you
today I'll be at in a virtual
public health safety setting as
you all know I'm Representative
lack of and I'm honored to seven
New Mexico's house district
thirty three in the Indiana
county where I promise you home
but today I'm participating from
my office here in Santa Fe at
the roundhouse and look forward
to our respectful and and and
productive conversation.
Today I'm here to present house
bill seven I am honored to have
as co sponsors on this bill
speaker Brian Egolf I'm
representative Debbie Armstrong
Representative Joe and Ferrary
and Representative Georgene
Louis of course with the spirit
and support of so many of our
colleagues in the New Mexico
house and we are also running
this as a mere bill that Senate
bill ten and are grateful to be
in partnership with with Lopez
from the Senate and Majority
Leader work from the Senate
madam chair I do want to share
before I get on that I may have
with Lopez join us at some point
so if so if we could have staff
let her in as a presenter I also
have with me today to experts
that I'd like to have in as
presenters that that would be
Crystal curly and Ellie rush
forth.
So for me house bill seven and
as you all can see is pretty
straight forward house bill
seven repeals section thirty
dash I dash one through thirty
dash five dash three of our New
Mexico statutes.
These originally or passed in
nineteen sixty nine with the
intention to keep people from
access to abortion care they may
need in their lives here we are
more than fifty years later and
I know has to so many of our
voters and municipalities across
the state that these outdated
laws have no place in New
Mexico.
I come to our committee today
madam chair as mama as a person
of faith as a Chicana New
Mexicans that knows and holds
deeply that I can hold my own
moral views about abortion and
still trust another person to
make these deeply deeply complex
and personal decisions for
themselves.
Madam chair as I began to do
this work both professionally
and in the legislative body over
years now it's humbling to me to
have heard and learned from so
many New Mexicans that have
shared heartbreaking stories and
and share reminders that every
pregnancy is different and and
to that I know and on that we
can never walk in another's
shoes will never walk in another
woman's experience and we
certainly have no place making
these sacred decisions for
someone else so with that madam
chair I'd like to turn first to
crystal curry to share a brief
introduction and commentary on
why she's in support of this
bill as a leaders leader from
strong families New Mexico.
Could you.
Ready for you we can.
Okay good afternoon madam chair
and members of the committee J.
acaso curly and insha.
Johnny Nash land Kelechi mean
budgeting the card in addition
to and how to be dissimilar.
My name is crystal curly I'm
from touch upon and that's here
in McKinley county I'm here to
speak on behalf of my daughters
and the generations before me
I'm here because.
Many women have suffered from
patriarchal policies limiting
bills that have taken away our
bodily autonomy.
We have been murdered we have
been raped sex trafficked
sexually assaulted we've been
murdered.
And our children have been
forcibly taken from us.
And we have also been forced
sterilized by the US government
and I H. S..
And a lot of my sisters my
aunties many grandmothers.
Have died or suffered because
they don't have access to safe
and legal abortion or
reproductive health care.
And if we continue to live in
nineteen sixty nine and have
built from that era we will
never continue to grow.
And the suffering will continue
lives will be at risk.
It's time to protect our
families and ensure they
continue to have access to safe
and legal abortion.
A recent twenty twenty study
from.
Maybe it I'm sorry a twenty
twenty study of native American
adults this is a study conducted
by Latino decisions southwest
women's Law Center and for
together action this study found
that eighty one percent of
native Americans in New Mexico
three with this following
statement women and families
deserve to make their own health
care decisions without
government interference.
And in my culture our way of
life is the supreme law of the
land it is the essence of our
survival.
And we are a major medical
society that highly values the
decision making of our
grandmothers and our mothers and
we inherently believe that our
women are capable of making
complex decisions for
themselves for their family and
for the community.
I and so many people across New
Mexico now that we can hold our
own moral values about abortion
and still try to trust others to
make their decisions for
themselves.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee for
your time.
And madam chair I might go to
are other second witness miss
Ellie rush forth to for a brief
introduction.
Afternoon madam chair members of
the committee my name is Sally
rush for it I'm a mom and a
native New Mexicans and I'm a
proud reproductive rights
attorney at the ACLU of New
Mexico.
Our purpose is to protect and
advance justice liberty and
equity as guaranteed by the New
Mexico and U. S. constitutions.
I have the privilege to make
justice to work to make justice
liberty and equity realities for
all people in New Mexico with
particular attention to those
who have been historically
disenfranchised including those
seeking abortion care and that's
what this bill is about today
it's about advancing equity and
justice HB seven removes a law
that is dangerous and has always
been dangerous I am available
for questions of course at the
discretion of the Sanchez thank
you so much.
Thank you Mr early in this rush
forth
Do you have any other presenters
then vice chair no madam chair
right now we're good thank you.
Okay so here's what we're going
to do first I'm going to ask
those in opposition to please
raise their hands if they wish
to speak now you don't have to
raise your hand if you don't
wish to speak and
Let me just say that although we
had some I'm more attendees in
favor of the bill and those in
opposition we did have calls in
our committee
prior to this meeting and there
are a hundred eighty five in
opposition and thirty four in
favor so I just want to announce
that to the committee as well.
And so let's go to the attendees
now.
So I can see who's first.
Different is it line up so that
the name at the top is the first
one who raised her hand or his
okay great all right.
So I'm.
This will be just a reminder
I I trust that everyone's
comments will be specific to the
legislation and
There will be respectful
testimony from both sides and
you all have one minute each and
I will begin with Mr Gaffigan.
You should be on muted this
graphic and and you may go
ahead.
The staff again we've give me
the ability to speak no just
need on me on your end.
It seems like we're having a
little difficulty permits
Gaffigan let me go to the next
person in line and that is how
do we have miss Gaffigan now.
Okay let's go to Stephanie
Currie.
Go ahead we can hear you yes.
Members of the committee my name
is Stephanie Currie Policy
attorneys family policy alliance
thank you today to address my
panel conscience protections are
not adequate as current state
conscience protections in
chapter thirty federal laws like
the church amendments only
prohibit certain government
authorities those that receive
money under the public health
services act from imposing
requirements contrary to
religious beliefs and moral
convictions.
No only protects workers in
federally funded training
programs and the welding
amendment does not protect
health care personnel
professionals in training
medical lab person or
personality Jing biomedical or
behavioral hospital research
meanwhile current state law
protects all hospital health
care employees who have an
objection including schedulers
housekeeping staff and those who
assist with pre and post
operative support it's not
dangerous to protect the
conscience rights all hospital
employees as protected in thirty
dash I dash to all of our health
care providers deserve to have
their fundamental rights
protected thank you.
Thank you and now we will see if
we can.
Let's go to grace I don't have a
last name.
I just got here you're ready to
talk right here you can you hear
me yes we can thank you okay my
name is grace all the best I am
a mother of three children I am
a daughter and I'm a social
worker I'm several years ago I'm
a poor supportive and I
experienced at and portion and
the after this the portion
experience I thought for from
extreme depression regret guilt
and thoughts of attempted
suicide.
as advocates for so called
choice of the abortion industry
needs to recognize the harmful
and damaging effects that
abortion has on women and
families please I respectfully
ask you to vote no on H. B.
seven thank you.
Thank you so much next we have
Chris Kelly.
Hello can you hear me yes.
Hello can you hear me OK hi my
name is Chris Kelly I'm
emergency department nurse Kay
I'm specifically talking about
the protections for us is health
care workers in that.
This takes away our our
protections to be to take care
of people but also to put our
own.
More conscious is in the process
in other words.
We're not just mercenaries we do
things to attempt to
take care of patients in a
holistic way where are our ****
right one matter referring
someone.
Does not help us because it's
like saying okay I won't shoot
you but also need to the pawn
shop down the road to get a gun
to shoot yourself or your kid
doesn't so are more conscious is
our portent and you gonna lose
health care workers if you.
Change these laws thank you.
Thank you press.
Next we have.
This Madam.
My name is Stephanie Hammond.
And I am a to Khanna a sexual
abuse survivor a mother of four
I was educated here in New
Mexico graduated from high
school and I moved to Texas and
graduated with a bachelor of
science degree majoring in
chemistry.
So we came from bleak situation
my parents were on welfare when
I was young we had assistance to
put food on the table clothes on
our back glasses on my face
however
The welfare you know status did
not keep us there we work very
hard we utilize the education in
New Mexico and me and my five
brothers and sisters we found
some.
On to all educated so the reason
that I want I say this is that
although we fall on bad times or
we start on bad times we do not
have to end there and so I'll go
on to the story of my step
daughter who found herself in an
unplanned pregnancy.
Her boyfriend was in prison she
was in high school she had no
job she she thought her future
was bleak and considered
abortion fortunately she reached
out to her father who I
encouraged him to encourage her
to to to to choose life in which
she did she chose life and.
Thank you so much you're just a
little bit over can you make
that it gives the and statement
please.
Okay great.
To help make Navan.
Hello can you hear me we can we
can hear you thank you.
Thank you madam chair I
appreciate the fact that you
mentioned the phone calls that
you received in the your office
today a hundred and eighty five
in opposition and thirty five in
favor and I appreciate the fact
that you mentioned that because
each time I hear someone speak
in favor of this bill is they
constantly say that statistics
prove that women in New Mexico
that have been pulled all want
abortion but the amazing thing
is that when I pulled my friends
my family and people in my
circle no one has ever heard
about these holes or even pull
themselves and I know my time is
very short but what I would like
to say is abortion is not the
answer we need education at the
elementary level.
And abortion in itself is not
health care there's other
options I'm a mother of two I
have a biological daughter in my
second daughter is an adopted
child there are many other
excuse me options than murdering
and my final notice that
adoption is not more excuse me
moral it's actually murder thank
you.
I'm sorry I meant abortion.
Next we have set the Ellsworth.
Hello can you hear me.
Yes we can thank you so much for
listening to us today I just
want to say legislating is a
difficult thing for legislators
should seek to provide equal
protection under the law for all
by removing the conscience
clause what we're doing is
guaranteeing legal protection
for some women and some choices
while at the same time stripping
legal protection for other women
and other choices if we truly
are pro choice that should be
unacceptable to us and any
attempt to create a fair and
equitable law like this rush for
said for women we are faced with
the glaring contradiction it
creates a patently unjust and
inequitable offer every doctor
nurse anesthesiologist who
choose not to assist with the
questions we must ask ourselves
if we say we're pro choice are
we pro choice for all women.
Or just someone in.
The result of removing the
conscience clause will be an
exodus of women's health care
providers my wife one of them
I'm willing to practice in an
environment that is already
lawsuit thirsty please reinstate
the conscience protection clause
thank you.
Thank you next I have Marci may.
Can you hear me yes.
My name is Marcy may and I
wanted to reiterate that this is
the third time that these
special interest groups have
been bring this to the New
Mexico people we have some only
defeated this bill under HB
fifty one for two years in a row
I find it highly offensive that
you guys continue to bring this
fourth when people have have
said their moral objections to
this conscience protection must
be protected reproductive
justice is neither reproductive
nor does it bring justice I'm
sorry but all kinds of life are
hurt breaking we have
heartbreaking stories all over
the place but it doesn't give us
the right to kill murder
dismaying and sell these unborn
babies to for medical research
vaccines putting creating
chimera including the scalp
babies here on rats to see if it
will be useful for somebody
please vote no on this bill and
stop badgering The New Mexico
people.
Next I have done price.
Thank you madam chair person can
you hear me we can thank you.
Yes I don't price with two close
friends who have had abortions
women's rights are very
important and in pregnancy there
is someone else's rights to
consider someone in the mother's
womb who was a different human
being of course human life in
its earliest stages does not
resemble his or her life later
on but we all agree that the
appearance of a human being
should not influence a decision
for human rights logic requires
us to treat the earliest stages
of life with the same Human
Rights we four through a
lifetime health care is the
preservation and support of life
abortion is not health care the
real issue is how to help women
in on wanted trouble or even
dangerous pregnancies without
deliberately causing death the
chair outcome of every abortion
these are the commitments of
Democrats for life of America
feminists for life assert that
women deserve better than
abortion and abortion is a
reflection we have not met the
needs of women stand for life
stand for women vote no on H. B.
seven.
Thank you next I have login.
Hello and thank can you hear me
yes thank you for a long this
time so my name is Logan brown
and I just want to reiterate
some of the things we've already
heard first off the sheer number
the vast majority of the
opposition of the phone calls to
this bill.
Way out numbered those in
support of the bill so if you
guys are really representing us
New Mexicans I want to put your
money where your mouth is and
actually do so if you you're
supposed to support all New
Mexicans including those most
vulnerable those in their within
their mothers wombs this and I
live in a very very rural part
of the of the state and I
promise you there are countless
physicians and nurses that it
goes against our moral conscious
to perform an abortion and they
have already said they'll just
be a bill leave and go to Texas
or Oklahoma and and so we are
gonna have a huge.
Mass exodus of health care
workers in this in the state
thank you for your time.
Thank you next we have Ashish.
Hello thank you for allowing me
to speak today
I just wanted to come on and
just say that I believe that
this is going to be an attack on
religious freedom if we truly
care about respecting New Mexico
which is you know the the bill
that they're trying to get rid
of may New Mexico very very pro
life state and that's the heart
of New Mexico that's who we are
and you're trying to remove that
hard and the people here that
are very pro life you're trying
to race that moral conviction in
the conscience protection
because needs to be protected or
offer only gonna have doctors in
the state who don't have
religious convictions and it's
not fair that people that have
religious convictions will not
be able to practice because
they'll be forced to do things
that go against their conscious
and this is against the the
first amendment and we have to
be able to stand up for that if
we truly care about remaining at
free country thank you very
much.
Thank you next I have DD.
Yes my name is Stevie Johnson
I'm the founder and ministry
that helps women facing
unplanned pregnancies I remember
a time not so long ago when
those who supported abortion
wanted abortions to be safe
legal and rare today we are so
removed from those words in New
Mexico now the abortion lobby
goes one step further and calls
for the conscience clause of
medical providers to be removed
sadly this assurances that
providers would not be forced to
participate in questions are
just as empty as those words
safe legal and rare over the
years you have heard testimony
about the barbarity of abortion
I would like to ask a question
of the committee and
additionally ask you that you
answer truthfully would you be
willing to shadow an abortionist
for a week would you be willing
to watch an abortion especially
a late term abortion if you're
silent answer is no but how can
you can tell someone to
participate in taking a life if
you answer no to my questions
how can you insist that someone
violate their own religious and
moral objectives and to
something you won't even look at
I urge the committee to leave
the conscience clause for a
medic.
Next I have Rebecca Lou Cerro.
We're back on the Senator go
there she is.
Go ahead Rebecca.
You might have to undo it
yourself.
Rebecca are you there.
This unmuted madam chair but
we're not getting any idea let's
go ahead to the next person in
line and maybe Rebecca can
rejoin Amanda fear all.
Okay can you hear me yes we can
go ahead okay thank you members
of the committee my name is
Amanda Fiero and I am the first
ten year old home school
teenager I am begging you to
vote no on H. B. seven because
as the sponsors of this bill
have made clear this bill does
nothing this bill does not do
anything to protect girls my age
were sexually abused and forced
into abortion by their abusers
this bill as a Sanchez
themselves have pointed out this
nothing to help the parents know
their child needs help to get
out of abusive relationships
that is why I am urging all the
members Republicans and
Democrats to vote no on this
bill that does nothing to
protect us you the loss to help
families to communicate and
solve problems together but
having an abortion without
parental consent only empowers
abusers to keep perpetrating
their abuses and of course if
the abortion goes wrong the
parent will only be involved to
take away their debt daughter an
abortion clinic please protect
this the young citizens and the
future of our state and local no
one eighty seven thank you.
Thank you Rebecca.
Next I have.
Still yeah Valdez.
That was a good us good
afternoon can you hear me yes.
This is a level that is I'm a
family practitioner I've been in
Rio Rancho and Albuquerque for
the past thirty years.
And I enjoy my practice I see
newborns up to grandma grandpa
also stand seeing teenagers I've
seen women.
In their forties and fifties who
undergone abortions and feel
quite guilty about this.
So poster Matix dresses shorter
due to.
Do abortions is a very real
thing I've heard it from priest
to hear these women confession
that they carry this with them
often for a lifetime.
I'm very concerned about
the lack of a clear protection
for health care providers but
myself we don't want to refer
recommend provider participate
in abortion something like this
Became a true issue for myself I
would probably retire earlier
leave the state go elsewhere
practice where I felt I could be
provided protected and not be
sued for following my conscience
please vote.
No I think we had Rebecca zero
at the top of the list before
Rebecca are you there.
I think we already heard from
Sally of all does so she still
showing up in the list okay.
Let's go to F. all my heart.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I am a
hard executive director right to
life committee in New Mexico one
parent who provided document the
state that seventy seven percent
of New Mexicans want abortion in
our state it closely it actually
says that given the right
information that would make the
right abortion choice having
working pregnancy centers I have
seen that women that are given
all the information ninety nine
point nine percent room she's
like twenty nineteen governor
Grisham massive public to call
in a letter know how they felt
about these bills with ten
thousand calls coming in over
ninety eight percent were
opposed to the bills and their
post because it provides no
protection for women doctors
were our children as you say at
doctor the doctors
you you have been a major you're
calling in but your eggs
ignoring the majority during the
pandemic everyone was fighting
for life for all of us but
because basically New Mexicans
level like and it is our
favorite right to life over
ninety eight percent New
Mexicans oppose this bill please
listen to and represent us well
please vote no on H. B. seven.
Marlene Lacey.
This Lacy you should be ready to
speak.
Okay we'll go to Patrick are.
Hello can you hear me we can
hear you great thank you my name
is Patrick are I am the adoptive
father of two beautiful children
my son was conceived in rape and
I know that that is one of the
cases that those who are for
abortion call out most
frequently.
my son's birth mother
courageously chose life and
he's a testimony to the fact
that all children born and
unborn deserves a chance at
life.
I would also ask those who are
considering voting in favor of
the bill why you were doing so
is it because you truly believe
that this is the right thing to
do or is it because of the
lobbyists who were to who were
speaking to you.
I respectfully ask that you
would vote no on house bill
seven I thank you for your time.
Thank you next.
Angelica Los.
Hello my name is a joke.
Okay my name is in Jellico plus
and I am a Filipina and the
mother of two beautiful children
I was looking up the bill and
and looked up the the law
nineteen sixty nine law and it
brought me to a nineteen seventy
eight law and it says here that
except as provisional in
subsection B. of this section
which is thirty dash five eight
dash for civil remedies for
following persons may bring a
civil action to obtain release
pursuant to this section against
a person who has violated the
provisions of this section the
person on whom a partial birth
abortion was performed the
biological father of the new
features that was the subject of
the partial birth abortion the
parents of the person on whom
the partial birth abortion was
performed as such I will go in
into detail but I can see that
what so they want to take away
is the right of a woman who has
had an abortion.
Right Strickler.
Thank you I'm sorry my phone
wasn't.
Operating that's okay.
Okay my name is Marie Strickler
and president of San Juan County
right to life I also volunteered
for the past eighteen years of
pregnancy help center and my
husband is a legislator for this
reason I know that every
legislator in Santa fe's fully
aware that abortion has been for
some time available in New
Mexico through all nine months
of pregnancy and is available to
minors without parental consent
or knowledge in this.
This this helps to encourage
abuse and trafficking.
This bill is nothing more than
insurance to the very lucrative
abortion industry so that in the
event roe versus Wade is
overturned late term abortion
will remain unregulated in New
Mexico.
I for anyone to say that they
care about women and children
and then support this bill is
beyond me especially with the
new push for in vivo di sections
of living imported.
Next we have.
J. Garrett.
Okay can you hear me we can go
ahead thank you I'm sorry I I
don't know if you could hear me
I'll start over thank you for
the opportunity to speak on what
may be the most important
legislation of our lives the
sponsors of this bill seem to
focus on the rights of women I
would like to change the focus
to the rights of children I
believe the entry level question
should be is a fetus a human
being I believe that this time
science leaves no doubt that it
is therefore it is a human being
the child has rights as all
human beings to and the right to
not be murdered in its own
mothers willing I pray for our
representatives that they will
vote to choose life for all New
Mexicans thank you.
Thank you very much
Dominique Davis.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is
Dominique Davis and I'm a wife
and a mother and I work at a
clinic with great health care
providers where we you're
pregnant women on October twenty
ninth two thousand eighteen I
delivered my twenty week old son
prematurely.
It was the most perfect baby
especially fully formed but
needed more time to grow you
just didn't get that time and I
held him in my arms until his
heart beating you left this
world only a few hours later.
Persons are allowed on BT done
all of my family and my heart
breaks for the women couples who
feel like they have no other
choice but to make such a
decision abortion procedures on
on board the that my son are
violent by nature you can not
have to bill about offering
clear protections to health care
providers who do not want to
purchase a new traffic
procedures.
Uniformed healthcare decisions
act is not cleared up or
protected enough for health care
providers who do not want to for
provide or participate in any
way bigger small an abortion
please amend for clear
protection thank you.
Next I have done it because S..
You're on.
Yes.
Thank you for allowing us to
comment on this I'm a Hispanic
woman of faith with the bachelor
degree in biology and psychology
I believe our women need to be
protected and provided proper
health education including when
they're around reproductive age
and provided the support they
need I need I want our women to
be supported in their crisis
pregnancies with informative
counseling for whether they
choose birth or abortion is
still supported if they choose
to give birth as well as
adoption being.
Given more support and women
who've gone through questions
also need proper health care and
protected my twin sister and I
were told we wouldn't survive
long past birth or would be
severely disabled for the rest
of our lives and my parents were
encouraged to abort us now I'm
alive and well to tell my story
and I'm a woman Hispanic women
in stem women are legally still
allowed to have late term
abortions if the pregnancy
threatens their lives but late
term abortions also endanger
women's health I encourage you
to vote no and consider all of
our stories and our opinions
thank you.
Thank you.
Jack is.
Madam chair and members of the
committee my name is Jack Santa
and I met mother native Mexican
and a nurse that works and
mother baby.
H. P. seven is conserving
concerning to me because it
removes in New Mexico's only
clear conscience protection The
New Mexico uniform health care
decisions act it's not clear
enough to protect health care
workers who do not want to refer
recommend to provide or
participate in abortions I am
asking.
You to ensure that there are
clear protections in place so
that we will not lose much
needed doctors and nurses like
myself I'm asking you to vote no
on health bill HB seven thank
you.
Thank you.
Let cool.
Can you hear me.
Okay.
Certainly this so I was like
Coleman I'm an act the I'm a
nurse nexus the practices in the
eastern New Mexico.
As an active practicing and
that's just correct providers
will setting I have experienced
firsthand how difficult as a
recruit fighters there are area.
Removing the conscious objection
from this bill is jeopardizing
access to health care because it
will force providers of the area
I am crazy on council with all
this because it is and was
presented in two thousand
nineteen.
That would assist the special
witness was represented her
testimony she admitted it wasn't
intentions to remove the disk
the conscious objection for the
providers we've all heard about
how it's not exactly gonna take
that away.
But that we all know that.
If that was the case why is even
being removed from this bill.
In conclusion I have had the
opportunity to talk to providers
spanning from closed to read
also each provider stated they
will be forced to leave the
state if the right of the costs
of the junction is removed.
Those in a season providers
still that HB is clear and
enough to remove the coach's
objection in the bill and
they're sending a clear crystal
message they will be forced to
do elective abortions.
One Chavis.
Good afternoon of can you hear
me.
Yes we can go ahead thank thank
you thank you my name is Juan
Chavez I live in Santa Fe New
Mexico I'm retired devout
Catholic.
Tracy my prayers every day hello
please indulge me as I say a
prayer.
The name of the father the son
and the Holy Spirit on then.
Father lord of life your son
Jesus Christ conquered the power
death by his own death and
resurrection and maintenance a
people of life called to
proclaim celebrate and serve the
gospel of life we praise you for
the gift of life the first and
most fundamental gift you give
us and the foundation of all our
other rights we thank you for
raising up Saint John Paul the
second book of life and for his
teaching and witness to the
value of life.
Grant that we may be Sanchez
called to bring it into abortion
euthanasia and all assaults on
you but like and two nights in a
grant integrate campaigns for of
life ring is a culture of life
we pray through Christ our lord
in thank you committee for
listening to me in the.
someone a line here and it says
Linda's iPad so not quite sure
who it is please introduce
yourself.
Hi can you hear me yes hi can
you hear me my name is Linda zip
I am a retired pediatrician in
Albuquerque New Mexico I do want
to say that I support a woman's
right to choose and I also
support to providers right to
choose whether they want to
provide.
Portions so I do have a problem
with this law as it stands but I
do support a woman's right to
choose I also support a person a
woman's right to obtain
appropriate counseling about
reproductive choices such as
birth control
and
I fear that that might be
affected in the future
I have had patients who have had
abortions and did not suffered
the type of PTSD that has been
described thank you.
Thank you our next I have
crystal.
Hi can you hear me we can go
ahead hi my name's Krista
Gallas.
I have several daughters and
I've experience to our birth
miscarriage the whole.
Range of life and death around
birth
I am very much opposed to this
two H. B. seven I don't want to
see of medical professionals
lose the conscience rights.
And I want to see us being
pushed
you know most people who are in
favor of abortion are citing
extreme situations right incest
mother's life is on the line and
then it I don't like to see our
state being pushed from from
those kind of situations into a
lot of that's just a broad brush
toward abortion up to birth
which just seems crazy to me
that's that's no justification
for abortion up to birth or for
medical professionals losing the
conscience rights.
Listen Martinez.
Can you hear me sorry yes we can
madam chair members of the
committee after the fact of the
matter is there is no broad
based support for this extreme
bill it is the most extreme in
the nation seventy percent of
Americans in New Mexicans
believe abortion should be
limited to the first trimester
and I actually have a real time
record of emails sent to all
legislators on this bill
opposing this bill from an
online petition it's
Representative Armstrong to date
has received over six thousand
as has Senator Lopez and Senator
Ferrari this is because New
Mexicans know this bill will
codify the extreme barbaric and
dangerous practice of abortions
up to birth for any reason
that's the status quo New Mexico
in fact one of our businesses
had twenty one medical
emergencies including the death
of the late Keisha Atkins native
American and African American
woman who died during an
elective taxpayer funded
abortion at six months this
clinic advertises abortions for
thirty two weeks or eight months
for any reason this is the
status quo and this bill does
nothing to protect women and our
girls from unsafe abortions and
to say otherwise is patently
false for this reason I ask for
you to oppose house bill seven.
Although rented thank.
Can you hear me.
We can go ahead.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Alexander
and I am a Hispanic student
currently interning at a clinic
that offers medical services and
crisis intervention for pregnant
women if I've learned anything
about crisis over the last
eleven months it is that there
is no clear way to respond
except that the response must be
through informed decision making
which requires time and a good
state of mind what I have
observed is that abortion
decision is made quickly due to
fear and without adequate
knowledge about a woman's
pregnancy her options for her
support resources often she goes
directly to an abortion provider
and over the last eleven months
I see that women will eventually
welcomed the pregnancy after her
initial fears have passed with
the help of a large support
system of professionals like us
that will walk alongside her as
other health care health care
providers have stated I am
concerned that the New Mexico
uniformed health care decisions
act does not provide clear
conscience protections and as a
future professional who could be
impacted by this I ask that you
please do not pass this bill
without making amendments that
clearly protect our conscious.
Thank you next I have.
Hello can you hear me.
Yes.
Madam chair representative my
name is Dorothy Hagaman I am a
doula and more New Mexico I also
have a pregnancy administrative
the giver project.
We have no restrictions on
abortion in New Mexico this
leaves in New Mexicans
vulnerable to profiteering by
the abortion industry I had a
woman come to me at five months
pregnant her entire pregnancy
she had made appointments at a
Planned Parenthood clinic in
Albuquerque her appointments
were repeatedly canceled until
she could feel her very much
alive baby moving and came to us
seeking other resources and help
and thankfully she's doing okay
now however Medicaid will pay
more the later apartments goes
and we know from the Bixby
centers
survey by Diane Greene foster
and study that most third term
abortions or due to financial
and domestic problems these
women need help not abortions
and the profiteering that goes
on.
New Mexico needs oversight we
should not remove restrictions
without replacing them we should
protect the conscience because
of our workers thank you.
Thank you very how New Mexico.
Go ahead Mr.
You need yourself.
Hi can you hear me now.
We can thank you very much
appreciated for voted no on HB
seven in any laws removing the
protection of lives of innocent
children I'm a grandfather to
beautiful healthy fourteen month
old grandchild okay because our
family refused to be pressured
by medical doctors to take the
life of our baby denture.
Every day I see a smile on
blessed my life to the promises
of god.
At fifteen weeks my daughter was
advised by a team of medical
doctors specialists specialists
in their fields she had no other
choice but to terminate her
pregnancy or she or baby both
died for delivery.
November days before
thanksgiving we celebrated
vengeance first birthday and my
daughter strength to stand
against the pressures of the
team of doctors that advocated
for death rather than for life.
This is just one of the abuse
the end industry allows in
addition questions also used to
advocate against children with
down syndrome's to take life as
a method of birth control and
worst reflector disregard the
state of New Mexico for life I
ask you to vote no please.
Thank you we have about five
minutes left for this side and
I'm now at the comment by
Jennifer Jones.
We can go ahead.
I'm sorry I'm on somebody else's
phone I mean somebody else's
computer my name is Maria
Benitez and I'm a PhD candidate
in biomedical sciences HB seven
is unconstitutional as the
removal section to goes against
first amendment our freedom of
religion and the removal of
section three goes against
Fourteenth Amendment individuals
right to life as a Catholic by
medical scientists these cell
lines that are products of
abortion would violate my
conscience I have the freedom to
object to the use of the cell
lines in my research for
religious reasons and my medical
colleagues on the front lines
have the same right to exercise
their religion slash morals
interject to perform an abortion
which would violate their
conscience again.
HB seven is unconstitutional as
it goes against the fourteen and
the first amendment.
New Mexican scientists Catholic
and woman I urge you to vote no
on HBs.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Greg.
the two speakers that spoke
earlier had mentioned that they
personally would not have an
abortion but they wouldn't
condemn other women's choice to
do so Sliq goes along the same
thought process of don't want an
abortion don't get one imagine
during the times of slavery
hearing a similar thought you
don't approve the slavery don't
get one abortions are always
wrong no matter the situation
that led to their conception I
agree all pregnancies are not
the same but all of questions
are the same they all in in the
development of a unique human
being in their mother's womb
you've been appointed to your
position legislators by the
citizens of New Mexico and more
importantly by god and you
answer to both and you will be
held accountable hi folks.
And what that is in the state of
New Mexico we are here known as
the late term abortion capital
of the United States this bill
would put the nail in the
already very bloody hot.
Thank you.
More commonly occur.
Hello can you hear me.
Yes.
Okay.
Nonprofit and the other part of
New Mexico in Santa Theresa and
cover your connection and unlike
the corporations that are behind
this that we do not profit from
women in crisis and we have a
Texas abortion as broad as they
are who was under medical a
Medical Board investigation in
Texas the closest clinic and
came across the state line in
New Mexico in Santa Theresa
because of the lack of oversight
and restrictions and
consequently one of our clients
actually went had a botched
medical abortion and then went
back was pressured into a then
botched surgical abortion with
home is an excruciating pain
delivered remains of her child
at home and when she came to the
clinic to get questions the the
the abortionist fled the scene
call the police and have her
arrested and now he's under
another medical board of
education here in the state of
New Mexico and so if the Supreme
Court decides that the nineteen
seventy three court cases
archaic and antiquated we need
more oversight not less than
encouraging you to vote no on
the seven.
Our our next
Participants will be the last
one Alan Sanchez.
And yourself Alan thank you
madam chair members of the
committee my name's Alan songes
on the executive director of the
New Mexico conference of
Catholic bishops and I bring the
message of the bishops today
knowing that we're gonna pull
Ristic society and we have our
religious teachings far
Catholics which life is is
always a consistent ethic same
reason that we fought to repeal
the death penalty is same reason
that the the bishops promote
life and against abortion for
a consistent ethic of life so
would be on on it would be
consistent for a Catholic to
support abortion but Division
today are very concerned about
the conscience protection of
there's been reference to the
other parts of legislation or
laws we don't believe that
that's enough to protect and the
other piece in the legislation
or the statute that's not
suppressed by the Supreme Court
is that a doctor must perform
the abortion so we ask you to
please keep the conscience
protection of for all of our
medical providers thank you.
Thank you.
Includes the testimony in
opposition to the bill and now
will have forty five minutes.
For those who are in favor in
unionization have now.
First I have heather Breslin.
Go ahead I'm yourself heather.
Can you hear me yes.
Thanks my name is heather
Representative of a primary care
doctor in Albuquerque and I
serve the council the New Mexico
Medical Society for about
fifteen years today I'm speaking
to describe the Medical Society
support of HB seven.
Members of the medical society
are more than two thousand
doctors across New Mexico and
our members hold positions
across the spectrum on abortion
still the society supports
repeal because we stand together
against criminal charges being
forced on our colleagues to
practice within established
standards.
We are also strongly opposed to
government interference the
patient physician relationship
my most important point today is
this the New Mexico Medical
Society recognizes there are
several other conscience
protections outside of the
school statute these are solid
state and federal legal
protections for physicians who
might wish to opt out of
abortion Care the medical
society would never put its own
members in a position that would
compromise our values on such an
important issue for these
reasons the New Mexico Medical
Society supports repeal of this
outdated law thank you.
Thank you very much.
Diane goals farm.
Go ahead and do it yourself.
Yes madam chair members of the
committee my name is Diane goals
for of and I'm here to speak on
behalf of the league of women
voters of New Mexico the league
supports a woman's right to make
her own medical decisions and we
strongly urge you to vote in
favor of house bill seven with
without a man we do not want to
women of New Mexico to run the
risk of returning to the days
when a personal medical decision
was considered illegal please
vote in favor of HB seven thank
you.
Thank you next I have Erica
Davis crop.
Thank you madam chair and
comedians and I to be in space
with you my name is Erica Davis
crop and I am the co chair for
the coalition for choice and as
a black woman who has a degree
from a southern Baptist
university in Christian ministry
specifically in has grown up in
New Mexico as a second
generation Mexican
I want to implore you to
continue to support this this
bill I hear so much of the
opposition mentioned that they
are centering the consciousness
of the provider but the thing
about faith and the faith that
they I know in have study that
they have subscribed to is the
fact that this god their god
that they have chosen their face
let it be known that self agency
and that self sovereignty is
what separates us from
everything else and
unfortunately to hear the
slavery abortion parallel is
disgusting and as a black woman
who can't be ordained in her own
faith because of the misogyny
that exists I implore you to
expand yourselves and if your
health care that worker that
wants to leave the field you
should because you've never been
sent to your patience in the
first place.
Thank you.
Thank you next I have Chris
Hoover.
Just I'm yourself.
Sorry my name is actually doctor
Connie Lou I am a rural OBGYN
Pailan and mom of two who works
in western New Mexico serving
the Navajo community medicine is
my calling in as a doctor my
practices rooted in evidence and
ethics caring for patients means
Frank conversation supporting
choices around pregnancy and
that does sometimes include
abortion abortion is a safe
procedure a statement borne out
by sound evidence and a
professional organization a clog
understand too in my ten years
as an OBGYN we are trying to
have conversations about
abortion or to refer to someone
who that can you can have that
conversation with need it when
needed but my fellow students
trainees and colleagues are
never required to perform our
system abortion if they do not
choose to those who do so do so
out of a deep calling to
reproductive justice my own
experience shows that people
from various political spectrums
ethnicities and religions do you
believe in self determination
when it comes reproductive
choices I ask you to protect our
rights to provide excellent can
medical care and to protect our
patients right to privacy and
self determination.
Thank you next I have Genevieve
Romero.
Hello madam chair and committee
thank you my name is Jenny
Romero and I'm at the risk for
together action and a lifelong
New Mexican the young lady then
sexual violence survivor I am
urging you to support house bill
seven no matter own use of
abortion I think we can all
agree that women and families
need to be up listed in their
reproductive health care
decisions and not currently
prosecuted that is what this
bill is about respecting and not
prosecute then as a sexual
violence survivor I'm asking
this legislature to allow women
to make decisions for themselves
and their families.
I'm hearing sexual violence more
than once that time I was
sixteen and I cannot adequately
express to you and this will
time how vitally important it is
to allow women to own their own
bodies and make their own
decisions please prioritize the
lives of all women in New
Mexican families over the
religious beliefs of some thank
you.
Thank you next is Liz Garst are.
Go ahead yourself.
Good afternoon I'm Elizabeth
Gardner and obstetrics and
gynecology doctor specializing
in high risk pregnancy I'm a
mother native Santa fan who has
lived in New Mexico my whole
life and have not had the
privilege of being the doctor
there doctor for the last five
years working both in
Albuquerque and my home city of
Santa Fe as an obstetrician I
still start every first time
obstetric visit with a simple
question how do you feel about
this pregnancy this is Matt with
a wide range of answers and I
pride myself allowing these
patients who met me usually for
the first time that very day
tell me where they truly are in
their life journey including the
reading this to parents house
bill seven will continue to
allow me to have all the options
open to every patient as it is
critical that women be able to
make decisions about their own
body which they know best
regardless of personal feelings
about abortion house bill seven
is important to preserve the
rights of women and our ability
to access health care in this my
amazing home state thank you
very much.
Thank you next I have Janice
Scanlon.
Madam chair and members of the
committee my name is Janice
Scanlon and I'm a proud mother
of three here in Santa Fe New
Mexico I'm here in strong
support of house bill seven
because I believe that we should
trust New Mexico women to make
the best choices for their
bodies please vote yes on house
bill seven and thank you for
your time.
Thank you next I have Sandra
pen.
Your self thank you.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee and house bill
seven Sanchez my name is Sandra
pen I'm a retired family
physician having been trained
here in New Mexico and Hawaii
where I practiced as a physician
I'm called to heal when possible
and to care always is the
patient who must decide what is
best for her and her family it's
her religious beliefs hard
commitments for life we cannot
allow someone else's interests
all religion to legislator
interfere with the rights of
each woman to access all the
health care she requests shame
and stigma do not belong in
health care it's time to remove
this outdated ban on abortion
access so that it may not harm
any woman or her position in New
Mexico please support house bill
seven thank you.
Thank you next isn't a call
Martin.
Hello can you hear me.
We can hear you.
Well my name is Nicole more and
then click on that and I live on
to a territory which is
Albuquerque and surrounding
areas.
I am the co founder for
indigenous women rising.
Mmhm.
And
a
member and.
These past couple communities.
Rough you know I'm here to
support H. B. seven because.
I so what.
People.
In this way to seek abortion.
From a bunch of strangers.
People were led.
I traditional values.
Strawberries are older than
federal and state government.
Support then people's decisions
on how they want to take care of
their families thank you.
Thank you Janet Williams.
Hi members of the committee and
chair person I am Janet Williams
of Santa Fe New Mexico and
president of Santa Fe now I and
our chapter support of house
bill seven the respect you
Mexico Women's family and family
acts I was a teen before roe V.
Wade became the law of the land
and I remember well having to
search for a legal abortion.
When I was this fall more in
college aged nineteen I was
fortunate to find inexpensive
but safe abortion doctor others
were not so fortunate as many
illegal abortions were performed
in Deschutes dangerous settings
I do not want to go back to that
time I have two daughters and a
granddaughter what I would like
to be able to make these
difficult decisions for
themselves I don't believe
politicians should have control
over any person's body these
decisions should be between a
woman or pregnant person their
family and their medical
provider thank you for your
time.
Thank you next Wednesday Basco.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members I want to
Basco the staff attorney with
the southwest women's Law Center
and listen to all of the public
comment thus far for this
legislation what I'm hearing
from the of a PO those opposed
to this bill can only be
described as hyperbole bordering
on hysteria that the world will
change fundamentally the day
after this bill becomes law that
is simply not the truth some
facts what is going to happen
when this bill is enacted it's
the same thing that has happened
for the last forty eight years
after roe V. Wade and state
versus strands were decided
Mexico will still be a place
where abortion care is safe
legal and for the most part
accessible.
The decision when and even if
the parent will continue to be
made by the pregnant person
based on their own personal
value system and not based on
the value system of others holy
and connected to them as such I
fervently urge you to commute
this committee to vote yes to
repeal New Mexico's and
constitutional abortion law
thank you for the opportunity to
speak.
Thank you next Sandra returning.
Can you hear me.
Yes.
Great I good afternoon madam
chair and committee members my
name is Sandra ready and I'm the
director of public affairs with
Planned Parenthood votes New
Mexico I'm here on behalf of one
hundred and fourteen thousand
supporters throughout New Mexico
and the over ten thousand
patients we see here in New
Mexico I'm also here as a woman
and Asian American a mother and
the proud daughter of courageous
refugees who survived the
canaries genocide in Cambodia
that claimed the lives of over
two million people it wasn't
until my parents rebuild their
lives in the United States the
for the first time they can make
their own decisions about if
when and how they would have
their family every family
deserves to make their own
decision deeply personal health
care decisions including
abortion care and abortion care
later in pregnancy must remain
between a woman and her family
in consultation with their
health care provider politics
has no place here I strongly
urge you to vote in favor of
passing house bill seven thank
you.
So they can.
Madam chair and members of the
committee my name is so we can
I'm a resident of Bernalillo
county and reproductive justice
leader with forward together
action I strongly believe that
every person has a right to make
their own decisions about their
bodies sexuality reproduction
and family as a young woman I am
painfully aware of the many ways
my body is treated as property
by the men around me and the
rules and laws of the
institutions that seek to
control me.
It upsets me deeply that this
nineteen sixty nine abortion ban
is currently on the books in the
state I call home I'm grateful
that I've got access to
reproductive health care and
education the recognize that
this is an immense privilege
largely due to the fact that I'm
a white woman with class
privilege that so many women and
people with universes in the
state do not have supporting
house bill seven is just one
necessary step towards
reproductive justice in New
Mexico so that one day we may
live in a community where all
women and people equal access to
the resources that protect their
ability to make decisions about
their own bodies please vote yes
on house bill seven.
Thank you very much I am a
Santa.
Good afternoon my name is Emma
Jones how much of Madam born and
raised in Burleigh county I'm a
mother and one of the I'm one of
the one in four women were
received in person services my
life from like the English in
the pale the Y. axis the
services were immeasurably
important to my life life
changing and why I'm not ashamed
of my abortion I don't know any
of you my story we must trust
and respect pregnant people to
make these incredibly difficult
decision with Nick situations
without interference from the
government or for somebody who
have moral convictions that are
different than mine Shane died
in the faces maybe that's one of
the issues that they're working
with the stop demonizing
criminalizing and traumatizing
the many women receive abortion
Services shame and oppression do
not belong in health care you
must give women the Tanami over
their bodies and their lives
thank you abortion safe and
legal lastly I want to remind
all of you that making abortion
illegal organizing abortion does
not prevent abortion services
from happening and prevent it
from being safe and legally
acceptable I implore you to vote
yes on this bill thank you.
Thank you Kimberly Weston.
Hi I'm yourself.
Yes we can go ahead.
Thank you for having me today my
name is Kimberly west and I'm a
law student and resident of New
Mexico I just wanted to thank
all the people who are in
support of this a ban repeal and
I urge the committee to vote yes
mostly because it is.
Shameful and ridiculous that we
are wasting our time having to
discuss this matter over and
over again of whether women
should be able to access safe
and legal abortion these are
antiquated rules these are
antiquated arguments and we
could be using the time to
create an economic benefit to
having safe and legal abortion
here and for making it
accessible to all women that way
women travel to the state where
it is safe to receive proper and
overall medical care also it is
shameful that doctors would be
saying that they would flee and
leave their patients which
statistically is unfounded thank
you.
Thank you.
Hi my name is Carl branches have
been a minister since nineteen
sixty four.
And I spent most of my ministry
taking care of children who are
and want to abuse runaways.
Imprisoned delinquents.
And so forth one reason our
state is in such poverty in our
presence feel of young people is
when a woman is coerced to have
a baby she's not equipped to
care for forcing them to become
a mother who is not prepared to
be an adequate parent eight two
children who are not loved or
bonded with their mother they
feel unwanted there often abused
at least neglected and without
that they often run afoul of the
law they try to be tough when
inside they're just hurting and
resentful they don't have a
parent who could would care for
them and love them without their
children as it should be.
I know that there are many more
children needing adapted
families than there are families
willing to adopt them having
cared for.
Sorry.
Strong.
Good afternoon madam chair can
you hear me we can go ahead
Aaron.
Chair members of the committee
my name is Erin Armstrong and
The New Mexicans and a lifelong
advocate for health access and
patients rights I have over a
decade of experience as an
attorney focusing on
constitutional rights and policy
that protects and expands access
to reproductive health care
including abortion.
If you're in New Mexico and at
the national level.
I urge your support of this bill
today.
The repeal of this outdated
unconstitutional why is so long
overdue.
It will ensure that New Mexico
remains the place that it is
today a place where individual
patients and families are
legally able to access the full
spectrum of pregnancy related
care including safe and legal
abortion.
As a patient was how to make
countless complicated and
complex medical decisions of my
own I value this autonomy and
security more than I can say.
Please vote yes to support this
bill today.
Thank you the correlation.
Hello my name is a quarterly and
then from the north lawn Jana
county and without forward
together action I'm in favor of
it should be seven was Simeon
because I feel as on the field
that women have the right to
access and safe legal abortion
Seve they need it
my support comes from supporting
my mother in the seventies even
though at the time
I was not aware of why she chose
in origin behind closed doors
she decided to and those are on
abortion with no medical care
and I'm sure many women nowadays
want to the same situations
because have no access to
medical care and the stigma and
judgment over there the
station's support issue we seven
thank you.
Thank you very much.
Next is Cat Sanchez.
The Sanchez.
We're ready for you.
Spilling your okay let's let's
go on to
But.
Madam chair.
Yes.
Hi there I wasn't given the
ability to underuse but here I
am.
Are you can is just too because
okay yes madam chair.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Cat
Sanchez born and raised in
borderlands and residing in Los
crucis my partner in our kiddos
I know what it is to live
without a Tanami and little to
no legal equity as a queer woman
my private life was criminalized
and litigated all the way up to
the Supreme Court in Lawrence V.
Texas federal recognition of my
same sex relationship was
litigated all the way up to the
Supreme Court within the last
five years the right to privacy
the core principle of roe V.
Wade is also at the center of
other rights including LGBTQ
rights the current Supreme Court
is prepared to dismantle roe and
to suggest that our Supreme
Court will do otherwise is
simply misleading repealing the
nineteen sixty nine statute
protects the bodily autonomy me
and other New Mexicans have I
ask that you respect my right to
decide what is right for my body
and vote yes to HB seven thank
you.
Thank you.
Next
L..
Go ahead.
Forgive me about the
pronunciation of your name I'm
not sure I got that right.
Please begin.
Madam chair looks like your
technical assistance hasn't
moved it to her yet there it is.
Okay.
Can you hear me now now I have
the item you buy in okay very
good okay.
Madam chair and members of the
committee my name is media and
I'm a born and raised New
Mexican raised by a strong
Catholic family and I'm
currently raising my two
children with the same values I
have been a nurse for eleven
years and I strongly support
house bill seven I was a labor
and delivery nurse for ten years
and now I'm a triage nurse for
women's health I have seen and
heard it all and know that one
thing is true the health care
decisions a patient makes our
between herself and her
providers only.
I patients sticks out in my mind
to told me in desperation in
tears I've always been pro life
I've never supported abortion
but just to say an abusive
relationship hi my top there to
support and cannot have a baby
right now I told her she did not
have to explain anything to me a
medical procedures a discussion
only between herself and her
provider there's no room for
others personal beliefs and
judgments in this decision.
I urge you to pass house bill
seven.
Thank you.
Kat Sanchez.
Madam chair you already called
on me thank you.
That's what I thought I don't
know why you're still in the
queue
next ISIS come close.
Please send yourself go ahead.
Yes.
Good afternoon.
Good afternoon chair members of
the committee my name is ISIS I
am sixteen years old I am
calling from Espanola New Mexico
I am here in support of HB seven
as a young woman I want to
ensure money an all women's
right to have a choice a choice
on whether to carry out a
pregnancy or to terminate it we
should all respect women's
decisions to do what's best for
them please go in favor of H.
the step.
Thank you thank you.
Jones the money in Sanford.
Go ahead John.
Can you hear me.
We.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is.
All the money in Sanford I'm the
director of the in New Mexico
religious coalition for
reproductive choice we support
the respect women and families
act because it provides
protection for women who have
made a personal decision about
abortion based on their own
beliefs moral code and
conscience.
They should not have to worry
that the state of New Mexico
health care corporation or their
own medical provider might have
the power to force them to
choose between their faith and
safe legal health care.
We know that we can all hold our
own moral views on abortion and
still trust a woman a pregnant
person and their family to make
that decision for themselves
thank you very much.
Thank you Charlene been como.
Hello madam chair members of the
committee my name is Charlie
medical loan and the executive
director both futures and also
coming to you today as a
southern New Mexican and Chicana
a mother and a survivor of the
violent sexual assault.
As a survivor bodily Agency is
everything to me the right to
autonomy is one that should be
afforded to all of us in all
cases not only when we are the
victims of the unthinkable it
disturbs me greatly to know that
some decision makers only
provide you capable of making
health care decisions for myself
if I had been violated.
Survivors of sexual assault
already know what it's like to
have their decision making
powers taken from them and we
can do better than that we
should not have to enter
violence to be deemed worthy of
respect today I ask you all to
protect abortion access in New
Mexico now by voting yes on
house bill seven I can be
trusted to make decisions for
myself an abortion care should
be more than the exception thank
you for your time.
Thank you very much.
Somehow I got lost in my list
here.
Gabby are you taking over now.
I am still using on Devon's
computer money was having some
technical issues I'm showing
Marian my Estes is next.
One eight Marianne milestones.
Okay go ahead.
Thank you and my.
Of the house Judiciary my name
is maryann messed us and I'm
here to support house bill seven
this is personal for myself and
my family and we really must do
what we can to preserve our
agency and freedom over our own
lives and in this case as for
killings all statute we need to
make sure that our laws reflects
it reflective of our current
values while respecting people
situations and this important
and complex decision thank you
to the sponsors of this bill who
have been working to improve all
New Mexico lives to better
healthcare better schools safer
and affordable housing a clean
and healthy environment and
working to make sure we live in
healthy communities we can
choose life by preserving our
economy and providing our
communities with more resources
and meeting their needs with
them thank you.
Okay I.
Something I was trying to go
down to see how many I had Gabby
and I have lost my queue so we
tell me his next.
Madam chair at next on the list
would be June.
Campos.
Do you think you can restore the
list for me that in the order.
Because it's.
I had to.
The tech I'm about cooking New
Mexico I'm here to support house
bill seven I have worked all my
life reproductive justice I work
for the go voice in one space
organization for twenty five
years before retiring to New
Mexico to be near my family I
remember conference in the
eighties were young man said
there's been no progress for
women I responded you didn't
grow up female in the fifties
and all the women in the group
applauded we will not go back
there please vote yes on each B.
seven thank you for your time.
Thank you very much and if Gabby
will you call the next one to.
Kelly.
Good afternoon.
Chair of the committee and
committee members.
My name is Noreen Kelly I am
from the most beautiful part of
the world Navajo Nation.
I grew up.
Boarding school.
I saw to.
Yes ladies that were in fourth
grade.
Girls were talking about her you
know what she did she Randal
clothes hanger up brought.
And this is the second time they
said.
And then in nineteen eighty
eight I had a choice I had a
child choice on my terms with
the love and support of my
family everyone deserves to be
able to make the choice that is
right for her only she knows
what is best for her
politicians certainly do not
know and they should not be
interfering.
It's because.
Sorry miss Kelly unfortunately
ran out of time
Researchers.
Please send yourself.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Clarissa due to an I have a
fifteen to generation new
Mexican and live in the table
base and home of my matrilineal
ancestral line RD seventy as a
right given to all humans is so
important in this time of
transition to equity as a
Chicana who experienced abortion
I know that making abortions
illegal is a waived immunity
ties in the power of women as
life givers.
No person should be able to tell
a woman whether she is ready to
give birth or not she knows that
innately and to even put this
into law to stop women from
making the decisions that she
knows are right within herself
has been a heinous crime against
humanity please vote yes on H.
B. seven thank you so much for
your love and support all to all
of our
People working in the
legislature I greatly appreciate
you.
Thank you Kanye Trujillo.
I'm the conical hat.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Connie Trujillo and I'm a
nurse midwife.
I'm as there's midwife I'd like
to speak to the concerns of the
conscientious objection clause
Health care providers have the
choice of the kind of care they
want to provide just as any
other profession does when I
decided.
But I wanted to catch babies I
also knew I did not want to be
responsible to provide surgical
procedures so I made the
decision to become a nurse
midwife instead of an OBGYN.
abortion is health care and just
like any other form of health
care and decisions made of how
women proceeds with the
pregnancy.
Should take place between.
The woman and their health care
providers I urge you to vote in
favor of House Bill seven.
Carissa juror and.
Thank you madam chair I already
have the opportunity to speak
thank you so much for saying
that and I think we had county
Trujillo to.
There's.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is heather Smith and I was born
and raised in Las Cruces New
Mexico I come from six
generations of black and brown
New Mexicans and every person in
my family has felt the
frustration and humanity as a
result of the government
imposing themselves on our
freedoms and our civil right.
As a woman of color queer women
of color I know how important a
person's body economies person
how important owning your own
personal choices are and how
important person civil rights
are because many times of my
rights have been taken away or
have been in danger locally and
federally I support H. B. seven
and women's right to choose
federally several attempts have
been made to overturn roe V.
Wade and it is imperative that
we protect New Mexicans rights
to health care as well as a
rights to govern our own bodies
the right for a woman to choose
is freedom repealing this band
would protect New Mexico's most
vulnerable communities black and
brown communities and women.
Please support SB.
Thank you Isabella Baker.
Hello can you hear me.
Yes
thank you.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is
Isabella Baker and I am an
organizer with board together
action I am here today in
support of H. B. seven as a
young Chicana woman it is
important to myself and my
community that people in New
Mexico are given the respect
they deserve.
You assuring the state access
that we all need
to reproductive health options
we must repeal this archaic
abortion ban and protect New
Mexicans I believe along with
over seventy percent of survey
New Mexicans that I can hold my
own more of youth about abortion
and still trust other people to
make decisions about their
personal lives.
At the present rate it is
because of my faith and the
compassion and love that I am
taught through my faith but I am
in support of New Mexicans and
their families and their right
to make their own personal
decisions about their healthcare
always because of this I know
for all of New Mexico that we
need to keep abortion safe and
legal I urge you to vote
yesterday thank you.
Thank you.
I just have current no last
name.
Hi can you hear me yes I'm madam
chair and committee members my
name is Karen Cheung I'm an
obstetrics and gynecology
physician in Albuquerque last
month they cared for a patient
who was nineteen weeks pregnant
develop severe preeclampsia
which is a pregnancy related
disorder for which the only
treatment is delivery having
preeclampsia meant that
unpredictably in minutes or
hours you could seize stroke or
die under twenty four weeks a
fetus cannot survive outside the
womb therefore she had to decide
between her own life or that of
her fetus in a matter of minutes
ten hours to prevent imminent
danger to her life not only was
is a decision that should be
made between her and myself as
her physician but there was
absolutely no way she would have
the time or physical
capabilities present this urgent
case before a panel of judges to
get the abortion care she needed
to save her life nearly every
week and sometimes every day I
care for women with preeclampsia
and that is only one of the many
causes for maternal mortality in
New Mexico please vote yes on
house bill seven to help prevent
women from dying in New Mexico
thank you.
Thank you I'm Karen Burkhart.
Yes can you hear me yes go ahead
thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Erin Burkart and I live in
Sandia park New Mexico I'm here
to encourage you to vote yes on
house bill seven because I
believe that all women have a
right to make their own health
care decisions in consultation
with their family and their
doctors and without any
government interference women
will never be fully equal New
Mexico and so we have full
control over all of our choices.
This bill was passed in nineteen
sixty nine the year I was born
and I am now fifty one.
Think how much the world has
changed in the last fifty one
years this bill is entirely
outdated and I sincerely hope
you'll vote yes thank you.
Thank you.
Caller.
Hello can you hear me we can
hear you.
Thank you so much my name is
Amanda caller and I'm an
immediate he is.
At the future medical
practitioner I recognize the
need to keep abortion safe and
legal for all women additionally
I serve on the American college
of physicians National Council
of didn't members the eighty two
year recognizes twenty thousand
are sorry the APP Representative
twenty thousand position to take
care of adult patients including
women and their childbearing
years the ATP of COVID
government restriction that
would erode a woman's right to
continue or discontinue of
pregnancy and the ATP opposes
that legislation and regulations
that would limit access to
comprehensive reproductive
health care.
I believe abortion care health
care and we must give women a
company over their bodies I are
deductible in favor of H. B.
seven thank you.
Thank you.
This this list up to date it
seems to me that we have some
who haven't been removed you've
talked.
I'm no I haven't.
Okay.
Hello my name is that the A. R.
C. I. A. with flow together
action and a member is making
the county I support H. B. seven
on behalf you know I hear
stories when I go out and do
organizing on a and there was a
ten year old girl who got right
by her own family member a ten
year old girl trying to develop
her own body and yet she has to
go and develop another inside
her.
Nine months of seeing this baby.
Develop in her womb what makes
you think that who's gonna take
care of this baby the state will
be the one to provide for this
baby after the baby is born
there will be birth defects
medical problems there again the
state will be responsible for
payments again.
Has this baby grows up in school
with birth defects this is where
bullying.
Comes in.
Gonna take care of this baby
again grandmas grandpas they're
also really.
I'm doctor will have you spoken.
I have not had the chance to
speak okay go ahead go ahead and
madam chair and committee
members my name is Joselyn blue
I'm overjoyed resident physician
and a member of the American
college of obituary ends who
also supports this bill I've
been serving families in New
Mexico for four years and as a
anticipation I also benefit from
the principles that H. B.
seventy tax I'm honored to
provide full screen care to
women including prenatal and
abortion care it's my job to
care for patients and also
consensus this bill preserves
the sacred space of trust and
privacy that doctors have where
we respect each an autonomy
COVID is killed over three
thousand New Mexicans politics
and patriarchy should never have
had a voice in health care and
H. B. seven will prevent
criminalization providers and
especially women who don't or
won't have the privilege access
abortions safely when roe versus
Wade is overturned.
we should be working to increase
access to all health care
including abortion care and I'm
proud to work in New Mexico and
HB seven as an opportunity
redefine our values as a society
and protect the quality and
access to healthcare which is
the minimum that New Mexicans in
this thank you very much please
vote yes HBs.
Thank you Jonathan Garcia.
Go ahead please.
Hello madam chair committee the
committee members I.
Well in favor of SB seven cause
bodily autonomy is important to
me especially as a queer person
it is principal of the person
choosing what is right for that
choices whether it is sexual
orientation and sexual identity
or healthcare choices abortion
access is health care.
Thank you thank you I'm Lisa
Hoffler.
Thank you my name is Lisa
Hossler I'm a board certified
OBGYN and executive officer of
the New Mexico section of a
crowd the American college of
the land.
Eight point eighty seven get rid
of more than fifty year old law
medicine has changed a lot in
the last fifty years and modern
abortion here is extremely the.
I thank you I am for more than a
decade I have never met a health
providers who have been forced
to provide care the approach not
even a circumcision I do see
people from all walks of life
during all stages of pregnancy
care and also.
Families most affected by the
old outdated law have already
received devastating diagnoses.
The court whose pre file
pregnancies and we left her with
serious health complications.
I'm working for strangers not
the core of doctors decide how
if you need to be able for
allowing the heartbreaking
choice that the her life by
ending her pregnancy I urge you
to act New Mexico women families
and support each other thank
you.
Thank you Sabrina.
I need yourself please hi hat
hello can you hear me yes.
Madam chair and members of the
committee I am Sabrina gill I'm
a physician here in New Mexico a
completed family medicine
residency and fellowship and I'm
planning to stay here I strongly
urge you to support house bill
seven I consistently see
patients who have had to make
these real complicated decisions
around abortion care this is
because one quarter of women who
have had an abortion in their
lifetime a woman deserves to
make her own health care
decisions without interference
from politicians or the
government we don't want to get
in the way of a woman's ability
to make decisions about
abortion.
Our opposition wants to
interfere and impose their views
on others.
Also I want to reiterate that
the claim that medical workers
will be forced to provide
abortion care is not based in
reality.
For every other aspect of
medicine doctors are able to act
in their best conscious and this
is true for abortion without
this outdated statute thank you.
Thank you so very.
Sir.
Madam chair I think we may have
lost so do.
Okay Mexico.
We we all they're going to be
able to do five more turn your
James.
Yourself please.
Hello madam chair and committee
I'm Tania James I support the
seven because of the victims
that have been affected they
didn't have a choice they follow
through with the pregnancy and
most times it ended up with the
child getting hurt because no
one listens.
I believe that we should have
our own choice of what we do
with our bodies no politics or
government should have a say in
that women are forced when
they're not ready or have no
support thank you for hearing my
comment.
Thank you Alexandria Taylor.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Alexandria
Taylor and the deputy director
of the New Mexico coalition of
sexual assault programs I am
also currently serving as the
chair of the governor's Advisory
Council on racial justice at the
core of our mission is ensuring
survivors of sexual assault have
access to services justice and
healing in alignment with our
mission we believe all New
Mexicans should have access to
care including abortion care the
cornerstone of our work as
advocates a supporting victims
in regaining control over their
bodies and lives so they can
make the best choices for
themselves we should not at
hurdles or barriers to their
healing process what people need
during this time is love and
support as they make the
personal decision and reclaim
their self HSD not for the state
or any other actors in positions
of authority to continue to take
it away I ask this committee to
vote in favor of HB seven so we
can continue to create a society
where survivors and all people
have access to the care they
need record require repro
justice is survivors justice.
Thank.
Next.
Hi Debbie coverage in the last
speaker will be eight estate.
Go ahead and I knew please
Debbie Everett.
Go to eve SB.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is eva SB I'm an OBGYN I've been
practicing in New Mexico for the
last thirty years and I'm
speaking in strong support of
repealing the abortion ban and
also the Legislature slated
chair for the New Mexico I
section of the American college
of obstetricians and
gynecologists I and my
colleagues have cared for
thousands of women and people in
the state caring for women
throughout their lifespan
including their complex and
always unique reproductive
health decisions what I've seen
over thirty years is that women
and people need to make choices
about continuing or ending a
pregnancy with their trusted
health care provider because
everyone and situation is unique
and individual there's no place
for Pyle politicians and
ideology in the exam room I
recently had a patient what to
make a decision to have an
abortion because our water broke
when she was very preterm and
she developed an infection which
was life threatening this was an
agonizing decision for her and I
feel so fortunate that we can
take care for with respect and
dignity and honor a choice that
was difficult difficult required
a lot of conversation with our
health care team and her and her
part.
Okay members I'm going to ask
Miss Sanchez at this point we
can take the timer off of that
screen I'm going to ask Miss
Sanchez if they would like to
address the public comment.
Or.
Five minute break or if they
would like to address the public
comment before we go to the
committee after we take a five
minute break.
Madam chair I would deeply
appreciate if we got to run to a
quick five minute break great
thank all right that's that's
what we'll do it is
we wanted I so we'll be back at
three thirty.
Are you ready to continue.
Madam vice chair.
Madam chair yes I'm ready okay
go ahead.
Good afternoon again madam chair
and committee members I
appreciate the opportunity to
wrap and just also recognize the
incredible New Mexicans that
showed up with so much
conviction and thoughtfulness
and respect throughout our long
public comment I just want to
appreciate and no madam chair
that as we all get to you get
used to doing are legislative
session virtually that we shared
and exhibited a lot of patience
and I just think that's an
important thing to note and also
note that I was happy to hear
folks from all over our state
had room to participate in this
important conversation so that
madam chair I'm not going to
make any particular comments
about what we heard but just
wanted to appreciate that so
many folks were able to weigh in
and be part of today's hearing.
Thank you madam chair okay thank
you let me go to members of the
committee and first I have
Representative Armstrong chair
of health and Human Services
Committee thank you madam chair
and thank you Representative
Cadena.
I just wanted to make a
statement because it was
indicated in some of the
or insinuated and and stated
actually in some of the
testimony that I and others
weren't listening to our
constituents and New Mexicans
because we received six
thousand.
emails and opposition.
And while I did receive about
six thousand emails in a matter
twenty four to forty eight hours
I spent hours actually going
through probably at least a
thousand of those looking for my
constituents and my district
probably less than two percent I
work for my district probably
many more than that it was hard
to tell whether they were even
from New Mexico.
But more importantly what I want
to say is that I've been talking
to and listening to women about
the issue of access to safe and
legal abortion for almost fifty
years.
I have
made it a cornerstone of my
campaigns that I believe
strongly in the access to full
access to comprehensive
reproductive health care up to
and including abortion I don't
think government has any place
in making those disks sessions
that are personal sometimes gut
wrenching that should be between
a woman her of provider and the
people she chooses to support
her and I trust women to make
the choice and my urged support
to make sure that we keep
of abortion access to abortion
safe and legal in New Mexico.
thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative
Armstrong Representative Lewis.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Cadena
I just want to thank everyone
for submitted their comments
whether that was to be as soon
today the emails that we
received and the telephone calls
I too was trying to go through
them looking for constituents
how a lot of the constituents
that I work with and my house
district and southwest
Albuquerque also reach out to me
via my cell phone Taos so that
maybe a little bit easier to go
through the emails but also I
want to say that I'm a proud to
co sponsor of the house bill
seven and I just want to thank
all of the other co sponsors for
your participation your passion
and your dedication to ensuring
that we continue to trust women
to make their own health care
decisions when it deals with
their bodies abortion is health
care when the government gets
involved in women's health care
I can tell you what's happened
in the past.
And this is something that has
Pat happened as recently as the
nineteen seventies
so this was a termed as a modern
form of genocide which was
sterilization.
So this was happening two and
eight of Americans again as
recently asked the nineteen
seventies.
Some of these procedures were
performed under pressure or
duress or without a women's
knowledge or understanding of
what was happening especially
after birth deliveries of course
this was easy because there was
language barriers as well.
There were subsidized
sterilizations for patients who
receive their health care
through the Indian health
services and for Medicaid
patients.
And black and Latino women were
also targets of coercive
sterilization in these years.
I am a proud indigenous women I
am a pueblo women I grew up on
an Indian reservation right here
in New Mexico I was very very
blessed to grow up in a
wonderful caring family and
tribal communities we are very
much focused on community.
And of when I was growing up I
was always surrounded of course
by my immediate family my mom my
dad my brother my sister but
also lots of extended family
grandmas grandpas uncles aunties
and a lot of cousins so I always
felt very much cared for.
Just like my co sponsors I too
am a mother in addition I'm also
a grand mother of three
beautiful grandchildren.
And I've I've told this story
several times and I I just want
to tell it again because I think
it's very relevant here.
Is that I became a mom when I
was a sophomore in high school
and again because of our tribal
culture and not focus on
community I was encouraged by
that community to continue my
education my parents supported
my daughter and me and I just
can't imagine what I would have
done if my parents kicked me out
of the house because I was
fifteen and because I was on the
right.
This still happens today
and so Representative the
katana.
Correct me if I'm wrong but this
is an old law that is still
sitting on the books prior to
roe versus Wade.
Which is currently not enforced
is that correct.
Madam chair representative Lewis
yes you are correct our house
bill seven and again I'm so
humbled to have you on as a co
sponsor simply and in a very
straightforward wait repeals
three sections of New Mexico law
that were passed and signed into
the books in nineteen sixty nine
to make sure that these
dangerous statutes are never
enforceable in our state again.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you representative and again
Representative cadet you're a
mother I'm a mother
you have two beautiful girls you
know my daughter is grown and
and.
Both women both women of color.
Of the.
Slightly younger
but our pregnancies I'm sure.
We're.
Not exactly the same I'm sure
your pregnancy with both of your
daughters was not exactly the
same I think we have to keep in
mind that every single pregnancy
is complex and every single
pregnant persons every woman's
pregnancy and her circumstances
are different.
So I don't see how we.
Cannot allow any loss in active
or active to take someone's
power a woman's power away to
decide.
What to do with her body
I I understand that life is
precious.
I'm again.
My daughter was the best thing
that happened in my life my
grand children are absolutely
beautiful and I love spending
time with them.
But women's.
Help.
Issues women's.
Pregnancies are very much
different and I think we must
listen to what women have been
saying.
Especially after we've seen what
can happen when the government
gets involved and when there's
other motives involves to.
Keep all.
Their hands from women's health
care.
I.
Like representative Armstrong
have always stood
with my constituents when they
want us as politicians to leave
those decisions with the and
their hands.
And those are women her family
her medical provider her fate.
And I think that's something
that we need to continue.
Today by listening to them and
ensuring that some of the
horrific stories about.
Girls and women not finding.
Medical providers.
To take care of them would be
seriously detrimental.
So again as a woman as a mother
as a grandmother I will continue
to trust and listen to women in
New Mexico and I again I'm happy
to be a co sponsor with you and
the others that are
Supporting house bill seven and
I thank you Representative
Cadena or
your courage and your commitment
to women.
And I'm happy to work with you
on this bill thank you thank you
madam chair.
Thank you
Representative Lewis
Representative Townsend Here
next on my list.
Thank you madam chair in the
thank you representative could
enough for bringing this forward
I think.
Yes as these debates like this
are.
At least to a man in an abortion
debate.
I.
I
deeply respect.
Your tend and that of.
Representative Armstrong and
Lewis and many others.
On your views.
And I want you to know that.
The best of the legislature.
Is that we take care of real
issues.
And don't worry about who had
Chinese food or whatever else
might be the topic of the day
this is the.
And
Like my friend
Representative Eli I think he's
wrong on most issues but I still
like you we still Brandt so
I would tell you that
I don't think we could be
farther apart philosophically on
right and wrong.
but I have a few questions
Representative that I don't know
the answer to and I'd like to
yes are currently a shortage of
a portion providers in New
Mexico today.
Representative Townsend thank
you for your respect or
respectful introduction and I
certainly feel the same and look
forward to a conversation that
some might need.
I am not prepared to answer that
question Representative Townsend
it's not within the purview of
the bill
I'm not sure what where we would
get that data but I am grateful
to say that it is real we look
across the country New Mexico is
a place where people can access
the abortion care they may need
in their lives the state the
legal like.
I think the
Men and women both having
adequate health care is
important so I that was that was
my question was.
Is there a shortage
and I don't I don't know the
answer and and and and I I
respect your answer.
we hear a lot today especially
in the legislature about
individual rights.
And
The right to choose and woman's
Representative right or then
tried.
Lord knows what Wall had
tried many different opinions on
whether you should get back to
nature you shouldn't get a
vaccination and my question is.
Those providers those health
care providers that.
Do you think.
That their rights to say no are
any more or less important than
anyone else's I mean should they
be considered.
Madam chair representative
Thompson again thank you I've
spent a lot of time over the
last several years with this
question.
And what I continue to do is
look through the other places in
New Mexico law that we already
have religious refusals
protections including the New
Mexico uniformed health care
decision act and the medical
practices act Representative
Thomson as you need it we will.
Disagree on occasion and
potentially on these issues
whether or not I support those
religious refusals in the long
run or today is not relevant to
house bill seven
for me in making sure that we do
a clean repeal of the statues
that were put in place since
nineteen sixty nine we are
making sure that we both protect
patients and providers as we've
heard today with support from
organizations like the American
college of obstetricians and
gynecologists a CNM and
including the New Mexico Medical
Society so I've I continue to
build reassurance and checked
your thirty year that we will
maintain those protections for
providers I do agree with you on
that point that people deserve
room to be considered certainly
as we move through legislation
like this.
Madam chair representative
appreciate that because I think
it is very important that people
understand that
I.
And madam chair.
It is as difficult as as some.
Situations are in and I raised a
beautiful daughter.
And we.
We're very lucky that we.
Fortune I think I should say.
That some hard decisions were
never before us.
I think the question of whether
at a.
Adequate health care is provided
is important.
And I think the question of.
Eight.
All persons right to choose to
me is important.
But I also think as adults.
And the S..
Legislators.
We sometimes come up here and
spend a lot of time representing
those people.
That don't have the opportunity
to come before us.
And in this case sometimes it's
a child.
That does not have the
opportunity to be represented.
And and I think as we go
forward.
That child's rights.
Should not be omitted from the
process.
I I understand the what you're
trying to do.
I I understand.
Your belief in what while you're
trying to do that.
I don't think it's in in the
best interest.
Of my district and in the area
that I represent.
I I do appreciate so.
Your concern and and I hear
their voice and and I I don't
discount that.
Madam chair I will tell you also
that I had a number of people
including.
I witness that seems to have
prepared in spent an enormous
amount of time
repairing testimony and was not
able to stay online was kicked
off multiple times and I am not
even going to try to read all
that into the record madam chair
because it's it's a couple of
pages and.
With my West Texas accent all I
wouldn't ever get close to
reading at all in that length of
time but I would like to submit
it so that you can have.
And Representative Townsend if
you want to just.
Read a sentence or two right now
that's fine and then if you want
to submit it we can our staff to
make sure that we all get it.
The the person as an attorney
With S.
Americans United for life in and
they are opposed to this bill
for a number of reasons.
And I would just
She talks about.
The protection should not
adequately protect the
conscience rights you know the
the.
The ability of a person or a
facility to say I don't want to
do that should that be should
that should that say you.
And and it goes on I'll just
I'll send I'll send a DM
But to me.
That is is
Is paramount to the process I I
think that life of the child
should be considered as we.
met and take
Laws off the books I think those
people in those mourners are
some representation and that's
what I mmhm.
That's what I believe which is
right I do not
I don't.
I believe.
In late term abortion I'm I'm
hardline against late term
abortion.
In in ninety percent of the
cases are more I'm opposed to
abortion at all but I would tell
you that
It bothers me.
greatly.
The decisions we make but I am
honored to be in the process and
to list some in to understand
people's points you so.
I appreciate the time madam
chair thank you.
Madam chair and thank you
representative Thompson I also
appreciate just.
Yes that's respectful
conversation.
Representative Snyder.
Thank you madam chair
What the Representative Townsend
Here said it's probably a good
segue to the.
The questions that I have for
the Representative and the first
one deals with our guests a
couple comments then what
Representative Townsend was
referring to in that letter
that's the conscientious
objection.
Portion of the existing statute
yes this bill gets signed into
law.
Are are there any other
provisions in law that have a
similar provision that allows
doctors and healthcare
professionals to not perform a
procedure by which they provide
are objectionable on.
Our guests are religious or
other grounds.
Madam chair representative
neighbor I appreciate the
question as has been shared both
in our public comments and now
as we begin this conversation.
In New Mexico law within the new
uniform health care decision act
as well as a New Mexico court
ruling afterwards that that
ruled this this decision act
applied broadly all health care
decisions as well as the medical
practices act
and in addition backed up by a
federal points like the federal
charge amendment we have felt
that there are significant and
and demonstrated ways that allow
providers to continue to hold
these conscience protections
today and moving forward.
So madam chair the testimony is
that there are other provisions
in New Mexico law that that
provide for the conscientious
objection.
Madam chair and representative
neighbor yes as well as federal
law.
Okay you wouldn't happen to have
any handy sites for those.
Madam chair representative
Madam chair representative I do
for the uniformed health care
decision act that is twenty four
dash seven eight dash seven E.
and within the New Mexico
medical practice practices act
it's in this section of the
administrative code sixteen
point ten point eight point nine
title medical ethics.
Okay.
Thank you for that information.
If this Madam chair of this bill
does become law are there any
other provisions in law that
would preclude what
Representative Townsend referred
to as late term abortions.
Madam chair your muted.
I unmuted myself maybe I needed
myself instead of I'm getting my
staff I asked.
Finish the question.
I thought I had previously
question the question was are
there any other it if this bill
becomes law.
Are there any other provisions
in New Mexico law that would
prohibit work Representative
Townsend referred to as late
term abortions.
If I may.
Jump in I think the vice chair
my.
But to reconnect I think she
might have frozen when I was
In the two thousand and one
session which is the sixty day
session I know there was statute
that was
Entitled late term abortion I
could not use the site for it
now but I know that there is a
lot in New Mexico
that that.
Representative can Martinez who
was a freshman then and
Representative Dan Foley was a
freshman and I actually worked
on the the legislation.
Which once enacted
the thank I don't recall any
further details.
Okay so there there may there
may be one and that something
that I can kick in research has
not been repealed to my
knowledge either I'm students
are that I can't just give.
So madam chair
Yes if there is a law on the
books with respect to that issue
our.
Would it be the intent of.
This legislation to continue to
prohibit back out those types of
procedures or is it the intent
of the Sanchez to basically take
all the abortion our laws off
the books.
Madam chair representative I was
on the legislative office
internet but it dropped me for a
second so now attempting to join
you again as a guest
Representative trying to catch
up to your question but for this
last chunk of it to respond
thoroughly I just like to add
that this house bill seven is a
straightforward repeal of only
these three sections of law it
does not change in any way the
standard of care in New Mexico
currently in place or does it
adjust any provisions of the
foundations of how people access
safe and legal abortions in New
Mexico to date it again only as
a straight repeal of this
section of law without changing
standard of care changing
parameters of care only making
sure that these statute from
nineteen sixty nine are no
longer on the books if that was
your question Madam chair
representative.
What you may not occurred and
vice chair is that in two
thousand with their weapons.
I'm.
Bill enacted and signed into law
by governor Johnson at
prohibited late term abortion
and I I imagine there are anyway
and that's not part of this
because it was not enacted in
nineteen sixty nine.
Yeah I think you're if I recall
my conversations with
Representative folly of the time
that that words are pretty
specific bill to.
Prohibit search and.
What they consider barbaric
procedures
that
It didn't deal with the timing
it dealt with the type of
procedures and I I I just can't
recall be on that but I don't
think it was
necessarily just a late term
abortion ban.
Bill but I'll check into that
the.
Later on.
Madam chair representative but
if I might offer Representative
night great your recollection or
understanding of what that was
it's very accurate that yes it
was a particular procedure.
And not related to that time in
someone's pregnancy.
And so madam chair my question
remains and other than that
prohibition on those procedures.
Here are are you madam chair and
representative aware of any
other statutes that would
prohibit these late term
abortions in New Mexico if
you're law if your bill goes
into effect.
Madam chair and representative
the questions an important one
and I just wanna also
acknowledge that as we engage
and media in different ways
whether it's social media earned
media that kind of movies we
show up and turn on our TV at
home there's certainly been some
misinformation circulating about
what this bill does and does not
do
In the way is that I've grown up
in New Mexico and moves through
navigating my own pregnancy
related experiences including
miscarriage and I'm lost with
myself and my family is a now
get to raise two beautiful happy
healthy kids it is real and
imported to say out loud as
Representative Lewis and
cosponsored with names that
every pregnancy is different and
we can never stand and a woman
shoes as she figures out what's
best for herself and her family
in New Mexico we do not have any
explicit probate prohibitions
that would ban abortion later in
pregnancy and what I would like
to say is that abortion is
highly regulated that abortions
later in pregnancy are
incredibly rare and
overwhelmingly
These decisions are made by
people and heart wrenching and
heartbreaking circumstances so
again well that is not the
purview of this legislation I do
just want to offer that as a way
of clarifying what this bill is
and is not this bill is not in
any way allowing abortion up to
birth this does not changing the
ways people access lately safe
and legal abortion New Mexico
it's just making sure that these
dangerous are statutes including
those that may criminalize
providers and patients for
seeking care never become
enforceable in New Mexico thank
you madam chair and
representative.
Madam chair representative.
In that regard
This bill.
Is quite simple if you have.
Very are pointedly.
Repeals the.
Abortion bill that the is on the
books in New Mexico so
I think it's so it's pretty well
understood that if this.
Bill is signed into law The New
Mexico other than maybe this
harsher partial.
procedural bill that we talked
about a second ago that may
remain on the books the fact of
the matter is New Mexico will
not have.
Any are provisions that would
prohibit
Abortions.
In the state of New Mexico and I
presume up into the the
enrollment so I you know I think
that that's something that I
think it is well understood and
and that's really the crux of
the matter for for me at all a
lot of people who
have spoken in a lot of people
that are have spent time looking
at this is that this is a
difficult issue and it's
difficult not just for work the
mothers to you may wish to seek
these procedures it's difficult
for every body who lives in New
Mexico because there's nothing
more.
The heart wrenching and
difficult to deal with them I'm
bored children right I can't
think of I can't think of a more
difficult subject matter for for
us to be
you know weighing in on our
opinions on and this about the
amendment
The the more child and and so
you know I I recognize from
every perspective this is a this
is a tough heart wrenching issue
for us to do work it's a hard
got raging decision for those
who are.
Our our.
Pregnant it's difficult the for
families who want to have a
family and find themselves in in
the very
tough our conditions medically
and
So you know there's many many of
us that have have to make some
of those very difficult
decisions that are in our own
lives.
It's it's very very
difficult and it's very of
promotional and we can the of
course this on either.
On either perspective as we as
we debate this bill and so you
know it's you so.
It's one of those issues that
comes up and I suspect it will
continue to to come up as long
as we have a.
Amaker C. and and the it it it
goes to
the very heart of of
a lot of issues so that we deal
with particularly of.
For for.
All people face very very few
certain things a certain way our
people are or from other
perspectives view things
differently and and we are
called upon as the Legislature
to to.
Representative various things
come to the table and and try to
try to resolve these matters in
may of.
In an open and and honest way
and and I think you're we're
we're trying to do that and
again our next slide certainly
thank you as well for the
respect and in for the time.
Tension that you give to me and
and to others and in the debate
A look at some of those things I
may have some additional
questions this makes it to the
floor R. thirty now some of
those the other statutes but I
appreciate the time and
appreciate the the testimony
from from both sides that we've
heard today and it doesn't it
doesn't get any tougher than
this in my opinion thank you
madam chair.
Thank you Representative Nibert
madam chair.
Thank you and next I have
Representative Rehm.
You madam chair and madam vice
chair you know I want to echo
what
our other colleagues on this to
discuss that you know it's the
extremely emotional subject that
we're discussing and and
therefore it makes it difficult
but
You know the two areas that I
see the most objection in the
emails that I received one be in
the conscience clause and that
that may be addressed some other
way it will have to look at that
but the other one is so late
term abortion and I was
wondering if you would be
receptive and one eighteen.
And of late term abortion in any
way.
Madam chair representative reams
thank you for that.
Right now and especially with
the concerns about the Supreme
Court at the federal level we
want to focus on making sure
that we repeal the statutes from
nineteen sixty nine so for to
date that would not be a
friendly amendment I'm trusting
and medical associations that
have shown their support I'm
trusting in the ways that we
highly regulate abortion care
just like we do every other kind
of health care New Mexico that
will continue to uphold medical
best practices and trust those
decisions that happen between
patients and providers so not at
this time but I appreciate
question.
Madam chair and then a very
secure thank you that's the only
question I have thank you.
Are there other members with
questions.
So I'm before we.
See what the pleasure the
committee is let me ask a few
questions of my own
The light right through it can't
do it
So I believe you were asked a
number of times about the
conscience clause and I think
that we're going to get
a reference to that we don't
need it at this moment but it's
primarily in the uniform health
care decisions act it's not what
the position is Representative
could chair yes as well as the
medical practices act.
You madam chair the son the
beautiful center and Santa Fe
shifting solves that and I can
hardly see myself but I'll keep
listing.
So I'm gonna be working I told
the committee the other day I
would be working on connectivity
and and then also some of the
little technical other issues
that I can do to make this
better
So.
I think that's a very important
one because we are not going to
dictate.
A provision of care that.
Practitioner.
Can not in good conscience
deliver simply because we repeal
this law correct.
Correct madam chair.
In.
I'm hearing an echo not sure
right madam chair and I just
even also wanted to offer on
that point that within the
medical practices acts that I
referenced a couple of times
we've actually cross reference
the AMA ethics rules of the
American medical association
rule so we have protection that
comes from what we've enacted as
a legislature here in our body
but also again these continue to
be supported by both medical
associations made up of
providers here in New Mexico
around the country as well as
federal us thank you madam chair
I think it's always confusing
and we do this.
A lot where we have a bill
that's a straight repeal or and
all you've got is reference to
the statute and then if you pull
the scroll and read the statute
and they say all of this is
being taken out but there are
other provisions in law for
these
Some sections of the lawn is
being repealed and I do think
that is confusing to people I
hope it would be of some
comfort to those who who base
their opposition on this
legislation to that particular.
Third of the repeal so.
I I do want to say that.
There were.
Some.
With some testimony that I think
might fail to recognize that.
The research shows that with a
portion is legal.
The actual rate of abortion.
Is much lower in countries that
allow it then in those.
I don't it's just not safe in
those other countries.
The other thing is that if we do
want to reduce abortion which I
definitely do there are.
Diss.
That we can.
Encourage US policymakers we can
fund we can ensure there in
place.
To greatly reduce the number of
on loan.
Pregnancies and the state of
Colorado has just made some
astounding progress in reducing
unintended teenage pregnancy by
making birth control universally
available long term birth
control so I I do think I hope
we can do more of that in New
Mexico so that we.
Really can make.
The need for abortion greatly
diminished.
So with that.
Yeah there any more questions
from committee members.
Seeing what is the pleasure of
the committee.
Moving to pass the motion for
two passed from representative
Armstrong a second madam chair a
lot of stuff Representative
Lewis.
I've got a lot of people
volunteering to second that
would you like to closer where
you are you ready for about.
Madam chair in closing I would
just again want to appreciate
all my work done the tone and
tenor of to date
when we I'm just gonna mute
loser okay madam chair.
I just again want to appreciate
the tone and tenor of the day it
is real and I I heard someone in
the committee earlier this
morning speak so eloquently
about the magnitude and impact
of the boats we take I imagine I
like many of you were held in
prayer today it was praying
myself was was just imagining
how I show up and give this
issue the thoughtfulness and
consideration that it deserves a
so madam chair I just have to
enroll in closing say as a
member of this committee I'm
just incredibly impressed by us
grateful for us that that we can
can do to the best of our values
and the constituents we
represent the good work of New
Mexicans every day so madam
chair with that I I would ask
that we move move to to pass
this incredibly timely and
important bill house bill seven
so we have
Shin and the second and debate
is closed so the quick will.
Representative o'connell.
Yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Cook no.
You Mr speaker.
Well yes.
Representative Eli yes.
Representative Lewis.
Yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative night.
No.
Representative Rehm no.
Representative Townsend.
So I checked.
Yes.
Madam chair taking.
Yes.
We have a vote yes for now.
So I vote of eight to four you
have a due pass for hospitals
seven and pretend I'm banging a
gavel here and that's all we
need is a virtual gavel I'll
tell you I I really you do have
a due pass and we've concluded
our agenda for the day I just
think they our staff have been.
Tacular analysts are but the
technical staff I really love
the polling and the timing and
setting up the speakers in the
attendee list so thank you
whatever and Gabby and really
appreciate everyone and we will
see you on Monday afternoon and
we'll have an agenda to you well
before that thank you all for
your
Attention and respect today and.
Compliments to every single one
of you.
I have a good weekend.
