year.
Madam Chair.
And I'm sure you have a corm.
All right, we are going to start
with, um.
House Bill 212.
representative Ferrari and Saana
on her and Polly.
alcohol.
So
I'm sorry, we
Because it wasn't approved by
the.
You're welcome
to the website.
I understand you have a
committee I just if we already I
think have it delivered to
everybody, so you wanna go ahead
and give us that.
Um, if, if your committee sub is
what you're explaining on we can
move it discussion.
All right, we'll just go through
this.
It is.
The 0.230797.
Somebody wanna move this for
this. All right, we're on your
committee substitute.
Chair, um, I would like to
introduce my house the changes
that we made.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um.
Uh, so with respect to the
committee's.
Uh, we had changes in the
committee sub subsequent to, I
believe our last committee,
which was Henrik, um, and the
committee sub substitute or the
committee subch changes are as
follows.
Um, in section 2, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, we
expanded the definition of of
juvenile products uh to exempt
certain things from that
definition at the request of
some stakeholders, uh.
Madam Char in the definitions,
we also expanded or clarified
the definition of PAS, uh, to
indicate that PAS is a certain
class of chemicals that exist at
a solid or liquid state at
standard temperature and
pressure.
Um, then, Madam Chair in section
3.
Uh, we
Clarified some exemptions.
So that we, for example, medical
devices and drugs, we act, we
included their packaging as
well. Um, and, uh, prosthetic
and or ortho.
Orthotic devices.
Um
Madam Chair, we again clarified
some changes with respect to
motor vehicles, uh, aircrafts,
lighter than aircrafts, given
our.
Uh, hot air balloons, um.
We clarified some of the, the
semiconductor exemptions, um.
Again, we added a series of
approved EPA alternatives known
as uh significant new
alternatives.
Uh, program that are
replacement.
Uh, chemicals for certain
refrigerants.
Uh, and Madam Chair, I get, I
can keep going through this, but
there's basically a number of
stakeholders who have, who have
come to the table.
Presented good evidence to us
and we adopted their changes to
the to the to the uh proposed
bill so that we could have not
have less or no unintended
consequences of bringing things
into this uh phase out and
prohibition.
And then finally, um, Madam
Chair, we, we, we were talking
with authority that we had
included labeling requirements,
but then realized that they were
not in the bill, so we added
that.
Uh
And
That's really the extent of the
changes, Madam Chair.
Thank you, um.
Secretary Kenny
Did you want to take the time to
explain.
That's OK, um, I'll start out,
um this bill um creates
certainty for New Mexico
consumers by phasing out and
prohibiting toxic POs chemicals
from showing up at their dinner
tables and um their homes and
while limiting state and
municipal liability for
long-term cleanup and this bill
represents a joint effort
between legislators and the
environment department with
input from various.
stakeholders, um, over many
months and most recent days,
that's why we have all the
changes, and we discussed toxic
um POS contamination in the
radioactive hazardous Materials
Committee um during the interim
and um what and the environment
department has invested
communities most impacted by the
record setting POS pollution in
our state.
And in addition, we built on the
lessons learned from the 13
states that have enacted laws
like HB 212 and um there are
various phases of implementation
around the United States.
And HB 212 aligns with the
efforts of major retailers who
have committed to removing POs
from their products and there's
fast food restaurants like
Chipotle, Wendy's Chick fil A,
Nathan's Famous, Burger King,
McDonald's, Taco Bell have all
committed to removing Phos um
from their packaging by the end
of 2025.
And grocery chains like
Albertson's Trader Joe's, Whole
Foods Market have taken actions
to reduce or eliminate PFOs in
their food packaging.
Other retailers like um keen
footwear, Patagonia clothing,
Home Depot, Lowe's, and IKEA
have some have committed to
carrying only POs free versions
of certain products.
And so the reason we need this
bill.
Um, is there's.
Products like this fabric
protectant and um you can buy
this or other brands in New
Mexico and the labels and
websites for these projects, say
safe for kids and pets and
nontoxic and non-hazardous, but
It's not true, and it contains
Phos chemicals that were phased
out of production about 25 years
ago, yet they are still
distributed in the United States
and the concentration of POS in
this container is about 50 times
higher than EPA's drinking water
standards.
you know, like, fine, we'll put
it on our fabrics and make them
stay clean and nice, um, but,
um, and while this only costs
$10 to buy.
And yet it can cost $2.7 million
to $18 million to remove a pound
of Phos from water treatment
plants. So we need to protect
families from products like
these in our municipal.
Thank you, Representative, um,
is that your
Uh
Secretary Kenny will continue.
Uh, Madam Jarra, I'll, I'll just
try to be brief and give you
just a very quick overview of
the architecture of HB 212.
Um, effectively what we're doing
is phasing out and then
prohibiting certain types of POS
chemicals in the state of New
Mexico. There's 3 key dates, uh,
January 1st, 2027, January 1st,
2028, and then January 1st,
2029. So essentially the January
1st, 2027 date are those uh
products that would contain
intentionally added PFOS that
would, you would come encounter
uh with in takeout food
containers, uh, at your, you
know, when you prepare your
dinner, when you prepare your.
breakfast burrito, those are the
types of things that we're
targeting first. Um, they tend
to include cookware, food
packaging, dental floss,
juvenile uh.
Products and firefighting foams.
I'll talk separately about
firefighting films. And then the
January 1st, 2028 date, which is
again a year out from the 2027
date of those products I just
mentioned, this is where we get
into things like carpets, rugs,
textiles, uh, fabric, uh,
cosmetics, feminine hygiene
project, uh, products, um, and
even ski wax. And then 3, Madam
Chair, members of the committee
is the January 1, 2029 date. And
these are the, this is the
where things that we don't
specifically call out with and
that that are not otherwise
exempt would also then have a
phase out in prohibition by that
time period.
Madam Chair, as you heard, and
members of the committee as I
started to, to talk about the
committee so there are a series
of exemptions in the sub.
Um, but there would be, uh,
sorry, yes, in the sub, they
would be added by law, broad
categories of things that we
don't feel as though pose a
threat to New Mexicans, but you
would find PAS in many of those
things are your devices,
electrical equipment, um.
You know, a host of things which
I'm sure we'll talk about, but
there's about 16 or 17 different
exemptions in broad categories,
uh, then there would be an
ability at later dates for the
environmental improvement Board
to also adopt uh additional
exemptions for things that
either we didn't catch or things
that are posing a threat, um,
one really key piece of this
where we're really excited
about. We're the only state in
the country to have proposed a
producer responsibility
organization and essentially
what that means that is that if
you will manage things like
mattresses or uh furniture at
the end of its useful life as as
a.
Uh, manufacturer of that
equipment or those, those
household goods that you could
also get an exemption. So we're,
we're trying to really keep this
out of our bodies, out of our
homes, uh, and out of our water,
out of our land, out of our
environment.
There is some civil enforcement
uh opportunity here that if
someone were to violate this,
uh, that we would have the the
ability to enforce it and the
Environment Department has
requested a special
appropriation um of which the
house has included 1 million of
the 3 million we asked for to
implement this starting in FY
26. With that, Madam Chair, I
think that explains the bill in
general terms. Look forward to
your questions.
Uh, thank you, Representative.
Thank you Secretary. Um, are we
OK to adopt?
substitute we already moved the
opposition to adoption.
We're on the committee sub. Um,
let's go to the audience. Um, is
anyone in opposition to um house
Bill any substitute for 2.
One too. Um, if you are, please
stand up and we'll give, um, a
minute to everyone here.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee.
Uh, Charlie Marquez with the
Alliance of Automotive
Innovation, who are of the auto
manufacturers.
Uh, I, and I, again, with all
due respect to the sponsor and
to Secretary Kenny.
Um, he has worked with us. He's
exempted vehicles, however,
there's language on on page 8,
21 through 24.
Uh, which, except it states
scratched out except that that
excepts exemption under this
paragraph does not apply to any
textile or article.
Um
That causes a problem for the
auto auto manufacturers and you
know, secretary Kenny has given
me some assurances that he'll
work with us on this, and I
appreciate that.
But this language is still
troublesome.
Uh, and for those reasons we
oppose. Thank you.
Ah, good evening, Chair members
of the committee. My name is
Alison Riley, public policy
director for the New Mexico
Chamber of Commerce, and we
respectfully oppose this bill as
it would pose in sweeping
sweeping restrictions on PAS
without considering their
essential role in many vital
industries. We truly appreciate
the work and the exemptions.
With Secretary Kennyon, but many
businesses still rely on PAS
based components for their
products.
We are concerned with a broad
definitions, particularly for
cookware, food packaging, and
juvenile products. We are also
concerned about the short
timeline to comply with less
than 2 years, it would be
extremely challenging to get
clarity, test, redesign, and
then roll out the new products,
especially for smaller
companies.
A band like this could
jeopardize jobs and investments
in our state, the chamber
appreciates and would like to
continue the work with Secretary
Kenny and the bill sponsors, but
unfortunately we do not support
the bill in its current form.
Give me online.
We have
Some folks lined up, I
understand to testify.
Um, and I'll just call them an
order that they um.
I've been, um, provided me Tim
Shestack with the American.
Hi, good, uh, good afternoon,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, Tim Chastick or
uh with the American Chemistry
Council, appreciate the
opportunity to uh testify today.
So first off, I want to thank
Secretary Kenny for uh the
discussions we've had is
openness and the amendments thus
far. Uh, we do support the
intent of this bill. However, we
continue to have concerns with
the scope of the bill and the
uncertainty, uh, regulatory
uncertainty that it creates.
Uh, unless specifically exempted
every product or piece of
equipment that utilizes a
fluorinated substance regardless
of its hazard profile, use or
possibility of exposure would be
subject to the law.
Some of the examples of
products, smartphones, paints,
and coatings, manufacturing
equipment, floral polymers used
in the tech industry and
aerospace applications, among
others, would be included.
The bill also creates uh a great
deal of regulatory uncertainty.
Uh, the secretary talked about
the approval process at the
board. However, the bill lacks
clarity in this process, demands
detailed reporting without
protection for vital and
critical confidential business
information, and we would agree
with the chamber that the
compliance deadlines that are
set are extremely ambitious.
Similar laws in other states
have yet to be implemented. The
client dates are much
Thank you very much for the
opportunity to.
Um, next we have
John Keane
The Association of Home
Appliances.
Uh, good evening, chair, vice
chair members of the committee.
Uh, my name is Johny
Association.
Of Homo punish manufacturers
also known as AAM.
In regards to House Bill 212. We
have serious concerns around the
broad PFAS prohibition,
specifically around cookware,
and he represents major portable
and for care appliances across
the United States and Canada.
Related to this proposal, it
represents a part, parts that
are powered for the operations
such as how to skillets, stoves
and microwaves under the
proposed bill, cookware with
intentionally had a peahos would
be banned in 2027. Cookware is
defined extremely broadly to be
any durable houseware product
used to repair, dispense or
store food or foodstuffs or
beverages with this language,
raise the serious concerns what
products would be incorporated,
for example, a refrigerator, a
stove, a microwave, prepare or
store food.
Plans are very complex products
with wiring circuit boards and
men some components, including
batteries that will be included
as well. The tight 2027 deadline
manufacturers would have to test
redesign and to the products
based on this unclear products.
OK.
Next, we have, um,
We're trying to ask you to
unmute Steve if you.
Sorry, apologize. OK, I'll start
over. Thank you. Um, Me chair
and members, as you know,
there's over 13,000 POs
chemicals, flu polymers are one
of them. Flu polymers are used
to coat nonstick cookware, the
sector that I represent, Flora
polymers, however, are, have
been proven to be non-toxic.
They do not bioaccumulate. There
are, there are orders of
magnitude larger and heavier
than other PFOS molecules, and
as a result, they pass directly
through a human body. They
cannot attach
themselves to any organic
matter, they're simply inert,
and they're not water soluble,
flora polymers cannot find their
way into drinking water, which
obviously is an area of concern.
And everything that I've said
just now has been published in
multiple independent refereed
scientific journal articles. In
fact, the US Food and Drug
Administration specifically
authorizes the use of 4 polymer
coated cookware as safe for food
preparation.
And finally, I would just note
that these same floor polymers
are used to coat pacemakers
before they're implanted into
human bodies, and they have been
for decades. They simply are not
dangerous. Thank you very much.
And um I finally we have um.
Patty Hans, uh, with the truck
and engine manufacturer or any
other rep from the truck and
engine and we'll take one more
comment, um.
Yes,
uh, this is your you are
with uh cookware and bakeware
Alliance, uh, I'd like to draw
your attention to some simple
analogies, uh, like the animal
kingdom, it is made up of many
different animals. Some are
extremely dangerous like a lion,
and uh we couldn't have have
lions roaming our streets, uh,
but how about house pets like a
cat, right? So they look very
similar, but they have extremely
different risk profiles. We're
not banning all animals because
some lines, right? And
similarly, mushrooms, we know
there are some poisonous ones,
some edible ones, but probably
in the past people didn't know
how to differentiate that, and,
uh, but key message here is that
we need to look at different
categories and properties of
these materials and evaluate
risk scientifically.
And um
We need to look at groups and uh
not lump every everything under
the PAST definition together and
PAS is defined in differently in
different places. Um, so,
scientific perspective and
evaluating. Thank you.
And we'll take what uh the last
hand up, Andrew.
Hello, everyone's able to hear
me all right? Go ahead.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you very much
for the opportunity to testify.
My name is Andrew Bemis with the
Sustainable PAST Action Network.
We're a coalition of users and
producers that are committed to
sustainable risk-based PFAST
management. Firstly, we'd like
to start by thanking
Representative Ferrari,
Secretary Kenny, and others who
have worked on 212 for adopting
many of our suggestions. The
bill, um, as has been noted, has
added a number of exemptions for
critical 21st century products,
and we're very appreciative of
that. However, we would like to
emphasize that the bill does
remain very
Broad, um, as has been
mentioned, um, the bill still
contains a class-wide reporting
program and total ban on
consumer products in 2029. Only
two states have adopted such
programs, Maine and Minnesota,
Maine has greatly scaled back
their program in Minnesota is
still considering additional
changes that will simplify
theirs, and also, uh, because of
the bill's broad nature, there
are still key aspects of
implement of successful
implementation that are being
overlooked, such as exemptions
for national security, um, and
products that are required to
meet
candidates for aeronautics and
aviation products and equipment,
um, and also the prohibitions
could potentially impact and
generally discourage research
activities taking place in the
states.
Thank you very much.
OK, we'll go back to our
audience I, um.
For those in support of the
bill, please raise your hand and
uh for those online.
And support. Please raise your
hands.
Admin, if you could just state.
Madam chair.
Representative Ferrari's
secretary Kenny, members of the
committee. My name is Nat Dean.
I apologize for the quality of
my voice.
I'm in favor of a house bill 212
committee substitute.
We always are looking at things
as a work in progress, and when
we make forward steps in our
progress, we are analyzing and
incorporating the many different
factors that are important in
examining the issue. I stand in
favor. Thank you very much.
Thank you now.
OK, um, so we're, we're back on
the committee substitute, did
you have any?
Um, madam
Excuse me, Madam Chair, um,
And members of the committee. So
um appreciate adopting the
committee sub and appreciate
hearing the concerns, uh, you
know, we're, we're meeting with
so many people and, and making
decisions uh about different
things that people are bringing
to our attention, similar to
what commenters said in
Minnesota, Maine, and other
places around the country,
they're learning a lot and we're
adopting a lot. One of the
things, Madam Chair, that I
don't think has reached the
committee is an amend.
Um, to the committee sub, and I
think, uh, just to, just to, can
I?
Discuss what's in that amendment
as it relates to the comments we
heard thus far. Um, so my
understanding, um, is that the
amendment got here late, so our
kitty and our analysts haven't
had a chance to review it is
just as a question, is it in
response to some of the?
Madam Charo is.
OK, so I think the um idea is to
roll.
If we haven't been able to
review what the.
For Monday?
Um, I think we should just keep
going through the dialogue. If
it's substantive as to certain
things that you know will, will
be changed in that regard. I
think discuss it, but until we
can have a chance to analyze it.
Um, we won't be able to.
Um
Actually vote on the bill.
Uh, right.
So Madam Chair, thank you,
understand, understand that and
um.
Uh, one of the key additions
that was added to the uh they
were proposing to add to the
bill is, is an amendment uh that
addresses uh what you heard from
some of the individuals about
the concept of fluoro polymers,
and I know Madam Chair, the last
thing you all want to do is hear
chemistry at this point.
Um
But there, there's some validity
to what you heard that, that
fluoro polymers are different
than uhur and polyfloral ayal
substances, uh, so we have a
fluoropo fluoropolymer, uh,
exemption that we're codifying
into the bill, uh, that will not
make it this less protective but
does recognize current science
is. Uh, so that everything from
EV.
Um, charging wires to coax cable
that goes in the ground, uh, two
coatings that go on buildings
and films that go on Windows,
um, we did not intend to.
Capture them in our bills, so it
was a good suggestion from folks
that you heard who are currently
in opposition.
Um, a lot of the other changes
of which there's 5 total, Madam
Chair, that was the most
significant one that I just
described. Everything else is
really just a, a catch-up
cleanup, uh, literally the
addition of a comma and some
other um small.
Uh, words, choices that will be
in the amendment when you see it
on Monday. Um, but Madam Chair,
members of the committee, I
think that, you know, we're
chasing the risk profile in this
bill. The risk profile in most
New Mexicans is they're going to
be exposed to PAS in their water
or around their kitchen table.
Um, there's a series of
chemicals, as you heard that
we're that stopped being
manufactured in 1999 and 2000,
but they're in these bottles
that are coming into New Mexico
today. And these
models are, are costing us a ton
of money. Um, we received about
$18 million Madam Chair, to
address emerging contaminants
like PFOS all around the state
of New Mexico. But as you heard,
one of these bottles or just a
couple of these bottles would
chew up all that money. So it's
a question of do we want to
start reducing on the front end
to save taxpayer money or do we
want to address this on the back
end where, where it becomes a
really big problem and expensive
one for us to focus on.
Um, Madam Chair, I do believe
we've, we've right-sized this
bill to fit the risk, but not
impact our economy, um, and
anyone who
You heard in opposition that
would like to work with us, uh,
we continue to work with them.
Uh, such that like cars that are
manufactured with PAS in the
next two years would still have
a ability to be sold in New
Mexico, and then we're going to
ask the manufacturers to stop
adding that to seat coating so
that you're.
It, it's, it's not something
like this that's being sprayed
on cars in New Mexico. Um, last
thing I'll just say, Madam
Chair, because I think, you
know, some of what we do here in
the legislature is, is so uh
clinical in some ways, but
necessary, but I think whenever
we, it's really helpful to have
a visual and Madam Chair,
members of the committee just in
Bernalillo County in
Albuquerque, you know, we've
been to furniture manufacturers
or furniture big box stores,
where we have 15 year olds,
16-year-olds, 17-year-old.
who are mixing up these
chemicals without, you know, any
protective equipment. They're
told it's safe because we've
asked them, they're spraying it
on, it's washing down into the
sewers. That's what they do,
they throw the empty container.
in the trash, they wind up in
our municipal waste landfills,
and then suddenly ABCUA is
dealing with a sludge and I'm
not in any way.
Trying to instill panic, but
suddenly, you know, a small
container means that they're
spending millions on dealing
with their sledge or a small
container means that a municipal
solid waste landfill is now
dealing with leachate that is,
is, is problematic. Uh, so this
is real, Madam Chair, members of
the committee. People are doing
this probably today right now,
um, telling you, telling me as
they did that if we put stain
protecting on your carpet. You
can have your children walk on
it the the minute you get it
home.
And it's just factually not
correct.
Thank you, Secretary. All right,
um, we're on the committee
substitute, um, just as a
procedural thing, um.
We can't amend the committee
subs so you're gonna actually
bring a video.
No, um
Anyone here
on the committee.
We're we're on the committee
substitute for discussion.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
secretary. So this is a little
above my head, so I'm trying to
understand all this, but
So, is there, is there good PO
and bad POS is that what I'm
understanding I'm chair
secretary.
Madam Chair, you know, I, I,
I'll go so far as to say that,
you know, all PA when intended
and it's intended product and
used properly is, is good POS.
It's there for a reason, it
keeps us dry, it keeps grease.
Of pizza boxes, uh, it, it
protects firefighters, you know,
it protects.
Uh, the military from, from
having runaway diesel fires. So
there's, it's, when used
properly, it's safe. Um, but
when it's not, when it's used
properly and then discarded or
it's used in a way.
Where, you know, this on the
bottle says it's not hazardous,
it it's not correct and and so
there's a truth in labeling,
there's a uh ensuring that you
clean it up properly and those
types of things, um, it's
typical typically around it's
generation or it's disposable
disposal, but I, in its proper
life cycle, uh, POS would be
something that you and I
encounter and it, it, it may
actually be safe because we're
not ingesting it or.
Otherwise being exposed to it.
OK, and so, Madam Chair.
I know I heard 15,000 types of
that correct, Madam Chair and
representative, yes.
OK, and so if I'm noticing
throughout your bill, madam
Chair and secretary, as you're
speaking with different
organizations, you're starting
to exclude different things in
the bill.
So what is the process um.
If we were to pass this bill,
and you know, there's another.
Exception, I mean, I think I,
you know, it seems like we keep
adding exceptions.
Like how is that process gonna
work, Madam Chair and.
And Mr. Secretary and
Representative.
So, Madam Chair, and, and um
representative, thanks for the
question. The way we envision
this working is there would be
broad categories codified into
state law, as you heard some of
those this evening. I think it
gives us an opportunity to come
back next legislative session
and, and continue to refine that
list, broad categories, but to
be nimble in between legislative
sessions to the extent that
something was unintended or in
uh that is causing uh or.
contributing to a public health
issue that we would be able to
address that, um, in between
sessions through an
administrative rulemaking, um,
the environmental improvement
board is our administrative
role-making body here. Yeah, I,
I have been explaining this a
lot to people who, who
legitimately have questions,
that board is set up under state
law. It's represented, it's
appointed by the governor.
There's no more than 4
individuals are from one party,
um.
If there's a public notice,
there's uh everything has to be
adopted into the state bulletin,
um.
It's an administrative hearing
where anyone can petition the
board plaintiff for a
respondent, if you will, or, or
start a rulemaking.
So it's, it's a full and robust
public process, Madam Chair.
Alright, thank you. um.
I'm, I'm trying to figure out
why you're approaching it this
way and not doing a more
targeted.
Um
Approach to it to where instead
of like banning all of it.
You're kind of focusing more on
what the bad stuff is.
That makes sense.
So, so, Madam Chair and
Representative, um,
We could focus in on it it's,
it's a
Smart comment, um, and because
this is, there's 15,000, 19,000,
20,000 depending on who you ask,
number of PFOS chemicals, um,
both in our economy and, and
likely in our environment and
understanding where those
greater concentrations and
exposure risk pathways exist,
uh, starting
With
Uh, defining what PAS is broadly
and then exempting the ones that
pose a lesser risk issue to New
Mexicans and therefore we're
exempting them. And what's left
are those higher risk ones. Um,
Madam Chair Representative, and,
uh, you know, to some degree,
those higher risk ones, I.
are, are tend to be liquid, they
tend to be the ones that get in
your house or they tend to be
aqueous fire of.
A firefighting phone, those are
our big risk areas and 15,000
types of POS, um.
And I've been explained, I'm
trying to learn this talk. Is it
made up of the a couple like
there's, I've been told there's
um a safe molecule in them, and
then there's like that's like 1
and number 2 is like the bad
molecule.
Is that correct? Just let me ask
that first, Madam Chair and
secretaries. Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative, uh, I, I think
what we're saying is the floral
polymers being the good molecule
and the ones that are not fluoro
polymers that are kind of the
ones in these products and in
AFLF, I, I would agree with you
if that's the, the sort of cut
point.
The the floral polymers being
safer uh for human health and
the environment and the uh
Um
Non-fluoro polymers, sort of the
older.
PAS are the ones that were Madam
Chair and secret and
Representative.
Um, and again, I'm, I don't even
know if that's what the bill
says, but can we just do it more
of a targeted approach for the
bad one versus just including
all of them and then having to
go to you for a waiver, um, as
things just pop up and keep
popping up, which seems, you
know, with the deadlines you
have in place that seem, so I'm
just trying to figure out why
you couldn't target it that way.
Maybe that's what you're doing
and just because this is a
little above my head.
Madam Chair and representative,
I would say that's exactly what
we're doing. Um, it's just that
it, if it was a finite number of
products or chemicals, I think
it would be more intuitive that
that's what we're doing. But
given that it's an infinite
number of products and
chemicals, it, you know, in in
relative that it, it feels
maybe.
Broader in scope, but in
reality, that's what we're doing
is going after the higher
concentration, the more
ubiquitous products, the ones
that are known to cause cancer,
the ones that are known to cause
birth defects.
The ones that that that that's
where we're focused. And in
order to get to that focus point
where eliminating everything
else, Madam Chair and
Representative through those
exemptions.
And just Madam Chair and
secretary, it just doesn't seem
to be a lot of scene, so and and
in your bill, so for I'm a
military base. What about the
concerns for the the aviation,
Adamur secretary, is that an
exclusion?
Madam Chair and Representative,
yes, um, any AFLF that that
contains these bad POS chemicals
or, you know, the ones that are,
that are more toxic, uh, would
be allowable for emergency
purposes. Um, they would not be
allowed to be used for routine
training purposes, uh, you know,
just release and then and even
if you do use them for emergency
purposes, Madam Chair and
Representative were stating that
they also have to be
collected. You can't just wash
them into the environment in an
emergency and, and let Art Scott
deal with them, uh, or, or
Southwest cheese be impacted,
you actually have to collect
those POs upon the emergency
and.
Safety was a big factor here,
Madam Chair representative.
Madam Chair secretary, some
examples of um stuff that maybe
aren't listed here that are
considered safe, and we've heard
a lot about these cooking
things, cooking pants, can you
go a little bit into that, uh,
Madam Chair and secretary, the
concern that those individuals
have about their cooking. Um,
Madam Chair and Representative,
so there's a category of POS
that we've exempted. So if you
think of PAS, the way we define
it as a big catch-all. There's a
series of, of
Probably is equally infinite
number of uh chemicals, uh,
those fluoro polymers that are
kind of the new way you, uh, you
would, uh, glaze or add to a
cookware. Um, so, you know,
it's, it's hard for to explain
because some of these chemicals
that are from 1999 are still in
cookware, but other cookware
companies are using these uh
fluoro polymers, um.
If the, if you see something on
a pan that says do not heat in
excess of 500 °F. It's probably
a fluoro polymer and exact.
Totally exempt as of, as of the
amendment that you'll hear in
the committee sub, uh, on, on
Monday or the committee sub on
Monday, um, but that was a late
edition and we learned from what
Maine and Minnesota are going
through, as you heard, one of
the commenters say, um, and we
agree. I, I've been in meetings
in the after this afternoon and
yesterday with the company and
the, their lobbyist that flew in
and, and talked and I feel
confident that that is not the
risk profile we need to protect
New Mexicans from. There's not a
risk to that that's been
documented.
documented. However,
There are other consumer goods,
cookware that are coated with
these chemicals that are the.
The, the bad FIFAs.
Um
Molecules
And so then, um.
kind of chair and expert and
representative.
Secretary, um, so these, let's
say if you have this on your
product, these timelines that
have been discussed and the
concerns about the timelines in
order to, I don't want to hurt
businesses obviously in Mexico,
we struggle as is.
Do you think your timelines are
a little aggressive considering
what was talked about with, I
think you, it sounded like a
Madam Chair and secretary there
those deadlines were able to be
made in those different states
because of all the.
I mean
Exceptions probably coming
through or asks some waivers and
things of that nature, so can
you address that, please, um.
Madam Chair and secretary, thank
you, um, Madam Chair, and
Representative, um.
the timelines we perceive as
being uh fair, implementable on
our at the, at the state level,
there um we built into the bill
reciprocity that if you have,
you have uh gone to another
state, Maine and Minnesota, are
ones we're talking about, but
not necessarily the only ones.
Um, if you've gone and gotten a
waiver exception for for your
products in another state that
will accept that.
Um
Because we're all uniformly
using the same definition of
PFOS across the country at this
point.
one state that I know with with
an exception there, but um,
Madam Chair and Representative,
you know, we had a more
aggressive timeline in there. We
then are ourselves edited out a
little bit longer. Uh, the other
piece of this, Madam Chair, that
I'm balancing is that in
communities like yours,
communities like Alamogordo, um,
communities like Laena Gua, um.
There are people with what we
perceive to be higher exposure
pathways, so the cumulative
effect of allowing some of
these.
Uh, let's say bakeware, cookware
that have the bad PAS in it with
their already exposed and
sometimes exceptionally or
nationally or world.
Record setting levels of PAS in
New Mexico. Um, we, we're trying
to balance what's practical
versus what is best for their
public health as well.
Madam Chair and secretary, so.
kind of back to my more targeted
approach.
Would you be more open or would
you be open to instead of
banning all POs by default.
Um, more to more of a risk-based
framework, uh, that aligns with
evolving scientific research
rather than a broad kind of one
size fits all approach, would
that be something you might be
open to, Madam Chair Secretary.
Um, Madam Chair and
Representative, I, I believe
that's exactly what we did here,
um, and, and we, you know,
again, I, I'm trying not to get
into heavy chemistry, but
basically some of the, the, the
heavier, the, the bigger POS
molecules that are the ones that
are known to cause, not
suspected to cause, um, cancers
or birth defects or liver
disease or kidney disease, um,
high cholesterol, all those.
issues are the ones we're
targeting.
First and foremost.
And as we get those out of our
economy and our environment will
be left with safer alternatives.
It's, it's not that, again, we
believe that all PFOS is bad
POS, but the PAS where the
scientific literature says this
is.
This is causing problems, um,
is, is where we focused.
OK, and thank you, Madam Chair
and secretary interested do you
feel it's it's pretty broad. I'm
just seeing all these products
that it's, you know, ethos is
not bad for, and I worry, I
worry about this, what I I do
feel is a very broad approach,
but I appreciate your answers.
I'm trying to wrap my head
around all this and so thank
you, thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, thank you, Representative
Reeb, Representative Hall.
Thank you Madam Vice Chair
Representative secret, um, with
All these thousands of types of
efasts that are out there, POS.
Um
How many has the EPA designated
as uh Madam Chair and
Representative, uh, thank you
for the question. Um,
I'll, I'll say about a dozen.
Um, depending on if it's a water
standard, a.
Hazardous standard, uh, but
there's multiple federal
standards, but they, they
encompass about a dozen or so
different POs chemicals,
depending on.
So in trying to study up for
this, um.
I, I was looking at the
thousands of types that are out
there and then they I was on the
uh.
Extension site, the University
of Pennsylvania came up with
some interesting stuff and they,
they start talking about
hydrophilic.
And uh
Hydrophobic
Are the good
Is there a combination of both,
I'm assuming cause the
hydrophobic is like our stuff we
put on raincoats and umbrellas
and stuff, and then the
hydrophilic does not dissolve in
water.
So with all these.
Combinations in these thousands
out there.
The administrative burden for
trying to control it. I, I, I
guess I don't understand how the
state of New Mexico is going to
do this.
Well, if it's just gonna be so
hard to enforce, you have any
thoughts towards that, Mr.
Secretary, Madam Chair.
Um, thank you
Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative, I appreciate the
question. It, it's, it, it is a
big
Uh, there's a lot out there,
which is why we've looked at the
risk profiles and said, what is
the likelihood of New Mexicans
getting exposed to something,
uh, from
Uh, you know, what a lower risk
consumer product in those
typically are exempt. So coaxial
cable in the ground that has a
PA sheathing around it to keep
it safe and keep our internet
working and our phone services
working. That's totally fine.
Uh, POS that's in an electric
battery or an internal
combustion engine, gaskets and
things that is, you know, in, in
your motor vehicle, your RV, uh,
the sheathing around a hot air
balloon, all of that is fine.
We're not Mexico. We're
literally
So to your point, Madam Chair
and Representative, we're
whittling down from the things
that we don't necessarily care
as much about or and dare I say
we don't care about because
they're not affecting us and
eliminating those from
regulation and then leaving
what's remaining behind those
higher risk pathways of
exposure.
Which makes it more manageable.
Madam Chair.
Secretary
representative, um, when.
So you mentioned earlier that
there would be a path for for
exemptions.
If this happened,
Um
And
Any idea
How many exemptions we'd be
looking at based on what other
states have
Experienced
Um, Mr. Secretary, Madam Chair.
So, thank you, um, Madam Chair
and representative for that
question. The
Um
What we, what we, you know, by
not going first in, in terms of
those 13 states you heard about
that have done this, we, we
could stand on their, on their
shoulders and understand things
better and, and for example,
Maine is right now involved,
sorry, my mistake, Minnesota,
Madam Chair and Representative
is involved in negotiations and
potentially litigation with the
cookware industry, because they
did not exempt those fluoro
polymers that
We are now proposing to exempt,
so thousands of products that
contain uh safer levels of these
fluoro polymers, which is a
completely different chemical
than a, than a, it's a
different, it's a, it's in the
family, but a different cousin
of the of of PAS.
Minnesota is dealing with those
thousands of, of, of products
which we're just blanket
exempting at this point. So,
Madam Chap representative, I
think the feedback we've heard
from other states is that
there's always more than you
think.
Um, which I think that is
probably what we'll experience
here, but I don't have a number
for like ski wax, for example.
I, I understand there's only a
handful of ski wax suppliers.
Many of them are voluntarily
removing POS from their ski wax.
But I don't know how many will
be removed.
Madam Chair and a Mister
Secretary Representative.
The other thing is, and your
exemptions cause I didn't, I
didn't read them all is we have.
Of course, I think somebody
mentioned we have land.
Sandia in my area.
We have Raytheon.
Is that all under state or
because they're federal that
falls under something else, the
defense contractors and the
people that are doing stuff.
Along those lines, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair and Representative,
uh, they, they are regulated by
the state.
So Madam Chair, would that
affect their processes and in
developing.
The different things that they
do since many of the programs
are classified in the state
would not have any legal way to
look at classified programs
without being read in.
Madam Chair.
Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative, uh, depending on
the, whether it's a Q clearance
or what the, the clearance level
is, um, we have the ability to,
to engage in those
conversations.
So, and Madam Chair and
representative, again, there's a
number of exemptions in here
that would allow for uh
For different exit for
exemptions of of different uh
electronics, semiconductors,
etc. So I'm not, I'm not sure
exactly. Well, Madam Chair, Mr.
Secretary, Representative, I was
just concerned. I have Raytheon
up in my area, uh, in
Farmington, and they do lots of
defense contracts and
Um, so
I don't know if.
I'm assuming, given the broad
range of things, there's PFOS
things there. I'm assuming same
with.
Los Alamos National Laboratories
in Sandia, and I was just
wondering, um,
A I guess, is that going to
Have a uh
An effect on it or would they as
this goes on, this would be part
of the
If the stuff they're using is
not exempted this, they would
have to come to the state to get
an exemption.
If I understand this correct,
Mr. Secretary, Madam Chair.
Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative, that's correct.
But again, I will remind you
that there are extensive
exemptions.
For for everything from
pesticides to uh.
Aircrafts, watercrafts, so.
It's extensive, Madam Chair,
representative.
Madam Chair, that's all I have.
Thank you.
Uh, thank you, Representative,
Representative McQueen.
Thank you, Madam Chair. um, and
chairs representative and
secretary, uh, we heard this
film in House Energy.
Um, I appreciate that you're
continuing to work with
Industry to craft.
Appropriate carveouts.
And my feeling is this.
is a useful substance in it
because it was so useful
incorporated into more and more
products.
Um
Before we figured out.
The side effects, the unintended
consequences.
And it's time to be pushing back
and pulling back.
Um, and I think this is an
appropriate.
Measured bill that that does
that.
Um, without, uh, just being an
outright.
I think time is of the essence
for this.
Uh, because
These chemicals, um,
Yeah, they call him forever
chemicals because
We're not getting rid of that.
Uh, and so we need to limit, um.
Uh, the expansion, the, the
continued the
The contamination of our
environment and our
Um, citizens, so.
Um, thank you for bringing this.
Thank you, ma'am, sir.
Thank you, Representative.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative in secretary, um.
So, how many, how many
exemptions are there?
is there like a
Definite number of Madam Chair
and Representative, thanks for
the question. Good to see you.
Uh, there's, um.
16 in the committee sub, a 17th
1 will be added for those fluoro
polymers in the, in the next
committee sub, and those 16
exemptions, uh, starting on
page, starting in section 3 on
page 7.
Uh, in
are not for particular products
per se, but for categories or
classes of products, they're
brought.
OK, um,
I, I kind of have a similar
question to representative.
but
if we're writing a bill and then
Putting all these exemptions in,
why didn't you just target
what's not exempted.
In the first place.
Um, Madam Chair and
Representative, the, the
definition of PFAS is, you know,
kind of like saying it's a noun
and write the exemption, you
know, target what you mean by
saying it's a noun. Um, the, the
definition of PFAS and being
that there's 19,000 plus
different chemicals that fall
under that category, which is
basically a carbon chain with
fluorines on it and then you add
a functional group to it. So
there's almost an indefinite
number of chemicals that meet
this definition of.
PA
Um,
Even outside of the state law or
the state bill we're proposing,
so it's, it's kind of hard to do
that. I, I appreciate the
simplicity of that, I would love
to do that.
But it, it, it's challenging to
do that when the category is so.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative and secretary, so
tell me about.
Firefighting foam and what's
what's the fix for that?
Um, Madam Chair and
Representative, thank you. Uh,
the fix for that is that the,
the Department of Defense has
petitioned Congress to continue
to use the couple of years. Um,
that means that our bases could
be still using that uh into the
future for a period of time
until they come up with fluorine
free foams which are available,
um, those fluorine-free foams
would probably replace all those
uh phosylate foams, um.
So in the interim, Madam Chair
and Representative, uh, this
bill would say manage your AFLF
in a way that it does not impact
the.
Madam Chair Representative and
secretary, um,
Um, on the committee
sub, so this is this the second
committee sub?
Cause it seemed like there was a
out of
Of synergy
the 2nd committee sub.
Madam Chair and Representative,
I think that's.
On page 10.
Uh
And
In establishing a stewardship
program, the board may consider.
Uh, statewide collection systems
that provide
Access to the public for
drop-offs.
Twas this
Is this immediately or after the
band goes.
Go into effect
So.
general public can start taking
all this.
Poisonous stuff. What's gonna
happen to it then?
So Madam Chair and
Representative, so it, you know,
in sort of thinking this out
chronologically, um, you know,
the, the product storage ship
program is likely to be more on
the, on the furniture pieces and
uh what would be bad, you know,
what would start being banned in
uh.
Get my dates down 2020.
2020.
2028.
So carpets, rugs, furniture,
things like that. So we would
work with uh those different
then uh those different
producers of those of those
products to say a way to secure
yourself an exemption is to
stand up this uh place where
these these um rugs, furniture,
etc. do not wind up in municipal
waste landfills, and then they
would take them and and recycle
them in a way that didn't cause
any exposure in New Mexico or to
our environment here.
Thank you, madam.
Representative, so we're gonna
recycle them.
Wouldn't they still be
Bad, yeah, mini chair and
representative, so think about
it this way, that if we were to
take those carpets, which, you
know, are hitting our landfills
and uh becoming microplastics or
getting into leach aid or just
being, you know, managed in a
way that that pose a risk to New
Mexico, these vendors, these
suppliers, these production.
Uh manufacturers could take that
and recycle the carpet fiber to
make new carpet that would be uh
sold elsewhere in the country,
Madam Chair and Representative,
I think the point here is that
We're trying to break the cycle
of, you know.
millions of dollars being put
into cleanup.
In New Mexico and prevent it
from.
Causing or contaminating.
Thank you Madam Chair
Representative and secretary so.
So please
Correct me
If I'm wrong, so what we're
gonna do is we're gonna collect
all this.
Bad stuff, recycle it.
And then take it to another
state and say it's OK for you,
but not, uh, Madam Chair and
Representative, I see, uh, I see
the irony in what you're saying
or I see the.
I see what you're saying. Um,
oftentimes with producer
responsibility organizations
result in and in here in this P5
stewardship program is that they
stop using the POS or they
changed the way in which they
manufacture the carpet, or the
teacher, um.
Similar, you know, the
conversation we've had with the
audience, we understand that a
series of cars for the 2026,
2027, but the idea is to stop
using that in the vehicle, um,
with respect to the textiles so
that it doesn't cause a problem.
So in one respect, you're right.
And in another respect, Madam
Chair and Representative, these
are the kind of state bills that
cause change at a national
level, um, and that's, that's
another uh positive consequence
here.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative and secretary, it
still doesn't make sense to me.
It's like taking
car that spews out poisonous.
Smoke from the tailpipe.
Painting it and then giving it
to my neighbor and saying it's
bad for my family.
But this will be OK for yours.
It just doesn't, it doesn't make
any sense that even if we're
going to recycle it.
And send it to another state.
If it's bad here, it's bad
there.
But doesn't it
That part just does not make
sense to me at all.
If it's bad, it should be bad
for everybody.
Um, not
Hey, we put a shiny sticker on
it and now it's good for you.
So that, that part.
Um, that part I have a, a, a
serious, serious.
Issue with it just it it
doesn't.
Doesn't make any sense to me.
Um, let's.
Let's go back to
Um, that question.
Uh, I just
I'm still trying to understand
the bill as a whole, but
That question of
of collecting and recycling is
just gonna
Well that's gonna stick in my
head for a little bit and
hopefully it just
I can hear something that makes
me feel better.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative secretary.
I think representative
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative.
secretary, um,
They've asked most of my
questions, but it just seems
like this bill would require
manufacturers to reformulate
products, find alternative
materials, submit these
applications. Have you
conducted, um,
an economic impact analysis on
the state.
Um, Madam Chair, representative,
um,
We have not conducted uh
economic impact study other than
to say.
Madam Chair Representative, you
know, we're spending $12 million
to fight the Department of
Defense. We are spending $18
million to get POS out of our
drinking water and waste, Madam
Chair representative that we're
trying to quantify the health
impacts that New Mexicans and
Curry County, Otero County,
Santa Fe County are faced with
where, where these hotspots and
I shouldn't call some of them
hotspots, they're infernos of
public health.
issues that are erupting in the
state, um.
So, you know, I, it's hard to
quantify when a person is
prescribed Lipitor for a high
levels of POS and told the
exercise and watch their diet
when none of those seem like
modalities that are going to
change their outcome for health.
So I know what the cost is of
the exposure at the moment. I
know that other states are
reducing these um chemicals and
in fact to Representative
Martinez's question, you know,
some of these chemicals are not
being sold in other states.
But they're gladly sold in New
Mexico, and they're pushed right
on as this one comes from
Denver.
Um
So Madam Chair and
Representative, I think what
we've been dealing with is the
acute issue of PFOS
contamination of our population.
Mhm.
secretary
I understand, and, and I
completely understand the.
Intentions of this. Um, I was
looking up.
I mean
Online, as you stated, um,
We've sat aggressive deadlines
for compliance, Maine, and
that's what I was looking at had
to extend its reporting
requirements. It looks like
because it couldn't keep up with
the volume. So, have we looked
at maybe delaying implementation
and reporting dates just to
ensure.
The regulations and reporting
guidelines.
For people as, as we're seeing
what happened in Maine.
Yeah, Madam Chair
Representative, thank you for
that question. Uh, we
We looked at Maine's first law
and then the one that went into
effect last year, and we adopted
90% if not 100% of everything
they did to slow down and and
properly size their bill, so our
first attempt is sort of their.
2nd or 3rd attempt similar to um
Minnesota and other states
around the country.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair. Thank you very much to
the sponsors, Secretary Kenny,
good to see you. Um, I want to
commend both of you for taking a
very large, very difficult
problem and um taking a
courageous and precise approach.
Literally started with something
PA is everywhere and everything
and um like my colleagues
representative McQueen, Sher
McQueen said before, I mean,
there are some good types of
PAS, but something that started
out to be so good over time has
turned out to be really bad.
And so, um, I appreciate the way
that you have listened to many
of the concerns that have been
brought to you, I appreciate the
exemptions that you've included,
um, especially the federal
exemptions, which I think most
people, um.
I, I want to reiterate the
federal exemptions for those
things that are federally
regulated are very specific, but
they cover a lot of things and
so, um, letting the federal
government do that work is super
important and so what seems like
a very big complicated long bill
is a way to.
at this problem.
And manage it.
And I think another thing that
needs to be said is that we are
the first of many states that
need and will be need to and
will be doing this in order to
combat this problem, so it's
extremely complex, um, I know
just like many other things and
approaches we do in the
legislature, it's probably not
perfect. It can't be, especially
when at at an initial attempt,
but um, I think you've done an
incredible job of trying to
focus laser laser focus and.
On those things that immediately
need to be addressed and putting
together a process um for
everything else that I think
over time will become more
clear. So, um, I appreciate the
bill. Thank you for taking this
very difficult issue on your,
uh, Representative Sapanski.
Thank you, Madam Vice Chair. um,
thank you, Representative
Secretary. um, I too am very
pleased that we are on the front
foot on this, I just think that
um the health concerns are sort
of growing, um, as the research
continues and.
Um, the more that we can.
Thoughtfully approach this and
you know, serve as a.
Uh, incentive really for for uh.
product manufacturers to look at
other ways to deliver.
Um, similar kind of goods that
are not harmful to people's
health.
Um, you know, uh, that's all the
better. Um, I just, I had a
question.
Um, and I laughed because this
is a very mom question, but I'm
just wondering, Madam Chair and
Representative.
Um, juvenile product now
excludes um personal computers,
gaming consoles, handheld
devices, incorporating a video
screen, and I'm just wondering
if you could tell me um why
those are now exempt.
Madam Chair and Representative,
thank you uh for that question.
The uh things that are in those
tend to be things like
semiconductors or microchips,
I'll say, uh, motherboards, wire
and back to the point of trying
to right size the risk pathway
with uh those are not documented
at this point, um, there's
causing uh exposures, so those
are why they've been added, uh,
the, the definition.
OK, great. Thank you, Madam
Chair, uh, Mr. Secretary, that
puts my mind at ease, um, my
kids are a little too old for
toys, but this is certainly um
something that is in their
hands, uh, far too often and I'm
glad to know that the, the
casing and and sort of outer the
things that they're coming into
contact with or not, are not
harmful, um, as far as we know.
So thank you very much. I look
forward to supporting this.
OK, um, I think that.
Includes discussions
This, um, as we discussed, we'll
see a committee sub on Monday,
right, we'll put it at the top
of the list.
Yeah. Thank you.
I appreciate it.
Thank you, Vice Chair for taking
care of that item.
We're now on House Bill 84.
employee a free Speech Act.
And I understand there is an
amendment. You, I'm assuming
you're gonna be proposing it.
I'm assuming you will be
proposing the amendment. OK, so
we'll get it handed out just
trying to move things along on
this late Friday evening.
Representative of the floor is
yours.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um, we
do have this with regard to
concerns nonprofit organizations
who are actually engaged in
political work brought to us.
And I am going to ask my expert
when explain the amendment in
more detail. Um, can I make a
suggestion? Sure.
Before we talk about the, it
would probably be smart to talk
a little bit about the bill and
then we will have some contacts
for someone to purposes, so, OK,
um, Madam Chair, HB 84 is the
employee Free Speech Act, which
protects employees from captive
audience speeches or meetings in
their place of employment in
this act, an employer is
prohibited from retaliating
against.
An employee or threatening
retaliation, who refuses to
attend or listen to the
employer's opinion regarding
political matters. The act
provides remedies for explaining
um more.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Steven
Curtis, a labor attorney in
Albuquerque, New Mexico, and an
occasional adjunct professor in
labor law.
Um
I think it's important to, this
is a relatively short bill, but
it's important to say what it
does and what it does not do,
and I'll start with what it does
not do.
It is not prohibit in any way
any speech by an employer.
The employer is free to engage
in political speeches, it's free
to have meetings to engage in
political speeches, with the
employer can't do under the bill
is retaliate against any
employee who exercises his or
her individual right to be free
from that speech to um to not
listen.
So this is in line with a long
line of US Supreme Court cases
under the First Amendment that
notes that while the First
Amendment would prohibit the
state from keeping an employer
from expressing opinions.
It is free to protect the rights
of those who are forced to
listen to them, so that's why
it's sometimes referred to as a
captive audience.
Um, so for example, in Frisbee
versus Schultz, which is in 1998
case. It says the First
Amendment permits the government
to prohibit speech as intrusive.
When the captive audience cannot
Avoid the objectionable speech.
So this is in line with those
constitutional provisions and
that is also consistent with
current federal law under the
National Labor Relations Act.
What the operative section as
Representative Chavez indicated
is section 3, which tells it,
which after definitions
prohibits an employer to take.
To take or threaten any
retaliatory action.
Because the employee refuses to
attend.
Sponsored meeting to communicate
political.
Or to listen to speech of
eucination, including electronic
communications, that communicate
political matters. Again, the
prohibition is on retaliation
when an employee says, I would
like that to be, I would like to
be free from that, not on making
the speech, so the employer can
hold a meeting, he can say, I've
come down to the break room, I
have pizza. I want to talk about
who you should vote for in this
upcoming election.
What he can't do is the employee
that says no, thank you, I'm
gonna sit at my desk and
continue to work, can't
retaliate against that um
employee.
Um
There are a number of
exemptions, um, contained in on
starting on page 3, subsection
D, which starts on line 13.
Um, so for example, it is not a
violation for an employer.
To communicate any information
that is necessary for such
employees to perform their job
duties.
There's an exemption for higher
education.
Or exemption for a religious
organization.
Um, it's also an exemption for
casual communications because
Ought to be implicit in the
notion that they're not captive,
but in the event, it's sort of
belts and suspenders approach to
make sure that we're not
prohibiting casual
conversations. And we're also um
not limiting in any way, um,
anything regarding the
employer's manager as
Representative Chavez alluded to
the
The um the proposed amendment
adds a further exemption, um,
which is for a political
organization, political party
organization, caucus
organization are not for profit
organization under 501c4 C5 or
C6.
From communicating the employers
but intent of that amendment
should be self-evident. These
organizations do not produce
widgets like the factory would.
They produce political speech,
so it would be very difficult
for them to not have
conversations with their
employees about that.
Um, I had to look this up
because I'm not a tax lawyer,
but uh if you're, if you're
curious C4, um, it applies to
social welfare organizations,
C5, a place to labor,
agricultural or horticultural
organizations and see 6 applies
to business leagues, chambers of
commerce, real estate boards,
boards of trade, and for some
professional sports leagues.
Madam chair is so moved. Very
good, thank you.
All right. Um, before we, um,
Come back to the committee to
discuss why don't we go to the
audience, those wishing to speak
in in opposition.
Please stand up and I'm gonna
limit.
discussion on each side to 5
minutes and I recommend a minute
per person.
Yes, sir.
So my name is Mark Allen. I'm
general counsel for New Mexico
counties. Prior to taking the
job in New Mexico counties, I
spent my career uh in the city
attorney's office of the city of
Santa Fe as their employment
lawyer.
And this bill is absolutely
unnecessary for public
employees. They're already
protected.
by the First Amendment and the
federal Hatch Act.
We oppose this bill not just
because it's unnecessary for
public employees, but because it
will impede the ability of an
employer to hold employees
accountable.
The broad definition of
political matters and
retaliatory action will hinder
an ability.
Of an employer to the pill, the
bill creates a retaliatory cause
of action or any communication
on political matters.
Which includes joining a labor
organization.
An employee exposed to a boss's
email containing a political
cartoon can threaten a
retaliation claim if facing
something as small as a schedule
change.
The main purpose of this bill
is to support union organization
campaigns by muzzling private
employees, Mr. Allen. Um, yes.
Good evening, chair members of
the committee. My name is Alison
Riley, public policy director
for the Mexico Chamber of
Commerce, stay in opposition to
HB 84, we feel it's an
unnecessary legal and economic
overreach that will stifle
workplace discussions and
exposed businesses to
unnecessary lawsuits. The bill's
vague sweeping restrictions go
beyond federal law and could
unintentionally restrict normal
business communication.
Under this legislation, routine
compliance discussion could be
misinterpreted as political
speech and lead to costly legal
challenges. Business leaders
have a responsibility to keep
employees informed. This bill
discourages that communication
and creates confusion, not
clarity. We urge you to vote no
on HB 84 to ensure New Mexico
businesses can operate with a
transparency and certainty they
need. Thank you.
Thank you.
Anyone else in the audience.
Mr. Espinoza, Madam Chair,
members of the committee
speaking on behalf of NFAB, the
National Federation of
Independent Business, uh, we do
stand in opposition to House 84.
Uh, we do believe that it's
vague and overbroad proposal
that will create legal
uncertainty and compliance
nightmares for small business
owners, while its intent is to
protect employees from coercion.
We believe the bill goes too
far, restricting routine
employer communications that
have nothing to do with
politics. One particular
troubling ambiguity in the bill
is how it treats rule or
regulation change proposals. The
language could be interpreted to
ban employers from even
discussing new compliance
requirements, placing businesses
in legal jeopardy, simply.
explaining how laws impact their
employees.
This is unworkable, especially
for small businesses that rely
on clear guidance to stay
compliant.
Additionally, the bill could
prevent small business owners
from encouraging employees to
join professional organizations
or trade groups that help them
develop skills, network and stay
competitive in their fields. Uh,
we do stand in opposition
because of those concerns. Thank
you.
Excellent.
Um
All right, let's go on. Anyone
else in the audience before, OK.
I'll take a couple of people in
the online, so um.
Cassie
Cathy
Cassie, please.
OK, I think I am unmuted now.
Um, good evening, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Kathy Coal. I'm the CEO
for the New Mexico Hospitality
Association representing hotels
and tourism groups around the
state. I echo Ms. Riley and Mr.
Espinoza's concerns and have
just a couple of additional
points um on behalf in
particular of the um hotel
industry. We appreciate the
intent behind this bill, but
have serious concerns with
interpretation and
implementation of it, uh,
specifically
the concerns that it's unclear
whether discussions involving
matters of public importance,
such as public health measures
and COVID-19 vaccine mandates
would fall within the definition
of legislation, regulation, or
political matters. In addition,
um, another issue is diversity,
equity, and, and inclusion and
under this law would employees
um be able to theoretically
refuse to participate in
employer sponsored DEI
discussions and trainings.
We also have concerns with this
bill impacting mandatory
meetings to you, Cathy.
Thank you.
Any other hands up in opposition
to the bill, OK.
Um, let's go to the audience.
Those in support to 5 minutes.
Thank you, Madam Chair, as
members of the committee, uh, my
name's John Durch I'm with the
American Federation of Teachers
in New Mexico, um, we supported
this bill two years ago as a uh
began to be discussed in New
Mexico and at that time we would
have been on the forefront of
this issue and protecting free
speech in the workplace, um,
since we've last seen this bill,
about 6 more states, and more
recently the state of Alaska by
a popular vote in 2024 adopted
policies such as what we're
proposing today. So we're hoping
that New Mexico will follow suit
the legislative process, so we
urge your support on housevie
84.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Carter Bundy with
asks me, uh, with all due
respect to our friends in New
Mexico counties, uh, certainly
somebody seeing a political
cartoon on somebody's computer,
I don't think by any stretch of
the imagination would be
considered a mandatory captive
meeting, so, um, and even then
the law would only apply if they
were retaliated against. So this
is something that we think is
important.
So the employees feel free to
walk away from political or
union busting discussions, and
again, there's no real
restriction on the employer to
say anything they want. They
just can't retaliate if someone
doesn't want to attend the
meeting. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Andrew
Palmer. I'm secretary treasurer
of Teamsters Local 492. I
represent 2800.
Truck drivers and warehouse
workers throughout the state of
New Mexico.
We stand in support of this
bill. It will provide
protections to our members and
we ask that you please support
this bill and vote yes. Thank
you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, member
of the committee, John Lipsy is
with the New Mexico Federation
of Labor, along with all the
other testimony you've heard.
I'm here representing the
workers, uh, not just the 40,000
plus workers that are unionized,
but in this case I could safely
say pretty much the majority, if
not all workers in the state of
New Mexico. Um, I will just
leave you with one other
thought. Uh, this law that is
being proposed by our sponsor,
and we thank her for that. It's
not being proposed because
want it just for no reason. This
is being proposed because this
happens in the real world.
Workers are retaliated against
for not mandatorily going to
meetings that prevent union
organizing or talk about
political speech. This is not
allowed in our society, and you
all need to protect workers from
being retaliated against when
this is happening. So for that
reason, we urge you to support.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Lipschutes.
Anyone else in the audience,
wishing to speak in support.
Let's go online and again I'm
gonna just raise your hand.
Anyone online wishing to speak
in support. OK, I don't see any
hands raised, um, let's come
back to the committee. We had an
amendment proposed for.
Discussion
So let's talk about the option
and then we'll talk about the
bill.
So amendment, um, Representative
Hoffman v. Hill.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair, and thank you, sponsor
and expert. Um, I just had some,
uh, a specific question on the
amendment.
So
When I was going through it.
Um, you know, I see it makes a
lot of sense to exclude.
501 C4s and C5s, but I'm
thinking to myself.
Aren't there some?
private entities that engage in
political speech, um, as part of
their business, I'm thinking
specifically like law firm that
employees lobbyists.
Where all day long they just
talk about political.
Issues and so um.
What
What do we do in that instance.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
um, I think the answer to your
question comes not from the
amendment, but from the
exemption that in that case, the
lobbyists.
That
The exemption number 2 on page 3
under subsection D, that it's
nothing in this act prevents an
employer from communicating to
the employer's employees any
information that is necessary
for such employees to perform
their job duties. So in the
example that you gave, the
employers's job is to lobby, so
it would not be a violation of
this act for that employee
supervisor to bring him in and
say, we need to talk about this,
our client wants us to do X.
Here's how I want you to do it.
It's exempted from the act.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair, that satisfies my
question.
Anyone else wishing to speak
about the amendment.
Sure,
Madam Chair.
On the 501C6s, the trades and
leagues.
Um, we've often heard about
sports teams, um, and their
league's subjecting them to
speech.
Not quite often, um.
And perhaps persuading them to
do so. Why are they exempt from?
Spell
So the exemption is drafted in a
way that it applies to a 501C6,
but only if they're
communicating the employer's
political tenets or purposes. So
if the employer has a political
purpose, then like, for example,
the Chamber of Commerce, um,
that would be exempted, but if
the employer's purpose, for
example,
New Mexico United, um, I don't
know if they're51 C6, but I'm a
big fan of theirs, um, is, is to
is to play professional soccer,
um, they would not.
So if I'm hearing that
correctly, if if it's something
like the New Mexico United.
They
Because they're
Their version of um.
speech is related to soccer, not
politics, they.
still fall under the purview of.
Statue overall.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
yes, I believe that's correct.
to adopt the amendment made by
Representative Romero.
Is there opposition to adopting
the amendment.
All right, we now have an
amended bill, questions on
Comments on the
Representative Paul.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative.
sir.
Um
How many other states have been
in enacted something similar to
this, Madam Chair.
Um, Madam Chair, members of the
committee.
Embarrassingly, I don't know the
answer to that. I think it's on
the order of somewhere between
6.
I know for one, for example,
Oregon has adopted Alaska, we
heard from one of the members of
the committee did so by
Vote a referendum, um, organs
has been
Challenged twice and both
lawsuits were.
And um
Madam Chair, Representative, and
Legal expert, um,
With
There's whistleblower laws,
there's right to organize laws.
Why
Why this
particular law.
I had heard a couple of people
say that.
This goes on and I'm not saying
it doesn't, but I'm just saying
don't we already have
Adequate laws in place without
creating another law, uh, Madam
Chair.
Madam Chair Representative, um,
this law
Enshrines
The right for an individual to
walk away from certain types of
communications, whistleblower
laws protect an employee who
goes and communicates to the
press or something about
something illegal going on has
nothing to do with what we're
talking about. Um.
National Labor Relations Act
protects against captive
audience speeches related to
union organization.
But this all goes further and
also protects from any other
unwanted political discourse.
Um, so it protects employees
from um having to
On threat of discipline.
Or discharge protects them for
retaliation if where those
political matters are discussed.
So Madam Chair, uh,
Representative expert of.
I guess
Where do you
How, what, how's the process
gonna be because I think.
Someone made the point if.
Someone is talking about
something and unless they tie
you to a pole or something, I
guess they could order you to
stay.
Well
And that would definitely be
coercion, my, my thoughts are.
Where do we draw the line and
what's considered.
Being coerced to listen, I mean.
Someone made one that
somebody made an example, you
know, political cartoon.
Or uh
You know,
Anything else that might.
You know, the Hatch Act doesn't
really affect private
businesses, but you understand
what I'm, what I'm kind of
asking. Does that make sense or
am I not, I can try to rephrase
it manager here.
Madam Chair Representative, I
think I understand what you're
saying and, and I think the um
The answer to your question is,
if the employee is free.
To refuse to attend the meeting.
Or free to refuse to look at the
Meme or whatever it is.
And they're not retaliated
against.
For exercising that right and
there's been no violation. So
the coercion, the, the, the
short answer is it depends on
whether or not the employee is
free to disregard or leave the
meeting. If they, and then even
if they're not, it's excuse me,
even if they're not free to
leave the meeting, it only
becomes a violation.
If the employee tries to leave
the meeting, and the employer
says, I'm going to fire you
because I wanted you to stay.
Again, it's not the holding of
the meeting is not a violation.
The retaliating against an
employee for exercising their
right.
To be free
OK, my, my last question, so I
guess I also think, Madam Chair,
I'm sorry, Madam Chair, um,
representative.
An expert, um.
You know, cause like
During certain campaigns,
depending on where you're
employed or maybe where you
live, the employer will have a
Big sign, like in my part of the
world, we had big oil and gas
companies and they freely posted
support this particular
candidate.
Would that be considered?
Granted, the employee can drive
off, the employee didn't have to
vote like that.
But because it's on site, is
that considered a violation of
this law, madam chair.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
no, it is not. Um, the two
violations are listed under
subsection A on page 2.
Its retaliation because the
employee refused to attend.
The meeting
Or listen to the speech or view
communications.
So in the example of the sign,
um, and again, the violation
only comes if there's a
retaliatory action, so no, that
would not be a violation.
OK, thank you. That's all I
have, ma'am.
Thank you, I have, thank you,
Madam Chair, um.
Just briefly, I know it's late.
I just, I wanted to thank you
for bringing this forward, um.
This, uh, my dad actually
experienced a bit of this during
his career. He was a mechanic on
a big tractor trailers for.
20 years and um there were
several attempts over the course
of.
His career to form a union, um,
amongst the auto tax and
mechanics on the staff.
Um, and, you know, it's um his
stories can be a little bit
intricate and winding, but, but
Madam Chair and Representative,
I would just say, um, he
certainly was afraid for his
job, um, in order to even have
some of those organizational
meetings and, and he certainly
was uh required to attend
meetings where there were things
that would fall under the
definition of uh political
matters in your bill, um, and so
I just.
Uh, appreciate that he felt very
frustrated by it and sort of uh
like he had no recourse, um, and
so I think this bill provides
some recourse for employees who
who do want to have those
conversations, um, and also be
sure that they're not going to
be retaliated against, um, you
know, for a lot of folks, um,
keeping that job is the most
important thing, and so they're
willing to.
Put up with a lot of difficult
conditions uh in order to
maintain that employment, put
food on the table, so just
really appreciate.
Representative Reeb and then
records and the talk.
Thank you, um, Madam Chair for
this bill. I feel like we was
this in the 60 day ssession
during labor
And so, and then, um.
Thank you.
So uh as as I stayed in Madam
Chair and and my concern and I
can only come from.
What I've done in my life and
that was being a district
attorney, and I think I brought
the scenario to you, um, under
lilation.
Madam
part of my job and the job of I
believe the people in my office
were somewhat influence
legislation and furtherance of
the district attorney's goal
would protect crime victim um
hurt victims, things of that
nature. Um, so, Madam Chair and.
Expert, if I had, let's say a
victim advocate in my office,
um, and I asked her or him,
asked them to come to Santa Fe
to speak on a bill that would
have protect victims, which is
the goal of my office is a they
said, no, I'm not gonna do that.
Um, and, and I, and then I
understand I can't retaliate,
but am I protected under this
because that is the I am trying
to influence legislation, but it
is.
Really my job is are supposed to
be doing in the sense of, you
know, my office how if.
If this bill would affect that
or um, Madam Chair, um,
representative, I, I'm going to
confess a little bit of
ignorance, is a victim advocate
and employee of the district
attorney's office. OK, thank
you. I assume so, but I,
so.
If it is um information that's
necessary for the employee to
perform their job duties. This
was this legislation does not
impact that.
The and
I will begin this with the
caveat that
I don't, I'm not an expert in
the government. The Conduct Act,
I would worry a little bit in
your scenario about 10-16-3.1.
which prohibits uh public office
or employee from advising an
employee to take part in
political activity or similar
activities. So that would cause
me more concern about your
scenario than the bill that we
have in front of you today. All
right, and Madam Chair and
representative and all of the
legislators who sit here.
Chief deputies, uh, coming and
speaking on behalf of, you know,
district attorney's offices and
things of that nature, so would
you still have that same kind of
concern, Adam share frequently,
um, supporting attorneys or the
Department of Justice or
whatever agency that might.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
uh, I, I don't have a concern
with it because that employee is
free to engage into that. Well,
the only
problem would be if that
employee is not.
If it's not within their job
duties and they are not as um
number 6, and I believe the way
we did it, it's still number 6
because the new one is number 7,
but if it's a managerial or
supervisory employee, then it
wouldn't apply in any event, um,
but, uh, the, the concern I
have, like I said, is not with
in your scenario is not
implicate this bill so much as
it potentially, although I admit
to being not very expert on the
governmental conduct Act. It
might to go.
legislation. All right. Thank
you and um.
And representative and so when
we're talking about the
retaliatory action prohibited.
Um
And
Um, what, what is that
specifically mean? I'm sure.
It means that if the employee
says, I'm not looking at your
email about this political
event, you can't retaliate
against them.
Right, so if I had an employee
that I said.
A in Santa Fe, they passed.
These laws, um.
That would be exempt, basically,
I'm not I'm saying I'm not
retaliating at this point, but,
but if I, they refuse to like
read an and um experts here, um.
That was basically.
Explaining what um legislation
had happened, um, and this is
what was gonna be in effect.
Would that
Be a problem if they said
they're not gonna, they're not
gonna read that email.
It's still, you know, is in the
job description, I would assume
that would be OK.
Madam Chair Representative, yes,
for two reasons. One is it's
within their job duties to know
what the current law is and how
it impacts their job. And 2, on
subsection C, which defines
political matters, doesn't talk
about communications about
legislation or about rules or
about regulations. It's instead
attempts to influence
legislation, rule or regulatory.
When you're informing your
employees, hey, the legislature
just ended. He's a whole bunch
of new laws that apply.
to us. Here's how I expect you
to behave in accordance with
those new laws. This is our new
directive is not in any way
implicated by this bill.
And not be subject to any
retaliatory.
Madam Chair representative that
would not be a violation of this
law because um they are not.
was they are refusing to do
something that's essential to
their job duties, and it doesn't
meet the definition of political
matters. And then just lastly,
Madam Chair and.
An expert in um.
representative, so it's more if
I ask them to come up, let's say
to legislation and they say no,
I don't want to do that.
That's when they can't be.
Any retaliatory action on them
unless they're a supervisor.
I have that right, Madam Chair,
uh.
Representative, yes, I guess I
don't know if district attorneys
have employed lobbyists, but
that would be if they did, they
would be, that would be within
their job duties. And that would
be another exemption, but yes,
you are correct. OK.
Thank you. Representative
Hochman v. Hill.
Thank you very much, but I'm
sure I'll be quick. So, um, I am
not a constitutional law scholar
by any means, especially not in
the First Amendment, um, Madam
Chair, Representative.
Um, I'm just trying to
understand since public entities
are covered within the purview
of this law, um.
Does the First Amendment only
protect someone's right to free
speech, or does it not protect
their right to not listen to
somebody. Um
misrepresentative, uh, you are
correct it.
Protect speech, but in no way
protects your ability as a
speaker to compel someone to
listen to you.
So for example, the Frisbee case
that I mentioned says that the
First Amendment prevents the
government permits the
government to prohibit offensive
speech as intrusive when the
captive audience cannot avoid
the objectionable speech. Put
differently in a case from the
70s, uh Douglas wrote in a
concurring opinion, while a
person clearly has the right to
express his views to those who
wish to listen. He has no right
to force his message upon an
audience incapable of declining
to receive it. So that's where
the notion
of a captive audience comes
from. If your audience.
Cannot avoid.
communication. They have the
personal private autonomy to not
listen to speech.
Um, then that is where.
Your ability to speech is
actually, I mean, it can
constitute harassment, for
example, in the workplace, um,
if I, I have the First Amendment
right to speak about.
Um, matters, um, but if it's
harassing to my fellow, that may
be a problem.
Put differently, I mean, the,
the, and again, I am also not a
constitutional scholar, you have
to know a little bit about the
Constitution to be a labor
lawyer, but not as much as say
to be a uh
representing news agencies, for
example, but um,
It has also been noted in uh
2000 in Hill versus Colorado
that there's a, you know,
there's not, it noted a focus.
Of protecting the unwilling
listener's interest in avoiding
unwanted communication. So the
protection on speech.
Which again in this bill, I
should reiterate in no way
prohibits an employer from
engaging in political speech. It
only protects the autonomy.
Of the employee who has the
right to not listen to speech,
to exercise that right.
Fascinating. Thank you, Madam.
Thank you, Representative anyone
else.
And I do want to point out there
is lunch, I mean dinner, but
maybe.
themselves
Um, anyone else wishing to
comment or.
Question proposal, OK, happy to
entertain a motion, Madam Chair.
OK, we have a motion for a due
pass before as amended, made by
Representative Romero and.
Seconded by representative
Sapansy, would you call the
roll, please?
Yes. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative of beta. Yes.
Representative Chavis. No.
Representative Hall.
No.
Representative Hoffman V Hill.
Representative Martinez.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen.
Oh
What happened?
Oh.
Representative Martinez, no.
Speaker Martinez, Representative
McQueen, yes.
Representative Reeb.
Leader Sapansy, yes.
Madam Vice Chair, Yes.
Madam Chair, yes.
Madam Chair, you have a due pass
on House Bill 84 as amended.
Thank you very much, um, really
encourage people. There's a ton
of food in my office.
So maybe we could take 5 minutes
if people want to go grab
something, salads and sandwich
type things, so.
Um
Give us a minute and we'll be on
House Bill 87 after that, OK.
All right.
OK, Representative.
Please excuse us our eating, but
um you know how life is around
here. Sure, ma'am sure start.
Um, you may start representative
and um the vice chair just went
to, to grab them. Oh, here
they're um.
Let them know that there are a
few members out there and
they're she's going to herd them
in. Awesome.
They're coming. OK. So feel free
to start. Thanks manager. So,
um, how will 87 was brought to
my attention by a constituent
who, um, let me know of the very
surprising and almost shocking
fact that as New Mexico statute
stands today, um.
Awful
Uh
are non or the crime of a non
nonconsensual touching.
Um, only be um prosecuted if
that touching is to an
unclothed.
Area.
So any nonconsensual touching as
in New Mexico statute right now
as long as that area is clothed
is not a crime. I thought that
was pretty shocking, um, I do
have an amendment, Madam Chair.
Um, it's 0.2309.
Uh, 2 2.1, yes, very good.
And so this amendment does Madam
let's move it for discussion.
OK. It's been moved for
discussion, representative and
so what this amendment does,
Madam Chair, is it just um makes
it clear one.
Um, that's either clothed or
unclothed, the application of
force without consent to clothe
or unclothed intimate parts. It
gets rid of section B, which um
I think we're demented
exceptions that made no sense,
uh, which I agree with, and it
renumbered the sections and then
added an additional definition
of primary genital area, um.
And so with that, madam chair, I
was. Really good before we adopt
the amendment, let's go to the
audience.
Which is of which there is none.
so um.
Let's go online.
Let's go online.
Um, I see this is in opposition,
OK, so this is an opposition to
the bill. Do we wish to speak in
opposition, please raise your
hand.
I don't see anyone raising their
hand. I don't see anyone in the
audience to speak and support
anyone online wishing to speak
in support Enrique.
No
limit it to one minute, please.
OK, Madam Chair, thank you so
much. I may not be there in
person, but I am with you guys
in spirit, um, I'm representing
the greater Albuquerque.
I would, I would love a
sandwich. Um, I'm representing
the greater Albuquerque Chamber
of Commerce. Um, how this bill,
House Bill 87 has the strong
support of the chamber. This
section of law has not been
updated since 1993, and since
then there has been a greater
understanding that unwanted
sexual contact can occur
regardless of how or whether one
is dressed. The majority of
other states have amended their
laws addressing unwanted sexual
contact to either not reference.
Dress or clothing at all or
specify that clothed versus
unclothed is irrelevant. This
amendment simply updates the
Mexico law to better protect our
children from predators. We
respectfully ask for a due pass.
Thank you. And I'll take that
sandwich.
Ship it down to you.
All right, um, anyone else Jade?
Was Waskow.
Jade.
Good evening, Chair and
committee. My name is Jade
Wasco, and I'm speaking on
behalf of the New Mexico
Coalition of sexual assault
programs, the statewide
organization supporting sexual
assault prevention and
intervention efforts in New
Mexico.
Over half of people living in
New Mexico have experienced
sexual violence, yet 2/3 of
those individuals have not
sought help or support. Under
current law, many survivors are
not able to access
accountability measures that
account for the harm caused,
whether clothed or unclothed. We
believe this bill will further
clarify and validate the extent
of that harm under the law. This
is especially important for
incarcerated survivors who are
already assaulted at significant
rates and experienced numerous
barriers to accessing support
and accountability.
As survivors and those in
service to survivors, we urge
you to support House Bill 87.
Thank you.
Anyone else
Representative before we go to.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Note
that um the public commentary,
uh, just took care of the last
thing I was gonna to tell all of
you, which is this is an old
law, hasn't been revised since
1993, and I think we have a
significantly better
understanding of um.
Sexual assaults and the sex the
what victims of sexual assault
have to go through and how that
can occur and so it's in our
law.
Thank you.
OK, um, I have.
Thank you, ma'am Chair. Uh,
ma'am Chair Representative.
Uh, I
your bill, um,
Reading through the bill, there
are a few things.
Um, I didn't understand.
Or
And the process
Um
And
At least one of which is not.
I existing law that you're not
amending. I understand.
But the stuff about
psychotherapists.
Kind of weird, isn't it? I, I.
Madam Chair, uh, representative,
that's exactly the point of the
amendments, uh, which that was
the demented language.
OK, so, Madam Chair, I hadn't
seen the amendment, so I'm still
catching up on that.
So page one.
So it just takes out all that
language, is that right?
Chairs representative, that is
correct. OK so that makes me
feel a lot better, um.
Uh, I did, um.
You know, I
I, I think not all
Um, gentle areas are the same.
Um, it, it does include uh one's
backside.
Yeah, and it would include
contact, uh, clothes.
Um, the buttocks is the word I
was looking at.
Um
But thinking back uh in my life,
uh, in sports in particular, uh,
Lots of physical contact.
Um, closed, um.
I, I'm a little uncomfortable
with that, um.
Uh, any thoughts on that?
Um, Madam Chair, representative
so I'm understanding your
commentary correctly, um, you're
concerned that you're concerned
that since our definition of
intimate parts includes the
buttocks, you, we can have
situations that we see a lot
like in sports where you're on
football and you're patting each
other on the behind, good job,
um, that would be captured
within the purview of this, I, I
don't think that would be the
case because I think um the crux
of it is whether or not it is
nonconsensual, um, I would.
you to you, um, manage your
representative that a bunch of
boys on a football team can
expect that they can to put it
bluntly.
Um
Ma'am representative that wasn't
necessarily, but uh.
The situation I was thinking of,
but I agree the uh
The consensual nonconsensual
probably takes care of my.
So thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Reeve.
Thank you, Madam Chair
representative. Um, so I, I like
your bill, I think I can, we can
fix this to where I understand
what Representative McLean's
concerns are, um.
Because I think what we got to
remember is if they're convicted
of this, it's a lifetime
registration. That's a pretty
big deal. And so I, I wanted to
bring that to everybody's
attention and so I think, well,
my first thingmo chair would be
um.
Based on uh dealing with this
with the unclothed and clothed
uh minor stuff that was um.
Not really confusing. I, I would
think, um, possibly a line on
line 24.
Touch once, you might want to
put clothed intimate parts in
there again, I just saw this
really backfire on us on a
uh I when it was with the minor,
we didn't specify it, put it in
there twice, but that's not
really the the main concern, but
I think how we could fix.
What you're trying to do is
somehow put in there what we
have with the.
Um
Touching of a minor with the
intent to arouse or gratify
sexual desire, and I think so
when you're getting, I think
it's Representative McQueen is
trying to say that.
Hop on the butt or, you know,
whatever, I don't know how you,
that's what you you're looking
at, you know, I I wanna make
sure that it isn't just a
battery because I know what
you're trying to get out of
someone, you know, grabs a
woman's breasts over the
clothes. I'm just gonna say I'm
used to talking about this stuff
in court and so you want to get
those people and and you wanna
get those people who are
actually doing it. I think with
the intent.
To arouse or gratify themselves
sexually, and I think if we can
somehow put that into this bill
that might.
Take care of what you're
concerned about with the butt
slapping and, you know, things
of that nature because that's
what we ended up putting in
there with the, the contact of a
minor, make sure we had an
exception, obviously, if you
were a doctor, but you have to
prove that in the jury
instruction, um.
That intent now I don't.
It's an instruction, madam
chair, not the statute, but I,
I'm just trying to put in
perspective, this is a lifetime
registration. So, yeah, go
ahead.
Just on that
on that topic, um.
Right, so I, I'm just curious,
so with the level of what we're
talking about with the arousal
or um
Sexual desire piece, if somebody
did that as a battery on the um.
In the um genital area, is it a
separate that you air situation
where it was just intended to be
a battery or just intended to
be.
Um
I think Madam Chair
representative so
if it's unclothes, you, you get
to a different place, but the
clothes is just a simple
battery, so I prosecuted a ton
of cases where guy walks by and
grabs a woman's rear end, you
know, and we're in this battery
section, um.
And I don't know, you know, for
attempting to get those type of
people in a lifetime
registration, but then I know we
were talking and represented
Paul, so there was a guy who was
reaching under girls' skirts and
and ending up, would you say
touching a?
The Sphinx.
And it was doing it to like 8
different girls and obviously he
had an intent to probably
sexually arouse himself, so.
That's what I think we need to
make sure that if if we're gonna
grab these people, um.
For such a lifetime registration
offense that we just have some
type of language in there that
it's a sexual gratification type
thing, and I just, we went back
and looked at what it was for
juvenile or for a child and it's
with the intent to arouse or
gratify sexual desire is what we
say in that, but it could be
worded any way. I just want the
intent to be clear because I
like this and I wanna be able to
get these people who are doing
this, but I, I don't wanna.
Have a life person having, you
know, butt slap and getting a
lifetime that makes sense.
Do you ever think that you've
or similar language, so.
I don't, and one other thing
while we're talking about it,
um, Madam Chair and
representative, and we also talk
about force or coercion on the
2nd page by 9,
and we're talking about results
and personal injury, force or
coercion office often can be
physical.
And so if you pop someone on the
butt and you get a bruise,
you're gonna have, you know,
some type of injury, so I don't
know if.
Just something else I'm thinking
about or what penalty we're
gonna give this person. I just
want to get it really tight, um,
because I do agree with you, we
do need to update the statute,
but I want to get the right
pizza and so I don't have any
suggestions where to put that,
those are just my thoughts,
Madam Chair, representative and
how to make this tighter because
when we realized it was a
lifetime register, it'll hit a
little bit more of a course, so,
um.
I'll just kind of leave it at
that. OK, um.
It sounds like we may need to
roll the bill, you guys think I
don't, I think what I can't
speak for everybody here, but.
I think you make some very good
points.
Situations that um you see where
we're coming, Madam chair, yes,
absolutely, and I agree, um, I I
it's been a while, are we?
Procedurally allowed to make
amendments on the fly and OK, so
thank you, Madam Chair, thank
you, representative. So I'm
thinking.
Um, starting line 19, page 1,
criminal sexual contact contact
is the unlawful and intentional
touching of or application of
force without and without
consent with the intent to
arouse or arise arise sexual
desire to the.
or unclothed intimate parts of
another.
I
I think Madam Chair
Representative that would. OK,
so where are you lying? You need
to tell us lines because we are
be page one.
Line 21, page one.
Page one, OK, 21, OK.
Consent
Uh-huh. Add with intent to
arouse or arise sexual desire
with intent.
Or to arouse, to arouse.
Or arise.
Or or gratify or gratify gratify
sexual desire.
To the clothes or clothed or
unclothed, which is the
amendment we just, all right.
The, the insert is before the
comma, out on consent.
After, after, after, oh, OK.
OK. And Madam Chair, and
Representative, if it's
friendly, um, online 24, 18
years of age to touch one's.
loathed intimate parts, right?
Clothes or unclothed. I think it
just Madam Chair representative
just from seeing what we dealt
with in this other.
Line of law I think it would
just be safe, uh, based on our
the analysis of your friendly.
OK.
That share with, I think,
satisfying.
OK.
Well,
Do you need the sponsor to
repeat it, um 2. There are 2
amendments.
OK, on line 21.
What it said, I believe I got
it, so on line 21 after the
comma.
Um, that's after consent, we add
with the intent to arouse or
gratify sexual desire.
OK.
With intent, with intent got
that cleared up, OK. So with
intent to arouse or gratify
sexual desire, and then there's
another amendment on that.
Uh
Yes, we did. You were, you
seconded it,
OK.
OK.
And then uh Madam Chair, my my
proposal uh would be on online
24, 18 years of age to touch one
clothed or unclothed intimate
parts or.
However, whichever way.
anniversary.
I think it should be closed, OK,
so that's right after ones,
right? Yes, ma'am, one's clothed
or unclothed intimate parts
parts and that's online.
Correct.
Yes.
All right, so, um, we just had
a, an amendment proposed.
Is there any objection to so
that amendment on the fly or,
you know, that we just discussed
is now adopted, and what we're
gonna do is I understand the
processes we put that in the
committee report. So we'll work
to get that correct in the
committee report, and that will
be part of the record when it's,
um, you know.
Good. So we have, you have
another amendment to your bill.
Is there discussion about the
bill as, as we'd say.
actually be thrice amended there
was an amendment in the past.
00, thrice amended from the
other committee, huh? OK. All
right, um, a motion for a due
pass on a chair.
Second. OK, so we have a motion
for a due pass on House Bill 87.
Race amended the roll, please.
Yes, thank you, madam chair.
Representative of Beta.
Representative Chavez. Yes.
Representative Hall. Yes.
Representative Hochman V. Hill.
Representative Martinez. Yes.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen, yes.
Representative Ree. Yes.
Leader Sapansky.
Madam Vice Chair.
Madam Chair. Yes.
Madam Chair, you have a due pass
on House Bill 87 Trice amended.
OK. Very good.
Uh, unanimous with one person
absent, um, just a reminder,
we're meeting tomorrow at 10:30.
I am having, I'm sorry to say
sandwiches brought in again, I'm
sure you're all getting tired of
sandwiches, um, egg sandwiches.
Oh well, oh well.
Just get used to it, brother,
cause it's gonna go on and on
and on.
All right, so just a reminder,
we're adjourned.
