Thank you very much madame chair
members of the committee it's
wonderful to be in front of you
here today and thank you very
much madame chair for making
accommodations to scheduling
very much appreciated we are
here today to talk about the
judicial salary bill many of you
have seen this bill before in
the past
one the housekeeping measure
madame chair is there I believe
was another bill house bill one
thirteen which also dealt with
judicial salaries however that
bill did not include all of the
required language that we needed
to get in front of the
committee and was also
negotiated with the governor's
office so house bill one forty
one is the correct bill and
essentially what it does is it
should it makes formulaic
changes to how we determine the
salaries for our judges and
state court and with that and
going turn it over to my expert
you've just shannon begin.
I think you madam chair members
and representative hockman v
hill
might be famous last words but
maybe third time is the charm
this is a bill that is come
before you now three years in a
row related to what we refer to
his right siding judicial
salaries so that we can be
competitive in the market place
in terms of recruitment and
retention of judges and
particular those that are in
civil private practice and
attracting them to the bar
the bill this year is a
simplified version from that of
of last year in the year before
it targets i'm a number for the
supreme court justices salary at
two hundred and thirty two six
hundred thousand dollars
and then keeps the the cascade
of ninety five percent to ninety
five percent and so on through
metropolitan court.
It would provide a salary to the
district for court judges of two
hundred and nine thousand nine
hundred and twenty one dollars.
We believe that that number of
two oh nine is right about.
The right target.
In twenty seventeen the state
bar conducted a survey of lawyer
salaries across the board and
the average salary of a partner
in the law across the state arm
is two hundred and ten thousand
dollars so this is just under
that but makes the judiciary
then competitive with the people
who work in in private practice.
The bill also but things that it
doesn't do in the past it was
tied to the federal judiciary
this is not hide lock step with
the federal judiciary but that
number the two hundred and
thirty two thousand dollar
number is tied to the district
court judges in the federal
system so you'd be paying the
highest court in the state of
new mexico what we pay a trail
for a judge in the federal
system so it's still not on par
with federal supreme court
salary but we think this will
marketly move the bar in terms
of our ability to recruit and
retain we have also stripped out
to the idea that there would be
a c p I
attached to it so a regular
annual increase dictated by
the the federal government
that was due in parts
negotiation with the fourth
floor but also if the economy
were to
take on a negative turn this
with the judges on the same
track as state employees in
terms of the rise and fall of
salaries as opposed to rendering
state and police flat year after
year while the judiciary salary
increases but we believe this
number really takes us to the
place we need to be that
cascading our percentage of of
salary ends at metro
metropolitan court and berlin
county and does not include the
magistrate courts any longer
I can go into detail on that if
there are questions but
otherwise i'm happy to stand.
For questions.
The.
Madam chair representative I
heat to disappoint you but you
would have we've had this
conversation time and again and
what I wouldn't remind the
committee is that we already
have a two tier system for the
magistrates and the lawyer train
judges that too tiered system is
related to the training and
qualifications of magistrate
judges they need to be eighteen
years old and have a ged not a
law degree
also importantly the magistrate
judges are the only people that
i'm aware of in our state system
that are permitted to double
depth
so most of our magistrate judges
are retired law enforcement and
there's an exception to the
prohibition on double dipping
for magistrate judges that does
not exist for any other judge in
the state of new mexico so we
already have a two tier system
i'm moving the judicial salary
the way it structured in house
bill one forty one we will rise
and fall in the same way that
the magistrate court judges well
so it's a distinction without a
difference at at this point if
state employees get a raise
magistrates will get a raise
judges all judges will get so
they're that distinction just
doesn't hold bring true anymore
but I just wanted to emphasize
we already have a two tier
system for the magistrates and I
think the magistrates would
prefer this to us insisting that
they not be able to double dip
anymore so there's some choices
to be made by magistrates and
that.
Madam chair members of the
committee representative ream
that bill did not make it out of
the senate so there has been no
change to the qualifications
that for magistrate judges and
which makes it doubly difficult
for us to do what but you and
i've talked over about over the
the course of years i'd also
like to point out that the
magistrate judges their highest
paid judges for their level of
court in the entire country
so they're doing fine from a
financial perspective and we
don't have any problems
recruiting folks to run for a
magistrate judge where we do
have trouble recruiting people
from private practice to be.
Then.
Representative.
I just wanted to.
At what.
And doesn't seem.
Madam chair representative it's
actually it at all levels it's
most acute at the trial court
level
but if you look at the latest or
the last round of vacancies on
my court the supreme court when
I applied and justice thompson
applied with something like
twenty one applicants there had
been the spent up demand but
once that disappears you end up
with just a handful of people
even applying.
You have the suppressed salary.
Significant changes in
retirement which we will come
and address hopefully in in the
sixty days session and you have
to run statewide and so there's
there's really three obstacles
to that recruitment peace we
think this is an important piece
of it but we do have those
challenges at every level it
just becomes more acute in in
district court where you're
really hoping to lower people
that are really well qualified
to the trial court and then
hopefully done the triculate
their way up.
Madam chair members of the
committee representative you are
correct and we have other
programs
ticking off last week home that
are related to that just a scap
that you're referring to the
legal deserts that we have and
encouraging people graduated
from law school through money
incentives to to go to smaller
communities and hang up a
shingle for that that very
reason we're also hopeful at
this salary there may be
somebody who say lives in
albuquerque who is willing to
take on that role in grants for
example because the pay will
offset some of the challenges to
moving to us leaving the big
city I use air quotes around
that and moving to a smaller
community.
Briefly I just want to check.
That's very high school kind of
terminology we are.
Thank you very much madame then
members of the committee.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I forgotten the personnel.
Thank you madame chair that we
should have an amendment to
pass.
Yeah.
So many chairs of the twenty
four.
Yeah
man.
Last year the international
association.
Is taking a rule graving the
entire speaker people having
trouble hearing representative
and
in gravy the entire vehicle
identification number in the
the catalytic converter then
they're using flores and orange
spray paint to paint on the
catalytic and further lapde and
they showed videos of
individuals crawling underneath
cars with sausage and
immediately crowling out because
now the catalytic converter can
be associated with the vehicle
it was stolen from.
We
had a couple years ago said if
you're going to sell catalytic
converters you have to show
identification i'm hearing that
some of those are going to
arizona texas where the laws are
not as strict as new mexic.
My discussion was with the state
we thought of theft unit and
send the money to there on
friday I was contacted by the
state police who said we partner
with the office of the
superintendent of insurance and
work with the auto theft
authorities so you should send
it to the office of the
superintendent of insurance
that was the first amendment
there was adopted friday and
given to the committee then to
my right is this robert abacha
she is the head of the new
mexico out of theft authority at
the office of the super ten and
venture.
She contacted me yesterday and
said no we have our own line it
so the change yesterday was at
the office but with
the
auto theft authority and so what
were asking for is and this was
endorsed by the courts and
corrections as four hundred
thousand to buy these tools to
work with
automotive shops to work with
lawn force meant to engrave the
entire vin number.
On to the catalytic converters
so that maybe we slow down the
theft and now i'd like miss back
at a address.
The.
Good afternoon madame chair
members of the committee my name
is referred to pocket and as
part of the osi fraud division
the criminal division we were
underst.
We have a similar program where
we low now equipment for window
vin etc so it only makes sense
that we wouldn't be able to
partner with the new mexico
state police to roll something
like this out it's very
expensive to have your catalytic
converters.
A lot of times because they're
not marked or identified
we could in law enforcement find
twenty more unmarked alright and
ID.
So it is an issue we will there
are jiffy loops that do give a
free catalytic converters but
it.
We really love.
And manamed here with that will
stand for questions.
The.
Rock and we'll see how this
works.
That works for me
madame.
Thank you.
Thank you matter chairman the
committee my name is japan i'm
speaking i'll be half of the
greater outcooking chamber of
commerce the chamber continues
to support measures that will
help mitigate the crime problem
in the greater outcookie area
and often times we see proposed
solutions to the crime problem
that involved in enhanced senate
set
this bill goes a different
direction and is sometimes a
simple solutions are are the
best ones and that's what that's
what this is this this will help
identify these devices that are
an automobiles and help and help
prevent their theft you know the
problem is these materials in
the catalytic converters are
more many of the metals are more
valuable than go so we've got to
do something because it's a
tremendous and set of are to
keep stealing these devices so
we would appreciate your support
for this legislation.
Thank you anyone else wishing to
speak and.
Yes madam chairs of the original
amendment moved the money over
to the office of the
superintendentive insurance and
then the amendment yesterday
corrected it it's going to go to
the office of the superintendent
of insurance but the light in
him the correct one is the
mexico out of theft though.
What.
Let me get a coffee of the
amendment I don't have this I
think there may be some.
Madame chair this is the friday
amendment where it's moving that
to the office of the
superintendent.
And so i'm not
okay and it's
too it's about correct to go to
read it to forest four eight
nine point two so
why don't we not adopt the
amendment and i'll correct it
when it goes to appropriations.
The.
Or we can we can send it to the
office of the superinte.
Just a moment.
The.
Manager know this is the.
So if we go to white it number
six on the amendment it's going
to be striking the mexico state
police division ap.
Vention authority at the office.
Yeah.
Uh chair.
Oh.
Merchant representing the queen
and I should have snapped on the
point two version because the
point one would have been the
prior one.
Manager reps between you are
correct this will be the only
men.
The.
So
we're now on the bill as
amended.
No man.
Yeah.
The.
A couple of questions.
Procedure.
You hope they're in great
me a j.
Madam chairman representative
and queen you're correct
unless we could get the
automobile manufacturer to
engrave the vin number and it's
in the origin of the vehicle
which would be the best solution
the
what lapde found by in gravy the
number and sprained the floris
and orange paint on it that they
became quickly identified by the
criminal and not being stolen
currently the the new mexico out
of the.
Loans the tools out in we see
them around the state where the
old vin edge your windows on
your vehicle.
That way you know if you take
the door off the vehicle which
they commonly do strip it the
ven number is on the window and
so they can now identify that
door belong to this vehicle.
That's what we're doing similar
to this one if they go ahead and
steal it we're hoping that it's
going to be the deterrent.
I'm terrible
is there anything.
Delegation.
Madam chair rips in a mcqueen
there is actually national
legislation but it's been stuck
in the house in.
And I think a lot of the
automobile dealer manufacturers
are against it because it there
argument is that it's not cost
effective to do.
Looked at on the national level.
The.
Madame chair representative yes.
They're different.
When you're reaching on glass.
Madam chair representative.
Managed her and representative
and queen and we noted in here
that if they were one two a
mechanic shop or some service
shop.
That they cannot charge for the
service.
You know it's got to be a free
service so were trying to figure
out the different avenues that
we can do this if you look at
jiffy lube as an example you
could have drive in and they
have a pit so the right
underneath the car the
lapdy what they're doing is
they're having to lift up the
car I put it on ramps and then
crawl underneath it so we're
trying to figure what would be
the best avenue to go ahead and
get these catalytic converters
marked and that's why we kind of
made it wide for lawnforcement
or service stat.
Managed her and representative
channeler and no that these.
In page two year eighteen
nineteen it remains the
ownership will remain with the
mexico out of the authority so
many terrible dream i'm.
So when I was.
And there's no there's no
return.
Yeah belongs to the legislature
and you some day or leav.
The.
If there's no.
The.
So.
Managed
to be queen not.
I'm not trying to work around
the entire donation of the new
mexico out of theft authority
will keep track of them they'll
know where they are and their
partnering with that.
Our group or organization do
edge those when numbers.
Madame chair reps and in
macqueen that that isn't an
issue just you know we have a
fairly good staff that keeps
track of the equipment.
Prior they get the equipment
prior to their event and then
post event they.
It that has.
That was the keys there you know
there would have.
Up madam chair no if you'd
restate it against.
The twenty four months.
I think if you make sure that.
The.
The.
I.
Madam chair and reps mcqueen
win.
That's for.
Fifteen.
Yeah.
That would be.
No matter you just strike provi.
Okay I thought it was gonna be.
The.
Madame chair representative will
probably mirrored the admin
process that we have right now
for the netching equipment it's
it is a little bit more arduous
but we think that this is.
Madam romero we have
relationships.
And I actually sit.
President.
Depends on what the m o u is.
It's.
Yeah.
Madame chair
you're correct but I was.
Question about.
Though now.
Like private.
Madam.
Madam chair rips that is
correct.
I appreciate your increasing
power.
Just this ones.
We h.
The.
The.
The.
Given.
Madame representative chasey so
we currently deal with then
numbers on vehicles or the
serial number on a gun
filed off.
And we have methods to do it one
of those methods involves an
acid
restoration to bring the number
back forward.
Are new mexico state police
crime lab does that i'm also
working with new mexico state
police I gave them the contact
information at the conference
there's now a new method where
it is a piece of film that they
lay over the old number and it
reads the number under it.
And so new mexico state police
was gonna but that in their
budget.
To use not only for firearms but
you could you also use it for
then numbers on cars.
When you're thinking of a van
number on a car
we also have what are called
secondary numbers and their
hidden within the under car in
different locations and their
stamped into the metal.
But.
The.
You know.
The.
And i'm not in.
I'm still good.
Madam care reporting chase the
this is a preventative.
We're under your car in.
It is more difficult for someone
initially to take it whether
it's our scrap metal or to the
scrap little a lot of them go
for the border in colorado texas
in arizona
those scrap metal dealers even
though they may be war
unscrupulous then we are now in
new mexico because of the law
you all passed.
Also know that this is connected
proba.
A stolen.
National data.
There isn't a lot of data but
they're there is some data from
the national insurance crime
bureau who partners with oside
that these types of prevented.
The.
They managed her I just want to
say I I really agree with I
think.
Thank you madame chair I just
i'm just curious.
Limit this mean that.
Madame chair rips and about
the host community.
A lot of times window bin
edgings a lot of police
departments in law enforcement
department's host different days
and their communities.
Madame chair of our code i'm
sorry here the last part of your
question I am
here do you know where th.
The.
Madame chair ribs and have con I
actually do know where the
catalytic converter is on my
particular vehicle and I learned
in this process that some
vehicles have more than one
catalytic converter and that.
If you steal them in trucks some
truck.
The.
Madame chair representative we
have a police agent's crawling
under them now.
As amended.
As twice a minute.
Thank you.
Yeah.
More well.
Yeah.
Chair just wanted to make a
comment my brother part two
trucks in front of my mother's
house and both the catalog
cattle is it converters or
stolen
from her home i'm very sorry
about that
a comment.
Um thank you madame chair and
thank you to the members
house bill eighty six well
before I get into the house bill
itself I want to introduce
deputy chief wagner and also
chief was weisler was also in
th.
So house bill eighty six is an
act making an appropriation to
the new mexico state police
division of the department of
public safety for personal
protection equipment and
canaba's testing equipment and I
just wanted to give the
committee just overly brief
summary of how this bill came to
be
the and also wanted to mention
that senator gregbacker is a co.
I noticed his name is not on
here but.
So a couple of I guess month or
two ago we were in las vegas at
the courts corrections and
justice committee and there was
a presentation
by the new mexico state police
on canabas and um one of the
questions that was
actually by myself was how they
dispose of count canabas which I
don't I didn't know how that
happened they just that maybe
they burned it but actually the
true there's much of it as is
buried
and so in talking with these
state police
and and chief wise learned his
presentation we came to find
that in their disposal they do
not have the equipment the
property proper equipment to
dispose of it umm and I know
that vice chair and your romero
house the bill with regard to
changing some of the canous
regulations
and.
The.
Immediate disposal is really
what came to mind and that then
there were some concerns that
were raised
by myself and other members of
the committee.
You know not having the property
proper equipment so you may see
this is really the opening of of
the door for possible future
appropriations as
vice chairs bill goes through
and we
sort of promulgate those
future regulations
at this point we're only asking
for a five hundred thousand
dollars to assist the state
police with the disposal
academic and I will.
Definitely cheap
wagged her
expand on it.
Madame chair members of the
committee thank you for having
me this afternoon I am depty
chief d.
For like a better turns i'm over
the criminal side of the house
the n.
Thank you for
representative breggle for this
to our attention this actually
steamed from the sites the
conversation with the chief and
vegas this stem from a meeting
we had in colorado and numerous
it was on elicit canada's and
there was numerous topics in
discussed all of th.
One of the topics that I picked
up was yes it was the disposal
of the evidence or of the.
Listed canabas but also it was
how the colorado beer of
investigations came across the
ulistic.
And the discussed how during
those growth indoor and outdoor
it could be very hazardous to my
officers and agents that are
actually.
Yeah.
And so.
A lot of what we're we're trying
to get there's numerous pieces
actually high dollar equipment
that we could get with this
possib.
On the friend and is I would
like to get equipment that
actually tests the air in that
legal canada scroll before my
officers go in and just bring
the air
and because there's a bunch of
pesters from talking to cbi
there's there's numerous pester
sides and stuff.
And they actually had to walk
out of a girl right above the
new mexico border internet dad
because of the hazardous
environment so that's the one
i've i've really triggered on
now is is arm trying to look for
machines I will actually test
the group.
Be the equipment that we're
looking at besides a disposal
stuff and then the personal.
Before they go in there numerous
levels there's a would you go in
and you don't know the
environment just like an
american you have to go in in
your actually breathing air out
of.
And then there's numerous levels
of protective equipment mast.
Yeah.
That's exactly what this.
And then on the back end.
Madame chair that's all.
And i'm just not.
Members of the committee madame
chair.
Honest I I believe we have an
issue with the listed canabas
but.
I'll be hungry and honest I
don't know the exact magnitude I
don't know if anybody does but
there is definitely.
So that's why we're actually tr.
And.
The illegal the legal canada s.
I could go back to.
Our agents would go to a merrill
canabas grow and they would get
a search work for the property
they knew it was illegal they
would if it was a group
the stocks and everything made
actually pulled the leaves they
would rabble mean gunny sacks
they had let him dry out and
then down the road we were
destroyed even back then we
didn't have anything written
into.
So that's the way it was.
The.
To my knowledge we are not
seeing that much.
No they actually the at the seba
level they are absolutely it's
just when you're.
In the past.
Especially indoor grows when
you're walking around like a
firefighter with your tank on
your back and walking around
eight and can.
Make now and some of this
equipment that we're actually
looking at it actually as you
downgrade the equipment gets
smaller you don't have a tank on
your back in it actually there's
one that actually helps the
officer.
In the air.
Make your way down the s c b a
absolutely because I talked to
colorado about that it it does
apply its just when you're.
It's very burdened someone you
can only be on air so long you
have to get out of it you have
to switch out it.
Yeah.
Thank you members thank you.
Hello.
I'm thinking madam chair members
of the committee i'd like to
introduce my expert f.
Attorney's office she
supervisors.
Twenty one prosecuted it is very
much evolved in numerous.
Civically involved in children.
I welcome her
briefly explained the bill.
Bill that I think many of you
have not most of you saw in I
was a doors.
Just makes a one word.
The abuse of a child statu.
Otherwise there's no.
Twenty or two thousand and nine
it was the last time an
amendment was passed by the
legislature adding the section.
I'm in this time frame
that's now moved to federal so
obviously I think.
So at this point.
Thank you.
Yeah.
It should include something like
unless provided by a dollar
prescription the other concern
that the office has d.
Is already slightly problematic
in that usually criminal law
does not allow reliance on.
Find all elements.
This provision of wall that
you're adding fentional to.
And so there is due process
concerns that have yet to make
it to you our ports on appeal
but we believe that adding
fencing all to what we ca.
Madame chair members of the
community drove on behalf of the
new mexico district attorney's
association
we stand and supported this I
know throughout the summer you
guys have heard a lot a lot
about the federal issues and how
it sort of taken.
And that is why it's not an
albuquerque thing it's not a.
As for the process.
Discussion was product earlier
or just a minute ago I don't see
an issue with the due process
for.
Expert would also.
It's still all.
On that.
Share members of the committee
definitely cheap map rooms and
misconstantly so we strengthen a
strong support of this
legislati.
Good afternoon.
Yes hi
my name is doctor andrew she
money retired general
pediatrician and I
wish to speak an opposition to
house bill one o six.
Thank you so much
merion chair and members of the
committee
I stayed in the opposition to
this bill
because the
criminalization of women who use
substances during pregnancy has
not been shown to be effective
in either
protecting children are
deterring a use of drugs during
pregnancy
and furthermore the
identification of internet as a
specific drug does not fill with
the science that um
basically
says it all opitioned drugs that
include ventinel and have
similar impacts on the course of
pregnancy and the development of
children and that a treatment is
successful in both reducing the
risk to the pregnant woman and
the baby after birth.
In addition the use of
appropriations to are both treat
and deterred the use of drugs
could be better used and too
expand programs like the
milograph program that I helped
start I am the focus program
stayed wide to both provide the
needed treatment services for
women with um substantial ad
identified in pregnancy
to reduce the use of services
and to insure that the baby and
pregnancy will go well
lastly and i'm very pretty of
the time to speak to this
I have to agree with the public
defenders in that the due
process issues are complicated
and I would are concluded by
asking
if a woman will be charged for
chart abuse
on prime official evidence then
it would seem there everybody
involved in
creating the pregnancy o
should also be looked out as an
accessory to chart abuse and
further more in the households
where a child has been exposed
everybody in the household
should be evaluated
for ongoing substance use that
might have been the cause of
exposure
madame chair members of the
committee thank you very much.
This.
I remember the committee j.
Three organization dedicated to
improving the lives of child
well systems impacted used in
their family.
I think the sponsors were
bringing it forward.
As you see any analysis that in
a friday pencils now the top
drug threat now because he per
the de.
Recalls weight mention all in
the majority.
Yeah.
It can be many different.
The.
Or you're talking about what w.
Correct if it will be
madam chairman representative
queen situations where there
there can be lots of different
situa.
And a child has access to it and
is able to.
Situations where that in all the
powder is suggested by the child
because someone is using it in
the whole but I will actually
defer to my expert who.
What we typically see is
children positive for a fatten
that they actually have a
positive drug test because
they're in the hospital but I
believe exposure could be all of
those things if they're around
it which then creates
unjustifiable risk to the child
so there there's an extra step
rate that we have to prove m.
For an example it's not just if
somebody has drugs in the home
it's it's.
They're then going to create
this unjustifiable wrist for the
child that's going to put them
in danger said shaze a key swear
a mother was taking her children
too self that in all to
undercover buyers or two other
drug dealers then putting the
children and in a severe risk of
harm so not just that they have
drugs on them which could
definitely be an exposure about
really what that risk is
typically we see.
The children actually are
positive.
The child.
Youth of would be being also
just having the the drug around
not actually using the drug not
and smoking the drug actually
using it would be.
In this term that having.
Possession of.
Even broader but.
Not if they're just if somebody
else is using the drug.
And they witnessed it I would
not think that is an exposure
and it's the wrist they're
putting them in so it's more
than using the drug it's what
they're what how they're using
it where they're around and the
risk they're creating for the
trials.
The manager represented the
queen so at what you're.
You're talking to
the work you're having a problem
with madam.
Well
madam chair representative I
would I would say that it spend
this language has been in the
statute since two thous.
And there isn't any case law or
anything that's been challenged
or had any issues going through
the process and so.
And I don't believe.
On what.
The.
I mean.
Of the method.
No matter to represent the
understood the last the last
person who ca.
And it doesn't apply to somebody
who's pregnant or born and you
know child born under the
influence.
Find.
Actually can't actually get a
prescribed method.
But i'm the only legal fat now
is a federal patch.
The.
Lix a fat and all pack patch but
it doesn't change the fact that
if you're legally on fatinal you
still have a duty to keep that
away from a child and you leave
it out for a child to grab it
you're placing a cha.
You could be charged under the
statute but I I believe.
Doing these types of cases I
have not.
These where we've ever charged
somebody for a prescription
fatinal and for leaving it out
unless there was and I can even
think of one where there's been
where there was reckless
conduct.
With other with other substances
of course and but we've seen it
with even legal substances such
as alcohol.
Rate that still reckless conduct
so it's in in the way they are
leaving it out how their
supervising.
Their medication or their child
to make sure they're not placed
in it.
The.
Yeah.
The.
The.
And now that's.
Chair representative.
It's worded that way.
If it g.
Touch your eye.
And you touch your.
We're having the same issue
with.
Because there's other exposures.
To a drug deal those kids were
not positor for a fat now but
then please in the situation
where they were with their
mother undergoing a drug deal of
thousands of fatnar pills which
she then was robbed and her
children were left in a car
without her and without any care
so there's more than just being
positive there's this exposure
to fating all.
And.
The.
Is probably.
Thank you.
The.
And I knew you're trying to.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Toward.
And then the thing I i.
The.
Concerned.
Yeah.
Finally I think.
I.
Yeah.
Yeah.
That knowledg.
And you can only get fentinal in
a hos.
You do have to obviously take
steps to keep.
But it's not going to deal with
the the elicit.
We added to the list I think
we're forgetting how potenti.
I'm child deaths fat no.
Again.
And discussed during in term and
so
that part of the elicit.
You know you not knowing it's in
there this w.
That yes they're there we have
to meet the general criminal
interns and then extra for
reckless child
so there there is more.
If they don't know where if the.
Didn't have means to know.
That's not what
to be honest we're not seeing
that what we're seeing is kids
ending up in hospitals exposed
her fatima almost dying or dead
so we're not.
The.
It's kidding up in the hospital
dead or brain damage which we
have last week and very clear
investigation into what what
what they were exposed to and
how.
Would absolutely have no.
That the child abuse statute in
general prosecuted a lot of
years to spend the sweep for as
long as I can remember and it's
always been messed with and
it's.
Put in a child at place in a
child in the situation.
The.
So I mean I would say we could
word.
The rest of the.
Over the year.
But it doesn't really change
that I have to still prove a
crime beyond a reasonable deal
so yes it is is this fact that.
The child was exposed and we
have that.
But I still have to prove the.
Yes it's helpful in the since
that we have the fact right
that's what the premature allows
but it but we still have to
prove th.
Sure I appreciate.
At when you pro.
Yeah.
So I guess I don't look at this.
As a state were okay.
The.
And not giving that a separate
criminal cat.
We were trying to protect her it
is our children.
You know in treatment is brought
up and I appreciate that man i'm
sure i'd.
But the reality is is.
Well.
Anything about the nature of.
The.
Anything medical about what I
have seen is long term effects
with children.
Their daily their daily.
What they do daily they can't
congentry most of the kids out I
deal with unfortunately are now
on life support in our
vegetables they don't have a
sense of life and and and we
don't know long term a fax right
now because most of these kids
are three two months olds and
very young so I think there is
well some studies about fational
use and in.
Because what happened is these
kids are overdosing which means
they are becoming unconscious
they are getting knocks again
should they bring in most of
them have to be revived with
narcan so.
That the effects of losing
oxygen to your brain.
I I can not a.
The.
I do want to ask for.
Prima feature is just that that
we have really a fact that but
there is rebuttable rate I can I
I have to prove the case so just
one fact that a a child was
exposed to this drug and then
but I still have a whole bird
into prove it and I want to make
this very clear to the committee
is not only as it intentional
knowingly and negligent four
child abuse I have to prove a
higher standard which is
reckless child abuse so there's
an extra added.
Unlike any other types of
general criminal intent crimes
which is the intentional
knowingly i'm intelligent or
negligent I have to prove more
than that even with a prime
facial case so even with
the math that's already in
statue I still have to prove
that there was a reckless
conduct cars so there's there's
definitely more and it's just
really that the fact that.
The fact that you have a premi.
The.
The fact that it's a premium
fish.
Of the things that we should be.
And when you're talking about
someone is almost a child who
doesn't have a choice.
Van and brandon bring.
Yeah you know I don't.
The.
III just w.
The.
I i.
The.
The.
Effort.
The second part.
But the first part the most
impor.
And.
The.
So I guess my question.
What has happened we.
Yeah.
And and I don't think in two
thousand nine.
What what effect.
Well.
Concern.
I can be brief madam chair and
representative I think one thing
we can look back on on the m.
I would argue.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Acceptable simply say oh we have
to protect the children so we
overlook obviously.
That's why voted against the
grill.
Because I was refreshing.
So I want to talk about the we
have.
Yeah.
