Representative Akan.
Representative Townsend.
Madam chair Katie.
I'm president.
I'm not sure about
Representative o'connor was just
talking to him so I wonder if
you just got dropped off or
something.
So I'm.
We do have a quorum Judiciary
Committee will come to order and
before we go to our first hello
I would like to.
I'm just everyone hear.
To observe a moment of.
In honor of the life of officer
Jerry Jarrett the state police
who was killed yesterday and for
all of the people who were
impacted by yesterday's
violence.
Thank you thank you very much.
Our first bill today is
Senate Harry Garcia and our
former member who we mess
Representative Christine
Chandler if you all would like
to begin with your bill.
Thank you madam chair of health
bill one thirteen as an
amendment to it do you want to
go through amendment or the the
bill now is for this Madam.
You know what I've done and I
and see if this works for you if
you're amendment.
Is fixing something I would just
give a summary of your all who
asked you intend to amend it and
then let's get the public
comment and then we go to the
committee will work and then on
does that work for you yeah that
was Adam chair.
Go ahead okay is.
Related to the Human Rights for
prohibiting discrimination based
on military or veteran status
this is a summary of the bill
and I will that Michael sponsor
weigh in on what she has to say
madam chair.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Garcia and good
to see you all committee members
I miss you I miss the staff you
have the staff in the world so
thank you for the opportunity to
speak to house bill one thirteen
it's really a pretty I hate to
say this because it's such a
cliche simple we help I think we
all agree that it's not right
that either members of the
military or veterans are
discriminated against and we are
just embedding that in our New
Mexico Human Rights Act that
that policy and it's in
recognition of that policy the
amendment really just cleans up
in clarifies that what and what
a military what a military state
status is and what veteran
status is madam chair and
And with that I think we're
ready to proceed.
Madam chair by may of.
The reason we introduced his
bill does that you know all of
our veterans are coming out of
the military are having a hard
time either getting jobs or
housing due to the military
status because a lot and if
you're in a reserved.
Of people do not want to rent to
a place you know to be a long
enough or that also goes through
with employment you know people
don't want to employee increase
somebody that might be gone in
six months right here and that
just of.
There's a lot of reside uses
bill but those are primarily the
reasons and our veterans should
be discriminated against for
what you're doing for our
country thank you madam chair
thank you I want to go to the
audience and see if there is
anyone here in
support or opposition to
One thirteen and
let's do a quick call for that
to.
If you are in support of the
bill please what a test then if
you're not physician based.
Hello and right now we have it
the call open and we got five
more seconds.
Okay looks like we have.
Ninety five.
Again and.
Five percent in opposition now
what I'd like to do is ask those
who wish to speak in opposition
to raise their hands first.
In opposition.
If there is someone who wishes
to speak actually.
Mr Connick.
We hear one yourself.
Yes can you hear me yes.
When he was rental company I was
on death row in seventy four
right from arraignment before I
was convicted or anything they
put us on death row where I went
through two years of no showers
and no exercise or was that a
lot of for us.
At my trial was state medical
examiner said that he did the
autopsy and spent two days doing
this testimony showing gory
pictures up on the big screen in
the courtroom later on he
admitted that he lied that he
never ever saw the body and that
the state prosecutor paid him
fifty thousand dollars for his
testimony.
Mr kind I think you might not be
on hospital with thirteen.
Are you.
I hope so I hope.
I'm not.
Immunity.
Talk about qualified immunity
from bill you're on the wrong
they'll hold off okay part of it
out already well we need to hear
in contracts with the right
time.
Thank you.
Let's see let me see here is
there anybody else is there any
opposition wishes to speak.
Looks like now is there anyone
who wishes to speak in favor of
the bill you may put your hand
up now.
Okay.
Secretary Kelly great to see
you.
You are ready to go thank you
madam chair first off I really
want to.
Yes my appreciation to the bill
Sanchez who worked with our
staff on the amendment our folks
at the Human Rights bureau just
really had some issues with the
definitions of of military
service and veteran and we
really want to thank the.
Sanchez for working with us on
this I also want to say madam
chair that in your FIR there is
a request for two additional
people in order to enforce this
bill our staff to call
California who's got this
version of the proposal on the
books they only had about six
hundred people last year file
issues with their human rights
bureau under this provision
obviously we have a lot less
people than California so we do
think we can handle it with the
current amount of staff we have
however madam chair it is really
important for me to express to
you how important is that as
these new provisions pilot so
last year madam chair we did
your bill which was the pregnant
worker accommodation act we have
this bill that may go through
this year we have the crown Act
that Representative Stapleton is
sponsoring there's an additional
bill by Representative Romero
Representative Rubio about
housing issues that we go to
human rights bureau though every
one of those things is.
Not huge they do add up and what
I my request of the folks here
is once again this is not a
governor's bill I'm not here to
speak for against it but I would
request that while this bill in
and of itself is is probably not
going to put us in and do
straits as you do pass these
bills without any appropriations
on them I would very strongly
advocate mass that you talk with
your compatriots who are on the
Appropriations Committee we are
requesting an additional
investigator for the Human
Rights bureau this year it would
really make sure that as these
things come through we can take
care of them Madam chair I know
that some folks think that that
you know as we have issues with
the resources that we don't care
that we're not working hard on
on these issues and are people
really do care as to why and our
people really work hard as to
why and we just want to make
sure we have the resources
available to enforce the rules
that you all passed so madam
chair I have a two o'clock
appointment but you have my cell
phone number I'm here to answer
any questions anyone might have
about the Human Rights bureau
processor where we go from there
and I sure appreciate your time
thank you.
Nice to have you with us next I
have Joshua Rosenblatt.
Go ahead you're on.
It yourself and go ahead.
Go ahead and do it yourself
you're ready to go Mr
Rosenblatt.
Okay can you hear me now.
Hello yes thank you thank you
for this opportunity hello bill
it's been a while
as I do support this I was still
working with the controls in
this meeting I only had some
concerns.
Not that I was in opposition but
that is this a matter of equal
rights let's say there is a
business owner and is required
to for the necessity of his.
Private business to have an
engage staff that there may be
concerns and I think that if
somebody was
Not necessarily discriminatory
so I don't know my concern about
a bill like this and it's
enforcement is that the private
sector being.
Well critical to its own
survival especially with what
it's going through this last
year the necessity for full time
employment are doesn't
necessarily mean that one is
discriminatory against vets but
simply the need for full time
reliable manpower especially if
it's something that is being
trained in an investment is made
in that individual and I wonder
better is it a calls for our
military themselves and G. we
have GI bills we have money that
goes into the military leaps and
bounds above state revenues and
resources that are perhaps is
better lobby for these.
Gaps or for assistance programs
of verses.
The presenting of it as an act
of discrimination that is my
only concern and of course as a
as a son of a World War two vet
you know I I I I do strongly
support our all of our services
and those of re integrating into
civilian life while still maybe
having obligations part time or
like our National Guard or
something to that effect where
they're still doing some amount
of service or maybe call back so
my only concern is is just
simply to question is someone
are being.
Queues of.
From the other end of that you
know that this is a
discriminatory
When the private sector has its
needs has it certain demands for
person
so that was just my only comment
and listening to the bill and
and I appreciate your time I
yield on thank you it's over.
Thank you next I have June.
June you need on your stock yes
thank you madam chair I just
want to say that I trust the
investigators to determine
whether there's truly
discrimination.
But that means we have to and
have in place the investigators
under the work force.
New Mexico workforce group.
I'm commenting as a retired
diplomat who gratefully served
behind marines in third world
countries after nine eleven in
facilities that were often very
hard to secure so I would not
want us not to have someone take
a look at any concern that any
veteran are retired military
have that they might be being
discriminated against so it's my
understanding this bill would
provide them those services to
make sure they're not
discriminated against and would
not unduly burden private
industry thank you.
Thank you very much to our next
I have Dorothy state will.
directly with you and the
I think I'm I needed now are you
hearing me right thank you all
yes we will.
Yeah my name's Dorothy seat
number retired army Major with
active duty Air National Guard
service twenty one years so I'm
I'm I'm in favor of this bill
because particularly in my
National Guard service I want to
remind the committee members
that we are citizen soldiers not
on federal duty.
Until we get orders and then our
status changes and I think
that's the crux of this
discrimination issue in
employment and housing.
Is that sometimes.
We're a Google community not of
our own choosing we may have to.
Take a time out from a job or
take a time out from a residence
to go on duty.
And I want to also point out
that this impacts our household
our family members and our
household as well just because
we go on duty doesn't mean we
still don't need our home for
our family to live in.
So
that said I'll tell you also
that I'm serving now with the
veterans caucus of the
Democratic Party and therefore
advocating for things that
benefit veterans and veterans
families and madam chair I thank
you for hearing me and I mean
paper thank you.
Thank you very much.
I think that is it for hands
that are raised so let's go back
to the sponsor and
because the sponsor co sponsor
if you would like to.
The special purposes would you
like to explain it please.
Representative Garcia chalet
take this one on yes madam thank
you thank you uncle sponsor
thank you you madam chair that
amendment that we're talking
about is.
Point two one nine five six five
point two.
And I believe all of you have it
was sent to your committee more
than twenty four hours ago
what the amendment does it
provides the definition of
Milly's military status that is
more consistent with other
definitions of that of a similar
kind in other other statutes in
the state and the same is true
of veteran status and that's the
that's the crux of the amendment
and then of course it goes
through the bill just to modify
the terminology so it's
consistent with the two
definitions that we we modified
madam chair.
Your muted madam chair.
You know I should get myself one
ensuring that the dog barks
sometimes.
What what you're doing is
essentially making then the same
amendment throughout the.
Yes madam chair it's just
striking out the old terminology
inputting and I what I hope is a
clear terminology throughout the
bill okay thank you very much is
there discussion on the
amendment.
Is there what's the pleasure the
committee on the amendment.
I move the amendment you have to
adopt the amendment bye bye.
Armstrong.
Representative ring second it is
there any discussion of the
amendment.
Certainly junction to the
amendment.
Okay so we will adopt that
amendment.
And we're back on the one
thirteen as amended.
Okay.
Representative Eli madam chair I
was looking to see if there is
any discussion if there's not
I'm prepared to make a motion.
You can still make the motion
because I can make sure there's
no further discussion after you
make it so hard.
House bill one thirteen as
amended to do now pass do pass
the most affirmative pastor
house bill one thirteen as
images also.
We can let you can let the
Sanchez Huck you too.
The sponsor but Representative
will Representative we don't
have this sponsor on the
committee anymore.
So Representative I'll close
seconds that motion and let's
called all these for the
discussion I'm sorry to ask
about that no questions.
Okay let's Colorado it.
Yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Cook.
No.
Mr speaker yes.
Representative Eli yes.
Representative Lewis.
Yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative night it yes.
Representative Rehm yes.
Representative Townsend.
Yes.
Thank.
Vice chair your need.
It's not easy.
I yes you madam chair I'm not
sure if I was muted that I I
wish to vote yes on measure
affected.
Thank you okay thank.
We have a vote of eleven in
favor one in opposition.
Okay you have to pass house bill
one thirteen as amended my
sister you Representative
Chandler and next year to
Representative Garcia thank you
so much for your support
committee thank you madam chair
thank committee members thank
you.
Members the our next item on our
agenda is house bill four and I
think that
What what explain what we're
going our plan is there is a
very significant different
version in the committee sought
that.
Fortunately can't really go on
the website until we've had at
least some would make
arrangements for that in this
committee ordinarily it doesn't
go up and tell it's better drive
but we're going to make an
exception and we're going to put
the committee sob.
On the website.
This afternoon.
And allow everyone who has an
interest in the legislation to
look at the Committee sob and
then we will take.
The bill introduction and the
public testimony and we will act
on the bill at our next meeting.
So we are actually just going to
introduced the committee but
this time without discussion.
So I'm Representative Liz.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you committee members yes so the
plan is to move the substitute
for discussion
so that we can get it published
to the website and take the
testimony from the public once
had an opportunity to view the
committee set up and so we're
working on that so
can we move the.
Substitute for discussion madam
chair we have as.
I'm Representative I'm from the
speaker and also.
Second Representative Lundstrom
and I'm assuming there's no
objections to.
Putting the committee some.
Madam chair yes.
We're not.
Okay I understand that but are
we going to discuss it again the
public can be involved in it at
the next time a real to are we
as.
How we gonna do this.
We're going to do that the
discussion of it once the public
had a chance to read the
committee so so we'll be doing
all that on Monday okay thank
you yeah okay.
All righty
So if.
We.
This will just get I don't know
why my screen has this giant.
Madam chair I think they have to
take that screen down because as
stated earlier we're not taking
public comment until right
right.
Do it right thank you thank you
that's better all righty
So we are moving on from house
bill for today.
Two house bill seventy nine.
Representative Eli is that you.
Madam chair I know that
Representative.
Garcia wanted to present on this
all.
And we also have yes.
Is in the attendee list if you
could be moved to the panelists
we are expert okay here we have
Representative first year here.
And the other experts name at
Hollington at holy.
I saw him on the list is here
okay yeah we're everybody's here
and I will begin with you
representative chair Garcia.
Lows.
Madam chair let me know when you
want to proceed.
ready for you all right.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee.
When I started this the let the
US.
I can agree to with the
traditional Mexican Spanish.
Reading for afternoon.
And then early it means may god
grant you a good afternoon.
That's the old traditional
Spanish greeting that you only
here in New Mexico you don't
hear anywhere else in Latin
America for Spanish speaking
countries.
Share house bill seventy nine.
Yes create an open primary.
Allowing declined to states
independence.
Minor parties.
It allows these orders all for
primary elections as.
And allows these voters who
request the balance.
Or only one of the primary races
by our participating major
parties.
In New Mexico those are the
Republican Democrat and
libertarian parties Madam.
Madam chair it allows it house
bill seventy nine.
Also allows these voters to
participate.
At all venues of the primary
voting process.
Which is.
The mail in ballot.
Which is all million ballot
precincts.
Which is in person voting.
Which is early voting.
Which is election day voting.
Madam chair.
It also allows.
And the secretary is they will
modify.
It will also allow these voters.
To use the mail in application
or absent slash early motor
balance.
In requesting a ballot major
party primary.
In terms of the mail
application.
And.
Madam chair it also allows these
voters.
Of which the secretary state
will also modify.
Online.
Application for ballot
solicitation to comply with this
law.
Chair.
What motivated me Madam bring.
Or.
It was the second special
session madam chair.
We had our very significant
election reform bill come before
us.
With the poison pill amendment
that was put on in the Senate.
That poison pill amendment
basically stating that.
That Independent School vote in
the primary.
What they have to change their
party affiliation wherever they
wanted to vote in the Republican
Democrat or independent or or
libertarian.
And madam chair I saw this was a
bill amendment.
And actually when we are
discussing it on the house.
The Senate kind of high tailed
it out of Dodge.
It went home.
So leaving us on started to but
the kind of deal with this
poison pill amendments although
it.
Madam chair I saw this was a
bill amendment that the Senate
but on.
As very demeaning.
Very insulting.
Questioning.
The independent integrity of
our.
Independent neighbors.
Plus madam chair I saw this
poison pill amendment.
In essence relegating our
independent voters to second
class citizens.
And the and that was the genesis
for my kind of picking up the
ball on this legislation.
You know madam chair members of
the committee.
Independents are fathers are
there are others there are
sisters there are and as as our
neighbors.
There are quality.
There are what we are camping
organizations.
There are mail carriers.
There are mom and pop restaurant
owners.
And.
Madam chair.
A majority of an independent.
The majority of us Democrats
Republicans libertarians.
They are god fearing chair.
Mr Representative Garcia when
you turn your head you it's a
little bit hard to hear you so.
You fade out just a little bit
so try to you know stay close to
the Mike if you can.
I'm sorry.
Okay madam chair I was at that
point in terms of
The majority of independence are
like the majority of us.
Democrats Republicans and
libertarians.
In that they are god fearing.
Law abiding.
Have family oriented values.
And most important madam chair
they are global finance.
And
Madam chair.
Every primary election year.
I get an average about two dozen
calls from independent
constituents.
And.
Every now and then.
This is how it goes with some of
them.
Me again.
I want to go vote for mark wren
Katie but was told no.
He's a good guy.
Because the same surcharge we
do.
Another thanks Amanda Bennett
water some years back.
Said this.
Again.
I want to go vote for Maggie to
lose.
But told no.
Program by defendant me in a
work injury lawsuit.
Anyone as a settlement that set
us up comfortably for the rest
of my life.
Madam chair.
What do you want to continue to
deny these voters.
The thrill and joy of voting.
For their thoughtful choices in
a primary election.
Madam chair.
We need to validate the spirit
and Dr of these motors to engage
in participatory.
The Monocacy.
Not question those dreams by
maintaining the status quo.
Madam chair I'd like to yield to
my witness and hauling ten if we
could bring him on board as a
panelist.
Mr chair.
He's on board go ahead thank you
madam chair my name is that
Hollington returning Albuquerque
have been working on this issue
for now almost seven years I
represented the plaintiffs in
the crown case that started a
challenge back in two thousand
fourteen.
I learned awful lot about the
history of our primary system it
began almost eighty five years
ago on our state and it was part
of the twenties and thirties
progressive era changes.
Trying to get the decisions
about party nominees into a more
a more democratic process but
over the years of the eighty
years our primary races not only
in New Mexico but throughout our
nation have turned into a
general election in which almost
sixty percent if not more of the
lectin positions are decided.
And DTS decline to state voters
in our state are excluded from
voting for their elected
officials I don't think anyone
would advocate.
Not allowing a DTS voter to vote
in the general election but that
in effect is what has happened
in the changes that have
occurred in the primary system.
We often hear the term
independent voter but it's
important to remember that it is
a declined to say it is a
decision that people make for a
myriad of reasons.
It doesn't mean the client to
affiliate or decline to
associate it means they're
exercising their right to
privacy to not publicly
disclose what their affiliation
is and I can tell you the
reasons are myriad I in my
practice I represent a lot of
employees and it it's surprising
how many employees have concerns
about their jobs because of
their political affiliation the
safe way for them is to declined
to say others simply do not want
to have that designation
publicly disclosed in the in the
very contentious environment we
find ourselves in now.
None of those mean that that any
of us are declining to associate
or affiliate with any political
party or or position.
It is up.
Very important to recognize that
our state constitution gives the
absolute right to vote in all
elections and as a set the
primary election has become a
form of the general election for
many many of positions.
All the because if there's any
concern about House Bills
seventy nine being that with
expanding a judicial challenge
I'd like to point out that this
bill does a
great job of balancing the
rights of parties with the
rights the basic right to vote
and the main concern that you
hear about in in in lawsuits
throughout the country as party
rating but that is clearly
addressed in this bill because.
Nobody can no Democrat can vote
in the Republican primary no
registered to Republican getting
voted democratic primary and the
N. D. G. S. voters decline to
state voters have to select one
party it can only vote for those
candidates on on that ballot so
it balances the right to vote
with the right of association of
the party our Supreme Court in
the.
case which I was the
representative plaintiff.
Maybe a very important I think
one of the most important points
in the very last paragraph of
that decision and I just a
moment to read it is only two
sentences and it says are
holding in this case and in that
case basis that the closed
primary system met the
constitutional requirements but
they ended the opinion by saying
our holding in this case should
in no way be interpreted to for
foreclose the possibility that
the legislature.
Can come up with a different
primary system and then they say
and open primary system for
example could also be
constitutional amendment to the
site a fourth circuit dissenting
opinion from judge Wilkinson who
said open primaries meet the
constitutional.
Barriers and and are not
unconstitutional so I think that
the the.
Well balanced.
House bill seventy nine would
withstand any constitutional
challenge and I urge all of you
to say yes to the right to vote
and bring our primary system
into the twenty first century to
meet the realities of no longer.
Presenting
DTS voters from exercising their
right to vote for their elected
officials thank you.
Thank you madam chair thank you
ed and with that madam chair we
stand for questions.
Thank you I'm Representative Eli
is a co sponsor did you wish to
say anything Representative.
I know madam chair just as you
get to the attendees now that
the secretary stated sure as
well.
Okay great thank you very much.
So we'll go to the audience now
Representative Garcia and I
would like to let's let's first
see how many here are in favor
of the of house bill seventy
nine.
could we put up a a clover
twenty seconds.
Here we go if you're in support
please say yes if you're in
opposition the state now.
And this will be open for.
Usually we do twenty seconds in
state governments that's usually
enough.
Okay good we show what the
twenty two in favor in two in
opposition and so let's let's
first take if the two in
opposition wish to testify and
it in opposition I'd like to
take them first if you could
raise your hand.
If you are in opposition.
C..
I'm not seeing a hands go up to
testify in opposition.
I hope I'm correct on that and
if I have failed to be correct
you can correct me let's go
ahead and now have hands of
those who wish to testify in
favor.
Right and I'm going to start
with our secretary of state
Maggie Toulouse Oliver.
You can I meet yourself in your
grant thank you madam chair and
members of the committee
negatively fall over New Mexico
secretary of state and this
committee well knows at this is
legislation that I have been in
favor of an supporting for the
last several sessions now in at
justified if you the reasons I
think some of the other as
supporters won't from an
election administration
perspective and you've heard me
tell you this before every
primary election that I have
ever run or overseen inevitably
there are people who come to the
pole who either at our mistake
in that they are not already
registered with the majority
party maybe they were in the
past something happened they
forgot to include a party
preference in their update and
they they show up to vote and
unfortunately either they they
decide not to vote because
they're not eligible or because
they have to cast a provisional
ballot that will be counted on
an increasingly at you know that
becomes very painful as an
election administrator in
somebody who is want people to
vote to see them go out of their
way at U. and handicapped the
ballot in and have their voices
be heard and then be turned away
from the polls and Office
creases create an increase in
provisional balloting for
primary elections which is an
administrative burden for our
election administrators
as well as an and some one else
will probably mention this but
we've gotten to a point in the
state where there are many
districts throughout the state
where the only election as the
primary election because
nobody's running from another
party and you know unfortunately
folks who are not eligible to
vote in the primary or not than
able to have their voice
ultimately heard and what is the
final outcome for their district
so I think for these as well as
many other reasons that I'm
happy to address of the
committee and of course we'll
we'll be here for any technical
questions you have I'm very much
in support of the budget.
In and really urged the
committee to to move at devoted
to pass on this thank you so
much.
Thank you madam secretary and
next to have money Jimenez.
You know if you and your spouse
you're going to go yes ma'am
thank you madam chair members of
the committee little tough to
follow our secretary state there
but I will say that coming
because New Mexico does support
the inclusion of all registered
voters in primary elections.
As mentioned before nationally
we continue to see newly
registered voters not
identifying with a major
political party and as a result
our voter rolls continue to come
to contain a large amount of
registrants wide in a fight with
no party or as the minor party
and additionally we often
nominate as again mention
elected official during a
primary election with no
candidate in the general
election which means a vast
amount of registered voters do
not have a say in who represents
them and house bill seventy nine
gives all New Mexicans that
opportunity to have a voice in
who should represent them we see
this as a good government piece
of legislation and I'd like to
thank the sponsors for bringing
legislation forward and just
body to support house bill
seventy nine thank you madam
chair.
Thank you next I have Kathleen
Burke.
Just yourself this Burke and
you're not very good about.
Thank you madam chair good
afternoon madam and members of
the committee this is Kathleen
Burke I am the vice president of
New Mexico open elections I'm
also with the league of women
voters of New Mexico and I agree
with Representative Garcia that
all fans and non fans of Lobo's
alike should get to vote in the
primary elections so I want to
thank you representative Garcia
for bringing this legislation
forward and thank you members of
the committee thank you madam
chair.
Thank you next I have come to
Berlin.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Hannah
Burling and I'm speaking for the
league of women voters of New
Mexico.
We strongly support this bill we
are in favor of an inclusive
system of voting that allows all
registered voters to participate
in primary elections.
And we're also in favor of
methods that increase voter
engagement thank you.
Thank you Mr rowing.
John house.
John just won yourself in New
Mexico righthand.
Good afternoon madam madam chair
chairperson of committee members
I'm speaking on behalf of
representatives New Mexico
nonprofit organization that
supports democracy reforms and
protections.
Our American representative
democracy is unique in the world
but we're going to regrettably
is not perfect it has always
been flawed so throughout our
history we have endeavored to
perfect.
Unfortunately over the last
thirty plus years it has been
under sustained attack.
And this and our democratic of
effort is continuing.
Already this year over a hundred
bills have been filed in
legislatures in other states the
design of which is to further
restrict.
After the storming of the
capitol on generation in our
democracy receive the biggest
blow it has ever had since the
civil war.
I believe most Americans are fed
up with all these efforts to
destroy democracy that we've
decided this year is the year to
Vegas strip the grisly defend
our principles of democracy and
we want and expect our elected
representatives to join in this
fight.
HB seven the line will eliminate
the current closed primary
system that unfairly excludes
independent voters.
With this practice was
jettisoned by most states many
years ago let's be honest it is
still here because incumbent
candidates of political parties
in power benefit from.
They do so by improperly
Division franchising the many
voters you simply don't
particularly want to identify
themselves with the.
Also evidence is shown that they
have come in the general
elections are for all practical
purposes.
decided in the primaries this
makes them extremely critical.
That means that under our closed
primary system controlled by the
two major parties.
A very large number of
registered voters cannot
participate in these critical
primary decisions.
Further more voters were allowed
to participate in these
elections the results would
better reflect the collective
voice of New Mexicans.
Statistics show that because of
all the percentage of.
Primary elections are much lower
than in general elections the.
Primary elections are seen to be
dominated by voters on the
political extremes this
contributes directly to the
polarized divided this country
that is crippling the ability of
government to solve problems.
Open I'm opening up the primary
elections to independent voters
whose ideologies are characters
characteristically more
centrist.
Would help remedy this
polarization.
I strongly urge the committee to
vote yes to pass age the seventy
nine.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr house Carla crew
over.
I just I need yourself and go
thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I'll
keep it brief and I won't repeat
the testimony provided before
but on behalf of the center for
civic policy I stand in support
of this legislation and
encouraging to pass thank you so
much.
Next I have.
No.
We have already heard from
Mister president what to
secretary.
Next is June.
June all right thank you.
Thank you yes madam chair all
attendees.
Thank you so much for giving me
an opportunity to speak I would
just like to emphasize that.
After working almost twenty
years overseas in third world
countries.
Where we were looked up to as a
beacon for democracy.
That I find it very discouraging
upon returning to my home here
in the United States than any
registered voter would be
discouraged or turned away from
the polls I'm particularly
discouraged about the turn out
in the primaries and it has to
do with our disenfranchised
voters I do not think that it is
right that political parties
have dominated.
The the forum.
And the policies.
Disenfranchised people who want
to be independent anybody who
looks elections closely realizes
that the general election.
You're really down to what
somebody else decided to
somebody else decided is on the
ballot for your choices our
primary elections are vital to
our democracy and we need to do
everything we can to enfranchise
every voter independent of
political parties or not thank
you very much.
Thank you very much Joshua
Rosenblatt.
Thank you again madam chair for
this opportunity to thank a
representative Garcia for
bringing this forward
I respect him and I respect his
patriotism and I think it is
about patriotism that is the
crux of this
This initiative which I support.
Because I myself have.
Never.
Just voted along party lines and
it is a moral character an
individual which one of us may
know better or less than others
or have paid attention to their
track records.
And thus which cast votes.
so.
I do believe that the that this
is a.
A worthy and certainly timely
and these days and the growth of
even more parties may come up
and individual expression but.
At the crux of this I believe
that there are
as patriots and US citizens
nobody should be denied access
to that vote equally and the
individuals that they may choose
to vote for regardless of party
affiliation or no affiliation.
I think the representative
Garcia for bringing this matter
forward at this critical time in
the nation's history again.
I support this bill.
Next I think the last one maybe
Barbara Chatterjee.
And if you'll you.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I rise in support
of this bill and I want to raise
one more point that I haven't
heard in the discussion and that
is the taxpayer dollars are
underwriting the
The running of our primaries so
therefore it's not just within
the club of each particular
party financing the the
primaries but all of us your
financing and for that reason I
support this bill to make sure
that all of us can vote in the
primaries thank you very much
madam chair and committee.
Thank you very much so let's go
now back to.
Representative Garcia do you
have any more comments before we
go to the committee.
I think you should your head now
and I'm going to go to the first
one on my list Representative
McQueen.
Thank you madam chair Madam
Representative Garcia did you
have a comment I was unclear no
no I would just responding I was
I was muted and.
In response the.
Thank you madam chair
mentor center see a in twenty
eighteen.
Which is the last time we had a
Our primary very much in twenty
seventeen to twenty eighteen
Alexion last time we had a
primary in the state.
That had statewide candidates on
it for state office governor
lieutenant governor Teter do you
know how many the.
Races on the Republican ticket
for statewide can't office were
contested.
Madam chair representative a
green I I I do not but I would
deal to the secretary of state
if she has that information
readily available.
So madam chair
Chair Garcia I I actually know
the answer and the answer is
not.
Zero.
So all of their statewide races.
The their candidate.
At their pre primary convention.
And so there was.
During the primary I think there
were three democratic
Representative or democratic
candidates on the.
Democratic side.
One on the Republican side for
governor similar numbers for all
the others.
So the problem here is that.
Independent voters or decline
stakeholders I get that.
Our diverse.
They're not.
All more they're not all the
lyrics.
There are plenty of people who
describe the state a party
because.
The Republicans.
bunch of softies you know I want
to associate with that where the
Democrats what we need real
socialism or real whatever their
temperature to far right.
And what happens when you have
open primaries is all those
people will vote in one primary.
In a case like we had in twenty
seventeen.
They're all the director in the
will those strategically.
That is they won't necessarily
vote for the candidate they want
to win.
For the candidates that they
intend to vote for in the
general election.
He will look for the can they
think makes the.
We can try to get their
preferred to.
We will for and I know it's been
said before the that doesn't
happen.
What does happen.
And it happens every time
there's an opportunity and I
have so I have in front of me I
will pull that.
Operation chaos this is from
last year.
Operation chaos Republican
voters need to excuse South
Carolina democratic primary.
So there was a concerted effort
they even had a.
Posters print up operation
chaos.
To try to nominate Attorney
seniors.
In the South Carolina democratic
primary because they thought he
for sure with the general
election.
Now that I understand it's
different I understand that in
South Carolina they let major
parties process not just the
client state voters.
You have the same level you have
the same effect on a smaller
level here in New Mexico.
And you know we have a lot of
small town races we have a lot
of races there decided by
handful of the.
I want to people who believe in
a candid to have the opportunity
to vote for that can't.
And I think this open primary
idea goes in the wrong
direction.
I hear it.
Yeah I've heard about this for a
long time.
And I think the the advocacy on
behalf of open primaries the
state some facts.
The first is what I think it's
important to remember that that
primaries are not.
They're not junior election.
They're not the semi finals are
not the run up to the election
there is the opportunity for
members of a political party to
pick their Representative.
That's what they're designed for
and as Mr Hollington alluded to.
Having them run by the secretary
of state.
Having having them open to
anyone who wants to participate
as a member of that party was
actually a substantial
democratic reform democratic
little D. democratic.
That decision making.
Out of the back room.
And let anyone want to
participate participate.
So when I hear the people are
locked out.
That's false.
They're disenfranchised.
That's what's.
You're free and welcome to
participate all they have to do
is check a box.
Part.
And.
And we encourage them to do so.
I'm.
Mr chair.
Madam chair Mr chair.
In your opening statement talk
about the poison bill that came
out in the.
The special session I I totally
agree with you and I think that
provision.
Which was a poison bill in which
to get past
I think the vast majority of
people don't like it but I think
some people think it doesn't go
far enough and some people think
that's too far I think that
provision should be repealed.
I don't think it should be
expanded.
And before and I just I want to
share story I was having
breakfast with the constituents
and so.
You know this was here to ago
back when people still have
breakfast.
And.
This is a constituent that the.
This is Porter
I first got in the first time
Iran I consider a friend.
In the open primaries came up
and I told her I was opposed to
partners.
And she was shocked so what.
Yeah I explain myself.
And she I think she accepted my
position to understood.
And what she told me was.
She was from I think was
Wisconsin where they had open
primaries.
And so it was something she was
used to.
And she sort of added after
sharing that yes my dad use
Republican you always voted in
the democratic primary to mess
with that that.
I just think that's what
happens I think members of the
political party should be free
to pick their representation.
I don't think it's a junior
election and I.
Yeah can't support this.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Mr.
Thank you
I don't see other hands up for
committee members.
Representative Nibert okay
Representative na.
Representative Albert you know
all going to share and look
instead of the other please
okay.
Thank you madam chair of.
Just a couple points I've made
most of these points and you're
on state government committee
one way or the bill but
Madam chair representative you
your you basically open your
remarks and said that the X.
creates an open primary.
But it's really not an open
primary is.
Madam chair.
Absent I bird
We do have a it it doesn't
elements of an open primary in
terms of.
Of independent voters being
allowed to vote and what.
Was typically just.
For the major parties so it does
open up for.
All registered voters not
affiliated with the major
parties so in that sense is how
might consider it to be madam
chair for primary.
Madam chair and representative
as a term often primary is
commonly understood this this is
really not an open primary it's
it's somewhat more limited than
an open primary I believe
Representative queen discussed
Wisconsin open primary situation
already.
Would you agree.
Madam chair representative Berg
yes I agree in that we're not
allowing the major parties to
vote in the other major party
primary that's that that is not
included in our legislation
madam chair.
So madam chair and and
representative of.
Your district probably my
district our maybe many of our
districts.
There's actually more decline to
state voters in our district and
there are members of the other
major party would you agree with
that.
Madam chair
Senator Nyberg yes I agree with
that my district is an example
of that.
Madam chair representative I
believe my district would would
likewise reflect that
And so what my question and it
has basically if we call an open
primary.
But the other major party has
less members Senate them these
other.
Minor parties for people who
have opted not to express a
preference as to party
Are are we really are we really
doing ourselves any favors here.
Madam chair representative
That is not across the board.
In terms of the make up of our
districts to where.
Independence constitute a larger
percentage them a major party.
And
So that is not a standard.
Madam chair representative I
have a run the math maybe the
secretary of state's run the
math but I would venture to
guess that.
A large number of the districts
in New Mexico
Reflect that there are less of
the other major party then there
are the recall of independence
are actually members of minor
parties and those who are
declined to say
I'm checking correct me if if
I'm wrong and that the.
Reception but
you know for their for the
reasons that Representative
McQueen stated
All right I've always felt
strongly that the.
Under process is a process by
which the.
Parties whether they're major
parties or minor parties.
But they select members.
Who will be placed on the ballot
for for their ticket.
And that if people want to
participate in that process.
They can easily do so under the
the very bills that there the
legislature's passed the last
the group for years since since
I've been here made it very easy
for people to change their voter
registration even after or early
voting starts I believe you can
change your voter registration
up into twenty days before the
election so
the words disenfranchisement
have been readily tossed about.
Yet.
People can choose to participate
in.
The democratic primary the
Republican primary and can do so
up to twenty days before the
election regardless of how their
register by simply as
Representative McQueen pointed
out check the box.
Medially thereafter they can re
register and change back to
whatever they wish to change
after they've cast their ballots
and so you know the return
disenfranchisement means that
there's your we secretary notes
that there's some.
Purpose school very preventing
someone from from casting their
ballots in and I don't see that
particularly under the
statutes that we have recently
passed.
Madam chair on that point.
Representative Eli yeah it was
something that I do want to say
that the current system after
the bill that we passed the
special session responding what
Representative nitrogen says
probably unconstitutional
because twenty eight days out
Democrat can change Republican
Republican change the Democrat
but a decline to state voter
is allowed to change a is
allowed to change their
conversation to address our same
day registration either Democrat
or Republican so I think you
really have a problem as the
current system currently exists
regardless of what we do here
I'm surprised there hasn't been
a challenge to it in terms of
just equal protection violation
that's a attended to what we
passed so I just want to make
that point thank you madam
chair.
Madam chair I guess we should
you have.
Yes Matt madam chair I guess we
we sure caught that point
several years ago
The.
The next question I have madam
chair representative is.
Under.
I guess under our statutes.
Yes.
One of the major parties for
both of the major parties did
not why this method of choosing
their ticket.
Could they choose to caucus or
create some other mechanism by
which they determine who will be
on their ticket.
Chairperson Nyberg
I don't know what options the
major parties have.
I don't know the histories of
states that have implemented
some of our lost of what you
have before you house bill
seventy nine or even broader
legislation which constitutes
wide open primaries where major
parties can.
Well again the other major
parties primary.
So
I do not know what those
alternative actions are.
short of.
Finding a lawsuit challenging
the legislation.
Madam chair representative may
be your expert or maybe the
secretary of state good
provide some insight into that
whether New Mexico whether the
parties the major parties in New
Mexico could turn to an
alternate form such as we see
the Iowa caucuses in New
Hampshire caucuses or what have
you which is different than a
traditional primary election.
If they would have anything to
weigh in on with
all chair I yield to add or
Maggie if they have anything
that helps to provide madam
chair and representative
neighbor
So currently under New Mexico
law we do have an option that is
available for at the major
parties with regard to
presidential
nominations it's not an aspect
of the law that has been taken
advantage of in recent memory
that the one that passed the law
that the Democratic Party of New
Mexico opted to have a E. at
presidential preference caucuses
both in two thousand four in two
thousand eight specifically for
nominating a presidential
candidate the election in in two
thousand eight as as any at
Democrats are really anybody in
the state who is around back
then unfortunately with with
fairly.
It's really problematic in terms
of the administration and so
madam chair representative I
think the Democratic Party since
then has decided to a let
election administrators the.
County clerks and secretaries
say handle all the management of
that presidential election and
so there there is not an option
four nominees for the major
parties that are not
presidential candidate to be
selected other than by the
primary election but I would
submit to you madam chair and
representative that it is in the
best interest of voters and
candidates and party to allow
professional election
administrative appears to run
these elections which is partly
why we had primary election
reform back in the latter part
of the twentieth century because
unfortunately you know it was
not a very small D. democratic
process it has it tends to work
much better when it's run by
state administrators thank you
madam chair and Representative.
Thank you ma'am.
Madam chair and representative
thank you and thank you madam
secretary of state for answering
my questions the
I have exhausted my questions
thank you.
Thank you let me say how do we
have other questions.
This.
I don't see any members with
questions.
There are no other question I
have one.
Representative will grant.
Chair I move to table.
Thank you.
Representative would claim those
two table.
The card please call the roll of
the table should.
Representative Akan.
Representative Armstrong no.
Representative Cook yes.
Mr speaker.
Yes.
Mmhm yes.
No.
Representative Lewis.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative Snyder.
The record reflect I'm voting
for tabling motion yes.
Representative Rehm yes.
Representative Townsend yes.
Price check and then I'll.
The table.
Madam chair Chasey.
To table.
Six test and fix now.
Your I think madam chair I would
yes I don't think I I don't
think my you.
Yes I I got you Mr speaker.
Who brought a table at motion
that split.
Was someone who didn't vote.
Madam we have twelve members.
That's right yes
so.
Let's try it what.
The motion let's try to two
passed motions see how that
goes.
I'll make that motion.
Representative Eli.
So we're now judge we're not
going to do house motion if you
want to take all the.
Okay Representative dot com yes.
Representative Armstrong.
Yes.
Representative Cook no.
Mr speaker.
No.
Representative even.
Yes.
Representative Lewis.
Yes.
Representative McQueen.
Representative neighbor no.
Representative right now.
Representative Townsend.
Representative Townsend.
No.
As check and then.
Yes I think I do.
Yes.
Six to six.
Okay just want the record to
reflect that make sure we got
everything right here today so
I'm Mr chair Garcia.
And Representative Eli we fail
to have a major to past or table
the bill so it is officially in
limbo.
Thank you madam chair for the
opportunity to present this
significant piece of legislation
and well thank you very much.
Members I think we are through
with our agenda but I want to
Point out something to you of we
are going to because there will
be some
all day floor sessions during
days that we have meetings we're
going to start doing since
Saturday afternoon.
Meetings we hope they're going
to be after Representative
queens Committee but that's.
Is to be staying on the
thirteenth that will be our
first one there will be a
Saturday meeting tomorrow but on
the thirteenth we're going to
have a meeting from.
Two o'clock to about six on
Saturday the thirteenth.
Representative queens Committee
may not be finished but you know
we'll we'll do the best that we
can I hope that they can get
some work done House
Appropriations is having
meetings early on those to
address perhaps they will
complete House Bill to and what
we did on Saturday and that
might make it easier for us to
change around a little better
earlier but you may have
received an incorrect invitation
to meet tomorrow that's not
happening.
We will have to put out a new
agenda for Monday because of are
having rolled over house bill
four and I invite everybody to
create the committee sub and and
analysis the analysis from for
the committee by on additional
west on the substitute so.
It days weekend everybody and
thank you for your very hard
work that this week.
Appreciate it so we're turned.
Thank you madam.
Thank you all thank you.
