Speaker.
Representative Eli here.
Representative Lewis.
Representative McQueen here.
Representative night.
Representative.
There.
Representative Townsend.
Here.
Share or Madam chair
representative.
We have a quorum thank you so
much
As I mentioned last night when
we were finishing our floor
debate we had announcements we
did some major shuffling in our
agenda really just to move so
Saturday presentations up to
today so that we wouldn't lose
time and so I.
Well now that all the calendars
are updated on the website.
Apparently the golden rod was
updated but not the judiciary.
Links so we are beginning this
morning or this afternoon with
representative Armstrong are you
ready representative Armstrong
and you have to witnesses.
Yes madam chair thank you I have
one expert witness Emily
Kaltenbach.
Which
is I think she's with us yeah
your.
House bill one twenty three
Representative.
yes thank you madam chair and
fellow committee members house
bill one twenty three is
Eight.
Establishing overdose prevention
programs are establishing the
authority for local bodies of
government to establish overdose
prevention programs are under
the guidance of department of
health.
And what this is and we would
admittedly be the first state in
the country to do this there are
ten other countries around the
world doing this and we've heard
in the interim in Legislative
Health and Human Services a
number of times about this type
of approach to preventing
overdoses and most specifically
we've heard from programs in
Vancouver Canada.
This is also known as safe
injection sites and is it while
it's not limited to injections
this is essentially a safe place
for someone who is using illegal
substances.
To
come under medical supervision.
Our take those drugs.
It's not providing the drugs it
is providing clean needles and
supplies.
And while they're there so a
couple of things one can
intervene should there be and
overdose.
To provide those clean supplies
to try and prevent
the spread of HIV aids hepatitis
C. or development of a systemic
infections.
And three to try and while
they're there be able to make a
referrals to social support
services and treatment
and protect them from law
enforcement while they're there
so that's what makes it to us
safe as well.
And that's in a not show what
this does is allow local
cities or or municipalities or
counties should they want to
develop a
overdose prevention program.
That the department of health
will be developing guidelines
and they would have the
authority to do that.
And that's essentially that's
essentially it and what to yeah
other countries and and programs
like this see is
definitely the decrease in
overdoses the decrease in some
crime the decrease in dirty
needles around the decrease and
communicable diseases and the
ability to provide support
services to try and intervene on
Substance abuse and without
madam chair I would like to turn
to my expert Emily Kaltenbach
from drug policy alliance to add
any additional information.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee and Michael
Michael drug policy alliance I
think that the sponsor did a
great job of setting it up so I
don't have much more to add
other than we continue in New
Mexico to see rising overdose
deaths and that's of great
concern to us we're also seeing
most recently those deaths being
attributed to Sentinel and these
overdose prevention programs
with absolutely addressed some
of that because also located
Mexico located in these sites
are being able to test those
drugs to see if they're an adult
friends and so New Mexico
actually was spared for a long
time around some of the Sentinel
yes that we are starting to see
an increased and also we're
seeing overdose deaths just
being exacerbated by the
pandemic we're seeing that here
in New Mexico we're seeing that
around the country so I'll just
reiterate this is an evidence
based program that you know
there over a hundred studies
that have shown as the sponsor
mentioned from increased entry
into substance use disorder to
reducing crime a street based
crime to saving costs to the
reduction of disease and
increasing the delivery of of
medical and social services so
in addition to reducing HIV and
hepatitis C. in some of those
other consequences with with Dr
king so thank you madam chair
and members of the committee.
Thank you madam chair and
employees now stand for
questions.
The audience first and do a call
to see who here is in favor on.
One twenty three.
And if your favor the bill
please say yes that you're
opposition state now it will
have this vote for twenty
seconds.
Okay we have eight in support
and one in opposition.
So with that let's go to
comments from those in
attendance if if you wish to
make a statement in opposition
will you please raise your hand.
Well that I don't know that it's
in opposition.
The city wants to go ahead begin
Karen would lock.
Go ahead and get yourself Karen.
Committee chairman would walk
with the national association of
social work.
His work Mexico chapter
apologized
and we stand in strong support
of this bill
anything we can do to prevent
all the opioid overdoses that
we've been facing is is help is
is positive in our book thank
you very much for we want to
thank the sponsor for bringing
this bill thank you very much.
Next I am a cash.
Go ahead and just yourself yes I
got a test and dynamic Cashin
I didn't prepared remarks for
this but I have a son who just
showed up to drop some stuff off
in our garage is an addict he's.
He's pretty much on the street
like couch surfing
and not I don't know if he would
use such a facility but I would
hope that people who might be on
the edge of like wanting some
safety who might then that might
indicate that maybe at some
point they would be willing to
help me to get help to go
farther and the state would be
safer I wish my son would use
something like this I think what
we can say for so I really am
strongly supported thank you.
You
know I am.
Next I have for non don't
Trujillo.
The madam chair members of the
committee my name's that number
you all information on your
landing Mexico animal policy
associate with gold futures for
many young women United.
I reside in Albuquerque having
grown up in my part in my party
the Espanola and all this
valuable that makes a little
phone.
We have had to deal with
substance issues for generations
thank you you opioids even
before what we now call the
opioid epidemic for years
families and loved ones have
pleaded for help and instead we
have been for the criminalized
in because at one time it was in
the situation to even call nine
one one if someone.
Why someone that would love one
with the we go see them not to
mention the statewide pays the
same about on by society in
general which has pushed people
who as use who use substances
underground and behind locked
doors in order to get their fix
so that they can get the day I
was twenty one years old when I
lost the one person I love most
in this world to an overdose
yeah I just got accepted to go
to we have that way and I just
got out of with you we jail
simply a violation and waited
for his mother would on the bill
the fact that the firm's got
more snow to eat when she got
back home to bonding with the
needle in a cookie by aside I
believe the people are seeking
temple these are outlined by
trained professionals with the
as the substance that the are
you with and have the lives a by
having a person around them by
having the states would be
access to resources and help
with when they are ready
analyzation of addiction
everywhere except as has been
evident in the past decade old
future stands in strong support
of the H. B. one two three eight
five you.
Thank you for listening Rikki
Lee Chavez.
Go ahead regularly.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Rikki Lee Chavez
on behalf The New Mexico
prevents lawyers Association
standards are.
For.
This.
Thank.
We appreciate the work of the
sponsor and advocate thank you
so much for your.
If we lost you and that's all
the public comment I have so
let's go now to the committee
on where you like to say
anything further Representative
Armstrong before we go to
questions from the committee
thank you madam chair I just
want to say this passed
unanimously out of health and
Human Services Committee
with strong bipartisan support
thank you thank you I have first
of all Representative reading.
Thank you madam chair and madam
chair and representative I I
heard you make a comment that
this would decrease crime I was
wondering how it would decrease
crime.
Madam chair and Representative
all all let Emily's speaking
after me but
Maybe more appropriately
decreased criminalization around
the act the use of of illicit
drugs if they are in
in this safe spot and Emily do
you have anything additional
from the studies are done in
other countries.
Madam chair and and
Representative read this B.
eight does studies relations
speak more to public disorder so
and and I as Representative
Armstrong mentioned around the
criminalization so crimes a
street based crimes in the sense
of what people are currently
being charged with because
oftentimes the people who use
these services are using on the
street and there is some public
disorder They Might Be
trespassing on property and it
also it also in addition to
reducing the the criminalization
of individuals who are using at
a street level that it's also
increasing public safety and I
just want to stress again how
I've heard by from lots of
people especially in Bernalillo
county how concerned they are
about use syringes in our parks
on our streets and so that's a
that's a big concern I know I'm
not only Bernalillo county but
another communities and so what
I didn't say in the beginning
that I I do really want to
stress is that the studies also
show that these programs are
really a bridge to treatment and
so a lot of individuals who
access the services end up
getting connected and utilizing
other treatment and it in Canada
in Vancouver they actually have
the supervised consumption
service on the first floor and
treatment services on the second
floor so there co located there
so thank you madam chair and
representative.
Madam chair and representative.
That is what I see is the
problem is is once they obtain
the drug they're in possession
of it.
And so what you're trying to say
is well if you can make it
across town and get to the state
favor and then okay bets are off
while you go ahead and check
that and I agree with the the
used needles in the parks and
stuff but I don't see where this
is actually reducing crime we
know that of the.
Drug addict generally is
stealing to go ahead and support
his habit.
I don't I don't see that the
decreasing crime yet.
Very soon up in a places marked
no trespassing American a
resting for no trespassing
arresting for possession of
whatever.
That madam chair and
representative let's go to some
reliability issues.
I'm.
I'm kind of concerned
individuals going to go into
this location he's going to
ingest whatever narcotic and
again these are schedule one
narcotics which I'll get to in a
moment.
Our.
Now he leaves this location
Anne's impaired.
What liability does the city
county state whatever have.
Now that this person will say is
driving and involved in a
collision or Representative does
whatever.
madam chair and representative
also part of this program is is
based to
to stay in and stabilize after
after ingesting but
Emily do you have anything.
Else.
Madam chair Representative I I
think that's a great point about
you know the stabilization also
I would mention that these again
that these programs are really
access by individuals who are
currently marginally housed and
homeless and so this this
program may not be apple to a
whole of our local jurisdictions
and that's what what's so great
about this this bill is it
really leaves it up to the
cities and counties to decide so
often times these these services
are located in areas where
people are actually living on
the streets and using on the
streets and so I just want to
stress that it's not necessarily
someone going out and driving
across town I mean that might
happen but people are being
stabilized they're being watched
while they're they're using and
it's a safe place so that they
actually aren't I think there's
greater concern about public
safety when people are using
in in who knows where.
in this is a safe place so they
actually can be stabilized
before their back out into the
community.
Thank you madam chair and
representative that leads me to
the next question is okay the.
We are not supporting the drugs
so we don't know if it's tainted
in any way if they shoot up and
they do and were able to save
them or stabilize them or
whatever and they die what is
the liability of the location
now I mean we had medical staff
there so.
I'm madam chair and
representative
again this this is intervention
program so that if there is
someone there they can who can
recognize overdose they can
intervene immediately including
calling nine one one as
appropriate but in our
also
providing thank nor can or on
the spot to be able to respond
and prevent and overdose and I
think Emily can confirm but
there are the studies of
existing programs show that
there's no overdoses that
actually happened ultimately in
any of these sites because there
is that intervention.
Yes madam chair and
representative in fact there in
all the time that these programs
have been open we're seeing this
across ten countries over a
hundred and twenty sites are
active there has not been one
death in these these sites
because of the medical personnel
they have the drug that overdose
reversal drugs for opiates on
staff there train to identify if
an overdose is occurring and
they can also immediately get
PMS in there if they need to be
transported to a higher level of
care right now those same
individuals if they overdose
they don't have the access to
any type of service quickly
enough and that was the point of
these programs so that they can
get it get access but I just
reiterate that there of all the
sites have been open they
haven't had an overdose death on
site.
Representative is nor can one
hundred percent effective in
preventing them overdose.
madam chair and and
Representative.
Emily do you have.
And the information madam chair
and representative it's not a
hundred percent effective not
not like any you don't know
medication is a hundred percent
effective I think it depends on
the amount and the quality of
what was used I also want to
just mention that the reason
that these sites exist is also
to do drug checking so that
people before they use can
actually get their drug tested
for example for fentanyl which
might make it harder or if you
need it might need more doses of
naloxone for an overdose and so
that drug testing is really
critical staff also educate
users on how to use just a tiny
bit before they use more because
sometimes if you use too much
that's when overdoses occur so
there's lots of overdose
prevention and education and
intervention built into these
programs.
Madam chair and representative
minimally what I think you're
just about a fight is
a real fine line definition if
you will of well there hasn't
been any overdose deaths
occurring at those locations
well.
Arcadians not a hundred percent
effective so they get him into
an ambulance I get him out of
there and they die on the way
the hospital it didn't occur
here and
I I think that you know probably
a better stat would be is who.
It is one word a person did
shoot up there or take whatever
drug there and as a result die I
think that would be a better and
maybe I need to ask it that way
is you have data in that way.
Emily.
Madam chair representative I
don't have any data indicating
whether someone passed away
after leaving those facilities
but I can say that these
facilities save lives and those
same individuals if they hadn't
had many more individuals that
they hadn't access these
services would have died on the
streets.
Okay
The end do you have any data on
the on madam chair and
representative and then we any
data that more people would have
died on the street if they
didn't have this is there been a
study done that way.
Madam chair and representative
it the studies show that of the
clients that have access to
overdose prevention programs
that the they have reduced the
amount and frequency of the
clients who use drugs so yes in
fact they can see that of the
clients that access they're
seeing their use patterns do
decrease their seeing their
access into treatment increase
and so yes in fact there seeing
positive outcomes and reduction
in overdoses and overdose
deaths.
and Representative David M. we
One of the things that concerns
me is under federal law is
Is operating or having a
location where schedule one
drugs
are located you know so it's
again so what I have here one
but we're gonna have a delicious
use here one as an example we're
gonna have this location it's in
violation of federal law what
present prevents the federal.
law enforcement from coming in
not only arrest the people that
are there but seizing the
property because that location
is subject to seizure under
federal law.
Madam chair and representative
it is you are correct that it
would still be illegal federally
and that's exactly the same
conversations that we had when
we past the medical cannabis a
program and that is currently
true for recreational or
medicinal cannabis and yet more
and more US states have
legalized that and have
implemented medical programs in
the it it doesn't make it more
legal federally but what is been
allowed historically is if it's
legal in the state and is
following state law they leave
it alone so we're hoping that's
what happens with these programs
as well and we have to start
somewhere and proposing on their
work there are currently and
Emily can fill in the details
several cities that have enacted
and I think that there are
lawsuits going on in trying to
address that but
for for me and I think for Emily
this is this is the start just
like the start of medical
cannabis of being able to
demonstrate to the federal
government that if we've got a
responsible scheme and legal
scheme in the state that they
will leave us alone
Emily do you want to add
anything.
Thank you madam chair and
representative the city's that
have approved programs like this
include New York Philadelphia
San Francisco and Seattle there
is a lot of work happening that
federal level right now our
organization is working with
sponsors in Congress to change
of the law the crack crack house
federal statute and so some of
those amendments are actually
being introduced meetings with
the new administration and the
office of the national drug
control program so there's
there's lots happening at the
federal level but I can't
reiterate again what the sponsor
mention is that we have to start
somewhere this is not unlike
medical cannabis and that the
federal pushback has been in in
a different federal circuit and
so at this point it's really
important that states do pass up
for.
Legislation like this
authorizing programs so thank
you madam chair and
representative.
And I think that
The federal government is kind
of step back on marijuana but I
don't City of stepping back on
here wanted to mess you know
cocaine but madam chair and
representative.
So a person on probation or
parole.
And they go to this location and
they shoot up.
Or take whatever drugs
then they have they test
positive that's a technical
violation or you know if you
will of when they see their
probation or parole officer
there in essence in possession
of that drug.
So how are they going to.
Or are they then say Hey I want
to the state facility or the
county facility and so it's okay
or or how we can handle loads.
you madam chair and
representative of what we have
stated in the bill is if they're
following this and I'm using and
at the site that in and of
itself for personal use within
this space is not our grounds
for
A violation of conditions of
parole or restraining orders
and.
outside of that or if they're
doing you know
trying to distribute or doing
and not not within this the
confines of this program that
would be there just protected
yes using strictly in this
program Emily if you want to add
anything else madam chair thank
you.
Madam chair representative of
the only other thing I'd add is
this isn't unlike our good
Samaritan law and New Mexico
actually was the first state to
pass the good Samaritan law and
recently the legislature
actually updated that lot to
hello you know someone called on
behalf of an overdose they
witnessed an overdose and they
happen to be on probation and
parole that wouldn't violate
their probation and parole and
so this is taking that concept
and just expanding at this again
I just go back to it's about
saving lives that person would
have otherwise died and so I I
just want to point to a lot of
that language that's included in
the bill is very much more is
what we see in our good
Samaritan statute today and New
Mexico was the first now almost
every state in the nation has a
good Samaritan law like New
Mexico.
Thank you madam chair and
representative hi I was having
trouble finding are are you just
doing it under general
you know shall not be arrested
that that paragraph is one that
supporting to
the probation or parole The
using the drugs is or is that.
Were you sending me.
Madam chair representative of
that's correct okay thank you
madam chair and representative.
Your next.
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair
What to pick up one.
One statement the those made
during Representative rain so
questions regarding decreasing
crime.
And.
Madam chair and and
representative.
I think I came across to Johns
Hopkins study that indicated
that.
People going to a methadone
clinic.
That there was no increase in
criminal activity in in that
type of activity.
Because those were people
seeking recovery.
But I believe the study further
said that were where people.
Are not seeking recovery of the
the same statement could not be
made at and so I'd like to focus
on that if I understand this
legislation correctly.
These facilities are not
necessarily.
Prime for people seeking
recovery although that may be
our desired result it's really
are providing a safe place for
them to get their high so to
speak is that accurate.
madam chair and representative I
would
probably say that not everyone
will come use this and if they
are
but if they have some concerns
about their safety and about.
being at
having a clean needles and that
that to me representative of
state of mind that is worried
about the use of the US and
would potentially be amenable to
some intervention.
And support so I think there's
probably a little bit higher
degree of
willingness to seek treatment
from from individuals who would
seek out a special place to
to be safe in their injection.
Or other substance and Emily do
you have
you have more knowledge of of
the studies that are out there.
Madam chair and representative
absolutely that's what the
evidence shows is that
individuals who are likely to
use these sites are more likely
to be open and amenable as the
sponsor mention and what again
what the study shows that that
same person beforehand may not
have access to information
education and resources but as a
result of these sites having
that interaction it has actually
led them to be more amenable to
treatment.
Madam chair and representative
of this
box the studies that you looked
out for the.
Other the experiences in the
other cities around the world
that have these types of
facilities.
Do that do the studies indicate
and and does the experience on
the ground reflect that the.
Addition of these types of for
our.
Centers or or areas.
Do they result in negative or
adverse effects to that the.
Community or area where they're
located for.
Is it generally B. and saying
that it to be a positive.
Of.
In fact on that community.
Go ahead Emily.
Madam chair and and
Representative so
It the anecdotal information
that we have heard and also from
qualitative interviews is that
the business community one is
very happy that these facilities
have opened up because what was
happening prior was that they
were seeing a lot of St based
use oftentimes right on the
doorsteps of many of their
businesses date law enforcement
in Canada has also been very
supportive of these sites
because again a day aren't being
called out over and over again
for someone who might be using
on the streets and so from that
perspective there's been very
positive outcomes
I think there's always a concern
where do these get located and
so people are right so you know
just to to share I think
sometimes
neighborhood say all I don't
want that in my neighborhood but
if you look at a lot of that
jurisdictions that have opened
at their opening right where
there's a lot of St based drug
use open air drug use to begin
with and so there is such a
positive response from
oftentimes downtown business
districts where people are
actually living in using on the
streets.
Madam chair and.
Thank you for that answer and.
You made the statement that it's
it's a bridge to treatment of
our I certainly think that the.
It's everybody's goal.
And in our society to.
Of.
Get people on a better course
particularly those that have
chosen.
A path of rejection and trying
to get them to break that cycle
and overcome.
Overcome that that direction
at it your virtually affects.
Almost every family in the state
in this nation unfortunately
What what my next question is by
making that.
I'm gonna use a term easier
about stopping right our but
bear with me by making it easier
on the attic to to do the sens
are we actually preventing them
from getting to the place where
there are constraints they need
to change our lives have that
real effort to seek recovery it
didn't do any of the studies.
Reflect on that that that issue.
The I made myself up at least
some I understood.
thank you madam chair and
representative Ron let and
family go ahead and answer that.
Madam chair representative I
think I understand your question
and the studies that we have
seen all show that there's that
individuals actually end up
having reducing their drug
consumption the amount and there
is an increased uptake in
treatment so we the studies
don't show the opposite side I
can just reiterate there have
been over a hundred evidence
based studies and bake
consistently show that people
increase up taken treatment and
reduction in drug use.
Thank you.
Madam chair a moment ago are are
I us to question about the
surrounding community and it
sounds like it's a positive
effect but I'm wondering yes
this facility because so are.
Maybe our as of adverse effect
on the surrounding community
one of the goals of this is to
protect the folks utilizing this
facility from law enforcement I
think that was a statement that
was very.
If there are adverse effects how
would the police be able to
operate in and around this area
to deal with the adverse
effects.
Madam chair and representative I
think that if there is
behaviors and activities out in
the local community
even if it's near the US that
that's not what we're talking
about we're talking about
law enforcement it waiting on
the doorstep if you will for
people coming in and out to rest
them that's that's the
protection but it's not
protecting them from all
activity wherever they are if
they happen to be in this use
this program.
and I hope that answers your
question.
So Madam chair representative in
that regard of.
You a person could not use this
facility as a.
Our.
Jail free zones so that they
could continue selling drugs for
it starts.
There still be a mechanism to
address that type of activity.
madam chair a chair and
representative yes the this
isn't on a base of operation of
for a drug dealer and
additionally in regards to Madam
chair representative the effect
on community is this is why we
have constructed in this this
way and that the municipality or
county is the one who gets to
decide
if to do this where to do this
our department of health will
develop the guidelines for how
to do it but it's up to the
local
local government just to to
where and if and.
Whether they want to stop it or
move it or
that that would be under local
control.
Okay.
Madam chair representative
looking at the the bill page two
Basically once for through
through eleven I'd like to look
at a couple terms that are
utilized in that section and you
just get your your thoughts all
what this means and maybe are
you.
Educate male what it does not.
But in line I we see the word
pre obtained drugs my question
is are those drugs that will be
supplied by the
program or are those drugs that
the person would bring on to the
location having secure them
through our.
Basically it was a it's.
I'm Madam chair representative
it is they've obtained it
however they've obtained it it's
not supplied on site.
Okay.
Although you.
Madam chair representative there
are programs in other countries
that actually provide
prescription grade a drugs to
get rid of this TheStreet drugs
but that's not what this is this
is what we're not I'm providing
here one and other illicit drugs
we are whatever they have and
that's part of the testing we
can also help sure
folks what their what it is that
they're about to take and I'm
gonna turn off my video madam
chair because I keep having
unstable internet.
And then the online mind are.
It becomes a duty of the
municipality or the county.
that has approved the program to
monitor participants are and so.
Kind of along the lines of what
Representative Rehm
Asked if there's a positive duty
to monitor participants are.
That in my mind.
Creates some liability for the
municipality or or County and
there was some discussion that
this is bottom line.
Are the good Samaritans
Samaritan laws have.
If I recall correctly one are
gone through some of those
statutes most good Samaritan
laws have.
Some express where meditations
on liabilities liability of the
good Samaritan and yet we don't
see any limitation of liability
provisions in the US that would
serve to insulate the minutes
bring us about eight for the
county have these are
professionals who are staffing
that from
of return to liability for maybe
it it messed up side so R. J.
just just a question do do you
see that as being a duty that
has to be that would that
subject the municipality or
county to liability.
I'm madam chair and
representative as I read it it's
the program that monitors the
municipality or county has
approved a program that meets
the guidelines of the department
of health and any additional
guidelines that they use
established and then the program
monitors and in the liabilities
section
we have sent an anyone who
establishes provides promises so
as for provide services pursuant
to or uses a program
it is goes on is is protected so
What Madam chair representative
worse out where's that language
is to register for a page three
line seven.
Our time line seven okay.
Yeah that's not the it's not
really the.
Limited.
Unity from suit that I would be
looking for that so kind of
unity for rest but anyway I I'd.
I I think go.
I'd certainly like to see some
sort of a limited.
You know limitations on the
ability pursuit
and here and then the
The last question that I think I
have.
Madam chair is.
Right.
I think the statement was made
that this this programs bottom
line.
Medical cannabis program.
M. I'm not sure I agree with
that I I think the medical
cannabis program was a
recognition by the state that
there is there some medical
benefits that can be derived
from from cannabis.
M. this is really not addressing
the medical side of opiates or
anything else.
Opiates can be prescribed but
this is really a program to
simply find a safe place for
people to engage otherwise are
unlawful.
Right years and so I don't I
don't see the connection between
what we're doing in this
legislation and what we did with
the medical cannabis
legislation several years ago
I I do think Madam chair
representative.
I I do think all support
legislation because it does
Vied for our county or municipal
option
I would like to see some some
issues maybe fleshed out further
such as water quality
but I I also hope that the.
Realization.
Your stated and tell.
Comes to fruition and that we
can't can't touch these people
and convince them that the
wires or not are drugs is is not
a very productive Water MFA
million turn choose to us
straight selves out.
You madam chair and thank you
Representative thank you madam
chair and representative and if
I can just make one clarifying
remarks my relating this to
the start of the medical
cannabis program was only in
reference to it being illegal
federally which it still is.
technically it's illegal
federally for medical or
recreational cannabis so it
wasn't like ending anything else
but the.
being illegal federally.
Thank you.
Madam chair thank you
Representative Nibert is done.
Thank you so much.
Thank you very much
Representative Townsend.
Thank you madam chair.
We were we were wondering where
you went.
So I'm I'm right here.
Multi tasking all day as.
Representative
On the opt out clause.
Could a county opt out of.
Collectively for the cities
within the county.
madam chair and a representative
I think that this refers to
municipalities and then counties
surrounding that municipality I
don't think it County could
enforce it for within the city
within the city limits and it's
often
Right.
And
Madam chair and representative
If the person intercept is still
of the with an addiction
problem.
But they are a known felon for
something other than.
Drug use.
Would there be a requirement to
report that person.
madam chair and representative
you know I don't think so I mean
we're not trying to protect
other illegal activity but we're
also trying to promote them
coming here for their drug use
of so
They they cannot engage in other
behaviors
And to to the extent that there
protected while there while
they're in there I.
You know that's that's the
intent and if there is going to
be hovering around if you will
of law enforcement just outside
the door
of folks that need to this
program are going to come.
So.
Chair and representative could
this facility be used for a
minor as well as an adult.
madam chair and representative
I think the answer to that is
yes probably yes we don't put
age limits on it and there are
age limits on
using drugs in the streets and
on the parks are we find kids
doing it to.
Madam chair representative
Is there a limit on how many
times a person may I know your.
The issue is trying to
facilitate people to.
Right to but but in and saying
that is there a limit on how
many times a person.
Can use this a day of the year I
mean is there any kind of is
there a limit where that person
would know that option is
running out and I must seek
help.
Madam chair and representative
I'm gonna let them only respond
on based on other experience but
I would say the answer is
probably no because there are
individuals who for whatever
reason aren't successful in
getting treatment or aren't
quite willing there's also a
individuals who are so addicted
that they've had changes in
their brain that really makes it
extremely difficult or or not
able to completely stop which
we've we've had other
legislation trying to.
promotes use of opioids to treat
opioid addiction to make it
safer so it probably not but
there is I think it as a core
value of the program is to try
and get someone into treatment
which may mean medical assisted
treatment and something that is
more appropriate less illegal
less risky
as opposed to completely
stopping necessarily and Emily
do you have.
any information to add to them.
Madam chair and and
Representative yeah there are no
limits on how many times someone
can access and and that's built
into the design on purpose
because the more people feel
welcome and
and secure in those settings the
more likely they are actually
going to access treatment and
they're more likely to reducer
druggies or stop entirely and so
it maybe for one person the
fifth or the tenth day they ever
access for someone else it might
be two years later everyone as
you know it's on a different
path to recovery if that's their
path and so these programs
really are around harm reduction
reducing the heart not unlike
the question if someone called
nine one one ten times because
of an overdose of repair to the
year would we not respond on the
eleventh time and so these
programs are really designed to
reduce that harm to save those
lives but because of hello
welcome they are we do see
better outcomes when it comes to
treatment uptake.
I appreciate that.
Madam chair representative am
This cut is it is there and
intervention process that
someone is just it the experts
there can just see I'm spinning
out of control I mean is there a
intervention process are you do
you just.
Monitor the demise coming how do
you how do you intervene if you
are planning on making a
difference in someone's life.
I'm madam chair and
representative the way these
programs are designed it's not
just a single person just
sitting there watching them
hello there is that but there's
co location of other of of
Services or counselors and part
of
this is if somebody is
consistently are frequently are
repeatedly coming to the program
donor built up some level of
trust and familiarity with the
staff that are there so that
there's an ability to talk to
and try and make those referrals
to to services or what supports
that they need.
We appreciate it.
Seems.
It it's probably maybe that.
That a community well maybe
maybe not let me ask this
question the funding for this
would come from where
Representative and madam chair.
madam chair and Representative
that's not addressed in here so
it would be
local governments requests
behavioral health substance
abuse program funding of that so
that we find in the in the state
and local government as well so
it may be from a variety of
places.
Is it possible that it could.
Come from staff the state funded
so that even a community that
opted out with the oil slighted
because then their cat a portion
of their tax dollars might still
be attributed to the to the cost
of one of these facilities.
Madam chair representative not
unless the legislature has
approved funding for for that
purpose but
it there may be out of of
funding to behavioral health
programs and you've got willing
communities and that meets
objective of behavioral health
programs to do demonstration
grants to our to try a program
that but that's not addressed in
here I think there's a wide
variety of potential funding
sources.
Is it possible.
Are or were there to be measures
in in place to prevent.
Say worst case of a minor from.
Trying something for the first
fund.
Is that it would that not be
allowed would that be illegal is
that I mean how do you stop
that.
Madam chair and representative
of the program is not supplying
the drugs and so they're coming
in with that we wouldn't really
have a way I don't think there'd
really be a way to know that
that's their first time or not
but hopefully if it were their
first time they just got drugs
and they're coming here so that
they're safe to try it is I
think that's your hypothetical
they get tested what the drug is
and maybe some education and
coaching along the way because
if you have somebody who's come
sentence never done it before I
think it may become fairly
obvious.
Well and chair representative
appreciate and.
Expert I appreciate the.
And and and the committee today
thank you thank you.
Presented.
Madam chair if you're ready at
like to move it to pass on house
bill one twenty three.
That's fine we have a motion for
do passed on house bill one
twenty three second that motion
is there further discussion by
committee members.
I don't see any other hands up.
May we please have the roll
call.
Representative Alcon.
Yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Cook no.
Mr speaker.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Lewis yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert yes.
Representative rain whoa.
Representative Townsend no.
Yes explain my vote please.
Madam chair.
I'm yes and I want to see if you
would see if the speaker has
joined us Mr speaker.
Okay go ahead.
Or
just give us the total.
Eight two three we have a due
pass and vice chair to explain
invoke.
Thank you madam chair and
representatives I just wanted to
appreciate this effort and
certainly sitting in my ammo on
a motion today as I think of my
loved ones that have survived
trauma.
So go to substance use disorders
and really all the women I've
met over many years we failed in
their lives is New Mexicans and
I certainly appreciate that
there's so much local initiative
built into this legislation so
communities can decide by and
for themselves what's
appropriate but just wanted so
much to appreciate the ways New
Mexico has been a model in
beginning to frame addiction and
substance use disorders as a
public health issue not a crime
and the shut out different
iterations of this work like we
heard about today and the good
Samaritan law
for those that don't know our
incredible chief of staff used
to be part of the drug policy
alliance as well as Aaron
Armstrong and let so much of the
work to establish New Mexico's
beginnings of this of this
approach so just grateful to be
in this conversation and to be
continuing to find ways to show
of our families and as we
remember those we lost over does
thank you madam chair.
Thank you very much.
Thank you representative
Armstrong.
To our new thank you members of
the committee.
So much sorry getting along here
next we have house bill one
twenty eight our representatives
I don't know.
In chair members of the
committee I do have two expert
witnesses.
Richard Delirio and Julia Garcia
Julie Garcia.
We can get those people elevated
to panelists status that would
help.
Looks like you've got in here
and are you doing without
Representative Trujillo at this
time we were still at work and
appropriations madam chair so
she's already I go ahead all
right thank you madam chair I'm
representative Debbie certainty
on I'm here to present house
bill one twenty eight as
amended.
The schools are expected to be
safe environment for children
but it seems like it's become
comments just east news stories
like the one last Thursday in
the Albuquerque journal
involving the rest of teachers
were being charged with sexual
abuse and misconduct involving
their students these arrests
make people realize kids are to
say that they would like them to
be when we send them off to
school.
Child abuse including sexual
abuse of students is rarely a
coincidence and for some school
has predators becomes a way of
life.
Left unchecked these predators
can leave us travel station that
stretches across many years and
countless students lives.
For some of these repeat
offenders finding a new job is
the best way to stay one step
ahead the past.
So move on before raising
suspicion while others depart
only after accusations against
them have been player.
These educators that abuse are
often helped by school officials
let them quietly slip away when
allegations arise this practice
of passing the trash finally has
already undivided attention and
it must be addressed
fifty seven requested that in
New Mexico PED convene a task
force to identify issues of
concern we bark regarding
investigation reporting and
documentation of F. of ethical
misconduct within the public
school system the task force
worked diligently to come up
with strong with the strong plan
and recommendations for
effective policy.
The vast majority of educators
take their responsibility placed
on the shoulders very seriously
but for those that plan in
practice ethical misconduct in
lead students down a road of
abuse to include sexual abuse
they have broken a sacred trust
and we must do everything we can
to make sure they never set foot
in another school so madam chair
what this bill does is to close
in identified loophole known as
passing the trash is to stop the
practice for a school employee
who's been accused of or
disciplined for abuse of a
student child these are current
place of employment to move to a
new area or new school and the
the new employer doesn't know
about the offenses them so I may
have committed or allegations of
abuse that may have been levied
against them an employer and
employees hired again this bill
is to prevent passing the trash.
The bill requires prospective
school employees school
volunteers and contractors to
report their background and work
history related to previous
ethical for sexual misconduct it
allows previous employers to
disclose misconduct to future
employers when they receive
enquiries.
Changes the school personnel act
to allow superintendents to let
other school districts know that
someone has had an allegation of
sexual molestation or sexual
contact expands the required
training in the detection
reporting of child abuse neglect
and ethical misconduct to non
licensed employees school on
tears contractors and contractor
employees it requires PED to
keep a list of persons reported
to them Representative of
ethical misconduct and for
felonies and misdemeanors
involving moral turpitude
analysts must be updated
monthly.
And your requires multi agency
collaboration between PED CYFD
and local law enforcement.
And madam chair elect to defer
to my expert witness witnesses
for additional comments if we
could start with Julie Garcia.
Thank you madam chair.
Please go ahead Mr stand.
I just thank you Representative
Sinai and madam chair
I would just like to add that
the yes the state which is the
every every student succeeds act
that was passed by Congress many
years ago and has been amendment
that asks all states to pass a
anti passing the trash bill
there are only a handful of
states in the United at in the
United States that have passed
such a bill and we would like
New Mexico to be on that list
that sends a pretty clear notice
to people who plan to move to
New Mexico to prey on our
children that they are not
welcome in our state.
Thank you and miss madam chair
Camille also hear from Richard
Valerio.
Thank you madam chair
representative
but are you on the executive
director for the public schools
insurance authority we are the
insurer for all eighty eight
school districts in the state
except for Albuquerque public
schools are the only district
it's not in our pool and we also
cover all charter schools even
those are turned under APS's
where do we find their liability
insurance we're hearing strong
support of of this bill
part of the task force was
created under house memorial
fifty seven have been
And helping review this bill in
providing our our feedback and
so we're we're here in support
also today we madam we have our
general counsel Marty SQL I
believe we try to raise his hand
if he may have some additional
comments thank you.
Thank you.
In.
Did you need to have Mr ask
avail in as a panelist
Representative yes thank you
okay Sir.
I'm sure he's in panelists.
Okay areas okay go ahead
mistrust about.
Thank you madam chair
Members of the committee of.
Representative did a wonderful
job presenting the bill I just
wanted and in Mr Larry R.
general counsel for the
School Insurance Authority with
a little bit of a cold here so
bear with me
there there was an incredible
amount of work that went into
this bill with the house
memorial fifty seven task force
I think this really this is on
child safety really hides that
are the rejection of students
throughout the state of New
Mexico in in the the standards
that we set really high in the
bar for reporting in protecting
children and I think this is
really one of the most important
pieces of education legislation
or we have the number of years
with really urged committee the
pass thank you I'm sorry for my
voice.
Thank you madam chair we stand
for questions.
All right let's go to the
audience and see how many here
are in support of house bill one
twenty eight and if there's any
opposition will put the call out
now for twenty seconds.
Okay that's Spanish we have five
people who are in favor and no
opposition let me see if any of
those folks would like to make a
public comment.
To hear.
Jareth modest.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee.
Modest I am policy analyst for
the office of the Attorney
General we stand in support of
this bill our office has been
involved in several cases that
have shown the gaps in our
system in oversight that have
resulted in tremendous amounts
of trauma and fiscal loss to our
school districts while also
seeing a positive fruits of
collaborating with teachers and
administrators to read out child
abuse and we think the sponsor
for bringing this important
legislation that we believe will
strengthen those positives.
Thank you next time dynamic
cast.
Go ahead I am.
Maybe she was on another bill
okay really make Ortiz.
Yes it I just found my new
button and my I needed this is
dynamic cash
I had.
Okay I have a question I'm I was
I targeted elementary school and
we had someone who was in there
for a while who was like taking
video under the desk of the kids
you know under their dresses it
was really creepy I don't know
whatever happened to him but
I've also been in situations
with students older students in
middle school.
I would know could get upset
with someone and making
accusations so I just wonder
about the protections of
unfounded accusations that might
cause a person to be
uncomfortable in the space to
leave this and so I just leave
it at that more of a question
but I do in general support.
Thank you.
Limit Ortiz.
Go ahead.
Can you hear me yes.
You madam chair I am millimeter
tease the legislative liaison
for the New Mexico school board
association and the New Mexico
square Association maintains a
membership of eighty nine school
districts throughout the state
of New Mexico with four hundred
fifty strong school board
Representative ward member
voices on madam chair what of
the New Mexico school boards
association had our executive
director Jovian said as a
representative on the task force
and we appreciate a place at the
table this conversation and
being part of the good work that
resulted while the bill will
increase responsibilities and
administrative requirements of
our square tenants and will
require additional policies to
be developed by school boards
without any additional funding
we do feel the intent of this
legislation and the best
practices that will result is
critical and should be
implemented in our schools to
create safe environments for
students so madam chair members
of the committee The New Mexico
scored Association supports this
legislation and we just for
favorable consideration by this
committee thank you for allowing
us to voice our position.
Thank you very much.
Is there anything else you'd
like to stay Representative
Sarinana before I go to the
committee.
No no madam chair thank you.
Okay first I have Representative
Eli
Thank you madam chair I just
have a couple of our technical
comments
madam chair and representative
on page five line eleven this is
going to come up quite a bit at
yes it's not just your ballots
seems like we're gonna have to
get together with the drafters
it says when requested to
provide a reference on a former
Corona employee and employer
acting good faith is immune it's
it's the language good faith
since that doesn't have any
statutory definition we are
seeing a quite at that if we
could replace that and all all I
just want to walk you through
these two comments with
reasonable care reasonable care
is actually defined in the
uniformed jury instructions and
thirteen at sixteen oh three
that defines it is ordinary care
reasonable care rather than good
faith which really has no
statutory definition only time
we ever see that is in contract
law but it doesn't have any
reference in employment
situations so that's number one
the second is our same page line
thirteen says the immunities
shall not apply when the
reference information supplied
was knowingly false or
deliberately misleading was
rendered with malicious purpose
or violating the civil rights
former employee I don't have any
problems than unity which I
usually do but I do think that
standard I mean is really too
high I mean it wouldn't really
make it virtually impossible for
anybody who you know just hasn't
done anything and just decides
gosh you know I've heard
something and I'm just going to
spread around it may not be
knowingly false or deliberately
misleading or not a malicious
but somebody should get immunity
for that either and I would
suggest language instead that
says one recently requested to
provide a reference on a curve
former or current employee and.
Employer acting with reasonable
care is immune from liability
for comments about the former
employees job performance that
we at least you know you're not
raising the bar so high nobody
ever is responsible for their
actions but you're putting a
reasonable standard on it so
they're acting on reasonably
than they have are such
liability but if they're not
that they're still in here and
so I think those would be my to
changes I'm happy to propose it
specifically but I did want to
know madam chair representative
if those changes I should call
Janet Vance I just looking at us
to see if those would be
friendly or not and if you're
not sure I don't mind waiting
and you know doing this before
it hits the floor but I think we
can do this right now if you
want to and I'm sorry for the
last minute notice Madam chair
representative thank you madam
chair and representative so okay
reasonable care is that what
exactly does that mean
reasonable chair is really a
negligence standard and so it is
in fact I can look it up for
you.
Just a second I'll get it pretty
quick there is actually a
uniformed jury instruction on it
just takes me a second to get to
the US we just look this up and
I'll give you the.
Sorry and I will give you the
site
so sixteen it's yeah so jury
instructions
are are we really a compilation
of the law
and then these are what's given
to a jury so
Reasonable care on is actually
defined it's it actually is the
jury instruction they talk about
ordinary care but it's the same
is that care which a reasonably
prudent person would use in the
conduct of the persons own
affairs what constitutes
ordinary care varies with the
nature being done as the risk of
danger that should be reasonably
foreseen increases the amount of
care require also increases in
deciding whether ordinary
teachers can use the conduct in
question must be considered in
light of all of the surrounding
circumstances so the idea is is
it's not so much to change the
standard from good faith
reasonable carriages that good
faith doesn't have any meaning
in statutory words and the
drafters at Legislative Council
Service keep putting and and I
keep getting these notes from
from my analyst saying this
doesn't make any sense because
there's no definition in the
statute for the keep putting in
good faith let me anything I
mean I'm willing madam chair and
and Representative referred to
any of the lawyers on the
Judiciary Committee but I'm not
finding any definition others
and
And not contractual stuff in in
the appropriation code but not
anywhere else.
Sure.
I.
Expand I was wondering if if
representative Sarinana wanted
to respond or if you're on
Representative by point.
I was on the Representative by
point then I'm going to go
Representative find out if you
don't mind I'll let
representative Nibert way and.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair
As you know well I think his
last week we had a discussion
off on.
Good faith and the context of
the uniform commercial code.
And
it's definitely a a definition
in that code and and as a long
statutory.
District comment in that curve
R. but I think Representative
might be correct that in this
context of good traits may be
that bad to us concept that
Representative McQueen was is
still maybe wrestling with even
after my explanation on the
uniform commercial code so so
that's probably up well thank
you madam I might just stab
there's a couple other areas of
our our I may want to have some
wind weird sure our elsewhere
the bill subject to a member of
well but we can do it in two
separate amendments if you wish
that's fine.
Thank you Representative thank
you madam chair I'd like to
actually defer to the low the
Nexia to see what they would
then they would like to do.
We.
Madam chair representative I'll
defer to Mister ask about.
Madam chair representative Ely
can taking the session that
you're having that concern with
the so I can address your
question yes I I have to flip
back because we want to I got
out of this section let me go
back to this you're testing my
skills and not just a minute the
other you all right so if we go
to page five and this is one of
those I I have to tell you I
don't want to hold up the bill I
really don't this is not for
that reason it's really just to
get it right is if you look at
page five.
Our line eleven you'll see it
says an employer acting in good
faith and I honestly we just
keep seeing that pop up and it's
one of those things I'm going to
get with Legislative Council
Service after the sessions over
to talk to the drafters because
these keep sticking that
language in here and in the tort
context and I think
Representative number two
hundred percent rate in the
contract under I remember from
law school we saw a good date
but not in the tort context and
it it just doesn't have any
meaning and so you can't say
acting in ordinary care you
would say acting and reasonable
care and that's what I'm
thinking at least that has a
definition in the informed jury
instructions so that's the first
thing and then the second is two
lines below that online thirteen
point as the immunity shall not
apply when the reference
information I was knowingly
false or deliberately misleading
was rendered with malicious
purpose or violated any civil
rights of the former employee I
mean my view on that is is that
lock I really I'm not just hard
about community as you know some
our lawyers can be I I don't
have a problem with community I
want to encourage people to to
not what what it what was the
expression of representatives
passed the garbage along I I
really do want to get the
information out there but on the
other hand I don't want to make
people immune that you know they
may not knowingly false or
deliberately misleading which is
really a high bar but they you
know just any kind of
investigation or anything else
that just here remember and then
were it and people should be
immune for that but if they're
using reasonable care I've got
no problems so it's both in both
places is reasonable care
language and I just want to be a
little more careful and a little
more nuanced about.
To make sure we've got the
striped but as I say I don't
want to hold up the bill I'm
just more interested in trying
to get this thing right thank
you madam chair representative.
Thank you hold on just one
minute Representative Eli thank
you proposed language on the
immunities that sentence as
well.
Did you not.
Some.
Anjana.
Yes
not yet okay I got the I got.
What was the language for for
all I'm sorry I'm sorry.
Yes okay beginning at line
thirteen instead of that
language I would have when
requested to provide a reference
on a former or current employee
and employer acting with
reasonable care is immune from
liability for comments about the
former employees job
performance.
Thank.
Okay thank you Mr us out.
Madam chair representative Ely
so I I think that
Yeah there might be some some
case law on this issue that
protects employers to provide
references and in good faith
I've dealt with this issue a
little bit of context law
and I would be willing to take a
look at this is your
as you proposed down the road I
guess I would voice a couple was
concerns
I think what we're trying to
accomplish here is is is for
public school employers to.
Without hesitation if something
doesn't appear right to be able
to
voice those concerns about it
about an employee so when you
when you talk about the good
standard you're you're probably
right is not defined as you know
what it is but it's not defined
type of thing
reasonable care I guess my
concern would be that high
standard for potential
negligence action and what
employer be discouraged from
reporting something that doesn't
seem right but didn't quite meet
the negligent staff that you're
talking about
And then the the immunity is
here your is your reference
I I think that case law those
probably already
for defamation action which I
think we're the case law
addresses
That this is covered we're
immunity doesn't apply when
something isn't complete
legislative but I need some time
to take a look at the the your
concerns but that that's I guess
the first one about good state I
think.
Upping the standard might might.
I would just be what we're
trying to accomplish with the
bill but I I do want to to take
a look at this work with
Representative.
Yeah I I and madam chair
representative and mistrust for
all I I do not want to get away
this bill I don't I I am happy
to have you look at it if the
chair is willing
I'm I'm happy to not proposed an
amendment today but when it hits
I'm assuming it's going to the
floor from here I have unlocked
but if it's going to the floor I
want to talk to you before it's
floor I no Representative Nibert
also has some amendments so but
I'm I'm I'm happy to work with
both of you with both
Representative and with you to
see if we get this right so it's
really up to the Representative
and frankly up to the chair as
to whether we want to pass that
a judiciary before getting this
to where you know I'm come with
it and you're comfortable with
that but I don't want to hold
this up either so I'll leave it
to the representative.
Thank you and representative
madam chair I would like to to
speak to get together and talk
about this so we can fix it
before it goes to the floor
possible.
Then I'm going to go to
Representative night work for
his questions and down we will
try to amended on the fly here.
Representative Lambert.
Thank you madam chair just two
quick points page eleven.
Lines two and three my question
is does the legislature want to
basically allow the department
to define the word ethical
misconduct and if we're willing
to do that why do we put it
paragraphs one through four why
don't we just say ethical
misconduct means whatever
behaviors prescribed by rule of
the department of so my
preference would be that we
define ethical misconduct as we
want to define it and not allow
the department to further define
that but if we're going to put
in paragraph five that.
My question is why we need
paragraphs one through four we
let the department do it all.
Are there my second.
Madam here's trades thirteen
I'm a page thirteen line
eighteen.
Have.
The words.
That appears designed to
establish.
Calls may be some problem
because this is sexual
misconduct and we're defining
what it is and all those seven
it's something that may appear
to be something not something
that is and I I think that there
could be.
If your people are going to get
trouble over this because it
sexual misconduct and there
ramifications to that.
Them the word appears
Shares Representative forgive
the pun appears to be misplaced
I just think it needs to be
tighter tighter why we're so
those will be by your comments
and yeah I'd be interested in
what the other committee members
think particularly about the
allowing the department to
basically defined what at the
gold misconduct means or whether
we should do that you know this
bill of.
Dot allow further
thanks to be advised by the
department so those be my to
come comments.
And the I would suggest those
students that worked on thank
you madam chair.
Thank you I did you have a
comment on that point on that
point madam chair yes
Representative hybrid asked if I
agree with the art if any of the
committee members agree with I
agree with both of those
comments that appears designed
would cost me some real
constructs thank you madam
chair.
Right thank you representative
madam chair can I dipper to my
experts this morning Mr our
thank you.
Madam chair representative
Nibert I think well we we ran
into this issue in a prior
committee and I I think the the
problem that you get into is
there's a lot of different ways
you can define misconduct and
when you try to.
Just find yourself in the
statute I think that there's a
number of areas this for example
and we see this unfortunately a
lot.
eight.
Coach sees another coach in a
car after practice with the
students.
it doesn't look right nothing's
happening but it's a red flag.
I'm.
That seems to be doesn't pass
the smell test and could lead to
bigger things but if if we're
gonna leave it to the statue the
buying with specificity what
ethical misconduct is and then
maybe not allow the PED.
Some some latitude in doing that
that's where I think.
We're gonna have to spend a lot
of time defining what is and
what is not and as opposed
referring to the educational
professionals to to make that
determination but this is a
policy issue for you know I'm
not I certainly respect we're
going but I think that was the
thought process
when this was addressed earlier.
Thank you.
All madam chair in that regard
yeah I mean if he's arguing that
PED ought to be the one setting
what ethical misconduct is then
we don't need paragraphs one
through four and to me we either
as a legislature determined what
that word means or we wholly
turn it over to the department
to define it one or the other
but by about.
Yeah and then.
Here's.
You know you brought up an
example of a coach be in a car
with the student of and all that
could appear may not pass the
smell test I don't think it's
good practice but I don't think
you hold somebody.
Our.
And have a real rapper questions
for what appears.
It may be totally us the but you
don't hold somebody as having
conducted sexual misconduct
because it appears or they
appear in a car with another
student and you don't know
what's going on
so I I just think that that the.
Those two areas need to be
addressed and.
The the appears on page thirteen
line eighteen
that to me and not be a criminal
lawyer that this raises some red
flags for me so.
Thank you madam chair and then
again I think the.
The former question on on what
is ethical misconduct I think
all of the committee on the
display and all that whether we
ought to define it whether we
ought to just turn it over to
PED that the fire.
Madam chair may I respond and
Representative funding under
that the appears to be
misconduct is really interesting
grooming behaviors and grooming
behaviors will not necessarily
meet the criminal standard and
our our our focus is to get
teachers right now teach
teachers will only eleven
percent of teachers will report
misconduct from a fellow
teacher.
And what only twenty five
percent the teachers will
actually report.
Sexual abuse to CYFD those
numbers are horrific and what
we're trying to do in this bill
is to make the grooming
behaviors as ethically
inappropriate as actual sexual
abuse.
Are one of our focuses in the
bill is to try to alleviate.
Bill who will grooms students
for potential sexual abuse from
being in our schools and be able
to identify those grooming
behaviors so the ticket so they
get reported and then PED can
then do an evaluation to
determine if in fact those were
behaviors that were lead
inappropriate in the school I
can bring up an example that
happened in Gallup school
district where I can study and
found a note in a trash can of a
second grade teacher that said
tell your friends you already
have a boyfriend.
He was arrested and during an
interview with the police he
told the police that he found
some second graders very
attractive.
And and that and then he said
that looks like my hand writing
but I didn't write it so do we
want to keep that individual in
the school because of the
appearance that he's doing
something that's lead grooming
behavior leading to abuse or do
we want to just leave them there
and let him continue.
So that's where the language
appears comes from.
Madam chair of your that's the
issue them it's thanks to be you
need another term to provide and
that's grooming behavior and you
can put appears in and you can
have some some process for
dealing with very behavior but
this is sexual misconduct means
and then you define it.
And the definition says many of
these things that appears
designed to establish.
To me that sexual misconduct it
needs to be more than appears
if you want to add another
definition for grooming behavior
apps of some of penalty for for
that
that that's fine but I suspect
sexual misconduct means it's
pretty significant.
Our.
Appropriations result as having
conducted sexual misconduct.
I just yeah I don't know what
else to say but example are are
brought in a new term and I need
a new term but the new term that
but but sexual misconduct has
serious consequences now
appears.
There's a much broader term than
that maybe our the term sexual
misconduct for.
So here's what happens with all
the attorneys are trying to help
you Mr speaker thinks he has a
quick fix so let's.
was shot at this.
Thank you madam chair I think
What might work is if we go to.
Page two your page.
I'm looking at the amendments in
context version so I don't know
the page line number but it's
section one a two.
This is a written statement as
to whether the applicant.
A has been the subject to child
abuse ethical misconduct
investigation more employer
I would suggest that this be we
organized to say a written
statement.
R. as to whether the applicant.
Has been the subject of an
investigation.
Or found to have violated.
And then list the statutes that
are at play here so list the
statutes for.
I'm sorry and it and you need to
have my camera off so we listen
statutes the statute for child
abuse in statute for criminal
sexual contact of a minor in all
the statutes that already listed
there already well known to law
enforcement there already well
known to school administrators
just have a statutes listed have
the crimes listed government
conduct act you know would be
there for you know and things
that involves you know ethics
you know sentiment contact at
all the things that the state
ethics commission has and and Mr
section to look at just list the
statutes so we are to be to find
anything and I am pretty sure
madam chair that we do have a
statue the yield of grooming.
And I know I've heard that come
to the committee before I don't
know if it's passed into law you
can include that as well are you
know yeah and it just list the
statutes directory to find
anything then it's objectively
knowable right so the the the
applicant's gonna know whether
they've ever been investigated
for.
In criminal sexual contact with
a minor they're gonna know
whether they'd ever been under
investigation for violation of
the governmental conduct act and
I would say that you would list
the statutes then you can also
include.
For violation of the applicables
rules and policies are enforced
by their prior employer right so
it you know it prior school
districts anywhere in the
country would have the handbook
that applies to teachers and
staff in the handbook or that
will work with those policies
and procedures applicables
employees and whatever they say
you know we don't need to in
this statutory what to we'll
look said it your prior employer
you just need to say is an
employee have you ever been
investigated for breaking the
rules that apply to your
previous job.
You know stealing paper clips or
you know being in a car with the
with the student when they're.
School handbook said that a
coach is not supposed to be on a
car the student whatever the
rules are skewed me so statutes
in a catch all he violated the
rules applicables.
The rapid will to you as an
employee.
and then I think if you go to.
On its own that again is the
members in context.
On it would be.
This is section G..
Percent section G. of section
one through section one G. it
appears a at the bottom of page
five on my equipment and
contacts which is when requested
to provide.
Reference implementing new faces
of liability I think maybe what
we should do is is again served
with it yes seven point.
A.
A a former or current or current
employee shall provide.
The information
and I don't think we need
internet we just it's if if this
if a law directs directs a
current or former employer to
find information.
And if you're doing it then
there's no claim that it did at
an applicant would make so you
don't need to have unity you
just have to have a directive to
the current or former employee
they shall provide the
information.
If there is a C. if there is
some sort claim made against the
entity or person providing
information the fact that
they're acting according to the
law in providing information had
to be required by law there's
that's an absolute defense of
any claim that will be made so
we are to get into munity we are
to give you could face is just
shop by the information.
Your.
To those of you that you sort of
the review suggestions I that is
obviously a lot more that we can
do right now on the fly but I
think it would make those two
check for structural changes the
rest of the pieces will
probably.
Following the places that we
ought to get into good faith
community.
What is the definition of
ethical misconduct and it just
be very any be very clear for
applicants in for players.
I'm gonna say before I call on.
Representative Ely and mistrust
give out again at I I really
like that idea because I don't
like it is straight Clause
risque patch first an employer
doesn't provide it
I don't like the wiggle room
there because this is it's too
dangerous for these children.
And you know we've.
We've been hearing from officers
how.
From the law enforcement academy
about how.
They are they're cleans insights
it's kind of reminds me of we've
got to get these things taken
care of so mistrusted all that
you want to comment before I got
a representative Ely again.
Yes can you madam chair can you
hear me.
Okay I I I I I I agree with the
speakers comments I I think is
the latter point about what what
we're really trying to
accomplish here is really
getting employees to come
forward and and report anything
that appears to be a safety
issue for children so I think
the the the latter point that
the speaker made about removing
the immunity statement and just
really forcing the issue that
this needs to be done there
should be anything that hold you
back is simply reporting it
doesn't mean someone's going to
get in trouble means is going to
be investigated that's what
we're really hoping to
accomplish here the because this
first statement about
identifying the specific areas I
and I think that's a very good
ideas well and we could we could
take a look at that so I think.
Those two suggestions for
effects would help advances so.
You know what I would really
like to do and
it would deflate just just
actually did not affect would be
one day I think it is if you did
a committee sought for House
Judiciary incorporate these
things and.
that on Saturday morning we
could act on it right away.
That's my proposal but I also
want to be sure that everybody
in the committee gives the
feedback that each individual
might have in case we've missed
anything else that we want to
put into the committee stop.
Are there others to help I think
India.
So I think that
okay Representative Eli.
Madam chair I was just gonna say
the sponsor and for the Attorney
I think it is going to be I
think these are all good ideas
and the idea of getting a bill
out of here the committee can
agree on well frankly make it
much easier on the floor so I
think the delay is worth it just
to get this thing right and so
I'm not really hearing the
objection to the bill it's more
of a concern about some of the
technical language and you know
I actually agree with
Representative divert with to
speak for both on the problems
and how to solve the problem so
I think with that this bill down
the road to move much quicker if
we get this right thank you
madam I'm real I really think so
too I like the idea that I'm
getting a really strong law in
place and one that really
doesn't leave any room for
people to ignore the problem the
vice chair has led her way in at
this with the.
I just wanted to appreciate
Representative study on a for
bringing this board the topic
generally is something I know
we've considered in House
Judiciary with a lot of
attention to the technical
details and certainly I know
together we're going to get that
right I just wanted to weigh in
I had a little bit of a reaction
to something that was said madam
chair representative
that we have data that teachers
will report on teachers etcetera
etcetera I just want to remind
us that our educators are in the
classrooms every day most of
them I imagine the overwhelming
number of educators across our
school and staff our schools and
and the staff to support them
trying to keep kids safe and
keep kids invested in their own
lives and their potential so
when I hear something like that
I just want to make sure we're
not putting the onus and blame
on those in the classroom but
we'll do really building better
systems in CYFD and in those
relationships with law
enforcement agencies so that
they have room to do what's
right and responsibly and
ethically show up and make these
reports when they're needed and
I I just especially appreciate
that Representative Sarinana is
here as an educator who's been
in the classroom who understands
the responsibilities of showing
up for our little ones every
single day so I'm incredibly
grateful for that and just want
to make sure that we're trying
to hold the system accountable
to keep kids safe but I also
just want to name in honor the
good ones the overwhelming good
ones that we have in our
classrooms to make sure that
we're not Act you know sliding
sliding folks when they're just
trying to do their jobs but I
look forward to the technical
fixes I think they make a lot of
sense especially appreciate
representative Ely for bringing
again of the questions we had
about the good faith standard as
we've seen it come come forth
thank you madam chair and
representative.
Thank you so Representative
Sarinana we are going to roll
this over and and put you all to
work on and I I would say not
only get with the speaker but
With the.
Drafter on the criminal laws
that you want to to enumerate in
the in the beginning so that
saves you all the definitions
later as well.
We'll see you back on Saturday
and.
We're going to be we're hoping
to start about one.
Right great thank you.
Thank all of you for your input
we just need a good bill this is
a really important topic and we
need to get it through that the
house and and and sent in to the
governor as soon as we can
because we saw this last week in
Albuquerque school so we we just
need to stop passed passing the
trash thank you so much.
Thank you very much and next we
have Representative Dixon.
House bill one forty four.
Welcome Representative Dixon.
Thank you.
Madam chair do you have
I believe the information for my
witnesses for house bill one
forty four.
Our committee people probably do
if you'll tell if they'll just
remind us of their names will
that will put them on panelists
status.
Thank you
Jason Weaks minta mechanical and
read more.
I don't think we've had any of
you and House Judiciary up this
session so away I think Jason it
we saw here but and
Representative bay.
Go right ahead.
Okay.
Wonderful I'm thank you madam
chair and members of the
committee I'm here today to
present house bill one forty
four as amended.
My co sponsors for this bill are
representative mo my estimates
and representative bill we.
The purpose of house bill one
forty four.
Pretty damage funds that is to
create a balanced statute that
will reduce that that a
regulated metal.
Metal that is an ongoing problem
statewide the issue isn't just
the loss of the metal but also
the resulting property damage
from both attempted and
successful act of that.
Here are two examples in twenty
thirteen approximately two to
five hundred dollars of copper
wire was stolen from Santa Fe
Turks the staff's cost more than
eighty thousand dollars in
damage when the boiler crafts.
And in the last two years the
cost to the City of Albuquerque
for total copper staffed topped
eight hundred thousand dollars
and those are just that city on
proper utilities and private
businesses also been part it.
Metal is a frustrating challenge
for businesses the community and
law enforcement existing
criminal statutes do not
specifically criminalized the
combined acts of theft or
attempted that regulated metal
and criminal damage to property
under one statute as a result
prosecutors and law enforcement
have to pursue criminal charges
under two separate statutes
larceny and criminal damage to
property.
Without a specific statute that
criminalizes the combined act
many of these cases go
unprosecuted and there is not a
significant statutory
deterrents.
By combining both the theft and
damage we believe also one forty
four will provide law
enforcement a more effective
deterrent to this continuing
problem.
And I think it's important to
recognize the steps the
legislature has taken in the
past to address this issue
specifically in twenty fourteen
by passing house bill twenty
one.
But the statistics have shown us
that we need to do more and so
house bill one forty four has
bipartisan support support from
the community from the community
including realtors utilities the
metal recyclers as well as law
enforcement.
So in addition to my co sponsors
I'm joined by the expert
witnesses Jason Weaks amendment
gonna go representing the metal
recyclers and grant more
representing the realtors
association so I'd like to allow
them the opportunity to make
additional responses are should
they be interested and then we
would stand for questions madam
chair thank you.
Go ahead.
Good afternoon chairman members
of the committee I am gonna go
and I lobbyist for the
responsible metal recyclers
initiative as part of this very
important building we've all
been working on for several
years there are the and Senator
administrative changes that we
think are important.
And will also that complement
what we're trying to do to find
out all that and with that I'm
happy to turn it over to Jeff.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee just weeks also
registered lobbyists for the
metal recyclers
really the criminal provisions
of this bill or what I'm gonna
speak to and what we wanted to
do was create as a
Representative Dixon said sort
of a mixed criminal offense that
combines both larceny and
criminal damage the issue has
been in the past that there is a
specific intent associated with
criminal damage and it's the
intent to damage property in
these instances there's no
actual intent to damage property
so it's very hard to charge
these as criminal damage to
property offenses and often
times when you have metal fest
the intention is to steal the
metal but not necessarily damage
to property it's sort of an
insular Ahrendts and really
that's where most of the damage
occurs is when you're
Representative and a lot of the
property it causes significant
damage that often far exceeds
the actual value of the
regulated material so what we
did was we created the next
defense of
taking the the regulated
material and the resulting
criminal damage on.
Anything that's a thousand
dollars or less is going to be a
petty misdemeanor one thousand
dollars to twenty five hundred
or under twenty five hundred is
going to be a for a misdemeanour
and then anything over on twenty
five hundred or twenty five
hundred over is going to be a
felony
We stop at that felony level the
point here is to create an
offense that can be easily
investigated easily charge and
then more easily prosecuted
and we think that this is
specific enough that will just
target this particular action
criminal damages somebody causes
criminal damage to a car is
still going to be criminal
damage to a car because there's
that requisite intent to
actually damaged so you think
that this is a good way to both
create a penalty that seeks to
disable from committing the
offence and actually when they
commit Defense face an
appropriate penalty associated
with the actual criminal action
with that chair over to Mister
Moore.
Thank you madam chair members.
Sorry.
I have
madam chair members of the
committee my name is Brent more
I am a registered lobbyist for
the New Mexico association of
realtors and we've worked with
the metal recyclers on this bill
and I would say we engaged in
some negotiations with them and
they have come forward and we've
reached agreement that we need
both criminal provisions and
civil provisions and I would
start off by saying that there
are a lot of good actors out
there in the metal recycling
business and they want to make
sure that that these types of
issues are not a problem what we
proposed to them were some
improvements in our view to the
sale of recycled metals Act and
you will see those reflected in
the.
The amendments that came in from
the consumer public affairs
committee and so those are.
Changes to section two point
four of that act there's two
provisions there and I'm happy
to address those to the
committee essentially what we
are talking about is increases
in the standard of written
documentation need to be
provided when somebody presents
these types of materials for
sale and also a new provision in
the new subsection C. which
talks about the knowledge of the
secondhand metal dealer what
they know when they are
receiving those materials so
those are the two provisions and
I'm here to address thank you
very much madam chair.
Thank you anything further from
your presenters Representative.
No thank you madam chair we
stand for questions okay I'm
gonna go to the audience to see
if there's anyone here on house
bill one forty four.
What was your first committee.
Madam chair of this committee
was our consumer and public
affairs okay thanks okay let's
see who's here.
I would like to.
By a show of a wait we have to
do the
are judging you wanted to be on
call first please.
See those here in support and in
opposition and will have twenty
seconds to.
Fill out your new use here.
So okay we have.
Eleven in favor two against so
we have eighty five percent in
favor I'm going to start with
the opposition first and let
those individuals would you
please raise your hand if you
are in opposition.
It Rikki Lee Chavez.
Go ahead.
Thank you madam chair.
The.
We're not hearing you I think
you might have a few items here
this happened in New Mexico
defense lawyer tend to.
Is this better madam chair.
Yes okay sorry about that
madam chair members of the
committee Rikki Lee Chavez on
behalf of the New Mexico will
defense lawyers association we
do appreciate the intent of the
sponsoring her advocates however
we do stand in opposition we
propose the creation of new
crimes we think that our books
are most likely adequate enough
for people to get creative with
any sort of charges that they
see fit to address this type of
crime we also note that
the creation of new crimes or
the enhancement of penalties
does not often to Turkey actual
criminal offense and for those
reasons we stand in opposition
thank you.
Thank you next Bernalillo treat.
Yes madam chair I'm Bernard
treat I'm governmental affairs
with Xcel energy we're just here
this afternoon to stand in
support of the bill would keep
it simple and we just appreciate
the efforts of the bill sponsor
thank you ma'am.
Thank you then I have others who
are in support if you would like
to speak raise your hand raised.
Hello Kent Cravens former
senator welcome to House
Judiciary.
Go ahead Madam chair of thank
you very much great to see you
all of this afternoon thank you
for the work you're doing under
some very different situations
and circumstances
as the CEO of the greater
Albuquerque association of
realtors would like to stand in
support of the legislation we
feel that it'll go a long way to
alleviating or or at least
mitigating up a problem it's
been a long standing I know here
the association we've had
numerous times where we've had
to replace wiring and the only
thing that stopped several
thousand dollars worth of
investments in protecting
via cages unlocks and different
different medium the the
facilities themselves so we
stand in support of the
legislation and we appreciate
the Sanchez for bringing it
forward.
Thank you next I have a mate
robin.
Good afternoon madam chairman
and members of the committee Amy
Verity.
I am the registered lobbyists
for the New Mexico oil and gas
association we appreciate the
Sanchez for bringing this bill
forward and I think
Representative Dixon said it
best this is a frustrating
challenge to businesses so thank
you when I was supports this
legislation.
Thank you except karla Kugler.
Go ahead.
Yes hello I'm madam chair
members of the committee can you
hear me.
Yes we can my name is Carla
Coogler I'm with associated
builders and contractors were at
largely commercial construction
association representing
contractors throughout the state
we stand in strong support of
house bill one forty four
unfortunately in the
construction industry metal
theft has become the cost of
doing business but what has
become an increasingly larger
issue is when the cost of the
damage is greater than the cost
of the theft itself individuals
can go in without for five
batteries from heavy equipment
on a job site can basically
leave the equipment useless that
can be thousands of dollars of
repairs or if they go in without
wires off of project it's the
kind with the framing in the
fact the crew has to come and
completely redo the entire
electrical system this bill
provides some remedy that can
better explain to prosecutors
and judges it's not just the
loss of the wire or the
batteries it's the way in which
that they they still it's the
full damage of the property for
for these reasons we ask that
you passed house bill one forty
four thank you thank you Ricardo
Gonzales.
Hi can you hear me Madam
chairwoman.
Yes we can I Ricardo Gonzales
with el Paso electric and we are
support of this bill we think
the the eight Sanchez for
bringing it forward and.
We we hope that that if if
there's just one one and one
person that that that is that is
able to to not steal something
and and and potentially put
their life in danger it's it's
worth it for us so thank you
very much
and and I'll turn it over to you
thank you.
Thank you next I have Tony
Trujillo.
Go ahead Terry.
Madam chair members the
committee my name's Tony
Trujillo I'm the registered
lobbyists lobbyists for free
report back around the copper
company here in southwest New
Mexico Grant County.
you know we have followed the
the this type of bills before
and I've always supported him
we have we want to thank the
sponsor for definitely bring
bring in this.
Legislation forward
I I will go to all the horror
stories I could tell you about
the copper thefts that that have
happened and I will just just
tell you that this type of
legislation is definitely needed
to stop what's going on with the
Memphis so in encouraging the
passage of this legislation
thank you.
Thank you Michael right.
Good afternoon.
Can you hear me yes very well
when he was Michael rife I want
to thank us.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you senator for carrying this
bill I'm a the executive
director of the New Mexico
within contractors association
I'm also the leader of the
construction industry crime
alliance group which is a
partnership with a PD and some
of the construction associations
and their members to try to work
with the those folks to kind of
help alleviate some of the
challenges they're having I just
wanted to mention you know I
can't see it as well as Meredith
did need to that you had it
right on the head and Carla
company covered everything else
I wanted to say I also wanted to
to to mention chastened covering
it well so I'm gonna just make
money short and sweet and say
that this is a a bill that's
going to help us resolve some
challenges working alongside of
APD that we've had for years
where some of the largest crimes
are being committed by folks who
have you know drug issues and
other challenges where they're
typically looking for quickbooks
and they're stealing copper
river stealing batteries and
they're using those as quick
cash changes so they can take
care of their drug habits and
it's been a challenge it's been
one of the biggest challenges
we've had in the construction
industry in solving crimes so we
really appreciate that this bill
number four we urge everyone
support and we did want to
mention just one quick thing
that maybe in five years from
now when lithium batteries and
other battery types are a big
challenge it might help if the
bill had a little comment to the
effect of
You know recycled recyclable
battery material or something
other than just limiting it to
To let acid batteries there's
multiple other types of
batteries that is as.
Time moves on we'll probably
have.
Bill Kerr.
Committee good afternoon my name
is the our operations manager
acting on that one out for tea
and.
We have organizations member
companies we stand and support
house bill one forty four
because it creates a criminal
statute that we believe will be
effective.
We also work Mexico association
of realtors for.
Both amendments to the sale
aside from that that thank you
for your time.
Thank you coming promote.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name's Kevin
rolled on the CEO The New Mexico
rule like trick coop Association
and would like to thank the
sponsors for bring this forward
this has been a problem for a
long long time the metal staffed
let me put a little different
spin on it this is this is all
about the theft and property
damage does this is also about
safety
we go out we find were copper
ground wires have been cut off
of our power poll polls that you
know creates an unsafe situation
for our
Please grounding pads.
Toward out of you'll substations
yield sometimes causing
substation outages were you can
do you know tens of thousand
dollars in damages of outage
time for our member
So along with property damage
there's also a very big safety
consideration here so we
strongly support this thank you
for your time.
Madam chair.
Can you hear me.
Oops I'm sorry I was needed we
can hear you.
Okay madam chair members of the
committee good afternoon my name
is Steve and I am.
CEO of the New Mexico
association of realtors I'd like
to thank the sponsors who
brought this bill in a
bipartisan effort to address the
serious problem has been facing
property owners for years I
think this approach them working
with several groups on this with
criminal penalties
administrative
Aspects to it and we stand in
support of house bill one forty
four thank you.
Thank you Mr that Rhonda
Mitchell.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee Rhonda
Mitchell for tri state
generation and transmission
association we thank the
sponsors for bringing this bill
as well as Mr on ball mentioned
this is a safety concern an
issue in the utility industry
not only for the person who may
be damaging our equipment but it
also creates an unsafe working
environment for our employees
so in addition you know the
damage we it creates additional
work for our employees to have
to go back and repair of the
damaged equipment so we stand in
support of this bill and thank
you for your time.
Thank you and the last person is
days.
As we know that.
Hi madam chair members of the
committee Jason Espinoza
registered lobbyists with the
associated general contractors
New Mexico my colleagues really
covers for the business and
construction.
issues well so I'm gonna share a
personal story about ninety days
ago
my one year old had to go in for
his annual appointment as doctor
to get its vaccinations when my
wife actually went to our
appointment they actually
informed us they weren't able to
give him the vaccinations
because of copper theft the
copper theft had issues with
their electrical system they had
to move their refrigerator with
their vaccines offsite and we're
able to move it back in time so
you know this not only has the
impact on the business but also
has the impact on consumers and
patients are because we had to
you know in the middle of the
pandemic do another second trip
back to the provider in order to
get this vaccination so I just
wanted to share that story and
that impact thank you madam
chair.
That's really interesting and
especially in light of our our
need for cold storage for the
comment vaccines let's go to the
committee now and first I'd like
to get Representative Dixon
opportunity at there was not
nothing really that you need to
respond to but if you want to
say something else before we go
to members that's fine.
Thank you madam chair I think we
can proceed with questions from
the committee thank you okay I
have some questions lined up it.
Just a moment first I have I
thought I did Representative.
The queen was the first and with
his handout.
Thank you Representative.
Thank you madam chair Madam
chair representative takes in.
It
where we hear version this bill
every session.
Is that true in fact I think the
first time I heard this bill.
Was before is in the
legislature.
And I was over at on the Senate
side late one night.
Serving as an expert witness and
we're waiting for it was the the
B. corporation bill to be heard
and they were presenting this
bill that was listening to it
Those at least ten years ago and
so I guess my first question is.
is is there not anything
currently on the books
addresses.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative McQueen let me
attempt to answer and then I may
also differ I'll defer to expert
witnesses but perhaps my co
chair
because sponsor representative a
reading for some of the history
I'm there was a bill passed in
twenty fourteen that did make
some changes however the
statistics that we have seen
over the last several years and
tracking regulated that's active
regulated metal have not shown
that
we are really reducing.
Prime in that and it's with that
if I could just for
What part.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative McQueen so Jason
Weaks talked about the the basic
problem of the current situation
so the intent is not to go ahead
and damage to property even
though they do criminal damage
to property that's over a
thousand dollars which is the
felony level you need to get to
for a felony
Senator intent wasn't that
they're not charging him with
criminal damage but they're
charging them with the theft of
the actual copper and the copper
since it's already been used
might only be work at the best
fifty dollars or two hundred
dollars and that's been the
problem is that all these are
misdemeanors and and that's why
nothing is happening we're
trying to raise the bar to go
ahead and and start preventing
this of action and you are
correct we've seen this several
times it usually makes it to the
Senate and we know all good
legislation dies on the vine
over there so.
Thank you madam chair thank.
What what was I think someone
says something was passed in
twenty fourteen what was passed
in.
I do madam chair and
Representative McQueen I was
sent I may have been one of the
sponsors I don't remember but
I don't remember the exact
specifics about what.
Mr weeks or miss Madonna go
would you like to speak on that.
Sure Madam chairman members of
the committee we have been
looking at this for a long time
and what we had started trying
to do and Representative Mamai
Estes and I started this.
Probably three or four years ago
is that we kept trying to figure
out how to make it into current
statute how do you get into an
in between position and what we
found is that.
In the ways that we we did try
the card to complex and then we
got out of the session yeah on
that people are saying well
that's not going to work anyway
that's not going to work anyway
Representative always came
through is that the property
damage is what is the the
primary consequence most of the
time so this time we went at it
with the property damage being
what.
Has the most consequences the
the choice of going into the
metal that so it's not like you
want to destroy the property but
to get to the medal you must
destroy the property so all
right Jason technically the long
thank you if I could just jump
in here my question was just was
there something passed in twenty
fourteen and what was that.
Madam chair and Representative
McQueen there was a bill passed
in twenty fourteen that address
the impact copper theft on upon
utility services and it created
a special larceny crime okay
thank you for that that's what
that's what I was looking for
Mr Representative Dixon or
possibly Representative ring
what what's the you I know we
refer to the you know a
misdemeanor petty misdemeanor
for three felony and then
there's a separate chart that
says what that is what is the
the penalty for fourth degree
felony.
Thank you madam chair
Mr weeks.
Chair and Representative McQueen
four degree felony is eighteen
months in prison.
So I'm.
Madam chair representative Dixon
and Representative right my
My concern about this and like
no questions at this is a
problem.
Clearly you know and that for a
petty crime you're causing all
sorts of damage and that's a
huge problem we haven't figured
out how to stop it in in
personally I think the way to
stop it is to drive the market
for the ballots and so actually
one of my favorite parts of this
bill is the amendment.
Which seems to be strengthening.
The rules on buying scrap
metals.
But my question would be.
You know we we have the fourth
we fell in the
And we have the restitution.
Or what's really upset.
The offense from people who
I I don't think these are the
most sophisticated criminals for
the most part that's my that's
my bias that's the cases I've
heard would reflect that
and so the the the example you
cited Representative Dixon.
There was I think you said
something where there was eighty
thousand dollars in damage so
does someone who committed a
relatively petty crime
good present for eighteen months
I think was the number and they
come out in eighty thousand
dollars in restitution.
Mr Reid sorry madam chair
Representative McQueen at I'll
try to handle that one if if
Representative Dixon doesn't
mind so yeah I mean the reality
is there is a penalty on that is
and then there is a restitution
requirement within the context
of this legislation so you can
also pursue restitution through
a civil offense right a civil
process I think the intention
here is to try to get
restitution through the criminal
offense if somebody search out
their time in their done then
it's hard to collect that money
because the jurisdiction has run
out on them and there's not
really another penalty that you
can propose upon I'm so if they
do eighteen months in prison
which almost is never gonna
happen on a fourth degree felony
and almost never going to happen
on a four three families
particularly a property
basically funds if they serve
out the underlying jurisdiction
can you come can you require
them to pay that restitution.
It's our because the court has
not run out of jurisdiction on
the underlying offense now if
you have educated them guilty in
a criminal case which has a
higher standard of proof in a
civil case then you can take
that criminal finding in state
in the civil court well we're
gonna pursue civil judgment
against you now this one's
pretty easy to accomplish that
because they've already been
adjudicated guilty for awhile
all higher higher burden of
proof and so the answer is you
know nothing's perfect the
concept would be let's try to
recover the
restitution without the person
going to prison but if we don't
need serve out their time what's
the remedy will you could
presume civil at that point.
Yes so Madam chair
representative Mr Rees that's
not the answer I was looking for
that's not my concern my concern
isn't your ability to.
Track this person down my
concern is their ability to pay.
So I see someone treat
committing a petty crime doing
some time forward in getting out
and being saddled with debt they
can't pay.
And I don't I don't.
The I I don't really see how
that helps anyone because on the
one hand they can't pay it.
So you know the company that was
damaged you know hopefully is
covered by insurance anyway and
then I can get back to me the
insurance companies going after
them but you have someone that
just got out of prison.
And you're having for money and
I just.
Yeah we we have a bill
Couple days ago the it dealing
with restoration of voting
rights for felons okay here we
have a felony and there is
argument made that before those
rights restored and this
argument it prevail.
That they should have to pay all
the restitution and it's like
this person never gonna pay that
eighty thousand dollars.
So Madam chair representative
and that that's that's my
concern.
Madam chair representative fully
understand I mean if if they're
not capable of paying I think
it's gonna be very difficult for
the criminal court to pursue
ongoing restitution what's the
jurisdictions run out
on the underlying eighteen
months
Exposure
you know I I at that point I
mean can you presume so we can
you say that they need to still
pay within the context of the
criminal case yes you can
but at don't know that this is
going to be something that you
know the criminal judges going
to come back and say I know I
don't have any jurisdiction to
school Hey and are they can't
send to jail anymore.
what's your sections out they
don't come out of jail.
Having satisfied the underlying
jurisdiction and and and have
anything that judge can't do
anything to at that point that's
why I say someone in perfect and
maybe it's a case of them at
that point is pursued a civil.
And again I don't think the
intention is to throw people in
jail and have them final out
their time in jail I think the
intention of this is to provide
one Forsman in the courts and
the DA's office reviews
throughout the state with some
tool to actually prosecute these
cases because they can't
prosecute right now the criminal
damages insulated larceny and
there's no intent to damage the
property and so all of the
criminal damage essentially get
swept under the rug the cases
just aren't being prosecuted.
Madam chair Mister weeks it if
you don't think this isn't
forceful lies in the bill I I
didn't see it wasn't enforceable
Representative McQueen I said
that once the jurisdiction is
done that it becomes hard to
actually collect the restitution
pursuant to the criminal
restitution requirement in here
and it's in the bill because
we're hoping that people will
actually choose to pay the
restitution as opposing as
opposed to the restitution.
Madam chair Mister weeks someone
who can choose to pay eighty
thousand dollars is instilling
metals.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative Eli.
Madam chair thanks hi yeah I'm I
have to admit I'm struggling
with the same things that
Representative McQueen is
struggling with I don't Sir
unfortunately
by I I do have
a technical and maybe we'll get
back to the I I do a technical
amendment that was suggested by
the Sanchez experts and it is a
little confusing so let me see
if I in their simple changes but
let me see what I go through
this first and then I'll
describe it because both.
The amendment in context that is
on the way out did not report
the amendment out of C. pack
correctly but I also want to
make a change to the amendment
that was made and she backed are
actually two changes so
What I'm gonna do is I'm going
to refer to the amendment
ordinarily I would refer to the
amendment context but it's not
correct and I'm looking at the
amendment from C. pack and so on
it is one of the men which does
not have a number on it I don't
know why it doesn't maybe once
they pass out they don't have
them but is a member coming out
of C. pack and it is online
three of the amendment so let me
just read this to you and if you
look at the amendment contacts
on page four and I know this is
confusing but I don't know how
else to do it it says the
paragraph a a second hand metal
dealer shall not purchase any of
the following without written
documentation indicating that
the seller is the rightful owner
comma and then the word or was
taken out.
And in the amendment in context
the orders in there but that's
not in the amendment itself so
we want to stick the order back
in there so that it reads a
secondhand metal dealer shall
not purchase any of the
following without written
documentation indicating that
the seller is the rightful owner
or has permission from the
rightful owner that is correct
because what we're trying to get
at is is that the second hand
dealer using a purchase at
unless they have either the
permission of the owner or
somebody acting on their behalf
so that's the first suggested
amendment to the C. pack
amendment and the second is
also to the amendment that was
done and she packed up paragraph
C. so it's on page two of the
amendment second line.
Well we're gonna change the word
owned to possessed so we're
we're read a secondhand metal
dealer shall not purchase or
otherwise receive any regulated
material the second hand metal
dealer knows is not lawfully and
the word it currently is owned
but it should say possessed so
that
it's not necessarily owned by
the person but they possess it
and they possess it lawfully so
madam chair I'm happy to make
that amendment formally but what
we're really doing is we're
amending and amendments from C.
pack.
Madam chair.
Were you did you want a response
from insert Representative.
Madam chair I would is yes yes.
Formally.
So so let me make the amendment
formally and see if the sponsors
will agree that it's a friendly
amendment so we are amending the
amendment from C. pack line
three.
to take out the word or that is
in brackets currently I'm sorry
not to take it out to put it
back yet so the work order was
taken out we would like to put
it back in that's online three
of the amendment and then on the
second page paragraph C. line
three to take out the word owned
and replace it with the word
processed.
And madam chair I would now I
asked the Sanchez at that as a
friendly amendment and
Representative US secretary of
the amendment.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Ely that is a
friendly and.
Any discussion let's let's move
the amendment for discussion
purposes and.
ET I will do that Representative
Ely will second that right.
Yes I it has been several
presented nine discussion
well he okay that's right he did
you move the amendment to do.
Right.
Is there a discussion on the
amendment let me change my view
here so I can make sure I'm not
missing.
Discussion of the amendment.
All right seeing no discussion
is there any direct action to
the doctor and then.
Representative Eli.
You have more representative Ely
I'm sorry I didn't realize you
were waiting on the sorry chair
you cut out a little bit so I
didn't hear you
yeah I met with the back to the
restitution I am curious as to
what the Sanchez think about it
you know.
I understand the problem we're
not trying to let people get off
with crimes but it does seem
like this would be a never
ending cycle of are you know and
I'm not saying it's not a
serious crime but they're both
going to prison and they're
going to get out and this can be
restitution and you know I'm I'm
I'm struggling for solutions I
don't have one and I you know
shorter stripping it out and I'm
not sure that's a good idea
probably a bad choice of words
to say stripping it out in this
kind of bills but I up I am
troubled by it I mean I just
think we're making people
criminals for ever and I just
worry about that but I'm
interested in the Sanchez
comments before I would propose
anything madam chair Sanchez.
Thank you madam chair and
representative you know I I will
defer to my experts witnesses.
Madam chair representative Ely
questions they don't really see
a problem so not stripping
taking the restitution provision
out I I understand both your
concerns and Representative
McQueen concerns you know at
this point I think the bill is
more important than that
provision and I think removing
it doesn't necessarily gain us a
whole lot and on definitely
understand the concern so I I
can't say what we would be
amenable to because I'm not the
sponsor of the bill but from my
perspective I think taking it
out would be fine.
Wouldn't affect the generalized
intent of this.
Madam chair in.
Representative on that point I
think that and what I've seen
and the court is if the
individual have the ability to
pay then it would be imposed
where as if they didn't have the
ability to pay why would you as
a business want to spend a bunch
of money to collect nothing.
Madam chair representative of
the land think this this
removing it does still give the
court jurisdiction and authority
to you know pursue restitution
there is a general restitution
statute in criminal already
so I think we're moving into
accomplishes exactly what
Representative Rehm is
suggesting any if the judge
wants to impose restitution then
they can if not then then they
can make that decision not to
impose that we're just as it's
written now restitution is
basically required.
so I think that leaving it to
the court is is probably a
better course of action given
the comments that have been
raised.
I'm madam chair and
representative with that
yeah but I'd be interested in
the discussion is
is I would suggest I'm still
looking the members to contact
so I'm looking at a page to the
minutes in time to exercise what
I have up
is to remove paragraph B. which
starts I should probably go back
to the bill but it's on on the
on the internet and then it's a
context of starts on page the
but you know it's kind of like
the prior bills I'm more
interested in a consensus on
this issue
that I am in trying to stir the
pot I do think I have seen this
bill before I know
Representative like she'll carry
additional I do think this is an
important bill I'd like to still
but I am bothered by that
requirement restitution it does
seem like it just ties
everybody's hands but I'd be
interested in what other
committee members would
say on that point and if they
don't I'll I would make a
proposal to remove that
paragraph.
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair I wasn't
going to
say anything on this for our
Representative asked so.
My my uncle died my uncle died
early wealthy I am now the
trustee of a trust for its
purpose.
His grandson is currently
incarcerated his grandson is
chosen I have but the
Involved in drug use and and
gotten himself into trouble.
This young man it has COVID to a
great deal of assets as a result
of this grandfather's to stay
out.
And although he may not a band.
Convicted of stealing our copper
and and things like that.
there could be situations where
people who make bad mistakes and
and have committed some acts ran
afoul of the of the statue to
come statute all the send
command to to to some money.
And I think restitution is
generally there are
we we constitution prohibits
debtor prisons so you can't put
people in jail because they just
can't pay a bill are people I
can't pay restitution are never
going to pay restitution.
But.
People that.
Come into money whether it's why
hard work whether it's by
parents or whether it's by
winning the lottery.
that one and then the thousand
one in a million whatever onset
is
occasionally there may be a
person that the is capable now
of repaying
for the damage that they caused
one of their fellow citizens and
that's what the I see
restitution as for and.
You know for the the the ninety
nine out of a hundred or maybe
nine hundred ninety nine out of
a thousand or nine hundred
ninety nine thousand out of the.
Yeah
Don't ever pay restitution
because they never have it to
pay.
But
I kind of see this is for saying
those who may have the means to
pay it then or maybe later
having to step up the to the
plate and and make good on the
damages they cause their fellow
students so that I would be like
comment.
It's so it's based on our
current personal experience
thank you madam chair.
Madam chair if I might just
really quickly respond to
Representative Nibert statement
criminal restitution can already
be required to be paid by judge
under thirty one dash seventeen
dash one B. so the restitution
still on the table even if we
remove the specific cost
restitution in this particular
bill.
I'm sure.
Representative with the thank
you madam chair thank you know.
Believe me the person can pay
they should pay what what I
don't want to do is.
You know I I just.
Do with this was a.
The gentleman lives across the
street from me and.
I miss wifi equipment dog in
there with him.
The addiction problems he was
stealing copper.
you know he wasn't in a position
that you know if there's a
generalized for us to should
statute that allows for judicial
discretion right yeah this
statute currently is written as
mandatory.
So you know if we can strike
that provision from from this
bill rely on that the.
The general statue that's Mr
week suggests
this it makes a lot more
palatable.
It does sound to me is that the
Sanchez.
Well not project.
Is that correct that is correct
Madam chair representative
Representative read I know
Representative Maestas doesn't
without spent.
Yes madam chair that's correct
so Representative.
Where would you like to make
that motion to amend the bill
and that way in the state it
properly.
In this Representative Eli it
was halfway through that.
Let's see up no madam chair I
I'm Representative McQueen
brought it up first I think it
should be has motion.
Okay so I I think I have the
bill in context and now I got
and I one of the real bills so I
get it right here so if you take
us through that Representative
we.
Madam chair.
As Representative Eli the
identified and I think he's
cracked without having gone back
through the bill it is section
B. on page two.
All lines three three seven if
we see that appears to be a
standalone restitution provision
so we would strike that and the
we numbers paragraphs.
Right.
So strike that subsection B. and
then re letter accordingly okay.
And so Representative McQueen
those that it is.
Chair representative Ely is a
discussion on the amendment.
Is there any objection to it.
I was seeing that amendment will
be adopted.
We're back on the bill so madam
madam chair I might all make a
motion for do pass of house bill
one forty fours twice amended.
We have a motion Representative
Eli.
I will second that motion.
And click to call the roll
placed.
Representative Alcon yes.
Representative Armstrong.
Representative Cook.
Mr speaker.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Lewis yes.
Representative McQueen.
Yes I'd like to explain my both.
Representative night Burt.
yes the new might check back
Representative Kurt K. Caesar
but he didn't respond
Representative Cook.
Representative Cook.
Yes yes.
Representative Rehm.
That's.
Representative Townsend yes.
Thank.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Yes.
I
want to explain you wanted to
explain Representative Quinn
wants to explain his and then
we'll announce.
Thank you madam chair
of just to see two quick things
one I'm still a little
income for with the bill but I
do appreciate the Sanchez taking
out that provision I you know I.
It just trying to let people get
their lives back together after
going to prison I think it's the
goal in the second thing Madam
want to mention the we we
amended an amendment I don't
think we can do that I think
would probably strike the C.
pack amendment and insert our
own.
Thank you.
I think our analysts are on top
of that.
But you're right we would strike
this to happen and.
Thank you madam chair yes very
good okay.
The number did you have
something you want to stay
before we.
Okay and the final count was it
was unanimous how many votes do
we have by a vote of ten to zero
we have a due pass as twice
amended thank you so much
already Representative Dixon you
have the next item as well along
with Representative right again.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you members of the committee we
do have expert witnesses are for
house bill one forty five as
well.
If okay they could be allowed
and that would be.
Mr Damon Martinez
and I believe his experts are
with him on one zoom.
Okay very good.
Okay great I'm and I do see them
So thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I am
have before you again at this
time to present house bill one
forty five which is crime of
illegally dismantling of vehicle
my cosponsors for this bill our
representative bill ream and
Representative joy Garrett.
Are there increasing nationwide
and here in New Mexico in
Albuquerque we're actually
number two in the nation or
highest vehicle thefts per one
thousand and as these rates
continue to increase more New
Mexicans will suffer from stolen
vehicles and every New Mexicans
will be affected by increased
insurance costs.
House bill one forty five amends
the criminal code to make owning
or operating chop shops illegal
chop shop strip dismantle stolen
vehicles for parts and then
resell the part.
They're a critical driver in the
auto staffed food chain.
At this point I'd like to
introduce my expert witnesses
and asked that they provide the
committee with an overview of
how Topshop organized the
different types of operations
they used to victimize the
community and insurance
companies and to provide the
benefits of this legislation
thank you madam chair and yeah I
I see
Mr Martinez and his our group
are there to speak thank you.
Members of the committee.
My name is David Martinez with
me today also from El Department
detective Daly Dave Taylor
Sargent trade consummated at
this point I'll turn it over to
act state Taylor to discuss what
Representative station just
stated in rural.
Yes.
Members of the committee
Press now since two thousand and
twelve and
At first to start off with.
The
economy correct and I still a
car and drive down the street
and get from one place you can
crimes of which we have all both
for.
as I progress throughout this.
Estacion side of the are similar
with.
The.
And number two a vehicle as.
You can see the vin number of
vehicle kind of like your credit
only more descriptive.
Where were they take vehicles
this not only in their.
Hi can still excellent identity
the stolen vehicle.
Think that vehicle Clark and
sell the parts
It's two maybe and the judgment
of what appears to be legitimate
body shop that sells us on parts
makes a huge profit.
Whether they this vehicles and
transfer about members of the.
Public I suspect purchases
vehicles
or and in the Senate all this L.
any loss as a stolen vehicle
they use profit margin.
Nothing on the books that.
We focus on this type of
operation and so there's no
incentive to stop doing it.
The continuing it'll you'll the
needs for stolen vehicles
coming.
Some of the different operations
that this call one of these are
solid operations where.
A person may have salaries the
ankles it may have a salvage
title to those vehicles you may
even have thank because and more
than eight Craske ical and they
retain ownership of that vehicle
no insurance plans.
And now he has the needs stated
that the vehicle still alive be
able remove the numbers from the
vehicle and switch on the song.
Created by it as the vehicle
titles you
when we stumble upon these when
vehicles are manufactured
and will this family line there
are confidential numbers are
place those vehicles where we're
still able to identify it and we
can see.
That number that's been placed
on page excuse late parent
because it doesn't correspond to
manufacture.
Method of application for that
number we can see these vehicles
which dissolves we just a
purchaser
we stumble upon these by either
we have for Mason maybe a
confidential informant or just
from the general public to say
Hey this is going on here and we
start looking into it
Yes cases complex of this bill
which becomes law focus on the
types of activities that are.
Happening with this type of
stuff and make it a little
simpler Representative
prosecutor and just full for law
enforcement skills to get these
pieces prosecute.
Another thing about is.
This.
It's much more difficult for
victims with this type of crime
first
vehicle stolen from on whether
they get that back they're not
or an insurance company pays a
loss and more losses they pay
out course those costs get
passed on everybody so we all
regions
The race do you which makes the
safety for everyone on the road
is real to what's called the
stripping operation where they
get these goals else down
and then fall through the SLO's
process after they've done to
shell out and certainly covered
by law enforcement the vehicle
that is removed from NCIC and
of.
Usually these are more than one
person involved in doing these
operations.
I have another associate recalls
through the us seller's process
and then maybe purchased it and
then we have some of the car.
These are licensed mechanics
about license auto body shops
selling these vehicles back out
into the public market value.
Again huge profit margin.
And.
States also we don't know if
their budget and Roadrunner
properly was gonna break down so
you can see kind of the trickle
down effect and it has.
By creating it to have someone
to.
In our homes are vehicles that
are probably the second biggest
purchased right in it and it
greatly affects the lives of the
LCS our children.
School or sporting events for us
to get to work
and when that just kind of gets
interrupted and being stolen
this it affects everybody like I
said this bill will help not
only investigators has chief to.
Ross you these types of crimes.
It'll it'll have hosted impact
on people and making thank you
for they committed sex crimes.
Thank you and I believe that
madam chair my co sponsor
Representative Rehm can find a
little bit of the history of the
committee for those who are new
thank you.
Members of the committee if you
remember last year we had this
bill before our committee and
the Judiciary Committee I helped
in amending that we amended this
bill and then pass to out of the
committee and out of the house
and this is the bill from last
year thank you.
Thank you Representative Rehm.
to the audience now.
Okay all right first we will do
a call to see how many are in
favor of house bill one forty
five and how many are in
opposition so let's get that up
we'll do that for fifteen
seconds.
Already we had three in favor
and I'm against and I will start
with those in opposition first
please raise your hand if you'd
like to speak in opposition hi
Kim Chavez Cook.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee Kim
Chavez Cook with the law offices
of the public defender and we do
stand in opposition to this
legislation primarily because of
the fact that while we
completely recognize the very
real problem that the sponsor
and proponents are trying to
address all of the conduct that
is prescribed by this bill is
already under various criminal
statutes including changing
serial numbers transferring
stolen motor vehicles stealing
cars all of those statutes
including accessory liability
which applies all of those
statutes with full force of the
law to people who operate the
chop shops already so as well as
racketeering conspiracy etcetera
I want to point the committee
members to the New Mexico safe
report card for this bill last
year on and save dot org we gave
the bill and degrade and
recommended that the that that
people it would pursue other
alternatives for trying to
prevent these crimes because new
crimes do not deter criminal
activity thank you so much.
Thank you our Rikki Lee Chavez.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Rikki Lee Chavez
on behalf of the New Mexico
Grable defense lawyers
association we also respectfully
stand in opposition we don't
support the creation of new
crimes and we appreciate the
work of the Sanchez however on
further reasons previously
stated by the offices of the
public defender we believe that
there are adequate statutes on
our books to address these sorts
of actions so for those reasons
we also are opposed thank you.
Okay Nancy now those hands of
those that were in favor of the
bill who wish to speak.
JD Bullington.
Thank you madam chair JD
Bullington representing the
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce.
One of the ways that crime
becomes a lifestyle in
Albuquerque is by starting off
with auto theft so with respect
to this property crime which is
often coupled the violent and
dangerous acts the chamber
believes and anything and
everything we can do approach is
warranted.
There is a link in the criminal
chain here that is getting
graced without repercussion and
that is the Topshop operations a
play a major role in the auto
theft problem in New Mexico and
we urge passage of this bill
thank you.
I don't see any other hands so
let's go back to the committee
now.
Representative the queen your
first.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair representative.
I understand I've seen this bill
for
give me my short term memory is
not what it used to be it all
looks new to me
I had some questions about the
way the bill distracted to begin
with.
On the first page alliance
twenty twenty one.
actually section let's talk
about section may madam chair
representative.
I was expecting the crime but
illegally dismantling a motor
vehicle to be dismantling a
motor vehicle but the crime is
is defined as operating a chop
shop.
Which is.
Sort of much more
Extensive.
but my first question is so so
that's a little odd but the
first question is why what's the
difference between a motor
vehicle vehicle stolen motor
vehicle and stolen vehicle we
want the crime simply
dismantling a car that's not
yours.
Thank you thank you madam chair
representative McQueen affected
defer to make a sponsor please.
Madam.
That Representative part of that
is and the
when you go to the motor vehicle
code which device defines a
motor vehicle you find it turned
in that manner.
Okay that's a good answer
We say.
Madam chair representative
green.
We we cite stolen vehicles but
then.
We have a definition of
unlawfully obtained.
Which is actually use the term
stolen.
So I'm awfully the teen on page
two of subsection three says
means of change but the fraught
the former someone but the
terminology seems to.
Not be consistent.
Yeah.
Chairman Representative McQueen
that really deals with
embezzlement of a motor vehicle
so I go to a of let's say go to
her to rental car and all the
you know Hey you to drive it for
a day and then I am bills will
that be it will work I borrow
your vehicle in new loan it to
me to to go to the store today
and a week later I still haven't
returned it to you.
Mentors and remember sheet that
but like we we have this
definition of unlawfully
obtained we have the term stolen
we have definition of Topshop
definitions of chop shop doesn't
include the words stolen
anywhere and it doesn't include
the term stolen vehicle.
Thank you Mr unlawfully obtained
vehicle.
Madam chair representative Mike
between my quick answer is is
chop chop is the location but I
need to read through and see if
I can see specifically what's
causing the problem.
The queen I now I'm wondering if
maybe you're right we are put on
page two one fifteen before
motor vehicle stolen motor
vehicle.
Stolen or embezzled motor
vehicle.
Madam chair representative
bringing.
Yeah of course when you don't
want to say and unlawfully
obtained stolen vehicle I think
that's.
Redundant
The thanks might be in the
definition on page one in
section may you legally
dismantling.
And unlawfully obtain vehicle
consists of.
It there's there's a lot of
different terms and definitions
and in my opinion they don't all
quite money up.
Nearly as a as I might want.
So I'm gonna let you I'm not
gonna ask you to figure that out
on the fly in the you want to
under that chair representative
Rehm.
I'm Representative McQueen can I
just I'm also tell you it does
sound strange to me if you take
out all the the words in the
middle illegally dismantling a
motor vehicle.
And then it says and then Bob
what consists of and then made
terror controlling and Topshop
that doesn't seem to fit with.
The definition of an illegally
dismantling a stolen vehicle
just it's just kind of night not
elegant.
It's a little.
Illegally illegally robbing a
bank is the crime of having the
loot from a bank robbery you
know it's just thank.
It's a step removed.
Go ahead with the rest of your
critique
Madam chair representative ring
on the definition of motor
vehicle on page two.
Motor vehicle means every
vehicle that is self propelled
in every vehicle this propelled
by electric power team from
batteries.
And madam chair Representative
Rehm I contest when I think of
self prepare propelled I
envision Fred Flintstone.
propelling his vehicle.
but I don't really know what the
difference between a self
propelled vehicle is an electric
vehicle because I would think
they're both.
Self propelled but one has
internal combustion engine and
what doesn't.
Madam chair and and
Representative you are correct
because the motor vehicle
comment was actually in its
origin in the in the.
To revisions back we're in the
fifties and this is out of the
state statute I'm gonna give you
the number here in a minute
because that's what it says.
So madam chair and
Representative McQueen it'll be
sixty six dash one.
Dash.
We.
Sixty six dash one dash four one
eight one one section H..
Motor vehicle means every
vehicle that is self propelled
and every vehicle that is
propelled by electric power of
team from batteries or from
overhead trolley wires but not
operated upon rails.
So you have.
That being so we're being
consistent with existing that
language.
So madam chair is that right.
Just because we're on this
topic.
Do we have any trolley cars in
New Mexico.
Madam chair in.
Representative McQueen it
actually goes back to the
twenties thirties and I think
into the early forties they have
him in Albuquerque.
Yeah I didn't think madam chair
I think that you are project was
overhead wires you know so I I
was trying to think if we if we
have that and.
So.
Madam chair is every you know I
I I think this bill could use
the.
Then and and it you know
streamlining I I.
I'm sympathetic to using
existing language for sick a
consistency yes struggling that
the existing languages so
Ross and other date I I'm also
you know I am sympathetic you
know I read the FIR and.
Pointed out that you know a
person committing this crime is
also committing six or seven
other crimes.
So you know why why those are
insufficient
yeah I'm I'm not sure
So I appreciate what you're
trying to do in the recognizes
significant problem in New
Mexico in my understanding is
Albuquerque particularly so
thank you madam chair thank you
representative madam chair I
Ask our expert witness to
elaborate on that specific point
because that is something that
has been asked before about how
this specifically would help
crackdown on auto theft.
Sure I think that would be a
good idea.
She is what David Martinez yes
please okay.
Share our will members that are
just first address
Representative greens.
Although the languages are based
on for example the probably car
stuff
References.
Can still right the language
together for example in section
eight eight on the other with
the destination from slides
twenty one twenty three on page
two the war in the subsection
three of the permission of the
owner I believe encompasses the
term stole which was I think one
of the first questions F. I turn
it over to the detective right
now to to actually quite from
Representative.
Yes share of Representative.
We do as it was are you still
love it there is a status you on
the books right is called
altering or changing the numbers
of law enforcement also as a
prosecutor trying to prosecute
one of those cases where that
may be going on there is a very
seldom crimes that law
enforcement witnesses these
subjects removing numbers are
all three engine numbers
following it on these
investigations we get on the
property and we say Hey here's
the frame of the vehicle and I
just from the stolen vehicle to
these numbers from this property
are on now.
And there is a charge of re
students has friends on property
transfers one would be able but
where is the punishment for
dismantling these vehicles and
create these numbers off their
plan after
this one that vehicle.
And placed on the table and when
the reserves that are this would
be less easy scratch each
process you as in regards to
that type of criminal activity.
Thank you thank you madam chair
thank you Representative.
It's occurring to me I have the
the the bills the appropriations
bill will go to appropriations
I'm reminded criminal code it
sounds like we need to include
the motor vehicle code in that
right Representative working.
Want to share act we and I
grant the last two governors
they have worked on that project
is sitting over there and I've
asked them to give that to me so
that I can work on it because
that's something I currently
work in a also and Kerry that
legislation but yes we need to
do that motor vehicle code okay
yes yes.
With the clerk please call the
roll.
Representative all current.
Yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Cook.
Representative Cook.
Mr speaker yes.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Lewis.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative night.
Yes.
Representative Rehm yes.
Representative Townsend yes.
By Jessica Benham.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Yes.
By a vote of eleven to zero we
have a due pass.
Thank you very much
congratulations Representative
the Dixon you thousand here
today and Judiciary.
Thank you.
Okay Sir.
Thank you.
Now madam vice chair house bill
one forty six thank you madam
chair before we go to that I see
some attendees that maybe
potentially be here for him
that's part of their registered
name so might we announce one
more time that some of those
bills and specifically H. B.
eighty eight were rules will not
be hearing those to that today
if I'm correct madam chair right
and I had I did and now
I didn't say specifically what
was being called but based on
the Sanchez request also eighty
eight is going to be heard on
Monday because of amendments
being proposed was there
anything else noted vice chair
thank you.
One twenty.
One twenty four has been moved
to Saturday and I think we have
amendments plus we need to
arrange for translators well
that that request of the sponsor
and the electrification I
believe as well I don't member
the bill number.
And that was the right move to
Saturday it's one thirty seven
after request of Representative
small thank you thank you very
much I I really should have made
that clear at the beginning I
apologize and madam chair just
knowing that some people may be
missed the beginning and join us
later in the meeting so helpful
well I am ready madam chair
today with house bill one forty
six I have my expert witness
today in the state with you
might be promoted it is
In fact the director port
operations at the administrative
office of the courts.
She's the head of you he's
already with us in this
madam chair and committee house
bill one forty six is hopefully
the most straightforward bill
I'll have in front of you the
session this in a simple sense
aligns are statutes with a
Supreme Court order that was
issued in April of twenty
nineteen
the Supreme Court made the order
after studying the efficiency
and efficacy of the court system
especially for our rural and
frontier communities and making
sure that their arm of
government has room to work best
for our New Mexican constituents
so in twenty eighteen they
convened a New Mexico Judiciary
leadership summit in which they
explored initiatives to improve
efficient and effective service
to the public later that year
the summer of twenty eighteen
they began a pilot in the
twelfth judicial district which
pulled the magistrates under the
more of the authority and day to
day operations of the district
courts instead of AOC in Santa
Fe directly and then they roll
Senator other district courts
into that pilot including the
ninety six the third and
eleventh up by.
July of twenty nineteen this
consolidation had been complete
and in FY twenty the budgets of
these magistrates were moved
from the AOC under the
administration and and the arm
of the district court's
specifically of this legislation
now is making sure the statutes
are lines so that these district
courts can oversee day to day
operations including the
appointment of a presiding judge
magistrate judge when there's a
vacancy as well as the quarterly
and an overall management of the
budgets and finally that those
district courts have the
capacity to hire and staff those
magistrate courts so again this
is already a Supreme Court rule
that happen in twenty nineteen
and what this legislation does
and finalizes is that chief
judges of the District Court
shall exercise administrative
authority over the district and
magistrate courts in their
respective judicial district so
madam chair with that I'd like
to turn on to director of
operations adjacent clacking
case he might like to introduce
himself name with his position
does and and then it midst of
this decision transitions and
then potentially offer anything
I've missed about this
legislation specifically.
I have Mister tech thank you
madam chair members of the
committee yes as Representative
Cadena said I am the director of
the court operations division
for the AOC so the core
operations division that's what
came of the magistrate court
division after the consolidation
of magistrate courts
so we still do overseas some
issues dealing with the
magistrate courts for example I
am the legal adviser for the
magistrate courts the Supreme
Court of thought that was
important to keep that position
in the AOC so there wouldn't be
any
any potential for conflict with
the district courts that have to
hear appeals from magistrate
courts we also still oversee the
magistrate court facilities at
the AC.
We also do on internal auditing
the magistrate courts so we have
a program for that and we
administered the magistrate
court warrants fund which does
compliance of for people who
have warrants helps collect on
outstanding fines and fees are
to the courts and they run a
customer service call center
and we are also starting a pilot
program to centralize traffic
citation intrigue for the
magistrate courts so all of the
the traffic citations are
insured by our our central team
has office in Los crucis so
that's just some of the things
that I oversee as the director
of court operations after the
consolidation.
And as a representative Cadena
said
the purpose of this bill is to
just aligned statutes more
closely with the Supreme Court
consolidation orders and to
eliminate some redundancies that
currently exist under the
statutes for the district courts
have to still go through the AOC
to do some things that they need
to do to to manage the day to
day operations of the magistrate
courts so we hope that you'll
pass this bill so that the
district courts can more
effectively and efficiently the
day to day operations of the
magistrate courts and with that
also for any questions.
Attendees would like to weigh in
on their support or opposition
to this bill will put the all up
for fifteen seconds.
Go ahead.
Okay we only have two people
here voting and they both
support the bills so let me see
if we have
if either of those would like to
call it in a home that any
public comment.
We don't have any public comment
so on the committee.
First I have Representative Eli.
Why madam chair representative
to I hate to ask this question
because I am a practicing lawyer
yet to appear in front of the
judges but the FY are compels me
to ask this question so under
significant issues I don't know
anything about this I just
wondered if you had a response
to this it says House Bill now
this is a house bill one forty
six completely eliminate some
reading from page looks like the
second page of the FIR is says a
completely eliminates arts
section five seven five which
provides for a misdemeanor for
magistrate judges who miss
handle court fees mandates
removal from office and
forfeiture of any public office
for four years if this section
is violated.
If the legislative intent is to
remove this portion existing
statutes District Court District
Court judges will now be in
charge such fees there's no
similar safeguard to charge
District Court judges with
misuse of course finds so I
guess I'm asking the question as
a practicing lawyer whether
there should or should not be a
statute to charge just or maybe
they're already as they just
missed it to charge District
Court judges with mishandling of
funds and so that is requests
for a practice before you before
you start answering I want to
point out it's the last point in
our committee and all what is
okay well you don't if you don't
want to go through the whole FIR
you can also look at the
committee analysis and that
point is I probably should get
an answer from Representative
cadet in Mr class Madam chair
representative Ely thank you we
have discussed this concern
raised and you feel that there's
other lost edges investment in
broad statutes that will
continue to protect the the
public good and and those monies
that come in it was removed
because the responsibility to
manage the funds will be under
the District Court not the
magistrate but madam chair and
representative I'll certainly
turned to director clack to
clarify again not question that
was raised.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Ely yes we think
it would be covered under the
investment or fraud statutes we
certainly don't think that
judicial immunity would protect
them from that because obviously
you know if they're in the
ceiling or fund that's outside
of their judicial duties and in
addition to embezzlement or
fraud statutes they were also
obviously be subject to removal
by the Supreme Court under the
judicial standards and code of
conduct
and and we felt that we should
remove that provision since the
management under the proposal
would be
of the District Court so it
wouldn't be fair to.
All the magistrate judges to
that standard
for something that they're not
gonna have any management
authority over any longer.
Madam chair representative that
is excellent Sir I stand says I
thank you very much.
Representative Alcon.
Thank you madam chair as a.
Thanks district judges yes.
The hard words especially as I
can to some.
To bring this the.
True or not but was this
discussed with the magistrate
judges before you move forward
with this legislation.
Madam chair representative I'm
certainly I appreciate our in
house expertise that you bring
to this committee and I will
turn that question too our
expert director clock.
Thank you madam chair
representative all come on yes
it was this you so the
legislation went through on well
I went there are whole process
that we have on our unified
budget
and the the magistrates are part
of that it's also they have a
representation on what was
formerly the chief judge's
Council what is now called the
New Mexico judicial council the
magistrates are are represented
on that and
this this did pass The New
Mexico judicial council with
unanimous approval.
So.
Chair and
vice chair my question of course
is how many members of the
magistrate part of the judicial
council.
Madam chair.
Director Ron Madam chair
representative welcome they only
have one Representative on that
Council that is the president of
the magistrate judge's
Association
and as you may know not all of
the magistrate judges are member
of the magistrate judge's
Association but but on matters
such as this the association
does communicate with all of the
magistrate judge's they have a
a group email that includes all
the magistrate judges so so it
doesn't matter if they're a dues
paying member or not the on on
matters such as this
they do are they do communicate
with all of them sitting
magistrate judge this.
So.
Okay so madam chair and minimize
your so this was not taken to
the magistrate the at the
conference that they have every
year and presented to them there
in my correct in assuming that.
Yes Madam chair representative
of all called on that's correct
we didn't take it to to them at
that I the magistrate judge's
conference this one there are a
regular process that all the
legislation goes through so I
went there are budget committee
which I'm sorry I should mention
that the magistrates also have
representation on the budget
committee so they did have a
pass at it at the budget
committee before it was approved
in that committee and before it
went up to the New Mexico
judicial council for their
approval and then of course rule
by the Supreme Court and the
extra long but thanks and then
madam chair and vice chair so
therefore again one member of
the magistrate the list by the
the one magistrate judge in the
whole state of New Mexico as
part of that budget committee
that went through this whole
process of my correct.
Madam chair representative I'll
call yes you are correct they
only have one actual magistrate
judge who's a member of that
that committee
but
since the master course have
been consolidated into the
District Court since two
thousand nineteen
they
We will I guess it is a feeling
of spring court is that they
also have representation through
their district courts which they
are now part of as well.
Thank you thank you madam chair.
X. share.
I guess the only thing to do is
to have invested in New Mexico.
Madam chair representative about
Kong I think
off the top of my head I think
there's something like sixty six
administrative judgments.
Thank you thank you madam chair
madam vice chair system since
madam magistrate judges no none
of the other magistrate judges
of only one of the sixty six at
anything to do with this this is
not brought be before the
conclave.
And now it is here before the
legislature and we expect the
basses legislation income hold
and let our magistrate judges
ask us what we did but they
didn't even know that this has
happening and I supposed to I
would like to respond to this.
Madam chair and representative I
certainly appreciate the
question and it's the first
question I asked the
administration administrative
office of the courts when they
brought me this legislation
whether or not we like it this
consolidation decision was made
in April of twenty nineteen and
has been overwhelmingly executed
by the administrative office of
the courts and district courts
including that the entire
budgets of the magistrates were
moved into the budgets of the
District Court in the twenty
fiscal year so for me certainly
the impetus of of this decision
remains in the hands of the
Supreme Court when they put out
that consolidation order in
twenty nineteen this legislation
is really tying up those
remaining strings that relate to
the hiring of magistrates staff
without having to come back to
Santa Fe to do that decision
making in in person movement and
then as well as like a name to
the appointment of a presiding
magistrate judge when there is a
vacancy so again certainly to to
your point this this wasn't an
important move it's not what is
within this bill is not a
decision we're making but
something that's already been
done and and implemented by
eight by the courts in in twenty
nineteen but Mr crack if there's
anything you'd like to add thank
you madam chair and
representative.
Thank you madam chair and
representative
yes
again I at the yes only one
magistrate judge sits on each of
the budget committee and the
judges council
but but like you all they
represent their constituents and
they consult with their
constituents which and and these
cases are the magistrate judge's
so they had ample opportunity to
consult with all the magistrate
judges and send this out to the
magistrate judges and get their
feedback on this bill it wasn't
I wasn't presented
in a matter of
Where where where they don't
have advance notice of what was
being proposed so they did
consult with all the magistrates
and it feedback on the
magistrates as this one through
the process.
Thank you.
Madam chair and vice chair I
mean
Madam based here would.
Listening to what you're saying
madam vice chair you're
basically telling me that no
matter what the magistrate
judges want the Supreme Court
has already decided this and
that's all there is to it is
that pretty much what I heard.
Madam chair representative I
thought I would hope I wouldn't
have spoken to you in a way that
came off as disrespectful
because I care a lot about your
leadership and expertise here.
But from my sense of the things
yes unless we wanted to.
Enact some kind of authority to
reverse the supreme court's
decision this order did go out
in April of twenty nineteen what
I was told is that in advance of
that order through their
leadership summit and other
means again waited for this
legislation they were in
conversation with magistrates
across the state as they move
towards making the courts more
efficient so yes in in summary.
It is real that that they made
this decision they put out this
order they moved to the budgets
and the district courts are now
overseeing the day to day
operations of these magistrates
whether or not H. B. one forty
six goes through.
So madam chairman licensure you
basically tell me and doesn't
matter what we do here this is
going to happen.
Representative it did happen
what this bill is doing is tying
up these remaining three or four
lost rings to match the statutes
to what the Supreme Court
decision already set and and and
acted.
Thank you madam chair.
The thank you madam chair I I
just don't support this cause of
spoken some of the magistrate
judges that are in my area
they're not happy with this and
the I just Madam chair in my
name Madam last year I just go
back to when I was a magistrate
judge in order to be a member of
the magistrate Association base
seventy five Bucks dollars no
big deal but do we matter to us
why would I have to be used to
be part of an association that I
was elected to and the only way
that I could have a vote to
elect the president of the
association was invited paid the
seventy five dollars.
That was do we that was kinda
like
Yes back to the day of the local
taxes you know there's seventy
five Bucks you know look for the
president so I totally in order
to show my distant my
disappointment with the number
plate at seventy five dollars I
never voted for president so
with that in mind yeah the only
one from the one big problem is
that I do have.
Is just from hiring the staff.
To.
To do
this before somebody and Mason
who instances in this record
many employees as many.
Employee and clerical assistance
from industry.
So.
Madam chair representative you
tell me what page you're on
second follow along yes thanks
law land six.
Okay.
The only thing I would like to
see an end to that.
This.
That the there's some things
that Lestat magistrate judge of
the state so as to who they're
going to work with.
District Court judge and I'll
just give you my example I'm
sitting here in Samoa gallery I
appreciate the presiding judge
of the District Court chair and
similar counties district
thirteen said this probably in
Santa Fe County.
At the.
Judge in Santa Fe County has no
idea of who is really I mean
they are elected just to see
what they really have no idea
who that magistrate judge has to
work within that county in that
area and there is no input from
the magistrate judge in making
the decision as to who gets
hired in the course of that so
magistrate judges would rather
not have anything to do with
hiring anybody but I would just
like to know that I have a state
so as to who is willing to
handle the paperwork and is
there are things going to be in
charge of the money is not even.
What is money coming to the
magistrate court to being the
boss that.
And the or the the nice thing
about as magistrate judge not
responsible for the money but
instead of running through the
magistrate court to obey.
Confusing.
Before the magistrate judge
would send the check to the
state and the magistrate judge
knew exactly what was deposited
now.
The district judges would have
to figure that out all the loan
to more.
So I'll just leave it at that
madam chair madam chair not
happy with the legislation my
magistrate judges are not happy
with legislation and that's all
I can say thank you madam chair
mind madam vice chair.
Madam one if we have discussed
this point about hiring myself
and the director of court
operations in AOC so there is a
specific word or two you'd want
to get in there to clarify that
consideration of the magistrate
it does seem like that would be
a friendly amendment so I know
we have other reps on the board
tonight but if that's something
you want to consider given your
displeasure with the bill is
that something that might
helpful.
We would consider that thank you
madam chair.
Thank you madam vice chair thank
you madam chair.
Next I have Representative
Nibert.
Thank you madam chair
Madam chair and representative.
As I recall
It strikes me as as all of that
the administrative office of the
point is giving up.
Some of its jurisdiction so to
speak.
As as I recall the restaurant of
offices report was specifically
created to help.
None other than the magistrate
courts is that accurate.
Madam chair representative I'll
turn to my expected that
question thank you.
You madam chair Representative
Nibert I am I don't believe
that's completely accurate thank
it was created to help the
Supreme Court exercise it's in
ministry of authority over all
of the Courts but the the
particular
administration over the
magistrate courts yes was a big
part of it originally
big when when that decision was
made to have the AOC oversee the
day to day operations of the
magistrate courts
and this decision to consolidate
was a
well as a representative Cadena
said it came out of the
leadership summit
which was trying to address how
this spring court should more
effectively overs oversee the
courts and administer the courts
and
this report looked at several
different models and they went
on this one to have more local
control over.
Point by consolidating the
magistrate courts under the
district courts instead of
trying to have AOC continue to
manage all the day to day
operations of the magistrate
courts
From Santa Fe so but no AOC
does oversee the administration
of of all the courts including
the district courts
and
add to some degree the the court
of appeals as well so if you
look at the directors duties in
the and the statute
it does give the IOC director of
administrative oversight
responsibility for all of the
state courts.
Madam chair and
the representative that may
maybe Representative dot com as
a better knowledge of the
history that I.
Spending quite a bit of time
with our.
One of our local magistrates Jr
who's retired out of judge
Robert court
and he used to serve in the
house and.
The stories that I hear from him
is the A. O. C. was set up to
assess the magistrate courts and
has had since grown into what
what your expert just described
is assisting about all the point
where are you at I have heard
stories that the AOC was set up
specifically to deal with the
bad district point that I just
find it the.
Our how our government entities
maybe outgrow and move on from
there their original right.
Madam chair of Representative
Malcolm has
has any information about our I
would certainly yield the Caleb
at Beatrice to use comments in
that regard.
I thank you madam chair and
madam lies to his to the
magistrate court goes a long
ways back and start over the
Senator Stewart and Chad is to.
basically got rid of the justice
of the pieces and they became
the magistrate court judges and
yes because there was little.
The District Court judges have
districts and they have their
own presiding judges and only a
funding things directives to pre
record the magistrate judges are
single I'm.
So therefore they needed to in
the Senator center split this
together this Chavis.
This new but this community
funding is the that I have the
AOC in order to have some kind
of control as some timing
guidance for the magistrate
court.
In all honesty when I'm seeing
this legislation I'm thinking to
myself why do we even have the
AOC anymore at all they're going
to do now is I don't know this
is to bring the course you
justice issues I don't know what
they're going to do now.
So I'll leave it at that.
Madam chair representative and
Representative are prone thanks
for or maybe some of that
history lesson
I do find it the.
A little bit strange and I've
been communicating with our
local magistrates our courts and
and while they don't like parts
of it that they supported but.
I I I am a little concerned
because I'm from the fifth
judicial district and the case
load in the fifth judicial
district is.
I believe this is an accurate
statement maybe higher than
that.
Most if not all of the other
judicial districts and so what I
see in this bill is that you're
going to put some administrative
duties all that district courts
that don't currently exist that
and I'm wondering in light of
the case load particularly of
the fifth judicial district.
All the District Court judges
there and specifically the the
chief judge going to have the
time to adequately perform
additional duties that are being
placed upon them Madam chair
representative.
Madam chair and representative
well certainly past this to
director collect elaborate as
it's been explained to me the
district judges already are
holding these responsibilities
but right now they have the
added step to sand sends them up
and up and down from Santa Fe
approval for instance if they're
ready to make a staffing
decision fill a vacancy in their
in house process and then having
to get it back to AOC to
finalize these hires that's just
one example that's been shared
with me so they're already
holding the responsibilities but
right now they have the extra
step because they're still in
the book of sending these back
and forth to Santa Fe but I'll
have director clack elaborate
thank you madam chair and
representative.
Thank you madam chair
representative number yes that's
correct this bill doesn't create
any additional responsibilities
for the district courts beyond
what they have already been
given under the consolidation
orders
so.
I hope you're provided with a
copy of this consolidation
orders which outlines all those
responsibilities for the
district point
and
yes Representative instead this
bill just six to online those
responsibilities with the
statutes so that the district
courts don't have to go through
the AOC to meet those
administrative responsibilities
they can just do them directly
and so having to go through that
extra layer.
Madam chair representative the.
The orders of the Supreme Court.
If they deviate from statute
then we need to get reports back
into our compliance if you will
we're with state statutes and
here your state statute says
this process goes from the
magistrate courts through the
AOC in the spring port and
changed it to a slide rule to go
through the District Court and
we don't like it I think we can
refuse to do that and have and
have a statutory scheme
Representative forces a
spring quarter two and here it's
rules to the legislative intent
M. and so what my concern would
be is if we have judicial
districts that are have heavy
caseloads and under the.
Spring for water that was
brought in and what two thousand
nineteen I think I heard
if those administrative duties
are additional duties why are
why impose those all the on the
chief District Court judge and
not have them are performed by
AOC which is traditionally
perform those tasks for the
magistrate court.
And so this is this is just
simply to to rubber stamp three
the spring court rule of but the
statutes are wired with with the
Supreme Court rule if we don't
like that I think we can push
back I'm not suggesting reduced
so I'm just saying that
Representative I'm not convinced
that that we have to do that and
and my real my real and only
concern is are we have has the
Supreme Court.
Place too many administrative
burdens on District Court judges
specifically the chief judge of
the judicial district that
of maybe should be borne by the
District Court judges baby the
existing
Where the existing statutory
mechanism of having the
magistrate court I do the higher
firing and all the other things
through the administrative
office of the courts
you know if that if that was
working then I wasn't working
that maybe legislative action or
spring or actually yes Sir I
just raised the issue are are
also board the legislation but I
am concerned about what it Sir
what it may do and what it's
done to our but the judicial
districts where I have a high
case loads and we here at
constant are clamoring for four
more District Court judges
because of their thank you madam
chair thank you Representative.
Representative Eli.
Sorry we're going to be on yeah
I mean I think it is an
interesting issue we we get to
the staff has to change but I
also think that we're getting
pretty close to a separation of
powers issue I do think the
judiciary has the authority to
it minister for his own agency
they are equal branch of
government although I I I mean I
don't disagree Madam chair
representative I'm not rich
point about well that's true why
we need a statutory change but I
think in this case I would be
willing to defer to what the
judiciary is trying to do to
streamline their processes I
just on our product a problem
with that I you know I my wife
always gently reminds me is a
retired judge that the judiciary
is an equal branch of government
so I have to say that every time
the school like this comes up so
I'm also in support of this bill
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative for bringing
this.
Thank you I'm I'm not seeing any
other hands.
Many other members who wish
state.
I was always.
Three to be careful about
separation of powers and not
legislating what a rule should
be for the courts and so forth
so it it I think I can say
Representative I'll call being.
Kind of offended by the fact
that there was an engagement of
the various magistrates but it.
light.
It's been in effect for some
time so I I guess
it seems appropriate to align
statute with the practice
sometimes we we
enact what is been case law so
it seems not entirely not akin
to that so.
That would be my comment and
what is the pleasure of the
committee.
I'm sure if it's appropriate all
moved to pass.
We have a motion for deposits
for representative Ely
I will second that.
Motion and is there for the
discussion.
The clerk to call the roll
please.
Representative Alcon.
Representative Armstrong.
Yes.
Representative Cook.
Yes.
Mr speaker.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative night.
Yeah I'm sorry Representative
Lewis.
Representative Nibert yes.
Representative rain yes.
Representative Townsend.
Yes.
Yes.
Madam chair yes.
Nine two one we have a two
passed.
Okay so
I'm.
Is our agenda but we did
actually add my.
I thought it would be great
today it's house bill two
seventy three and it is an
appropriations bill and so madam
I sure we take over here yes.
Okay committee members.
Well still two seventy three was
endorsed by
The.
Courts corrections and justice
committee we've been talking
about this for a long time.
Particularly with the
Hello Justice Reform trying to
figure out how the world we can
get our statutes you guys are
committed Alice's points out in
it in the sentencing commission
to that we regularly Amanda and
add new crimes to the criminal
code and to the wider statutory
law of the state so their crimes
in New Mexico law that are
located outside of the criminal
code and they're they're
they're.
Again the.
Each house for example so this
piece Miller creation of new
statutes and amendments to old
agency has created in the
state's criminal statutes and
Representative rink years trying
to remind us that we have this
is ridiculous in balance second
degree murder in in relation to
other crimes and I keep saying
let's just put it in that
rewrite of the criminal statutes
so that we can.
One thing just hanging out there
all by itself your income
students.
Is between certain criminal
statutes and that's when I just
mentioned and in case.
so we are.
That was what the analysis says
that criminal statutes are
littered with special provisions
to adjust the panelists for
particular crimes making
exceptions to the general sense
in state.
And
Adding to.
inconsistency.
The state of the law but we
know so much more now about
comparable statutes do we do not
to Turk prime and how collateral
consequences of conviction and
hindering offenders attempt to
rehabilitate and it would be
sitting so we have.
We thought.
In the beginning when we created
the cruise Justice Reform
subcommittee that we were going
to rewrite it criminal statute
the whole criminal code the
comprehensive criminal code and
we have never I'm.
The time as a part time
legislature and the overworked
staff in the Legislative Council
Service to get that done so we
had talked with the sentencing
commission about what they would
need to do it and how long they
might do it and so it's
contemplated just a one time
appropriation to.
So with that stand for questions
Madam chair did you have any
expert.
Eight.
Well Kerr
is is here and I think if he's
willing I haven't asked him in
advance but it would be nice to
get him over into the palace
statute because I think you can
answer questions as well.
Mr Kirk really please raise your
name if you want to come and
join us okay he's been moved
over here is okay.
Thank you madam chair also.
With that we will go to a quick
pull of those remaining
attendees we have seven left
with us today so we're going to
put up a poll now we'll leave it
up for fifteen seconds please
share with us if you're here and
want to weigh and whether you're
in support or in opposition to
HB to seventy three.
It's.
Okay it looks like we have to
folks lane in today that have
joined us a resume both of those
are.
Work for this bill.
We're now going to go to public
comment if anyone here in our
audience state would like to
weigh in on house bill two
seventy three please raise your
hand
I do want to just ask definitely
quickly I see Representative
medical ends name under
attendees is he also in the
panelists column if not let's
make sure we bring him back over
yeah it looks like
Representative about going has
been made in attendees that we
can bring him back to the panel.
Thank you I.
Public comment we have Rikki Lee
Chavez.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Rikki Lee Chavez
on behalf of the New Mexico
crumble Defense lawyers
association we stand in strong
support of this measure we
appreciate the work of
chairwoman Chasey and the
sentencing commission we also
encourage you to support we
often advocate and
ask you to consider positive
criminal justice reform I think
that this measure takes a step
in that direction and so we
encourage you to support as well
thank you.
Thank you for reading and next
we have Kim Chavez Cook.
Please on mute yourself you've
now been given permission to
weigh in.
Miss cook it looks like you're
still muted so if you wanted to
weigh in please go ahead and
unmute yourself for your
comments.
Okay.
Looks like she may be having a
glitch today madam chair than
anything else you wanted to add
before hello now to.
Okay okay madam chair anything
else you wanted to add before we
go to committee on Douglas
Carter might want to join in
real quickly here now that he's
in the panel.
Mr Carter thank you madam chair
madam vice chair members of the
committee my name is Douglas
carver I'm deputy director of
the New Mexico sentencing
commission I just want to the
only bit I'll add to what
sure warm Chasey said was that
this bill came out of the
sensing Commission was endorsed
by the full sentencing
commission and to address a
point that might have something
less stressful than the F. I. R.
Whether the commission would
work with other agencies.
For everyone's information the
sentencing commission is made up
of all agencies in the state who
are involved in criminal justice
issues the LPD is represented
the district attorneys
Representative as a magistrate
judge on the commission the AG's
office the courts.
Actions
department of public safety
victims advocate is sits on the
commission and the member is
appointed by the governor and by
members of both chambers in both
parties so it's as broader cross
section as you can get on actors
in the criminal justice system
that's why we are very well
situated to bring people
together for what would be a
fairly monumental undertaking of
re writing our criminal code and
that is why if this is a two
year project two year
appropriation because past
efforts to rewrite our code have
generally taken about two years
thank you madam chair thank you
madam vice chair.
Thank you we will now go to the
committee we have Representative
Eli.
madam chair all goes well just
to see if anybody else has any
comments but I would move a two
passed house bill two seventy
three and good luck to the
chairman appropriations.
Thank you Representative you I
do we have a second.
Representative Nibert and I saw
his hands go up first and
emotion the past motion for
Representative like is there any
further discussion on this bill.
May I just suggest that you know
if I think what we're might be
getting junior money and if
members would like to help
with with there are a junior
money in this effort.
I don't have I sure I'm not.
That dollars myself so I think
it's a really were all out
effort and and especially I'm
hoping all those on point
corrections and justice and
justice reform step thank you I
anticipate vice chair I could is
justice Chavez I lost track as
you know the chair of the
commission.
Yes I am Madam out vice chair
representative Ely he is still
the chair of the commission so
far the madam chair I I've no
problems I'll be happy to help.
You can hit me up.
Okay seeing no I just.
Being no further discussion is
there any opposition to this to
pass motion.
Madam chair can I do that
without a roll call vote.
As long as there it appears to
be no opposition and that nobody
should waving hands or any any
waving their hands raised and I
can see most faces on camera.
I see representative Armstrong
shaking her head vigorously.
With a smile on her face going
in the no direction as to do
opposition honesty yes motion.
Okay just show all members
present voting in the
affirmative I'm very so we show
all members present and voting
in the affirmative of madam
chair you have a do pass on
house bill two seventy three and
good luck in appropriation.
Thank you and they thank you all
for hard working afternoon I'm
glad we added support bill so we
could make a lot of our wait
list and we're we're trying to
get
let us know if you have an easy
win thank you.
And we'll see you I'm on the
floor tomorrow and then on.
Friday on the floor and Saturday
and Judiciary at one o'clock
thank you everybody.
Have a great evening thank you
members.
