Representative Lewis.
Representative.
Are we voting or taking
attendance at.
Okay I'm here.
What you just voted for
Representative line for.
Just but we doubt yes.
Representative.
Here.
Mr speaker.
Mr speaker.
Representative Lewis.
Our.
Second.
Can hear me now.
Yes okay sorry about that.
Here.
And madam chair.
I don't know if I'm really here
or not I was I just hello.
It government I have actually
have a custody hearing during
our Judiciary Committee meeting
today so the vice chair and I
are going to have to be trading
off and.
The chair role.
I did want to begin today's
meeting I know things are
awfully busy as usual at this
stage in the game it seems more
difficult to be doing it
remotely but perhaps it was
easier to get for one committee
to the other
Well to begin with House
memorial very quickly I think
that that would not take a lot
of time and I I would like to
begin with that with
Representative role metal.
And I hope you can be as brief
as possible I know we're happy
to have you here but if you
is a memorial.
Thank you madam chair yes
thank you madam chair thank you
members of the committee this is
that house memorial at that
looks at the opportunity of a
possible satellite law
enforcement office is in the
northern part of our state which
currently does not exist we do
have the state
Police I'm in the teaching
center in in Santa Fe however
for the majority of our law
enforcement practitioners right
now there's not a northern hub
and so based on the different
cultural dynamics socio socio
economic social dynamics
dynamics etcetera we would like
to have the study conducted on
to look at that and also in in
and as we've seen many many
social justice criminal justice
reform bills we'd like to look
at the collaboration with other
first responders with mental
health practitioners in the
possibility for collaborative
work in in designing and and
operating a possible satellite
that would incorporate those
various entities all in the same
place so that they can work
together being that we're trying
to to move into the direction of
responding to the needs of our
communities as directly as we
can
with that madam chair looking
forward to questions and to
getting a study done thank you.
Thank you very much are you
ready for comments and questions
for me is there anyone in the
audience who is here on west
memorial thirteen and I'll show
by show of hands we do a ten
second call those in favor and
those in opposition.
Michael doesn't have a timer at
the top so I can tell where we
are but it looks like this isn't
drawing a lot of there we go.
We have
Six in favor into in opposition
let's see if anybody would like
to speak on this either side.
Raise your hand please if you
would like to speak.
Representative Kerr.
What I'm not getting my
participant list districts
spring up to secretary.
Yes I don't want a progressive
caucus go ahead.
Can you hear me.
We.
Yes this is Cheryl Harris I will
change my name in a minute here.
I speak in favor of this because
I think just in general terms
the more we can
distribute and diversify our
presence of.
Click safety people throughout
the state the more we're going
to connect with the citizens and
and make the relationship better
so I think it's a great idea.
Thank you very much.
James Langenbrunner.
Excuse me.
Please go ahead.
Mr Langenbrunner.
You need to undo it yourself.
It appears that we can't get Mr
Langenbrunner.
Okay go ahead.
Yes we're we're spoke committee
of a northern New Mexico folks
that are really interested in
this.
This bill going forward.
Just to see if there are fees
due to issues we face ability
studies so that we can now.
understand what the real needs
are I know that law enforcement
right now is going through a lot
of all.
Headaches and stuff so we
support the.
Would like to participate as
much as we could.
Thank you very much Sir I don't
see more hands up so let me go
to.
Committee members at this time.
And.
Committee members.
I'm Representative Townsend.
Yes thank you madam chair
Representative I was looking
through yes and.
It appears
That day there are a.
A number of facilities.
In the Albuquerque area.
Our.
It is possible to add or reading
okay.
An existing facility.
Madam chair Representative we're
looking at an additional
facility at the possibility of
that currently with you know the
size of Rio Arriba and
Counties in the north you know
L. loan are just all the way up
to the Colorado border there's
no location available currently
so folks have to travel to
Albuquerque and otherwise and
again we don't have any
understanding of those northern
counties to be able to to have
that sort of localized training.
Thank thank you
Representative thank you madam
chair.
Thank you I don't see a further
discussion what's the pleasure
of Representative ring.
you madam chair I move a do
pass.
I do pass for Representative
Rehm a second from
Representative Alcon.
Is there discussion.
Because I'm not absolute it is
certain if we heard one on here
I'd like to have a quorum call
the roll.
Representative welcome.
Yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Cook yes.
Mr speaker yes.
Representative.
Yes
Lewis yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert.
Yes.
Representative Rehm yes ma'am.
Representative Townsend.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
It's
well
do pass on has more breaking.
Thank you very much I'm I'm
going to take a two minute pause
here.
I'll be I need to speak with a
by.
Representative Romero are you
still here.
For.
It
looks like she's given that old.
Thanks she was really happy with
the unanimous vote and got out
of town.
That's right take it while you
can.
Okay.
Let me explain what we're going
to do next we are going to do
the topic of redistricting we
have three bills
Actually we have three bills.
Our calendar that relate to read
just.
Also to eleven we have Senate
bill fifteen and Senate bill
four what we're going to do is
Senator Ivey Soto will be
presenting on.
the Senate bill and then we will
have Representative Dow
presenting on the house bill and
then we will take public comment
I'm not going to
Trying to make people up because
I think that there will be
people kind of.
Metal and on both sides either
side
and then we will go to the
discussion as I said I think I
said I have a a legal hearing
that I have to attend at one
fifteen the vice chair will take
over at that time there's
something that I wanted to say
hello with regard to the
Redistricting issue and that is
that
I was in a legal mediation
yesterday when there was
discussion on how hello.
For that we had not scheduled
House Bill to eleven I wanted on
the record here at this
committee that we have that
they'll schedule four times and
we were asked by the sponsor to
roll it over so that's one got
out there and with that I'm
going to go to Senator Ivey Soto
on the Senate bills first.
Go ahead Senator.
Thank you very much of Madam
chair members of the committee
so there are two bills are
before you from the Senate one
is Senate bill four.
And Senate bill four is a bill
that is brought.
Primarily at this moment because
of the fact that the federal
government is not to meet the
the normal deadlines that they
would have for but the census
process so normally.
The federal government releases
the street level data as of it
by April one in the year
problem in the census and this
year they've let us know that
they expect date they're
optimistic to get us on the
street level data by off by the
end of October.
Wait we had a requirements that
once we have the street level
data the secretary of state
would review the maps make sure
that the precincts are imported
with requirements in our laws
including the requirements and
one dash to dash one which
provides that no precincts on
more than five hundred
people in my population that if
there are any changes that those
would have to be made.
Should send those those proposed
the the
Should alert that is where those
precincts exist and that the
crimes that would have thirty
days to adjust those pressing
primaries in order to to make
them comply with our loss and
then they would after that the
secretary of state would have an
opportunity to review the
amended maps and if they kind of
did not do that then the
secretary of state.
What is necessary to achieve
compliance make those
adjustments but.
There is first a thirty day
period for local governments to
do it because they know their
own community based.
So we changed but I'm prime so
what we did and actually
Representative my suggestion.
Is instead of using a hard dates
are on page five line fourteen
Senate bill four we went to
ninety days following receipt of
the results of the federal
decennial census.
Now it they get it to us at the
right time frame that will be
back into the June thirty of the
same here but it but if there's
a delay in the future than our
laws will so simply flow with
those delays without us having
to come back and make
adjustments while we were doing
this we also realized that there
were for local governments they
did not have direction as to
what the
What their what their
responsibilities were in terms
of districting
and so we went ahead and
provided some of that for local
governments in Sen bill for not
in terms of state governments
and also with that madam chair
that is Senate bill off for
international the of the one
other thing that I will not with
Senate bill for a section one of
the bill has what the standard
base maps would have in them on
in a subsection B. which is on
page two and we did have that we
inserted through an amendment.
Senate bill for that a new
paragraph six remembering six
and seven that it would also
this database maps would contain
the boundaries of the Indian
nations tribes and pueblos that
was appropriate I have there and
that way that is that that will
continue does not separate
provision that will continue to
and are substantive law.
With regard to the Senate rules
committee substitute for set of
bills fifteen and one ninety
nine.
this part deals with with the
our process of actually doing
the the maps at the state level.
And so what we did is we created
the system redistricting
committee.
Am This system rejecting
Committee are is a committee
then that would that they would
do the hearings around the
states and they would propose we
are maps for each of the our
jurisdictions for which we have
to do different things of that
proposed three maps for House
representatives three potential
maps for the for the state
Senate re maps for the Public
Education Commission
and and if there's anything else
that that we're as well so I'm
sorry three maps for the federal
a United States yes
Representative our districts and
and so what do you what a few of
the things that we that there
are seventy seven people on this
a sense of redistricting
committee we do find that no
more than three of the seven
shall be members of the same
political party.
We are a multi party state with
a very high number of people who
are declined to select a
political party and so therefore
no political party would will
control this process of
registering Commission are we
also provide
very clearly in terms of people
of changed parties in the last
two years that if they take part
is in a way that will not
disrupt that balance that's fine
if they changed parties the last
two years that would have
disrupted that balance of
ensuring that no political party
controls the state assessor
system district commit Act
mission then they would not be
able to serve on that commission
so people of had a last minute
revelation as to their political
party
my mic picks excluded but not
necessarily depending upon how
they made that change.
this commission would would use
some standards as to how they
would proceed to do the the maps
using a process that actually
was created through fair
districts New Mexico worked over
the interim and and so we just
went ahead and adopted that we
thought that those were
appropriate
considerations for them to use
in that process and then at the
end they would then submit those
to the are to the state
legislature where they would be
introduced as bills are in the
same manner as legislation
recommended by interim
legislative committees and which
means they would it would also
say at the top for the services
redistricting commission and our
and so that way then the public
will be able to see these maps
where where Noel member the
legislature no family a member
of the legislature would be
allowed to serve on this
commission as they went about
the process of doing that Max
And so with that madam chair of
that is a a brief overview of
both Senate bill four and Senate
bill fifteen I'll be happy to
stand for questions.
We're going to do the questions
later let's go ahead with House
Bill you eleven and
Then what we're going to do is
take public comment will do a
poll on each of the bills what a
time with and then we'll take
public comment
After that.
So we'll do house bill two
eleven right now.
Thank you madam chair and
actually my co sponsor Natalie
Figueroa will be presenting the
Maria possible to.
Thank you madam chair thank you
committee house bill two eleven
more and Senate bill one ninety
nine it came out of the work of
the task force madam chair
so this is the NM first task
force that the senator referred
to in his presentation that was
a coalition of many groups
working on this bill everyone
from the league of women voters
to and then first a common costs
working for months and so this
is the bill that incorporated
the recommendations of the task
force and then was to in turn
and it's Senate version adapted
into espy's.
In the original house bill two
eleven.
Much of the language is the same
and given that we are presenting
these altogether I think I
should probably focus on the
differences and madam chair just
if questions arise later that
our technical
retired Chief Justice and Thomas
and lily my tail our expert
witnesses they were members of
the task force and they can
address some questions at a
later time they don't need to be
part of this presentation at
this time
Unless I forget something
important.
Madam chair to House Bill to
eleven is demolitions that
what's been renamed as the
system districting redistricting
committee this call the
redistricting commission it is
the same seven members that
language is not different and
the process in the guidelines
that were adopted into SB
fifteen are in many ways the
same there is an amendment to
the bill
that was made after comments in
the first committee that house
bill two eleven was and in those
amendments
and seven seven five point
three.
But that's what brings the
language together with Senate
bill fifteen.
So.
To point out the differences
that remain for the committee's
debate.
On page five of the bill.
We set a limit of a hundred and
fifty days.
One hundred eighty days after
receiving census data because
that day seems to be moving
periodically and asked the
senator pointed out a lot of the
amendments and language change
had to happen because and after
our first presentation of this
bill the release date of census
data changed one more time so
the amendment had to change all
the respective dates in the
bill.
But K. five there's a reference
to one hundred and fifty days
after the release of the census
data that gives us a little
leeway in case they change it
again.
The release of the.
And the other is substantial
differences between these bills
are references in recognition to
tribal boundaries
Chunk of the task force
discussion the committee were
from participants from our
tribal nations who were
concerned about the divisions
that were not recognized and
particularly in chapter houses
but tribal boundaries and
divisions that would make it is
actually impossible for people
to vote on the same date in two
elections that they were in
different districts.
So there is language and house
bill two eleven that is a
language that allows them to use
smaller than the precinct.
Divisions.
In order to allow them to adapt
to the tribal divisions and
tribal lines.
If necessary and if allowed by
federal law.
Yes.
Is.
It.
Section see.
There's a prohibition in house
bill two eleven.
Against adopting a proposing a
district plan that.
Favors a political party or
incumbent.
One of the things that came up
in the work of the task force
that was open to the public and
their hundred recorded our state
you can also watch online if
you're interested of course the
concerned about protecting
incumbents most states have done
away with that NCSL is
recommended store is not on
their list of good guidelines
for good governance is a piece
that the task force recommended.
We do not is the legislature
protect our own seats so that is
a piece of house bill two eleven
that is not yet in as B. that
gene.
What a prohibition against using
partisan data for that purpose.
And we sat in chair I would let
money co sponsor and anything
else I missed amendments to this
bill.
Is an amendment to section nine.
And it brings it in line it is
the exact same language I
believe that is in the SB
fifteen substitute.
The maps are presented to the
legislature in the same way that
in turn legislation is
presented.
And then it is that meets the
task force guidelines for
transparency and openness in
this process that the bills
would be debated.
Or the district plans would be
debated publicly and amended
publicly it does also have the
same language that would ask for
an explanation of why changes
are made to the commission's
plants.
All right.
Madam chair and committee I
think we will read it will stand
for questions when the time
comes.
Just real quickly Representative
Figueroa when you said
amendments you mean the
committees right.
Not for house bill two eleven
there isn't a committee set up
per se there are two actual
amendments.
Committees may share file so.
Do you what
what we can do now at this time
is less intake but all.
On the first we'll just do a
call on Senate bill four.
The
Looking at the wrong.
The committee and looking to the
state government agenda before
the redistricting precinct
boundaries so we're not taking
public comment yes but I'm where
you're just raise your hand if
you're in favor of from the go
for and raise your hand if
you're opposition so go ahead
and do that we're just going to
do.
The policy concluded we had
eighteen and support and three
in opposition.
And let's do a poll now on.
The on Senate bill fifteen the
committee some Senate Bill
fifteen they redistricting
committee I'm from Senate.
I had raised ten seconds.
It fifty fifty with them well
now I'm looking at maybe at went
longer than ten seconds forty
eight percent to fifty two
percent support versus
opposition and it leads to the
committees or the house bill two
eleven.
Okay.
Would house bill two eleven we
had
Thirty eight thirty one in
support and for in opposition.
Here's.
Okay what I would like to do now
is take public comment I'm not
asking for
people to be for against let's
just keep I mean you have to
line up in a certain group I'm
just going to take the
pharmacists they are up and
there are the comments will be
limited.
Four minutes ago folks thank you
first I have just found that I
had Mr have.
You need to I need to hear and.
Mister Rogers.
Madam chair I believe that the
expert fourteen fifty four I'm
not sure I hate is very.
I was going to.
Well we we don't want him to
comment at this time.
So you can.
I mean that that's not I want to
provided to the panelists for a
bill.
The.
One of the top but we can we can
remove.
All right let's go to Judy
Buckingham.
Good afternoon I'm in support of
the amendments and
I'm watching this.
And the new yes this so thank
you very much for your public
service.
Did you wish to say something
further.
Okay we'll go to Pete Williams
go ahead.
This is Patty Williams I am
Representative the Navajo Nation
in the two thousand eleven
redistricting trials and without
the amendments that are in.
House Bill to eleven regarding
Navajo native American
communities of interest the bill
is fatally flawed and invites
litigation because it will
violate the federal voting
rights act I'm in at least in
the northwest quadrant of the
state so we would I would
support any bill that includes
the native American voting
considerations and I want to
thank fair districts New Mexico
task force for their excellent
work in in terms.
Thank you
It.
Allen.
It
is good afternoon and.
I'm sorry about the echo.
I'm going to ask if that I think
that helps I am a task force
member and I've been working
closely on the outreach portion
of of the legislation and I hope
you've seen that that there has
been statewide I interest and
support for house bill two
eleven
the voters and the media and the
voters know the different
systems bills Senate bill fifty
has no teeth more importantly
it's not in compliance with the
for the people act which
specifically prohibits are
drawing additional districts in
favor of one specific party and
favoring incumbents of course
that is specifically proscribed
in house bill two eleven I it's
been called out by the media
from Silver City to Carlsbad to
Espanola to Gallup the media
understand the people understand
I hope you will listen to your
voters across the state and
votes for this.
To put House Bill to eleven to
the floor for a quick photo so
it may be taken up and passed by
the Senate thank you very much
for your attention.
Dedrick page.
Go ahead.
Yes good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Cedric page I'm a member of
the New Mexico first task force
on redistricting and I would
support very strongly the
amendments applying for House
Bill to eleven I also would like
to call your attention to the
data that we will be using and
drawing these district
boundaries the sources of data
need to be.
More than just the census which
we have heard will be too late
and also will contain quote
unquote noise.
As a result of the undercounts
that the place in the past year
because of the COVID.
Pandemic so again I support the
amendments and house bill twenty
two eleven and the thank you for
this opportunity to share my
comments.
Thank you.
Senator.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is Kurt
record on the tractor Lujan
advocacy ministry of New Mexico
with your advocacy ministry also
speaks on behalf The New Mexico
conference of churches I'm here
today to state our strong
support for H. B. two eleven as
an organization we follow the
work of the redistricting task
force sponsored by New Mexico
first over the summer and fall
this past year and were
specially pleased with process
and strong cross person part
eight participation in the final
report and recommendations HB
two eleven of course as a result
of this task force work.
Particular we support this bill
over SB to fifteen because of
the inclusion of the new
concerns are tribes and pueblos
or it's greater emphasis on
transparency with the
legislature's conserving map
options efforts accountability
of legislators and the process
and the probation of person data
we believe it HB to eleven makes
tremendous strides in terms of
equity fairness and confidence
our state's political process
it's elected leadership I urge
your support for H. B. two
eleven thanks for this
opportunity to speak.
Thank you.
Next we were.
Thank you and good afternoon
madam chair.
Good morning ladies and
gentlemen of the committee chair
districts for New Mexico and
it's twenty six partner
organizations totaled nearly
forty thousand New Mexicans
watching and invested in this
process and urging a fair and
modern redistricting process in
which we as a state can take
pride that's forty thousand New
Mexicans in addition to a
statewide redistricting task
force comprised of twenty five
diverse members who astutely
developed the twenty five
recommendations in large part
responsible for us being here
together today.
Pulling by a common cause shows
seven in ten New Mexico voters
support an independent
redistricting commission.
More than three hundred petition
signatures were received in the
last four days calling upon you
to pass HB to eleven or amended
and passed just be fifteen to
include amendments.
Our districts New Mexico.
Adelante progressive caucus.
Thank you madam chair.
I'm speaking on the oblong
depressive caucus of the
Democratic Party of New Mexico
we strongly favor House Bill to
eleven over the Senate bill of
Adelante caucus is an advocate
of anything that moves the
process of political involvement
closer to the citizens is more
transparent.
Help service with equity I
support the.
Respecting that.
Native American boundaries we
might compromise on the dates
from the.
Fifty.
Twenty having help us if we ever
have.
Early done under the
circumstances this one was up
please support house bill two
eleven thank you.
Next I have Edward Travis.
Thank you.
Is Senate bill four because I
thought that was your
instruction is want to waive the
right to speak in any of the
bill I want to thank Senator Ivy
Soto he's knows a lot about
election law and he had the
fourth to think about the
precincts and also appreciate
the fact that he included tribal
boundaries in Senate bill four I
did wonder however given the
delays from the census bureau
whether it makes sense to amend.
Subsection D..
Which requires the legislature
to redistrict in the same
calendar year that they receive
the the census data.
Perhaps you would consider
limiting it to allow the
legislature to go into the year
ending in two.
just in case all of the work
that has to be done is not
doable by the end of this
calendar year thank you again
Senator Ivey Soto.
Correct.
It is.
Good morning.
Yes okay thank you thank you
madam chair and committee
members I speak out in support
of H. B. two Levin and the
amendments and speak out against
S. B. fifteen H. B. two Levin
represents more balanced
approach to redistricting and
just be fifteen is subpar
inferior legislation that lacks
legal compliance and adequate
protections for New Mexicans
which will have a lasting effect
for at least the next decade.
A recently published comparison
matrix is circulated around on
the internet showing it just be
fifteen is fundamentally flawed
H. B. two eleven discourages
costly litigation and requires
compliance with the voting
rights act prevents lawmakers
from redistricting are drawing
their own districts amongst
other critical issues encourage
you to support H. B. two Levin
and the amendments thank you.
Thanks I'm Carla.
Madam chair and members of the
committee it's Leri Sonntag here
on behalf of New Mexico business
coalition we strongly support
house bill two eleven there are
legitimate concerns that.
We have with the our election
integrity and that starts with
redistricting even public
officials have made comments
that indicate gerrymandering
could be could come into play so
a vehicle to have independent
redistricting advice is
absolutely necessary and of
those bills are up for
consideration we believe house
bill two eleven is the best
thank you.
Richard Mason.
Okay.
Interrupted you go ahead Richard
okay at chairwoman Chasey
members of the judiciary
Committee many miss Mason I'm
sure the action committee the
league of women voters of New
Mexico I attended a ten pack
economic I. series and
redistricting conducted by the
national conference of state
legislatures so I have a good
idea of the emerging best
practices when it comes to
redistricting I also represent
the league on Mexico First
redistricting task force in H.
B. two eleven reflects the
recommendations of the task
force specifically I want to
point out H. B. two eleven would
put in statute redistricting
criteria that would make us
stand that is lacking in AT SB
fifty just be fifteen.
Thank all the sponsors of HB two
eleven SP one ninety nine SB
fifteen for their work in movie
redistricting important forward
but whatever a marriages we
want the legislative
accountability by providing
right now valuation of the maps
required by I'm so just that's
required by the sentencing
commission and prohibition of
consideration of incumbency and.
Leonard garment.
When Corman here
and I'm the executive director
for the Navajo Nation Human
Rights Commission.
The commission was a member of
the New Mexico task force on
redistricting.
The very principle an important
measure that needs to be adopted
by the state of New Mexico
legislature is to get away from
utilizing precinct boundaries to
develop redistricting plan
precinct boundaries is for
election activities it does not
respect Navajo nations chapter
boundaries.
The XP two eleven provides for
the opportunity to utilize.
Census blocks.
Order to arrive at a refined.
Increase native American voting
age population and respect
Navajo Nation trap the
boundaries thank you for your
support.
That I'm my name is Haley
that I'm representing the New
Mexico civic engagement table
where more than forty community
organizations across the state
are working with black
indigenous that the next Asians
are people of color all across
the state and we are here in
support of as before as before
you send the parts to needy for
office really
be able to benefit community
participation and that just the
map to what time like that he
are reciprocal and because we
have all inclusiveness we
support as be fifteen and we
want make sure that they see
this in redistricting committee
really representative or a state
this means that you will be
Representative tribal leadership
and that's well black let the
next Asian leaders but all of
the decision making also as B.
fifty.
Charlotte little.
Thank you good morning madam
chair members of the committee
my name is Charlotte little I
come from the pueblos as family
pandemic I'm here to register my
support for the eight pieces of
legislation and I am urging that
the amendment be included in
particular recognizing tribal
borders of political boundaries
to be considered during the
redistricting process and also
including members of recognized
tribes or pueblos on the
redistricting commission I thank
you all for your support and
your work on the is and the is
it important pieces of
legislation thank you.
There is.
After you madam chair and
committee members I am in Mary
H. Smith in Albuquerque attorney
and a member of the league of
women voters as a voter I have
been involved in redistricting
efforts since the year two
thousand and improving how New
Mexico re districts is important
to me.
The violence that the U. S.
capitol in January six made me
cry broke my heart make me fear
for the future of our democracy
and caused me to double down on
getting a redistricting act in
New Mexico this year for now in
the future.
I believe H. B. two eleven
includes provisions that are
needed in statute to ensure fair
redistricting that meets
national standards we're just be
fifteen to be the legislation
that move forward I urge
inclusion of transparency and
open meetings act compliance by
the legislature accountability
by providing the same written
evaluations of its maps and a
prohibition on consideration of
incumbency and partition data
thank you.
Centric page did you already
speak.
You.
Okay.
Hello good afternoon madam chair
and members of the committee
what if you mess with common
cause New Mexico I'll do my best
to keep brief as we've already
had a lot of experts.
Pieces of garbage all three
pieces of legislation I too was
a member of St task force your I
partners.
Right up several organizations
community individuals.
He.
The three things that would ask
the committee look closely
adding language to whatever
piece of legislation thanks
committee for the thank you
thank language is in fact it
would eliminate the protections
while creating new district
boundaries.
I'm sure that we have language
that will protect our tribal
communities.
It also take a look at the I
would also like to thank all
come also answers of the three
pieces of legislation discussed
here today you know there is a
lot of bipartisan discussion.
There has been a lot of cross
communication where we.
Really Irvin Vitela.
I think she must have taken your
hand down.
I'm Lisa.
Madam chair and members of the
committee my name is Lisa Marie
Martinez and I am in support of
two eleven as it provide HB pool
and excuse me as a provides open
an open and transparent process
where is SB fifteen does not
unless the committee adopts the
recommended amendments that have
thus far been ignored as a
native American woman of both
the Zuni pueblo and Navajo
Nation tribal affiliation I'm
I'm very concerned about support
for H. B. two eleven and
protecting the voice info of our
tribal communities if we do not
address HB to eleven or the
amendments thousands of New
Mexicans will be disinterred fan
tries from fair representation
without this legislation that
lays out a clear comprehensive
and transparent approach
thousands of our indigenous and
tribal communities are left out
and this is become all too
common as our tribal communities
are often left out of
governmental decisions that
affect them this bill also
requires explicit in its
requirement of compliance with
the voting rights act not to
favor one party control leads to
this tendencies to gerrymander
and something that is
antithetical to our democratic
and Representative dot.
Amber how do you know.
Go ahead.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is amber Karia and I am the
executive director of the all
pueblo council of governors and
I am speaking on behalf of
parties of interest today a
historic record demonstrates
that all public tribes and
nations participating in
redistricting and impacting
existing major and native
American electoral districts in
New Mexico have an interest in
the redistricting process and
allow for you the elected
legislators and regulators from
the from these districts to
carry the most important pro
sovereignty legislation adopted
by the state.
Given the experiences with poor
consultation for tribes and
Peublo redistricting process we
strongly recommend that SB
fifteen be amended to achieve
number one inclusion of a member
of a recognized tribe pueblo or
pueblo on the citizens
redistricting commission and
also explicit Reds recognition
of tribal borders as political
boundaries inclusion of public
redistricting meetings to be
held and tribal lands and we ask
that it be considered thank you.
Thank you madam chair I co chair
the of first redistricting task
force first I want to thank them
Senator Ivey Soto in the speaker
speaker you often bring a Senate
bill fifteen to this chamber
having received unanimous
bipartisan support in the Senate
I also want to specifically
thank the speaker you recognize
that Senate bill three seventy
seven then allocates million
dollars to redistricting was
money that would not be
available to the citizen
redistricting committee so you
took care of that and making
sure there's a specific
allocation three hundred
thousand to the committee I
think that demonstrated
commitment to wanted the
committee to work are a lot of
the public and Beijing proposed
amendments to the legislation
which I support but I find
myself supporting both Senate
bill fifteen to eleven I suggest
that the adopting the plan that
does not favour political party
would comment is consistent with
measuring partisan fairness
which requires the dean and I.
Specific command.
The Chavis I am the executive
director of N. M. native fo and
was a member of the
redistricting task force I asked
the committee that you please
past of SB four so that we can
have the and a time line that
works best for the though the
work that we need to get done in
addition there's confusion over
SB fifteen and H. B. two eleven
HB two eleven was very is what
came from that redistricting
task force and is very
thoughtful in the provision that
it allows for communities of
color just be fifteen without
the amendment will not have that
so I ask that you either add the
amendment to just be fifteen or
you pass HB to eleven the
amendment in SB fifteen and
section seven and section three
and section five all help
support and native American
communities so we ask that you
adopt these amendments and that
you further look at the census
block language because there are
thousands of.
Carla creating wealth for.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Carla
creating have for and I'm with
the center for civic policy and
we stand in strong support of is
the foreign as the fifteen we
believe that these bills would
benefit community participation
and adjust the mobs to make sure
that they comply with current
law making the process more
accessible transparent and open
for the for the public as well
as making sure that they are no
redistricting that redistricting
processes are not tied to
deadlines that are no longer
viable with that we are to do
pass on as before in is B.
fifteen thank you very much.
New Mexico ethics watch.
Yes this is Kathleen Sabo on the
executive director of New Mexico
ethics watch and we appear to in
support of house bill two eleven
we are and have been in support
of that bill that came out of
the redistricting task force we
if the committee decides to go
forward with the substitute for
Senate bill fifteen as other
commenters have noted of the
amendments would be necessary
for our support that would
encourage transparency
accountability that would
prohibit consideration of the
competency in partisan data and
would address the concerns of
the native American Community
legal and otherwise thank you
very much.
Really Irvin Vitela.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members my name is
lily Irvin Vitela and I'm the
president and executive director
of New Mexico first and we have
the good fortune in our mission
to be able to work with cross
partisan groups on all all the
time and one of the things that
we learn is that principle
people who are reform minded and
wanting to improve public policy
can come about issues in
different ways but when we lean
into the wisdom of community and
we do that with the real
intention around equity
inclusion transparency
I'm really creative things can
happen and we see evidence of of
that coming out of all of this
redistricting legislation we
look for towards holding up the
work of the redistricting task
force and what's most aligned
and well HB to eleven is most
aligned with the task force SB
fifteen has so many strengths
and with amendments could could
be equally powerful in terms of
giving voters confidence that
they can be involved in
redistricting and that their
votes and their ability to
choose their elected officials
matters.
Thank you I'm.
Rodrick Kennedy.
Madam chair members the
committee thank you very much.
I am another one of the co
chairs from the New Mexico first
task force and I want to thank
work that they did in the
support that we've gotten
through the community.
I have at this point I support
H. B. two eleven.
At the same time I recognize
that SB fifteen it's for a if
you were amended to include some
of the some of the passages of
HB two eleven could be an
extremely effective bill.
I wanted to also mention there
are other task force members who
have talked to talk to use
separate pages of professional
geographer of those Chavis Mr
Gorman or false experts of
redistricting
and certainly the cross the
cross partisan and cross
cultural influences to the task
force report.
but generally speaking the.
The use of other demographic
data is important but also the
transparency provisions of two
to eleven that would carry
forward.
Georgia can you let judge
Kennedy finish is Madam he was
the other co chair of the task
force.
Judge Kennedy want to go back.
Thank you very much basically
what of we've already talked
about the native communities and
the demographic that up but
generally speaking the the open
government features and and
section two eleven are extremely
important
the the commission the committee
has to justify the maps that it
chooses in terms of compliance
with best practices listed in
and legislation.
And of and in two eleven it
carries forward to the
legislature that if the
legislature wants to depart from
the commission's work that it
needs to equally find a of a
justification for having done
that and carrying forward the
the work of the commission and
the Canadian in terms of open
government in terms of
transparency and justification
of why a map complies with the
with the loss of the Ford Rights
Act is something that can that
was explicitly.
Opted by the committee and put
into HB two eleven of to make
the to make the legislature
and that process increases
business visibility in the
strength of what it does and
thank you.
That's a thank you Sir.
New Mexico ethics watch.
Madam chair and members of the
committee I I already spoke up
so I will I turned and I didn't
want to be.
Want to catch you up on the ball
thank you.
Other policy.
Many just as a quick points of
clarification several of the
commenters today have addressed
a reference to the amendments
and there are multiple versions
of amendments that are floating
in the universe right now
including original amendments to
the house bill and then
potential amendments to be
introduced to the Senate bill
there is one package of
amendments that was offered by
the coalition that we hope was
distributed to the committee and
that is published on the website
for this coalition which is
redistricting NM dot org so if
there's any confusion about
which set of amendments most of
the folks have been referring to
it is to the ones that are
posted on the website and have a
really clear in blue text at the
top that says these are from the
coalition and it lists the
multiple organizations that
contributed to that thanks very
much for the opportunity to make
that clarification.
Certainly okay we're going to
go.
Back to the committee now.
And.
Just one second here.
Did anybody want any of the
Sanchez wish to say anything
quickly and response to public
comment.
It is briefly.
Our.
Yes.
Me just very quickly I just a
couple of very quick minutes the
first thing is I'll certainly
will never have to help what
never hurts to have it.
In a loss of compliance with the
federal voting rights act is not
optional and would be applicable
to any commission and as
applicable to the state
legislature in terms of any work
that we do that's pursuant to
purpose the positive message
constitution.
Also note verification of those
who may be our participating in
today's hearing that in two
thousand eighteen I was one of
the sponsors of how straight
resolution for that stop it
three eight an independent
redistricting commission where
that commission what adopts the
are the maps and the legislature
what what will move its own self
interest by not having part of
it
that is our
impact I actually wrote that
proposed constitutional moment
and the cost is member is
consistent with US spring court
case and of the Arizona
redistricting commission matter
that went before them and and
does comport with those
requirements.
I will continue to work to have
a constitutional process for
what we do and redistricting
well House Bill to eleven may
have many best practices
included in it.
Many of the provisions I do not
find to be lawful without a
constitutional amendment.
I will not with regard to
explanatory statements in
legislation that that can be
required by constitution.
And there is one place in the
constitution article twenty
section three paragraphs C. one
explanatory statement is
required for a certain type of
legislation.
The Legislative Council analysis
when that was being considered
by the people noted that this
was the only place one
explanatory statement was
required with regard to
legislation and in fact noted
that this was an outline in
terms of the legislative
process.
Before I will continue to work
towards a constitutional
amendment in the future in the
meantime the combination of
Senate bill four and Senate bill
fifteen representative the best
step forward possible under our
current constitutional structure
thank you.
Thank you
Senator rona.
Madam chair and members of the
committee thank you so much for
hearing these bills together and
thank you for the opportunity I
think this is the the Boston
area for us to come together and
we really wanted to make sure
that to eleven was heard in its
original version and there have
there are multiple equipment and
even cell is that have been
recommended by the statewide
task force that could be adopted
to consider today I hope that we
get I do consideration and we we
really feel that with all the
amendments that are asked for
instead of the team which could
move forward you to fully with
the amendments but without those
amendments which should be
considered by this committee
Senate bill fifteen in its
current form stresses the
constitutionality concerns it's
still disenfranchises native
American populations in some
ways independent voters there is
It allows lawmakers to amend the
maps without requiring lawmakers
to explain how the need having
met the redistricting criteria
was to eleven counts that the
public be informed why the Max
which after considering which
was decided on Senate bill
fifteen does not in its current
form require open meetings with
in the deliberation of the law
makers whereas Senate and house
bill two eleven does ask the
lawmakers meetings to happen in
in open and transparent process.
And
It just Senate bill in its
current form will allow for the
status quo the old school closed
door lock picking to happen
we're has the biggest and most
important piece of the two
eleven at at that still remains
and is the desire of the
statewide task force is that the
public has their voice heard
their votes are counted and that
it is I'm done in open and
transparent process not only in
in gathering community
information but also as the
lawmakers explained how they
chose to choose thank you madam
chair.
Thank you and let me say that
miss Evans has told me that.
We have now in the Here file
looks from the wrong text
message here hold on.
I
just think.
Public testimony there was an
amendment for house bill two
eleven that was drafted on the
seven.
On February seventeenth it's now
the share file.
Been out because we thought we
were supposed to go with the
stop so it's there and then at
twelve twenty nine.
And that that had been drafted
on March tenth but we did not
have has now been added to the
chair but also there's a couple
of amendments to to eleven and
when we get to that point people
can check on the numbers but I
wanted to let you know that
there are some equipment in the
share file right now.
And with that we are now going
to start with Senate Bill.
Fifteen and I will have Senator
Ivey Soto be ready to discuss
our bills.
Do you have any remarks before
we go to the committee at first
I have Representative Eli okay
Representative Eli.
Thank you madam chair first I
think I need to say that I
appreciate the wisdom of the
chair
I I know you were available for
the floor session yesterday but
I I think even Representative
Dow who raised the issue of
blasting this bill on the floor
recognizes the wisdom of putting
all these bills together one
here and I appreciate that very
much because I think this
discussion has been incredibly
helpful to see all of these
bills together and address these
concerns so I just want to
compliment you madam chair on in
know the patience you start to
make sure that these Senate
bills are in front of you as
well as the house sponsor bill
so I appreciate that very much
so madam chair I do have an
amendment on that I have talked
to sponsor about to Senate bill
fifteen let me give you and the
committee members to to a two
number is two two zero seven one
four point one I do think that
that those amendments as I go
through them will address some
of the public's concerns and I
want to just briefly go through
them but as I say I have
discussed these with the sent
sponsors for however the chair
would like me to proceed.
Go ahead I'll move the amendment
for discussion purposes.
Let's go out let's go through
that all right I won't take too
much time I know we've we've got
caucus and then floor but one of
the very first things that the
amendment does just make sure is
the committee is appointed that
quote with their point quote
with due regard to the cultural
geographic diversity of the
state
you know I think we have to be
careful two you know as the
members of the public are
talking about it they're talking
about native American
Community says kind of one group
it's not it's a very diverse and
very distinct group I I know
that from my days as county
commissioner and so I think we
have to be careful give the our
process I'm not flexibility to
be able to address both cultural
geographic and native American
concerns we put that in there we
make clear that an employee
executive branch as a separate
item cannot be part of this we
have recognized the time
limitations the Senate bill
fifteen said beginning on April
I think was April one we moved
that to no later than July
hoping that we will get the
emergency clause is Senate bill
fifteen comes out of the
committee that that we won't
need that but if we do if you
were to Clovis in past and will
get it to our our then what
we'll do it later and that no
later than July and and part of
the reality of this is the
Senator I've talked about on is
the time line is pretty tight
and so we all have to be
cognizant that we are allowing
for virtual participation but it
is simply because we're
recognizing now in person is
obviously best but virtual
participation should also be
appropriately considered because
yes been so helpful in the
legislative process just in
terms of.
The participation so it's not
just webcasting it's also people
think being able to participate
so long as it doesn't violate
our public health order and then
and then we have at least one
meeting will be held on tribal
lands on we we do have our
little bit of an explanation on
that there would be in terms of
the districting that they could
have a total deviation of no
more than ten percent this is a
recognition of the under counter
what we don't want to happen and
he almost protested to save some
from Senator Ivy Soto because
he's the expert on this but the
reality is is given the senses
what we don't want is for
particularly native American
Community under represented so I
giving a deviation no more than
ten percent we're trying to make
sure that that does not happen
to give the committee
flexibility and then
finally we do have this was
something that was specifically
talked about of the public
testimony that you don't just
rely on census data all we have
spoke put in here and may use
other reliable sources of
demographic data is determined
by the majority vote of the
committee and I think that's
basically yet I don't think I've
been I mean I miss appointed
here too but it is on the share
file and the ideas to address
some of these concerns and make
this a better bill madam chair
I'm happy to turn over to the
Sanchez uses as a friendly
amendment or turn it back to you
thank you madam chair.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Well madam chair it is difficult
for me to to recognize input
from representative Ely is being
culture helpful however this is
a from.
I'm.
Let's have a discussion on the
amendment.
So I didn't need to do it myself
Representative night raise your
hand up for that purpose.
Yes ma'am it's more more for the
amendment of the bill.
So with the.
Number one I'd like to.
Thank you Representative for.
In the amendment because it
answers virtually every question
that I have.
Mark on the bill.
I do have one point on the
amendment but I just want to
make sure that that the.
I'm.
Representative.
Complies with law firm outside
of number thirteen.
Have a total deviation of more
than that that ten percent is
being inserted so basically
Thanks from my plus or minus
five percent to eight total
deviation of ten percent and I
just wanted to make sure that
that was consistent with.
Our.
Federal law maybe other stable.
Madam chair members I'm madam
chair all of the sponsoring it's
that it is fun I I'm sponsors
that question.
Not so with it when it comes to
US yes Representative seats
the jurisprudence for the United
States Supreme Court is that
then the numbers need to be as
nearly equal as practicable.
And so there were really looking
at a non deviation all of the
numbers so so that's that's
that's based on federal
jurisprudence that's that's
really not an option when it
comes to a local are are are to
state offices
you're allowed to have a a
variants of no more than ten
percent now that is generally
applied as plus or minus five
percent from the meeting.
And in fact that is that is the
guidance that we're giving with
regard to local governments that
they should be within less than
five percent of the main however
for the citizens redistricting
commission I do think it's
appropriate to ought to allow
them a ten percent deviation but
that's not ten percent either
direction from the meeting
that's a total of ten percent.
And between the districts and
and and one of the reasons for
that is because we do have vast
differences in population and
and because of the rural and
urban nature of New Mexico what
we end up is with a very high
concentration of elected
representatives and senators
from the urban areas and the
rural areas having extremely
large districts covering many
counties.
The extent that they are able to
do a a deviation of no more than
ten percent which is consistent
with what is allowable at the
local level that actually may
help to equalize a little bit
some of the representation
within the urban and rural
areas.
Okay my concern was that we just
heard government ten percent
deviation to a twenty percent
deviation but but that's not the
ultimate outcome of our.
Thank you madam chair R. thank
you Senator thank you
Representative.
Madam chair that's all have
other than the amendments are in
the show I so there are
available thank you madam chair.
Townsend did you have a question
on the amendment.
Yes ma'am I did out.
Yes thank you madam chair
Representative I I do appreciate
the amendment.
One provision that is still that
I believe could be addressed in
the amendment that hasn't been
addressed is is the fact that.
The six meetings that are
proposed in in both bills.
I believe leave out many New
Mexicans and the process has
there been any faster adding
that to your amendment to make
it more inclusive of the.
The
differences all across the
state.
you madam chair that the only
thing I can tell you is is that
well we tried to do is included
here cultural geographic
diversity the state I do think
there's almost no way I mean if
you have some language that you
would want to suggest I'm open
to it but we try to be as
inclusive as possible in doing
this I I'm I'm if I the Senators
got some suggestions the sponsor
I'm interested I I think we we
wrestle with that issue to make
sure that everybody feels
included invests but.
And suggestions.
Thank you madam chair and
representative
Representative Ely is yes the
amendment Rick does they and
then much require right
justification when the standard
deviation is used.
Kerman.
I guess I'm not following you
written justification with the
standard deviation is used.
Yes if you're going to if you're
going to deviate.
From the nor.
Is the standard that you're
going to use that you're going
to propose.
With the will it be just about.
Hold on just a second let's take
a look.
Let's see.
I'm I'm looking here to see
because I remember language
here we go
so if you look at section eight
are beginning online sixteen.
After the committee adopts the
district plans to committee
shall provide written
evaluations for each district
planning addresses the
satisfaction of the requirements
set forth in fact in fact and
for those of you who have not
read it just as Chavez report
following a committee process if
she's the head of this you will
not be disappointed in the
breast an explanation.
We go into that so yes I think
those concerns will be satisfied
yes I would I'm just looking for
the language and and a good
question so yes I think so.
Thank you for thank you madam
chair.
Madam chair I would move
adoption.
If there's no further
discussion.
Motion to adopt the amendment
and did you set this up.
Second in the second motion
okay.
Well the court please call the
roll on adopting the amendment.
Yes.
Representative Armstrong.
Yes.
Representative Cook.
Yes.
Mr speaker.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Lewis.
Yes.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative Nibert yes.
Representative Rehm yes.
Representative Townsend yes.
Representative Cook yes.
Yes.
Yes.
That that amendment is adopted
and I'm the vice chair is going
to have to take over now and
Taos you awful shortly.
Thank you madam chair returning
to the bill.
We have speaker it off of next.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee
we were waiting on a.
The amendment are from council
service to take the provisions.
Senate bill four as it currently
exists in amend them on to
Senate bill fifteen
I am getting a text that says
the amendment is coming right
now with six exclamation points
so that may be imminent if there
are others that might want to
COVID madam chair you need to
come back to me but the just for
the members of the committee to
know that I'll be proposing
momentarily an amendment to
attach the provisions of four
hundred fifteen so we can do it
but the single piece of
legislation that will have that
shortly thank you Mr speaker
will go next to Representative
Townsend.
Yes thank you madam chair
Representative.
And I'm going through these
pretty quick so Representative
Rubio.
Allow me a little the way.
With regards to HB to fifteen.
It HB to a lab.
It seems to be more.
District late.
Fine what a district in the
district should look like.
In.
With regards to its eight.
And what.
Which would also in many
instances.
Restrict.
You can't go gerrymandering.
Of the district in order to
incorporate our office.
Populous.
Why was that.
Operated in the SP fifteen.
What did I miss it.
Absolutely this time the so some
of these are provisions that are
being suggested for our.
S. S. team from beloved.
Well we're already subject to
open meetings act.
When we going to redistricting.
Every we're already over
district proposal addition
proposal is a bill.
Subject to the same rules as any
other bill implies that.
As a bill.
When it goes to a committee.
That committee meeting under the
open meetings act is held in
public.
When it goes further committee
and and the vote is held about
when it goes to another
committee that meeting is held
in public the debate is in
public the voters in public I
want to go to the floor.
The debate is a public and the
voters in public.
People say we want to have a
public process in fact that is
the requirement of the
legislature already when
considering any.
I'm.
So so so that is already
provided for.
But it.
Senator issue well not.
There are many.
I understand the open meetings
act understand each each
district will be a
representative in bill form and
will be voted on by those in
that committee and on the on
those for the of the houses
Representative but the fact
remains that the in the design
of the districts if you want
more.
Non political gerrymandering if
that is the intent they get
their district the it would seem
to me.
That defining expanding the
setting the parameters is not
too much to ask in the bill
before it gets to the committees
that make those decisions we
have districts in the state and
that and in the house that are
Very unique.
And what long cylindrical from
from the very northern parts of
the state all the way down the
the staff and taking off top of
my head the of Representative
castallanos district over on the
east side of US senator steps
phonics district and central New
Mexico.
It would seem to me that.
If you were going to.
Be considerate of those people
that are Representative that you
would try to make that
Representative or that Senator.
more centrally located to the
people that they were
representing and and so that was
something into a level that I
thought was very beneficial
because it.
Acted yes specs it may be that
Representative are Senator more.
Available.
Hello Sir more in tune to what's
going on and I just saw that was
missing and two fifteen and I
thought it would be something
that would be beneficial to your
to support for that effort of.
Do you does that make sense
Senator.
R. madam chair and
Representative Townsend I I hear
what you're saying I do what
however part of what I'm hearing
you say is that we should we
districts where we exclude the
outer ring of every district has
someplace where the person
representing the district and
let.
It actually by law when we
created district.
Everyone in my district is
otherwise qualified.
has the opportunity to run.
The the.
What.
About grace is a true challenge.
And and that challenge gets made
worse I agree when people start
considering economic protection.
When they start to considering
some some certain other
matters such as part of the make
up of the district.
And and you know and and so
that's why I wrote
constitutional amendment.
That was that was introduced as
how drug house joint resolution
eighteen so that we can are just
some ourselves of those
processes and procedures are in
New Mexico.
However.
R. that did not make it through
the legislative process and so
therefore we have the
constitutional structure that we
have not the constitutional
structure that made that we may
wish to have.
Senator the six public meetings
to make the determination on
where they will be tail and what
will be the the rules of
subjected in the in those
meetings.
Mr madam chair and
Representative Townsend the six
public meetings they are the
decision as to where they would
be would be made by the services
for district commission which
excludes any member of the
legislature from participation
in that work and so that a
family member from suspicion
that
the the meetings are though the
rules of the meetings is there
required of a pursuant to the to
the the language on page six our
lines nine and ten they are
required to be conducted
pursuant to the requirements of
the New Mexico open meetings
act.
And you're a I don't have your
amendment but I've been in front
of me but yet provided for the
comment sections of a emergency
health orders that correct.
madam chair and representative
Thompson it does provide for
that are I will tell you that
was one thing I was a little bit
conflicted about to perfectly
honest because our and and the
reason I was a little conflicted
about it is because.
This is a separate branch of
government.
The legislature I don't believe
the subject to the public health
orders issued by the executive
however as an independent
citizen redistricting
commission.
They probably are because they
are not we we the destruction of
legislation is intentional that
they are not a branch or four
eight eight and I'm sorry part
of the legislature.
And so therefore
I gave in to to
the suggestion about about that
simply because at that point I
think they probably are subject
to executive public health
orders.
Yes.
Thank you senator thank you
madam chair.
Thank you next we have
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair and senator we're
just a man made the amendment to
take up to ten percent.
My question is.
In order to have that the.
Ten percent deviation if you
will.
Would there be some sort of.
Process to justify.
Every map deviation is it going
to be part of their node store
part of their report or is there
going to be anything to explain
why all the sudden this
particular.
District has a.
Ten percent deviation R. because
before the the five percent was.
Easy within range but for the
having that ten percent is there
going to be a requirement to
justify that we have that part
of the notes of the report.
Madam chair and representative
Nibert I think I definition it
will have to be and that's
pursuant to federal
jurisprudence and and and that
would I anticipate that that
would be the the advice that
they would receive hopefully at
least from their legal counsel
when they're doing that federal
courts have actually struck down
districts that have a ten
percent deviation from unlawful
purpose.
And so in order to protect
ourselves.
I mean both the last two
redistricting measures a product
worked I guess to protect
ourselves.
In the venture out a that
somebody back question at the
that there are those folks would
be encouraged to.
Court for.
Probably in detail they're just
J. Strickler reasoning why that.
It's either ten percent greater
or two percent below
the the standard so I'm I'm glad
to hear you say that what with
respect to the.
I guess the overall bill
basically.
Other than the commission going
around the state collecting
information the rest of that
right basically the process of
redistricting will remain.
R. like it's been.
For the last number of of our
redistricting efforts is that
correct.
Madam chair and Representative
Nibert so New Mexico used to be
a cover jurisdiction under the
voting rights act which is to
say that before we could adopt a
districting
a provision of among other
things we needed to get pre
clearance from the United States
department of justice when we
did that there was no litigation
that took place however New
Mexico not only worked its way
out of the pre clearance
provision of of the voting
rights act in addition to that
we also are that the US Supreme
Court has struck down of the pre
clearance requirement of the
voting rights act and so since
the I'm a redistricting process
that we've had of which has been
I think three of them.
Out of an for this is new for
our past and our.
Some what was one or more of
them such a mass has ended up in
litigation.
Right right we can't just stop
people from filing a lawsuit in
order to try to get a different
set of maps for whatever their
agenda may happen to be out but
if we stay in the most
defensible place and we're doing
our district in process we not
only I think limit the amount of
litigation that would take place
we also limit the opportunity
for a judge to provide our maps
not to not to be done in a
lawful manner.
thank you for that.
And then
but my final question I think
early on in the comments the
question or or what maybe one of
public comment said something
about
We should consider incumbency
and I come from a community
where
Incumbents have to square off
against each other of all on
multiple times we've lost
several seats as a result so one
of the concerns of the.
You.
The community was as where where
the when some of that happen.
And in one case.
R. the.
We got the district that got
moved to Rio Rancho because of
growing up.
Another situation made by move
the Senate lines around and
basically took out are you
Chavis county used to have
Senate district thirty three
that's about bill birch street
over Alamogordo and
So.
Whoever's draw the lines can
always use are some
justification for doing what
they're doing.
I I.
I'm somewhat.
Concern when I hear where we
should consider this server
should consider that because
really it's the people in the
communities that are barely the
Harm that occurs by by some of
the the.
Once again drawn certain ways
or.
Move that skip drawn or whatever
and the community loses its
Representative or it Senator and
The.
At some time so it's not a good
thing so thank thank you madam
chair thank you senator.
Thank you next I have speaker
Egolf are you ready.
Thank you madam chair I am
we have an amendment the to to
number is two twenty.
Seven fourteen point two.
Two two zero seven one four
point two.
This is just been added to the
share file.
What it does is takes the
contents to Senate bill four as
it currently exists before the
committee and adds it to the end
of the Senate rules committee
substitute percent of bills
fifteen and nineteen as amended.
I would I would move the
amendment and I'm happy to
answer any questions after we
had talked to the sponsor.
Senator Ivey Soto
you madam chair well it does
distrust with that I think the
next consequences you will end
up tabling one of my bills.
It does seem to make sense to
put them all together
both the administrative aspect
and requirements of
redistricting that we have in
Senate bill four along with of
the procedures for the citizens
raise commission as of them
already amended by this
committee R. so that we have
adult ality of those provisions
in a single piece of legislation
it avoids conflicts and ensures
that federal gets considered
thank time.
So it would be a
That would be a friendly.
Thank you Mr speaker and senator
discussion on the amendment
looks like Representative Nibert
you have your hand up is it on
the amendment.
Madam chair I'm trying to read
the amendment right now I I
don't know whether I have any
questions or not by hand was for
the other one but I'll take it
down but I may have some after I
read it thank you.
Madam chair just to keep things
moving but I recognized
Representative I'm treating but
also commotion.
Okay we do have motion and we do
have a second but we will House
there just a second to make sure
we allow room for discussion or
debate on this ammendment.
Madam chair if I may just kind
of gratuitously while we're
waiting Representative Nibert
raised the issue of of
consideration of incumbency.
And let me just simply COVID for
those who are we're observing
that while the federal courts
have indicated that
consideration of of well with
having COVID lives is a valid
consideration.
I will also note that I don't
think it should be the pre
eminent consideration what is of
interest should be the pre
eminent administration.
But part of ensuring that that
communities of interest to have
a voice is to make sure that the
the voice of those communities
have been selected make continue
to start so so while it should
never be the pre eminent
consideration all other things
being equal it is under federal
law a valid consideration.
Thank you senator.
We have other discussion on the
amendment.
And madam chair I may just
simply inquire of the speaker
with regard to the amendment as
I don't have access to the chair
Dr but what I am
understanding though is that
none of the provisions that
exist in Senate bill four are
being changed as they're being
included in.
Senate bill fifty is that
correct madam chair Senator yes
it is the amendment is verbatim.
Senate bill for just so it it
begins by of course many missed
the short title and then we add.
section ten to the bill is there
yes Senate bill fifteen as nine
section so that we got a
passionate.
Hello.
Yeah.
And madam chair if I may also
require the speaker of this does
not undo any of the amendments
that Representative Ely are
forced on to Senate bill fifteen
is that right well no no
actually what it does if it
contains the so madam chair what
I'm gonna do is I'm gonna to
make of the COVID and if I may
I'd like to then my.
Motion to strike the amendment
of representative Ely previously
adopted that's right and in
adopt only the amendment two two
zero seven one four point two
that one and then seven one four
point you can date contains the
entirety of Representative
realize amendment.
From a moment ago and Senate
bill four.
Yeah madam vice chair I had the
same point so I appreciate the
sponsor mention metal slides
thank you choose the workforce
was somewhat inappropriate.
Well well we we just that we
need to consider this
madam chair an amendment so nice
we tested twice.
Madam chair I am getting a sense
of what
what house members experience
when they come to Senate
committees that I'm on when when
they're built office and leave
it out completely different for.
Thank you we appreciate that
consideration Senator we are
going to go back to
Representative Nibert
Representative Nibert have you
had a chance to review this
ammendment.
Not not not very well but I I.
I'm I'm glad that the discussion
was of it it Gerry over house
bill four into it I did have
some some comments on house bill
four star I guess now would be
an appropriate time
There's a paragraph on page six
of the amendment which Senator
for your purposes would be.
I'm looking at the the amendment
such concepts version I don't
know if you have that it's
essentially section to.
Paragraph do to.
Of the original house bill four
yes.
At Senate bill four and has been
carried over on page six of the
amendment Senate rates each
local public body subject to
districting and whose governing
body members are not elected at
the regular local election show
create or redraw districts for
the local public body.
Could you explain what that
means and who does it apply to.
I'm certainly madam chair and
representative Nibert so let's
let's begin with the beginning
of subsection D. which is
following completion of the
procedures outlined in
subsection B. of the section
which is the finalization of the
that that ninety day period no
more than ninety period and in
the same calendar year what's
the state receives the results
of the federal census each local
public body seven to districting
and whose governing body members
are not elected regular local
elections across right right
right districts to local public
body so basically what this says
is in within that context is
that is that they're responsible
for writing
there district boundaries I will
note by the way that the
constitutional amendments that I
wrote a few years ago but I do
hope we consider at some point
for the future at the the
independent redistricting
commission under the
constitution Brian Alliance for
all local public bodies in
addition for all state bodies
however the procedures we've had
to have been that local public
bodies were under their own
districting.
And and so that the council is
that there that is more in terms
of the time frame so the local
public bodies that are not
elected it's a regular local
elections would include for
example county commissions whose
actions take place on the
general election and so that is
why they need to do it in the
same time frame as the
legislature does for state up
State thank.
And then we also have there are
of the one hundred and six
municipalities there are I
believe twenty seven or twenty
eight that are not opted in to
the regular local election there
are election is in March of even
numbered year and they can in
twenty twenty one still do that
districting before their next
election so that there are there
boundaries would be drawn prior
to their filing date which is in
January.
So madam chair and senator of
the term.
Regular local election that's
not being the regular general
election on which are statewide
offices are are filled.
Madam chair and representative
that is correct regular local
election is a term of art it and
and it refers to elections
that that take place in November
of the odd numbered year which
is our which is all of the
nonpartisan elections and that
is covered pursuant to chapter
one article twenty two of the
election code which is local
elections.
And so madam chair and senator
after this redistricting process
then even those twenty seven or
twenty eight communities that
have March elections.
Hey will no longer be able to
draw their own district lines
because I will be elector at a
regular local election.
Madam chair and
Representative never that is
incorrect the art of the March
of even numbered year elections
for the twenty some
municipalities that have not yet
opted in to the regular local
action that the term of art for
that election is the municipal
office for collection.
And and so they are they they
will draw their own lines
as provided for in this section
that with this program that
we're looking at section D. RF
two.
Those local of those public
bodies whose elections take
place at the regular local
election which is in November of
the odd numbered year.
They will do their districting
following that election in
twenty twenty one they will do
in twenty twenty two and that is
contained in subsection E. of
you are you of the amendment for
the original our central for.
Madam chair and senator do you
believe there's anyone in the
state of New Mexico other than
yourself that would understand
that.
Madam chair and that point yes.
Representative.
I don't believe you Mr speaker.
I read this is a is why I'm
happy to appear before this
committee that's right I I I
just read that and I'm thinking.
I don't know what that means and
there has to be some code that
the site for the code here and I
guess that's all of the defined
terms elsewhere but the.
Of.
I I think we could process also
we write that maybe a little of
will clear to where everybody
might might understand what
we're talking about because
basically what you're saying is
that county commissioners and
that local our.
Local bodies will continue to
draw their district boundaries.
Madam chair and representative
Nibert regardless of whether
they did it in the same year as
the results or in the year
following they would continues
this as.
And I can that I can understand
that what the grades hi I have a
hard time get bye bye head
around the.
Language you put out and then
the one other thing of the.
Well page three of the
amendments and contacts version
of.
It's our section.
Section one.
graphs a seven.
B. seven.
Let me just make sure it made
its way over.
Madam chair here but as we go on
I also point out that the fact
that we have.
Quite a few of the local public
bodies that will do their
reapportionment in twenty twenty
two.
Is it a big help because for the
very limited number of
demographic demography
professionals in New Mexico and
they're just basically their
availability and their time I
tends to be the same people so
research and polling does that
we did does reapportionment
services for the legislature
they've been retained to do so.
They do reapportionment if not
for all you know for certain the
vast majority of the local
governments I know they did it
for the City of Santa Fe and
Santa Fe County and I think
spreading this out over to your
process another.
If it just it all this has to be
done this year I think that
would presents some real
difficulties
yeah and and and just so that I
mean there are other options of
the just research and polling
for example for state senator
monetarists demographer.
And I know that he is visiting
with Representative Dow at this
moment he can certainly weigh in
on the fact that the he does a
number of the
because of the district
boundaries for local local local
public products.
I'm not endorsing one company
HSD I think there's just not a
lot in the.
Madam chair and senator again it
it did make it onto the
Amendment and it's a.
On page three of the amendment
at the very bottom of that page.
Our.
And again that that talks about
the other major train features
such as rivers trams Arroyo's I
think my comment previously was
that you know there's other
recognize geographic features
order I take it such as is just
an example it's not there are
your it's not a closed if it's
not the universe it's just
examples of things that you
would want noted on the map.
And so I I appreciate that.
With that madam chair
I appreciate the answers
appreciate the patience and bear
with me as I went through the
amendment thank you.
Thank you at next on the
amendment I believe we have
Representative Townsend.
Representative you're still on
you.
Thank you I'm sorry about that
Madam chair representative with
respect to the amendment what
what issues or what provisions
of the amendment well it
Dirac's.
Incumbency.
Or partisanship.
issues I mean how is that
addressed in your amendment or
is it addressed at all.
Mr Madam chair
representative hasn't it is not
it's not the topic of the
amendment the what we're the the
amendment takes Senate bill for
which talks about the drawing of
precinct boundaries just take
that bill and puts it on the
fifteenth so that we have
everything done in one piece of
legislation to.
So thank you for that Mr speaker
I I think that still the issue
that both sides should be
Concerned with.
This.
Okay you madam chair thank
leaders has I guess maybe I
don't understand the the the the
precinct.
Batteries are drawn by county
commissions the it with the
assistant county clerk's.
And.
So this this doesn't have
anything that Senate bill four.
Right this is that's just how
they're going to prepare the
maps and how what features the
maps are gonna show an as yet as
a changes service the
chapter houses and tribal
government batteries can be
taken into account to the
precincts can be drawn
appropriately based on the
decisions of county commissions.
Yeah I I catch up with that Mr
speaker I was trying to meet a
number of different amendments
of and just like you probably
and getting a lot of input from
side thank you and and I can say
that at least as to Santa Fe
County they didn't take
anything because I found out
months after afterwards that the
precinct which I live have been
split and all sorts of things
occurred
so
I can see through for at least
one county because it without
telling anybody.
Thank you Sir.
Thank you further discussion on
the amendment.
Seeing none Mr speaker might you
repeat the motion and we'll see
if we can get a second I'm not.
I move to strike the amendment
offered by Representative Eli.
And to adopt.
The amendment with the two two
number two two zero seven one
four point two.
All second.
Thank you so we have a proper
motion from speaker Egolf and a
second from representative
Armstrong Representative
Townsend you do still have your
hand up my you want any more
discussion on the amendment for
the motion.
I see the hand down okay
see no further discussion on the
amendment click to call the
roll.
Representative okay.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Cook yes.
Mr speaker.
Yes.
Representative Eli.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative night.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative.
Representative Townsend.
Yes.
Thank you.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Eleven two zero.
Thank you madam chair and as I
give up the floor I am.
Are you will you can't pass up
the opportunity to say I am not
Daniel A. Ivey Soto I just play
him and House Judiciary.
The but when I went to comment
about some things that were said
before about.
House district fifty and senator
supports districts
That the boundaries that we have
right now in read in the
legislature we're not drawn by
the we're not drawn by
legislators.
if for the last I don't believe
we've had legislatively created
maps since nineteen ninety.
So we are operating basically on
coming up on thirty years
maps that it were never drawn by
members of the legislature.
In the current mass we have
withdrawn by a judge in Santa Fe
a Republican judge actually and
those the maps we have now what
I.
By happenstance I was the lead
plaintiff in the redistricting
litigation at ten years ago and
my group Representative number
in Representative was it.
I was a party it was not a
lawyer in redistricting
I mean I was a lawyer but I was
not acting as a lawyer in the
case and I was just a plaintiff
and.
Our our group we had several
plaintiffs in our group and our
purpose for for participating in
reduced in the redistricting
litigation was specifically to
protect native American voting
strength and the voting strength
of as it's this is the term is
used in redistricting law of
minority populations so is
minority voting strength and
native American voting strength
to make sure that we were doing
everything we could have
districts they were created to
allow those communities to elect
a candidate of their choice and.
The.
The judge did a fair job I think
on the native American
districts.
Less so for districts that were
it primarily comprised of
communities of color.
You would be here we are again
one of the things you know going
into this and you know maybe
we'll have legislatively drawn
maps you live court drawn maps.
Yeah we're dry Matt is a
possibility whether we have an
independent redistricting
commission or not you know
that's something that is always
to be considered your commission
can produce maps that people
don't like and they can they can
still be here taken to court and
the subject litigation
Did this Stefanics and and then
the queen districts.
Windows came up those districts
they look strange and they are.
You know long ago from Santa Fe
you know the house Mr Garcia
Santa Fe down a real communities
and let's see County it's a
hundred miles.
That was not a gerrymander that
was.
The the litigation around that
district in particular was.
Focused on trying to maintain
and preserve a rural seat so
that district connexin number of
rural.
Communities Senator they would
have Representative that would
be attentive to the commonly
shared needs of rural
communities
that's why we have that district
it would have been I think which
easier for the judge to.
Draw a compact district it would
have taken in populated portions
of Santa Fe Bernalillo county's
and may the district compact but
we would have lost a rural seats
in the house and that was the
that was the purpose for that
and I think it was a good
purpose and it shows and
sometimes when you try to
compare protect communities of
interest and keep communities
with similar interests in a
district to increase their
influence in the legislature you
might get districts that appear
you look on but the achieve
their purpose.
In terms of making sure there's
a representative and senator
from that party state who is
going to be a champion for rural
issues and and that's what we
have right now those two seats I
just wanted to make that point
R. on those two districts thank
you madam chair and thank you to
the committee thank you Mr
speaker back on the bill we have
Representative Eli madam chair
all make a motion to pass the
Senate bill fifteen is twice
then.
Thank you.
I do still see further
discussion so thank you for that
motion will come back to that
next up I have Representative
article in.
Thank you madam chair.
I have a few questions on the
legislation before before I make
up my mind that I'm going to do
so as I'm reading the
legislation senator.
What is going to happen is we're
going to have a commission that
is going to go out there and
brother districts my correct.
Our.
Representative although some of
what is going to happen is that
we're going to have a citizens
registrant Commission that is
going to take input from around
the state and following that
input is going to provide
proposed maths this is a
proposed maps to submit to the
legislature.
Now we submitted to the
legislature in the same manner
as a bill is submitted from an
interim committee and that will
be considered by the legislature
in the same manner as in the
bill is considered are subject
to debate amendment
substitution.
So okay that's and madam chair
so my question of course is my
question is this commission are
going to draw the maps that's
pretty much it.
Madam chair are you madam chair
and Representative Alcon they
are going to drop proposed maps
nothing would stop other members
of the legislature from also
submitting their own bills that
would contain other proposed
maps.
During that process nothing
would stop in the legislative
process is the legislative
process unless constitutionally
restricted and there are no
constitutional restrictions on
that legislative process at this
time.
Despite
those that that exists.
And to do my one simple question
madam chair and senator but.
I guess the other thing is that
the.
So then there's both send the
send the legislature these maps
and supposedly we are supposed
to acceptable.
Madam chair welcome we are to
consider the maps okay.
Is up to us the fact that there
will be delivering three
proposed Matt sets of maps for
each area in which we will be
doing district thing means that
by definition we will at the
very least not adopt the maps
for the house of representatives
that they would submit.
Sure we will not adopt through
the proposed that the maps for
the state Senate.
But.
That we could reject all of.
Madam chair of the.
Representative account pursuant
to our current constitutional
structure yes we could reject
all of them if we just.
The
board madam chair this morning
is going to be selected and you
have X. amount of members gone
through that so many times and
it's giving me crazy and these
are supposed to be all non
partial or non political or
partisan.
Motor members that are going to
draw these maps.
One of the primary this big
claim actually House Bill to
eleven and Senate bill fifteen
is that house bill two eleven
does not restrict.
One political party from having
the majority on the commission.
The house Senate bill fifteen
laws restrict a majority of
thank you no I.
What's that about us the server
buddy was yes Sir all right.
Representative Nibert I'm about
to meet you he.
But first thank you.
it was.
Madam chair representative
of the under Senate bill fifteen
of the seven members no more
than three can be from the same
political party so by definition
then no one political party will
dominate.
Of the the citizens registering
Commission pursuant to Senate
bill fifty.
So that does not exist and House
Bill.
The seven members are going to
be representative of all the
citizens in New Mexico.
Madam and Representative I'll
come up if we were to have a
commission that were
representative of all of the
services of New Mexico that
would be somewhere between
seventy eight maybe forty two
perhaps three hundred people
that was a little unwieldy for
commission so we're picking
people to serve as a proxy for
that and the proposed
legislation.
Thank you thank you for that and
so and and that is exactly what
I William right now slide into a
follow we follow the
constitution.
we have seventy members of the
house and forty two members of
the Senate.
That are supposed to be a
responsible for doing this
redistricting my correct.
Madam chair representative that
is correct and in fact we will
be the ones making the final
decision.
The madam chair and senator
we're going to be had in the
responsibility of these dry you
of Brian this proposed maps
seven people in the state in New
Mexico.
Madam chair of Cologne based
upon the the work and the
recommendation of the ark of New
Mexico first and very distressed
New Mexico that is the model
that was proposed in the model
that has been adopted.
Thank you thank you see and see
because I was going through this
madam chair and I mean just the
day before yesterday I think
those Representative to realize
that bill on the floor.
And only say that the.
At least the.
Sixty percent of the people
that.
Thank you that will be sent to
lace in the the representative
was.
Was.
We're basically
meals because
the one you love their
constitutional right.
And the law on hearing the same
be able.
Forty
process.
That is going to take away their
constitutional rights.
Wireless invited people.
You do a.
Do you redistricting.
Job.
Constitutional duty to do this
since low there it really is
and.
But we're going to hand it over
seven people to do it for us.
Heartburn with that.
Or maybe a lot of heartburn was
that.
So I I understand the proposal
and once a popular measure out
there everybody's thinking that
the if we do it this way we're
not going to you know anybody
that's what you hear over and
over and over again you read new
single.
The news on the radio on the TV
said.
You read the newspapers and
everybody uses that we going to
add to this.
And now you're telling me that
we're going to the system
people.
And these people are not.
These people are perfect.
I just don't.
I don't think those people are
more perfect and.
Seven forty two.
And I'm really just might be the
problem how you look at it.
I I don't.
Like any of this I just don't
think this is the way we should
go I don't think we just elected
officials and community should
you of our rights.
To represent our people.
And for those people on this
board.
If you really want to be part of
redistricting they should run
for our state for our spots.
And with.
Part of the redistricting.
Constitutionally.
So.
No matter which bill is
presented and and voted on I I
will be a solid no no matter
what you look at it how you look
at it so that's the only way I
can go I mean I always always a
wide especially.
Example one of the things that I
was really disappointed on madam
chair.
District judge.
District judge retires somebody
wants to be a district judge
well they have to do is please.
Thank.
Was like twelve people.
Please.
The community or the district
that they're gonna be judging
and all they gotta do is.
Sure.
These people.
I'm going to select them to send
their nomination to the
governor.
And those people because I sat
want them Linda morals stroll
around there was okay but anyway
those two people there are not
representative of the people
that that judge serves.
Well honesty
everybody there was very.
And these are only.
One half of one percent of the.
The community yet they are the
ones who are going to still like
who is going to serve as their
judge.
As the judge of that district.
And now we're going to have
seven people
How.
We are going to draw maps so we
can serve the state of New
Mexico thank you madam chair I
I'm done.
Thank you Representative have
gone now it looks like we have
Representative Townsend.
Yes madam chair that this is
kind of a procedural question
we're listening to two bills
today.
And shortly I assume we're going
to come to a vote.
On to fifteen.
Will have to eleven be heard
regardless or will a passing
boat on.
Just be to fifteen the gate
hearing to a level I'm just
trying to figure out.
What the plan is.
Representative thank you for
that question as of now we still
have House Bill to eleven and
just before the agenda so I'd
imagine if we pass just be
fifteen we may see SB four
withdrawn with the inclusion of
the amendment that we've already
adopted and then at given that
hopefully if we still have time
we can move after that to take
action on H. B. two eleven I
would like to announce that
Representative he'll give me a
minute we have heard from the
sponsors of HB two fifty four
are there pulled and other
committees so if anyone in our
audience is listening and
waiting for HB to fifty four we
will not be hearing that today
hopefully we'll get to it on a
rollover calendar this weekend.
Madam chair any of the apps that
we run out of time with the
caucuses and all that will to a
lab and then be routed to the
next meeting and B. R. or I'm
just trying to find out what
your plans are
in that of the.
Thank you Representative it does
look like representative Ely has
something on that point you like
to add that our our council I
think if we do if Senate bill
two it's not to fifteen I'll set
it is settled fifty if.
All right if I just want to
confuse people if we asked if we
pass out of this committee
fifteen R. then yeah for what
would almost have to be
withdrawn or table and then just
to alert the committee at that
point two eleven is really
relevant and I would be moving
to table just so you know okay
and then you know the committee
has to decide on a table in
motion but I think becomes
irrelevant hi if we pass out
fifteen I think it's it's fair
to ask Miss procedural question
but that's what I would plan on
doing thank you madam chair I
sure thank you for letting me
answer that question I realized
we're not on that but I thought
it was a fair question and she
answered thank you.
And there in the madam chairs
the partisan divide thank you
very much.
Thank you Representative
Townsend and
we do have a motion on just be
fifteen.
I was made previously by
Representative ET les I actually
all second we have a second from
Representative Armstrong I do
see Senator Ivy Soto with his
hand raised Senator Ivey Soto
would you like to.
make another comment.
Senator you appear to be muted.
Madam chair actually not like to
request is that not only should
I be allowed to close on the now
amended Senate bill fifteen I
think out of courtesy the R.
Sanchez of of house bill eleven
perhaps should be a lot of well
given what Representative
Maestas reports eight we
certainly will do that before we
take a vote ideas even and in
town since hand up on the bill
again.
And madam chair I have a point
of order
The chair where when we
introduced us.
I was somewhat confused as to
what the debate was gonna be
over and I thought we were going
to have committee but.
All three but we kind of went
one at a time and we haven't had
any committee but on the last
piece of legislation so
I guess I'm.
We're where we're at now is a
different place than where I
thought we were at it where
sure originally said what her
intentions were for this.
These these three pieces of
legislation I just like to point
that out before we take a
backpack I'd like to have an
opportunity talk about to eleven
before we but.
I thought we were going to do I
have chair.
Thank you Representative so yes
we heard a presentation on each
of the bills and then we did
hear combined public comment but
we will be taking action on each
of these pieces of legislation
separately so we will go first
from on SB fifteen we will then
here and we're just getting
notes that if needed we will at
go conversation as it's merited
but after we take action on SB
two fifteen we will be going to
HB to eleven and have room to
take action on that legislation
after after when we get to that
point.
you representative will go to
Representative Townsend and then
Representative right after that.
Thank you madam chair and and
Okay I was there I was hopeful.
That
That we yesterday to try to
blast the level elements for.
Should be seen as being I need
it.
In fact today we are going to
list we're going to introduce to
the committee to eleven to
fifteen and the public has voted
overwhelmingly to support to a
lab.
Overwhelming the support to
eleven over two fifty and we're
now going to.
Around two fifteen.
And and to fifteen is going to
be some merrily table.
It just proves the point to me
that the effort yesterday was
merit to.
maybe should be merited more
often.
And the.
And that the public's in but yes
totally discounted in the
process for a partisan issue
that the testimony today is that
we're not going to be part of
some and I find that very
troubling of.
Madam chair I just I think it's
disrespectful the process I
thought we want to hear both of
them get on their there do a
time before committees of so I
will wait to see what happens
thank you madam chair.
Comment on that point.
Representative Townsend is yes
and I I I don't know if he's not
been listening that you madam
chair just said.
We're gonna vote on fifteen and
then the committee is going to
discuss to eleven and then we'll
take a vote on two eleven one
member of the committee said he
intends to make a motion to
table which is entirely within
the rules is entirely
appropriate and many bills get
tables of both parties in both
chambers and we at that please
let me finish are provided in
Townsend okay.
And we were trying of
partisanship you'll note that
there is one Democrat and one
Republican sponsoring to eleven.
And they are going to be heard
we're going to discuss the bill
in just a minute there's no
reason to say that we should or
shouldn't vote on one bill based
on what may happen to vote on
another bill they touched on the
same topics and you know before
you start throwing around
accusations of partisanship I
might suggest that you may end
up being surprised about what
the votes are in this committee
with regard to eleven.
When we started checking
partisanship and lobbying you
know the explosions on this
committee it may and may not
lead in the place the wanted to
lead.
Especially when we're talking
your broad strokes about
partisanship as relates to
redistricting.
This relates to voting and you
look all over this country and
it is one party and one party
only that is trying to restrict
people's access to the ballot
trying to reduce voting strength
of African Americans in Georgia
in Michigan and Wisconsin it is
one party is trying to make it
harder to vote it is one party
that is trying to make it.
The less accessible especially
for low income people of color
to vote and have their voices
heard just look at Georgia right
now madam chair in terms of what
partisanship is doing with the
right to vote and the right to
have your voice heard.
It is outrageous every American
should be ashamed by these bills
that are being considered in
state legislatures around the
country unfortunately uniformly
and only supported by
Republicans to make it harder
vote restricting early voting
time voter ID laws that hello
this in evidence an immediate
impact on people of color make
it harder for them to vote to to
change ours so that send a
voting can occur for African
American
religious groups I mean it is
outrageous what's happening.
And we had a fair hearing and
madam chair you pointed out as
did chairwoman Chasey that
Representative Dow asked for
this to eleven to be rolled over
four times this is the fifth
time is been on the agenda to be
heard.
I had notes on two eleven
sitting on my desk for weeks to
talk about it.
So it is just beyond the pale to
say that there's anything wrong
with what this committee is
doing at madam chair then by
checking data and madam chair
Chasey have bent over backwards
to accommodate Representative
Dow with respect to eleven we're
about to discuss there's a
committee to take action.
And I think that.
I know that there is support
among both parties on this
committee for two eleven.
So I think you should we can see
where the votes are.
But you know I think Senate bill
Levin has merit it passed the
Senate unanimously we just heard
the co chairs of the and we
redistricting and committee that
that the reducing group together
supported.
So you know I think there I
think everyone should try to let
the process play out go forward
as a four star casting
aspersions on the committee.
Thank you Mr speaker now we're
going to Representative Rehm.
Sure that more of taking care of
my concerns because I to noted
that there was a lot of support
from the public going to eleven
of we all know that the several
pieces of legislation make it to
the governor's desk even on the
same topic and then she chooses
which one to sign and so I I
think we need to have a hearing
and and I think we can move to
eleven this well thank you madam
chair thank you Representative
every man yes we will be going
to the hospital to left and
immediately following our action
on Senate bill fifteen is
amended I ate on on this bill I
look to seem to have
Representative Ely with the hand
up and then representative
Thompson again will first go to
representative Ely.
Madam chair madam chair
Representative Townsend asked
what my intentions were I gave
an answer I think we've
addressed it with two fifteen we
address the audience's concerns
as far as you're concerned not
trying to interrupt the debate
what what what I'm certain that
we will do what we've always
done this committee is that we
will get to to eleven but I
thought it was fair still due to
alert the minority leader to the
fact that are you saying from my
point of view we have now
covered the ground was sent
bills fifteen not to fifteen
Bucks fifteen and that that
would be my intention but I am
in no way suggesting that we
were interrupted discussion as
the speaker said however the
doctor what I thought was fair
at for him to ask the question
for me ask answered straight
away and frankly while I I'm
very much enjoyed visiting with
leader on I don't appreciate
intact it's not intended the
parsonage intend to solve the
problem and I think we just
solve the problem if we pass out
Senate bill fifteen now I
appreciate it madam vice chair
you letting me answer that
question again I won't do that
thank you very much thank you
Representative Eli we're going
to Representative Townsend yes
thank you madam chair and and
the in response to
Representative Ely is answer I
appreciate that I I expected you
to answer it honestly and you do
it and and with respect to the
speaker's comments what I am
doing today and what you stated
that representing their
districts their caucuses in the
state of New Mexico not in the
state of Georgia and and all of
those accusations have nothing
to do with what we're doing in
the in this
Committee today so I I take
exception to that the madam
chair thank you thank you for
that I am calling that I see no
further debate on SB fifteen is
amended.
We do have a motion on the table
we also have a second I am going
to turn to Senator Ivy Soto the
sponsor on SB fifty for closing
remarks before we go to the vote
we will then go to house bill
two eleven where are bipartisan
co sponsors will have room to
present their bill
of course take committee
questions and then we'll take
action on that bill separately
and after this one so
Representative Phyllis Sanchez
on two eleven you'll have your
moments to be in front of our
committee and make your comments
as we take action on that bill
but Senator Ivy Soto to make
your final comments after that
we will go to the quick for the
roll call vote on this bill
thank you senator.
Thank you very much madam chair
I think much has been discussed
about this bill let me just
simply say that change is
difficult and constitutional
restrictions are frustrating.
This bill seeks to push us
forward.
Towards a more and in in the
kind of a distinct process.
In a manner that is possible
under current constitutional
structure.
This will be the first time if
this bill is passed and adopted.
That the legislature will begin
its raise process.
With us not just testimony but
maps derived.
From the public.
From in from a citizens
redistricting commission.
What will be our starting point.
The people can watch our process
because our process is required
to be done in public.
We'll continue to work to change
the constitution.
For a completely be politicized
process start to finish.
On our constitutional process of
structure however.
This is I think as far as we're
able to push it and I'm proud to
be part of this effort.
Thank you to call the roll.
Representative Alcon no.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Cook no.
Mr speaker just.
Representative.
Yes
Lewis yes.
Representative McQueen.
Yes I'd like to explain my vote.
Representative Nibert.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes ma'am L. explain my point
of.
Representative Townsend.
No ma'am.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Have a vote of eight yes.
No Representative.
And Representative when to
explain that.
Thank you.
Representative McQueen first and
then we'll go to Representative
re.
Thank you madam chair of madam
chair members of the committee
of the listing of course of the
debate I just.
Want to note
I've seen this number committees
on different bills citing the
whole as the boat that should
bind our decision.
The poll is not a vote.
It is the virtual equivalent of
raising your hand in the
committee room to take the
temperature of the public
participating.
I appreciate the public
participation but to say that we
should be bound in this
committee by the call of a few
dozen people is it Sir thank you
madam chair.
Thank you to Representative
remove to explain his vote.
Thank you madam chair I just
think that
we need to move both pieces of
legislation and that's why I'm
voting for this right thank you.
Thank you as senator by with
eight in the affirmative and
three in the negative you have a
do pass on Senate bill fifteen
as amended I am going to take
just a minute to explain my vote
and hopefully my comments will
be part of transitioning
transitioning our committee and
to HB to eleven I like so many
New Mexicans
really I'm drawn to the idea of
an independent redistricting
committee in process and
certainly through most of the
year I was grateful to hear
advocates from all sides of all
sorts of aisles speaking in
favor of a process that would in
in the end and eventually get
New Mexico to an independent
redistricting redistricting
set up.
I have to say and I've said this
before and I'm grateful that
I've into state today January
six changed everything for me
when I think about the attack on
the capital the attacks that
have made across been made to
across this country to
undermine.
People's access to democracy and
a fair vote I frankly have to
say that I don't think we're
playing on an equitable ground
and certainly not an equal
ground so I I trusted that
through this bill that I just
voted to advance we get to hear
from public in a meaningful
engage smart ways so that we get
maps like came came through with
Representative article in
question that we get to consider
I hope that all of us as policy
makers representing our own
districts in our constituents
will take that responsibility
with the incredible weight it
deserves as we make sure that we
are doing a lot including the
rights of indigenous people to
vote fairly the rights of
communities of color and the
rights of our rural communities
to really have a voice in our
democracy and our legislature
also certainly for me I think
this is a compromise that meets
in the middle it gives the
public a lot of room to way and
bring maps to us and then we
will still maintain that
responsibility that is ours to
to ultimately decide what maps
are going to move forward
whether or not a court weighs in
in changes changes those anyway
also with that we are officially
done on just be fifteen as
amended Senator congratulations
you're welcome to stay on and
listen and if you'd like but
next we are moving to H. B. two
eleven so Representative are you
ready with your bill.
So we're madam chair.
You heard the presentation you
want me to just now I know we
have ten minutes before we have
to get caucus and that's not a
lot of time but.
That we do want to make sure we
have a thorough discussion on
this bill so we'll take the time
we needed and and figure out
what I want but that's the
message I received from our
speaker is that will be holding
off on our caucus make sure you
look at the hearing that you
deserve also if there's anything
you'd like to make and let
anything else you want to ended
in a reflection of the last
lively discussion we've had you
to make that now otherwise we
will go to committee comments
but your welcome you have the
floor please if you'd like to
bring this back to your bill.
What what is with an H. B. two
eleven.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you committee you are doing
yeoman's work for the people of
New Mexico to discuss this issue
that is so important one of the
members of the committee pointed
out that if you want to be part
of redistricting you run for
office well it's one of the
reasons I ran for office and
like many of you on the
committee and previous sponsors
of the other bill have have
mentioned a constitutional
amendment for independent
redistricting would be ideal but
in this decade cycle.
We don't have time so we are
looking at legislation to do
that I will say I think perhaps
we missed an opportunity my
understanding of Committee was
discussion of all the bills to
to pull the best pieces together
of everything the way Senate
judiciary did to pull pieces
together to make a good bill I
wanted my House Judiciary to
have that opportunity and to to
them for pull out of two eleven
the best that they thought were
worth caring into just be
fifteen.
But given the way things have
fallen I'm just going to outline
briefly the things that are left
that are different
Building commission with regard
to cultural and geographic
diversity
is in a three to eleven.
Prohibiting participation from
the executive branch any member
any family member at cetera is
in HD two eleven
I'm willing calendar timelines
as they need to be to address
late census data is into eleven.
Other sources beyond the census
if the census data is just
flawed is also into eleven so
many of the great pieces in as
be fifteen.
Pulled right out of the task
force work in our two eleven I'm
and I'm so glad that they got
amended in even plus or minus
five percent deviation with an
explanation of why if if there's
that population deviation exits
to protect communities of
interest to protect the wishes
of New Mexico into a level so a
lot of good pieces are there I
would say madam chair the pieces
that are not there yes R. the
prohibition of incumbency
protection yes the Supreme Court
has ruled it can be an out of
interest but only nine states
still allow it it is not an NCSL
best practice and it is
something that my constituents
and many people in the public in
New Mexico C. as a break a state
are faced with that.
That we would draw districts
with that in mind so it's
important to me that that be
removed from the redistricting
process with respect to
Representative Nibert is
concerns.
If you also hold consideration
of partisan data you avoid the
gerrymandering technique of
getting to income as against
each other to reduce the voice
of that certain party that's why
prohibiting partisan data as
well as protecting comments is
into eleven.
The other thing I think.
Is this not there is to eleven
had a piece that.
Allow the legislature to
redistrict finalize the maps in
the year ending in two if
necessary if the census data it
came so late and between all the
amendments that I can't see
because they're in your
committee chair file and I don't
have access to that I hope that
peace was added or if it's not
they will be considered as the
bill moves forward
those are the key pieces that
stand out that remains to be
considered to my mind that are
into eleven and I appreciate
Madam chair of the work of the
committee.
This is important.
To the people of New Mexico it's
important for the next ten years
and I will point out that in the
last fifty years the legislature
has only once created maps that
stood.
For every other time it is the
judiciary a court that has made
our maps so if we feel like we
are ceding power as the
Legislature to this independent
commission I would say we are
ceding power to the judiciary
every time we do it wrong and we
were than one judge if we as a
body can put together a good
independent commission and put
together a good maps.
I think we can restore some
faith with the public I will
point out into amendments you
need to look at with the belt
because a lot of what I said
would it be true without those
two amendments the language now
in the streets to eleven.
In terms of maps being delivered
to the legislature.
Just like interim legislation is
and debated like built some need
to change debate amendment is
also in the H. B. two eleven
now.
With the amendments that we were
bringing today.
Thank you madam chair thank you
committee thank you.
Representative that we're going
to add anything.
Chairman thank you members of
the committee I think that might
cosponsored by a bipartisan co
sponsors summed it up really
well I also want to thank the
sponsor of Senate bill Ford
Senate bill fifteen for
requesting that we do get to
have a closing on this I think
that was very kind and there is
work to be done on Senate bill
fifteen if it moves forward is
Senate bill two eleven those
forward.
Once when I will make the
commitment to present the
amendments as we intended as we
support thank you.
Thank you Sanchez.
Representative Sanchez if if
you'd like those amendments can
be presented today and and you
should do so if that still your
intention as part of our
committee process.
Madam chair then I can give you
as to how to number thank.
Two one nine seven seven five
point three.
I just wanted to get a.
Absolutely my apologies two one
nine seven seven five point
three.
Thank you very quickly with
committee staff to we have these
amendments and they are they
part of our shared file on H. B.
two eleven.
Give me one second Technion Kerr
thank you.
Madam chair since she's checking
would you like me to give you
the other amendment number as
well used to that as well.
Two two zero six five four point
one.
Two two zero six five four point
one.
Yes madam chair if you're pas
I'm also going to our share
file.
To.
That we have these incredible.
Madam chair we don't have the
point three versions.
Sanchez we've heard on the
previous bill we are within the
last day of the session so our
twenty four hour rule is behind
us might you email that quickly
to myself and our staff and we
will make sure to get that up on
the share file out on to the
point three version was mailed
to the committee on February
seventeenth February
seventeenth.
My apologies.
Chair I think they're both
there.
Representative Nibert.
If the other ones point to two
oh six five four point one.
It's there and the other one
that Representative Figueroa
announced is there as well thank
you.
Representative Representative
one point of order since we're
dealing with the.
Judiciary Committee substitute
the.
We generally send those back.
For an updated version of if we
agree with the the amendments.
Thank you for that reminder
representative Nibert also we
would not take action on those
amendments we would need to roll
them into a further point of the
committee said that please I
would if you're interested
please let us know what's in
that and if so we would put
those in the next version of the
house Judiciary Committee step.
We did not move the committee so
we we created one that decided
to go with the two amendments
instead.
Okay thank you for that
clarification Representative
Nibert is that there.
It's clear it just means I read
the wrong thank you okay.
My apologies Mr chair and
representative Nibert a day how.
to confirm to make sure we're
all on the same page Sanchez in
committee out we are looking.
At House Bill to eleven not the
committee said that was sent our
way and now in place of the
committees that we may
previously analyzed and reviewed
all we have to amendments
brought by our sponsors that are
accessible on the share file.
So Sanchez if you'd like to walk
us through your amendment one at
a time that will go to
committee.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for for your patience I
think it will relieve the minds
of some of the committee members
that the language in the
amendment
is the language that is in the
as the fifty eight so in in the
points to three amendments.
Thank you go through there it's
strikes public education this in
our Canadian.
In share file is called.
Been proposed amendment.
Please proceed representative
thank you sure.
Yes Representative places in
various places throughout the
bill from beginning to end to
the words Public Education
Commission and inserts any other
state districts requiring
redistricting this is the
language in as the fifteen.
On page three line fifteen
instructs be inputs has been
have been
to ensure.
That commission members cannot
have switched party recently
just to get on the commission.
Same for page three line sixteen
at any time in the two years
preceding appointment this is
also the language that is in SB
fifteen I believe
page three between twenty and
twenty one insert the paragraphs
appointing authority shall give
due consideration to cultural
diversity into achieving
geographical representation this
was hard Representative Ely and
the lies amendment to fifteen.
Their date changes because
between the presentation and our
first committee in the
presentation here half of the
census status been pushed back
so the starting date is now July
first for twenty twenty one for
the commission and their work.
Eliminate the possibility of
anyone from the executive branch
serving on the commission is
also in SB fifteen that is item
ten on the amendment.
Another date change.
Item twelve.
Is the best we can come up with
to give the commission
flexibility in case the census
data is pushed back again we
just says a hundred and fifty
days from when the census data
is received they need to reduce
the maps.
With reference to virtual
meetings the meetings around the
states after virtually we put if
required by law.
Which is the health order still
there.
Eighteen.
Create district plans to
preserve communities of interest
create district plans that
consider tribal governments and
tribal boundaries and create
district plans that preserve the
core of existing districts
providing that the other
redistricting criteria are able
to the next that is the
substantial change of this
amendments and those pieces are
not all in as for the fifty.
Appreciate that so we're going
to the committee
with this amendment for
discussion speaker egolf.
I move the doc shin well but I
want to move adoption both
amendments I presume.
Madam chair representative euro
a.
Representative Dow are you do
you agree with this and I'm
just.
What chairman Mr speaker yes I
think.
It
I'm really I was the and
induction amendments no no I'm a
learning chair so there was a
bit of discussion or question
not so if you'd like to start
over and make the motion that I
I'm gonna come back to you so I
appreciate you we had a question
of the Sanchez it appears that
we have Representative if you
get a and out in support of the
CD amendments I'm coming back to
Mr speaker move adoption the of
both amendments.
We have a motion by speaker it
off in a second by
Representative Nibert I want to
confirm that this is on
amendments two one nine seven
seven five point three as well
as two two zero six five four
point one.
Let's take a vote on these
amendments then see the state no
is there any further discussion
speakers off you still have your
hand off hand up to have it more
discussion on the amendment.
I don't thank you.
Clerk to call the roll.
Yes.
Representative Armstrong.
Yes.
Representative Cook yes.
Mr speaker.
Yes.
Representative Eli just.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert yes.
Representative rain yes.
Representative Townsend.
Representative Townsend.
Madam chair and.
Yes and it looks like we have
Representative Townsend backed
judge if he keeps going back.
Yes.
Eleven two zero and the
amendments are adopted.
Sanchez you have an amended bill
we're going to now go back to H.
to eleven as amended first up we
have speaker you off.
Thank you so.
Madam chair representative
average of zero with those
amendments.
Our is the.
What is the difference now
between two eleven fifteen.
Madam chair direct uses section
seven.
Six and seven of the bill.
See is a substantial difference.
That and the permission to use
areas smaller than a precinct to
accommodate tribal governmental
boundary lines.
Explains.
Mr speaker which piece the the
first one section seen.
So.
Seven.
C. explicitly prohibits.
C..
When I was in our top ten
district plans the commission
shall not it has some specific
things articulated that the
commission shall not do
inspections State and as far as
I know was far as I can find
there was nothing in SB fifteen
similar to that.
Madam chair and.
The.
And overarching concerns of the
litigation ten years ago yeah
the approaches maybe least
change perspective.
And the New Mexico Supreme Court
held that one of the one of the
overarching concepts to be
protected here is we want to
look at these change for I need
a degree of fairness.
You must use partisan.
Data.
In other words they were they
were looking at.
You know roughly how many seats
within the going to the
Republican Party and how many
seats in end up and how many
would be yes Sir.
Up for grabs districts and
it's impossible to do that if
you're not looking at.
Partisan data.
And I mean that's the New Mexico
Supreme Court so I.
How is this I mean how is it
permissible you're one of the
when a core aspects of the
fairness the New Mexico Supreme
Court was looking at
Taking of required the district
judge to look at partisan data.
To have some sense of you know.
Making sure that it was fair to
each party.
You have to then you know each
party would have roughly the
same number receipts.
in that that the number of seats
are up for grabs.
Maybe it at a map.
That really could swing in
either direction.
Right so by Noreen partisan
data.
You have no way of knowing.
That one party or the other has
a reasonable opportunity to win
a majority in either chamber of
the legislature.
Which was a primary driving as I
said concern New Mexico Supreme
Court.
So why why would why would we
want to point.
Madam chair Mister speaker
that's an excellent question and
it was the subject of weeks of
discussion on the task force
which is why the language says
provided that it may be
considered to ensure it complies
with federal law because there
are those considerations exactly
that you just mentioned but
that's the staff at the end of
the process not the defining
characteristic criteria at the
beginning of the process and
the.
Prohibition to adopt district
plans to specifically favoring
Cummins is a pretty clear
prohibition now I will say in
part C. three item number three
is included in SB fifteen so
that is not part of the
discussion of differences so
madam chair eight okay J..
Once twenty two to twenty five
contain an explicit prohibition.
Against using artisan data.
So that's part of the shall not
category.
Chair Mister speaker.
With the provided that language.
It follows online twenty four
and twenty five and Mr speaker
and madam chair given and I am
not an attorney this is why.
Chief justice Thomas is our
expert witness and he might be
able to more directly answer.
The speakers questions if you
just right here.
You madam chair that if if
that's okay I would love that
because I remember sitting in
the Supreme Court justice Chavis
was Chief Justice and he wrote
the two decisions one of which
Jim all completely ignored and
that's prompting the second one
which judge all kind of ignored
also
but.
I was I was on Justice genocide
on that one so I think I'm happy
to.
This is Thomas.
Thank you very much.
Yeah dude let me a try to
explain is that I try to say to
my public comments what this
language is not inconsistent
with the rest of your bill.
It is true that ten years ago
the Supreme Court remanded
because of concerns for partisan
bias in the map that the
district judge at the doctor
research polling like other
demographers have
external metrics they can use to
measure plans to make sure that
they do not introduce partisan
gerrymandering you have that
requirement in Senate bill
fifteen which you haven't been
explicit about why this portion
of the bill C. one into.
So that you don't out of the
gate start looking at partisan
data like voting history the
party registration when you're
drawing the maps do it in a
neutral fashion but to verify
and submit the comments to the
legislature for why these maps
complied with redistricting act
federal law and have a you
partisan additional aspect to it
we require the.
External metrics to be used to
measure just like they did back
when we remanded the case judge
all the right to tell made some
adjustments based on remand from
the Supreme Court.
Looking at the seven one one
expert which happened to be.
Research and polling and they
made the adjustments and took
away the partisan bias.
Out of the gate you should be
focusing on political parties
were registration incumbency
things of that nature is
perfectly consistent it just
tells the public to reassure sin
that you're not gonna start from
the aspect of.
Partisan gerrymandering if you.
Right and madam chair I I get
that I don't think we anyone
should states certainly start
with that I just.
It seems odd to me that you
would R. the commission from
even considering from you know
even looking at it and because
you may have put at.
Matt together that.
You know who's compacting to US
and seems to protected
Yeah communities of interest and
the Democrats have a permanent
fifty to twenty major.
And if that were to happen I
don't think that we are Townsend
Rebecca Dow would be very
pleased with that because I I
know that they I know that both
parties.
We'll be following the work of
the commission.
I will be running a proposed
maps through each party's
analytical software to know
within minutes in the have to
release you know what the effect
would be on the partisan
breakdown in the legislature.
I I know that you true because
that's what happened ten years
ago and and I have no doubt I
I'm certain that the Republicans
are not going to ignore the data
and I'm certain number the
Democrats will either
So I I just need you seems to be
I don't think anyone would think
was fair the commission came out
said congratulations Democrats
you have forty five seats that
Republicans can never win the
next ten years the legislature
right I mean every Republican
with the square of screaming
bloody murder.
And if that is a possibility it
is not so it is not something
that can be considered yeah even
if it's just as a final pass
detector fairness I I I don't
think that matters madam chair
and Representative Dow project
here I I don't think that is a
good idea to include that for
that reason I understand what
we're getting at but.
I'm.
Also consideration of partisan
data to my recollection and and
madam chair are just Chavis.
I am I mean it's been ten years
and I am like ninety nine
percent sure that you can not
under federal law city your
created a district likely to a
lacked.
A. R..
Likely to give a native American
District or and district with
Minority population the
opportunity to elect a candidate
of their choosing without
considering partisan data.
I because I my recollection is
that.
For a primary election.
Other for native American
districts districts larceny
American population you've got a
look at party registration
and you have to look at
performance in primaries
in order to get that done that
was ten years ago and I think
that partisan data is is
inherent in.
Creating districts that can give
these communities a reasonable
opportunity to elect a candidate
of their choosing at least
that's what the demographic
experts on both sides of the
case ten years ago.
We're talking about in the both
sides agreed that there needed
to be a certain percentage of
our district
have demographic characteristics
as well as partisan make up in
order to be able to stated and
a reasonable opportunity to like
to Canada.
the community's choice in my in
my Mr Embry.
Madam chair.
Justice.
Madam chair Mister speaker.
That's that's exactly why we
have that exception written into
the sea to basically is it says
that you can consider it.
To make sure that it complies
with federal law.
That exception is written in
there for that reason federal
law that we are obviously
interested in the voting rights
act.
And secondly again I would say
that in the final analysis
comments that have to go to the
legislature so that the public
will now requires the partisan
neutral measure.
In your right those metrics are
are are based on partisan data.
But you should not be looking at
it in advance drawing maps
because we what it does is it
it.
It creates the appearance of
intentional gerrymandering.
But we can't do it for you in
the final analysis with the use
of technical experts but there
is an exception Cartmell
Representative would you said Mr
speaker voting rights act.
Thank you okay what are the
other questions I I've taken
average unity to show just
Chavis and I was paying
attention ten years ago.
so that have been said madam
chair and anymore questions
they.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Committee I don't see any other
hands raised.
The manager of the past.
Wait as promised Representative
table.
Our motion to table the non
debatable motion if I get that
right I do see speaker Egolf
raising his hands but we are
going to do the tabling motion
Mr speaker did you have a point
of order.
I I just forgot to lower the
hand okay and we have chair
Chasey back for the excitement
hello madam chair representative
Casey.
Going I have no idea what's
happening.
We have a table a motion on
house bill two eleven.
correct.
Sir please while.
You madam chair doesn't need to
be a second.
On the table.
A second.
We have.
Representative
Armstrong.
Well it's going
The yes to table I can't quite
hear you if there's someone else
speaking in the background if
you could please restart the
vote.
There was another voice in the
background
and he's.
Representative.
Yes it is.
Representative.
Mmhm yes the table.
Yeah.
Okay.
Representative.
Representative.
Representative Lewis.
I know.
Representative McQueen.
Representative Nibert.
to table.
Representative Rehm.
to table.
Representative Townsend.
No to table.
Representative Chasey.
Madam.
Yes to table.
So.
For yes seven no to table.
The table the motion has failed
we do have a due pass motion on
house bill two eleven up these
are many committee did we have a
second on the house bill two
eleven do passed motion all
right.
Representative Nibert you got
you to Representative Rehm.
madam chair I think we need to
make sure that it is clear from
the committee secretary that
this is a motion for to pass as
amended because we did up
you just two minutes.
So at we will again reset that
motion it's a do pass on house
bill two eleven as amended.
He noted that discussion on the
do past question clerk to call
the roll.
Representative Alcon.
No.
Representative Armstrong.
No.
Representative Cook yes.
Mr speaker.
Yes I'd like to explain what
what.
Representative Eli.
Representative Lewis.
Yes.
Representative McQueen.
Yes and I would like to explain
by the.
Representative Nibert.
Representative Nibert.
Yes.
Representative Rehm yes ma'am.
Representative Townsend.
Yes ma'am.
Madam chair.
Representative Chasey.
We are when I'd like to stay in
my mouth.
No.
You have a vote of seven yes or
no.
Mr speaker Representative
McQueen and Representative
Chasey to explain about.
Eight thank you.
Sorry.
That by
a motive eight in the
affirmative.
And three in the negative might
you repeat that are just.
Affirmative and for.
Eight in the affirmative and for
the negative you have a do pass
on H. B. two eleven as amended
we have three people to explain
their votes we gonna start with
speaker Egolf and Representative
McQueen and then lastly chair
Chasey.
So Representative thank you.
Thank you madam chair I I I
really seldom ever do anything
approaching and I told you so
moment.
But I do think it is.
It bears mention and
consideration that.
I'm back in my back.
Okay.
so I think it bears mention.
That despite what we heard
yesterday on the floor and we
are to this committee today
about fairness and about
transparency.
That this bill got a good
hearing the amendments that were
friendly were adopted in the
bill just passed.
And I think it would be
appropriate for
Those who cast aspersions on
this committee to cast
aspersions on chairman Chasey in
honor vice chair representative
data to apologize frankly.
For
claiming incorrectly that this
committee was not being fair for
claiming incorrectly that the
chair and vice chair we're not
behaving appropriately.
Hi for claiming incorrectly that
we were not following the rules
that we're not following the
process and that we in a
statement that was made
yesterday on the floor that is
one of the sponsors of this bill
have been told that this bill is
going to be immediately tabled.
Well guess what madam chair
didn't happen.
We just schedule this bill now I
think the fifth time.
And we just passed it.
We probably would have passed it
weeks ago.
If you didn't schedule.
But it was rules rules rules
rules.
And I have tremendous State.
And tremendous confidence and
you madam chair Representative
Chasey and and you madam vice
chair representative Cadena and
it all the members of this
committee Jack fairly.
To consider each bill that comes
before it to give a fair and
adequate an open hearing to all
the bills to come in here.
And it is it is very upsetting
to me.
That claims were made as
recently as an hour ago.
That you know shenanigans were
afoot me give me a break madam
chair.
It's just you know claims of
partisanship and all the staff
none of that happened there is a
bipartisan vote on both of these
bills Democrats and Republicans
want both sides on both Senate
bill fifteen and house bill two
a let.
And you know I when we we have
very strong accusations made
against the leadership of this
committee ending just members.
I think it's as I said I think
would be appropriate and fitting
and the right thing to do to
hear an apology from those who
cast aspersions and question the
fairness of the leadership in
this committee and its members
thank you.
Thank you next we have
Representative McQueen.
Thank you madam chair.
Here are good for both of these
bills.
And they're both lot.
For so this should be done at
the national level.
By Congress.
We have increased just
gerrymandering going on.
Predominantly in Republican
controlled jurisdictions.
The state to think we can solve
this on a state by state basis.
Secondly this even at the state
level this should be done in the
state constitution.
Because we can adopt these
procedures now.
And they will apply in the next
redistricting.
And the control of our
government could change.
In these procedures could be
repealed.
So there is no long term
protection.
My final comment.
Some of the consisting of men's
I personally find it really
distasteful.
Artisan way that this has been
pursued.
And portrayed in the public.
I personally have been attacked
repeatedly.
For being the quote unquote
beneficiary of the gerrymandered
district.
Even though that has no basis in
fact.
Yeah I think there are sponsors
of this bill who have
perpetrated.
The partisan nature what should
be.
And there is a vote for these
bills.
The non partisan activity thank
you madam chair.
Thank you and with that chair
Chasey has elected to not make
any further comments and we are
wait wait wait I'm sorry.
After make my comment we're
going to ensure that our.
Sure I just wanted to say that
I'm so sorry that I missed the
discussion and I had to wait
thirty minutes for the judge to
even show up in my hearing that
it was absolutely I'm
unavoidable and
I appreciate the speaker out
clarifying the record which I
think I did at the beginning of
the meeting as well but I I want
to point out that
although in the past I have come
gradually to
Lean in the direction of that
the redistricting commission I
think January six change that a
lot for me because I think what
we have now are maybe forty
thirty five forty forty five
percent of the country fixed
that we didn't have an election
that was valid and that
I I I just think that things
have changed dramatically and I
have not seen gerrymandering to
the detriment of any
Community in New Mexico and I've
been through two sessions so
with that madam chair I I I just
want to explain my vote and I do
apologize for not having been
able to be present and you're
welcome to join now thank you
thank you we are going to attend
any further business today thank
you for the lively conversation
will likely be having a weekend
meeting as we figure out floor
schedules and we'll be in touch
about that today's meeting has
and it thank you for all that
joined us and zoomed in and we
look forward to the democracy
ahead have a good day.
And I guess nothing from.
The apology miss to that.
