Representative Reeb.
Leader Sapansky.
Madam Vice Chair, here.
Madam Chair,
Here,
Madam, I've got about 10 things
going on at once. I'm sure you
have a quarrel.
Um
House bill, um, 78 was pulled
back into our committee
understanding that you all had a
committee sub that you wish to
representative, um.
You could briefly indicate what
this committee sub does, we're
not going to public comment,
we've been through that. OK, so,
madam chair, and we realized
that the bill, even the
substitute that you heard the
first time was way complicated,
the speaker told me the morning
after I read the bill 4 times in
the analysis. What does it do
now?
now it takes out all the
entities except for federal
federally qualified health
centers and federally qualified.
Health Center lookalikes. Um, so
pretty much it's down to a 2,
2-page bill. It just, it takes
out all of the, all of the
reporting requirements and takes
out all of the other.
Entities like HIV clinics, etc.
So it's just the, the FQHCs.
Madam Char, I'd like to move a
do pass.
a second. We have a do pass
motion on
Uh, let's see. House Committee
substitute for, oh wait, I do
not pass on House committee,
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 78,
but a due pass for House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 78,
uh.
No, OK.
Anything else? Will you call the
role?
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Abeta. Yes.
Representative Chavez, no.
Representative Hall.
No.
Representative Homan B. Hill.
Representative Martinez.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen.
Represented Reeb.
Leader Sapansy.
Madam Vice Chair, yes.
Madam Chair, yes, we have a due
pass.
Thank you for your um
Efficiency, how about that?
That's a good word, yeah, we
don't use that often here. OK.
OK.
Here we go.
Um, we're gonna do a few things
to rearrange some things, so let
me just give you a
housekeeping.
Update. We are going to hear
House Bill 346.
Now
Um, representative Romero has
some personal things that she
has to attend to this evening.
Then we will hear House Bill
197.
Um, then we will hear how school
131.
And we are not going to hear
House Bill 124 will be rolling
that there was a, a late
amendment and so we'll be
rolling that hill.
All right. Everything else thus
far will stay in, in order that.
I haven't mentioned. OK, very
good. All right.
So, um, we are on house build.
346.
Representative Romero. Thank
you, Madam Chair. So how 346 um
is a, is an agency bill with
regulation and licensing, um, as
well as the environment
department, um, currently in the
open market right now is
synthetic cannabinoids. Many of
you know this is delta 8 or 9.
We've seen it in the news as
this sort of open market um
opportunity that's a kind of a
loophole we're closing here with
this bill, um, Madam Chair.
Um
Hemp derived cannabinoids are
psychoactive and they do not
come with any regulation
attached to them.
Do this bill, this essentially
allows NMED to um tamp down on
that provision, and I'm sure
that this is no longer available
in the open market, um, and so
what we're doing here is closing
that loophole as well as just
aligning the um
The overall hemp Act, um, and
according to that principle that
we would no longer like this in
circulation. Again, everyone's
children, two adults can buy
this without need to show ID,
etc. so we're just, we're just
eliminating that, and then
there's some other cleanup um
with rulemaking in order to do
so, but that's the principle of
the bill, madam chair.
With that, um, I have a lot of
experts about.
That always scares me cause that
usually lengthens the period of
be real short and sweet, madam,
madam chair, we have bipartisan
support on this bill. So, um,
with that, we'll just still for
questions and introduce folks as
as checking on our forum. Things
are crazy this time of year
cause people running between
bills and committees and so on,
and I'm going to be jumping up
at some point, so just be aware,
um, so let's go to the audience,
those wishing to speak in
opposition.
These, um, step up to the
gentleman, you have about a
minute, OK, Madam Chair, my name
is Matthew Manos. I'm a
registered lobbyist with Heart
of Hemp.
They are the only hemp
manufacturer in the state that
this bill is going to affect and
it'll force them to close their
doors the moment the governor
signs this piece of legislation.
Um, additionally, this bill does
nothing to protect.
children and other people in the
market as it doesn't do anything
to stop online sales in the
state of New Mexico. Um, we're
asking to be regulated and taxed
similar to cannabis and not just
to be disposed of. Thank you for
your time.
Thank you. Next.
limit it to 5 people. Go ahead,
sir. Uh, Madam Chair and members
of the committee, my name is
Upton Ethelbaugh. I'm a Native
American branding designer for
the.
I oppose this bill because it
does nothing to protect.
Or keep children safe, said it
destroys the responsible local
industry without addressing its
purported concerns. This bill
would shut down the only local
company that already surpasses
the safety quality and testing
standards required of the legal
cannabis industry.
These products are lab tested,
free from contaminants, fully
comply with state and federal
regulations.
Meanwhile, cannabis companies
are allowed to extract using
harmful butane, hexane, cocaine,
and ethanol.
Why? Because this bill isn't
actually about safety. It's
about eliminating their
competition.
It won't keep these products out
of New Mexico. People will still
buy out of state versions online
or from the black market.
Where there are no safety
standards, no age restrictions,
and no oversight. Any use by
children as with cannabis,
results from parental negligence
or illicit sales, neither of
which this bill can prevent.
If you really care about
protecting consumers, you should
focus on age restrictions,
testing, and clear labeling
instead of pushing them towards
dangerous alternatives. Thank
you.
Thank you.
Yes, ma'am.
Hello, Madam Chair and members
of the committee. My name is
Anne Maria Tafoya, and I'm a
Delta 8 consumer, and I chose
this product because it helps me
manage pain, anxiety and stress
without the overwhelming effects
of marijuana. This bill does
nothing to protect my right to
access a product that works for
me. Instead, it eliminates the
competition and forces me to
rely on out of state or black
market sources with no
oversight.
If safety is truly the goal, why
does this bill ignore labeling,
packaging, and enforcement.
Instead of protecting consumers,
it shuts down New Mexico
businesses, it kills jobs,
enhanced control of the market
to large cannabis corporations,
I urge you please to vote
against this bill and bring
forward legislation that ensures
product safety, product, uh,
protects the jobs and allows
consumers like me to make
informed choices. Thank you so
much. Thank you.
see anyone else in the audience.
Let's go online. Those wish Chef
Apodaca.
Yes.
Yes, I'm here. I was trying to
turn on my video, but maybe, uh,
Madam Cha, thank you very much
for your time. I'm in the hemp
business, um, but I'm on the
industrial side.
I read through the bill. I think
in the Department of Environment
has done a great job monitoring
and regulating uh the hemp
industry. My biggest concern
with this within the bill, it
talks about a key to or spice
product, which is really a TAC
based product which you're
talking about Delta Delta 9. My
concern with this is this is a
little bit of an overreach when
you start looking at
cannabinoids, there are 134
different cannabinoids that are
not THC.
That have medical benefits as
some of the other people have
talked about, a favor of
regulating delta delta 9, a THC
product. My concern with the
bill is an overreaches on
anything else, whether it's CBD,
which helps you medically, CBN,
which is a natural sleep aid
versus a medical, uh, sleep aid,
CBG, which handles
anti-inflammatory and
depression. Also, uh JW Yale,
Michigan, Penn State.
They've all been looking at um
these cannabinoids.
And let me make this very clear.
The way that bill's written is
any kind of synthetic or any
kind of extraction is considered
synthetic. That's going to do a
lot of damage to a lot of the
medical side of the business on
that. So
you're welcome. You're welcome.
OK, let's go to the audience,
those wish.
Oh, is there one more? I'm
sorry, there's a new hand.
Um, Chad.
Yes, uh, sorry, I hope this is
for the, against the bill. I'm
actually in Austin, Texas right
now, um, at their legislature
checking things out. And um I'm,
I'm against this bill. Um, I
believe this bill would actually
criminalize people more. Now, I
will be forced to prove to the
police officers that I don't
have a Delta 8 HHC or any type
of those products versus a state
legal product. So we're going to
take a federal product and make
it legal, and then a federally
illegal product that's legal in
the state will be OK, and this
causes more confusion.
Um, and I, I just don't see the
reason why we're going this
route. Even here in Texas,
there's a lot of pushback, um,
from a lot of the businesses
here and a lot of the locals and
everything on that same bill. So
we need to be a little bit
careful when it comes to this
because this is a slippery
slope, and uh all we're gonna do
is give more power back to the
black market, because all it's
gonna happen is your
neighborhood friendly plug is
just gonna buy it online, by the
bulk, and then start selling it
to everybody that way, because
it's still a federally legal
substance that you can buy
online. There's no way that
We can um manage this because,
well, how are we going to do
online? We're just gonna to
block a bunch of websites. So,
um, for me, I'd rather these
products be regulated versus
banned, because we're going
backwards in this sense that
we're not going to help
ourselves out. One day we're
gonna have to combine this hemp
and THC theme because it's the
same plant. And this just isn't
the way to do it. Thank you so
much.
Let's go to the audience, those
wishing to speak in support of
the bill, please um step up to
the gentleman here with the
microphone.
And please limit your comments
to about a minute.
Uh, good afternoon, Madam Chair,
Scott Scanlon, registered
lobbyist for Schwab, and we
stand in full support of this
bill.
Um, about a quarter of the
states have outlawed uh this
product, the state of
California, uh, right before the
legislature, the the governor.
issued an executive order, um,
so this is uh
This is not a good product. It's
unsafe. It's not good for kids,
and we would urge your support.
Anyone else in the audience
gonna limit to 3 hands, so, um,
Bob Bolan.
Good evening, Madam Chair. Thank
you for your time tonight. Um,
we stand in strong support of HB
346. We've been a licensed
manufacturer er botanicals for 5
years here in New Mexico and we
believe in naturally occurring
cannabinoids and stand against
synthetic and semi-synthetic.
Thank you.
Next, I have um
Madam Chair, committee members,
Ben Leeinger from the uh
Cannabis Chamber of Commerce. We
stand in full support of this
bill and thank the sponsor for
bringing it up. Uh, hemp derived
THC was made possible through a
loop in the federal farm bill a
few years ago. This was never
the intent. There's no uh
regulated industry like we have
for the cannabis industry,
there's no testing for heavy
metal or pollutants or other
items that are, are required
for, uh, for
Cannabis, and we, uh, we urge
the committee to join the 20 or
so other states that have
prohibited hemp-derived THC.
Thank you.
next
Very Duncan.
Hello, my name is Barry Dungan
and I operate one of the longest
standing cannabis testing labs
in New Mexico in 2018, we
started testing hemp under the
farm bill. Uh, I've never
detected any delta 8 or delta 10
in any of the farm bill
compliant hemp that we've
tested.
Um, we've tested dozens of
products from gas stations, 90%
of those turn out to be illegal
cannabis products, the type of
health issues that will arise in
the next 10 years due to the
lack of oversight can be right
now to protect public health and
safety,
uh, the Delta products that are
currently on the market are
subject to THC testing only. Uh,
the other contaminants that are
in the products are not subject
to testing and I think this is a
step right now we can take to
make sure that the public is
protected.
Thank you.
Thank you.
OK, that concludes our comment,
um.
So back to the sponsor and her
experts. We'll stand for
questions, ma'am.
questions.
All right, I see.
Rippo and Bee Hill.
OK. So, um, Murphyson Hoffman be
him. Thank you very much, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Representative
experts. So, um, we're talking
about a, we're talking about the
Delta 8.
Um, cannabinoid. Is that
correct, Madam Chair
Representative, so that is one
derivative that is synthetically
or semi-synthetically derived
what we're trying to do here is
ensure that any new component
that it becomes psychoactive
within the hemp jurisdiction
that were preventing that from
happening, but Delta 8 being
probably. Thank you, Madam
Chair, thank you,
Representative. So is it your
position that any of these
semi-synthetic derivatives are
unsafe in any application.
Madam Chair Representative,
that's what we've learned
through this process of looking
at these derivatives, the
psychoactive components being,
um, how they behave, not only,
um, with the consumers, but also
the way that they're derived, we
just don't have a safe way of
being able to understand them,
um, nor do we have a great way
of of of understanding the
components to be safe, so
overall the best sort of route
for us understanding what we're
trying to do with THC and
regulate it is to just keep it
out of the hemp, um.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative, but isn't,
aren't these, these derivatives
like 99% similar to cannabis,
which we just legalized in 2021.
Madam Chair Representative.
The misconception here is that
these are naturally derived,
they can be, but typically they
are created with a very, um,
with CBD which is pure,
basically pure hemp.
And they are combined with the
multiple different chemicals to
create a chemical substance,
what the representative was
talking about is we do not know
what's being created. We do not
know the byproducts that are a
result of these um synthetic
synthesis that's going on, so it
can start with uh a natural
cannabinoid, but it ends up
being something that's almost
completely chemically derived,
and we have the labs somebody
mentioned earlier, um.
that, that we need to bulk up
lab testing there are currently
no standards available for
synthetics that a lab could use
to test these for safety at this
time.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair, I representative, and
that's, that's exactly my
concern right here is that
instead of simply trying to find
a way to test these synthetics
and understand what is in them.
We are going to wholesale just
render them illegal when Madam
Chair Representative, I've been
I've been visited by several
people who use these products,
um, and say that for many
different reasons, they're more
effective for them. They don't
want to feel the same
psychoactive effects.
That, let's say THC or other
cannabinoids bring to them, uh,
that I'm here representative and
so it sounds like rather than
trying to be more exact and,
and, and uh put up a regulatory
scheme and a testing scheme to
better understand these
products, we're gonna just
wholesale render them illegal,
um, which is concerning to me,
Madam Chair Representative,
because I mean, this is what we
were doing with, you know, him
many years ago prior to we, you
know, when we even understood.
Cannabis and it's not, and its
natural form. So do you have a
response to that representative
Madam Chair Representative, so
we, we don't have a regulatory
framework for this. We don't
even know how to quite test it
in the way that we're looking
for psychoactive active
compounds right now, so there
really isn't a regulatory scheme
that we would would know
scientifically to be able to
regiment a psychoactive, um,
synthetic like this. So when
we're looking at the derived THC
product, um, we want to keep
that.
In the cannabis range. We want
CCD to control that. We want
that to be, um, essentially in
the purview of the experts.
dealing with THC on that side,
the in the in the cannabis
realm. This derivative is coming
from hemp again totally
different regulatory scheme. We
never intended for hemp to be
THC derivatives, so it, it
really convolutes the process
and that's why today when it's
being purchased in the open
market, and it is unregulated,
there is no regimen, there is no
testing, children and folks all
alike are confusing it now with
a very highly regulated.
Product, which is in the THC
cannabis realm where you need an
ID and it's highly regulated.
Now these products are out in
the open market, completely
unregulated, completely
unvetted, etc. um, the whole
scheme is, is completely
different and that's why we're
saying we don't want folks to be
confused as consumers with what
these products are, what they do
as a THC derivative, there's no
vetting, there's no testing that
we can reliably call them safe,
and that's why we're saying we
just want this out of the realm
of possibility within our state,
subject to 17 other states that
have just abolished, um, this
product from their shelves
altogether, um, and that's where
we are, uh, unfortunately with,
with sort of looking at what are
the what are the possibilities
for something like this, and we
just can't come up with the safe
way for consumers to be able to
purchase it right now, um, Madam
Chair Representative.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, but then if we
render these products illegal,
can't people just buy them
online, Madam Chair
representative, so that's
actually what's happening right
now in Colorado. They have
abolished the ability for this
to become a, a product that's
available to consumers, but
their manufacturers can still
sell it.
Two New Mexicans, that's
actually where we get the the
vast majority of our Delta 8
products right now. They're
coming from manufacturers in
Colorado, um, so this does both,
it, it also prevents from
manufacturers from producing
this product, we don't want to
be one of the actors that
becomes a problem for other
states surrounding us as well.
Thank you, Madam Chair
representative, but I don't
think you answered my question.
I mean, even if we did this,
wouldn't New Mexicans still be
able to purchase Delta A
products online. uh Madam Chair
Representative, no, because
this, this prohibits the sale
and manufacture of those
products within the state.
OK. Um, and, uh, Madam Chair
Representative, so is that
another reason why you're
transferring the rulemaking
authority for this from the
Environment department to the
EIB.
Madam Chair and uh.
Representatives, so.
EIB is the rule-making body for
the environment department rules
were initially done.
That wasn't clearly identified
and so that's one of the things
that we're doing.
Um
Last question, Madam Chair
Representative, are there any
cannabis products made using
these same
And methods in this that
Legislation that are
Madam, um, legal cannabis.
OK, but Madam Chair
representative, but are there,
uh, do you know of any other
cannabis products that are made
using some of these same
compounds.
Go.
Chair Representative, uh,
representatives from CCD or
cannabis Control Division are
here, but I do believe some of
the cannabis companies do use
synthetics at this time.
OK, Madam Chair represented, why
aren't we going after them too,
Madam chair representative
because I believe the, the
regulatory um scheme as far as
how they're tested, how they're
promulgated, and then how
they're allowed for shelf
readiness for consumers as a
totally separate, um, regulatory
framework, and again, it's the
the testing is and rig the
rigorousness of the testing is
already in the purview of CCD at
this time.
OK. Um, I'm sure so
representative, even though
these cannabis products they use
some of these ban methods, you
can be tested better. Is that
why we're more comfortable with
them. There's, but I'm just
trying to find the distinction
here.
I representative
Kevin Graham, general counsel
for the regulation and licensing
department, the psychoactive
compound that's being tested for
in cannabis products is built 9
THC. That is a known and
understood chemical compound the
psychoactive properties of it
and the concentrations are
testable and are understood.
It's a different compound than
the type of cannabinoid that's
been syntically produced for uh
adult to 8 or adult to 10 or
other variants that are out
there. So we have rigorous
testing procedures already
available.
to test not only for the Delta 9
THC but for any other
contaminants that are in that
product so it comes out. We know
there aren't, you know, we're
testing for heavy metals, we're
testing for pesticides, molds,
funguses. That testing protocol
addresses cannabis products and
how they're manufactured. It
does not address what has been
brought up by environment here
regarding the creation of the
synthetically produced
cannabinoids and we don't, and
we, we don't pretend to know
what's in all of those.
is that we don't know and we're
concerned. Thank you.
Thank you. Um, let's end of
call.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
representative and experts. I
was just looking at uh
Section 6.
Under the penalties, um,
specifically where it says if
Somebody's caught, it's a um
petty misdemeanor.
And or you can issue a
compliance order. My question
is, who's gonna enforce that
once the, does it go to the
Attorney General or is it gonna
be done through another.
Outfit,
madam chair.
Madam chair and Representative
Hall, so the
Enforcement piece of that is
done through the the environment
department.
And Madam Chair, I didn't notice
that if there's repetitiveness
to this. I mean, you, you can,
it says you can uh
Requires compliance immediately.
I'm on page 13 lines 1 moving
requires compliance immediately
or within a specified time
period, and that would be EIB
that would specify the time
period and then decide whether
or not and is
The further action or just the
max I'm reading at this, it
looks like the max manager.
Madam Chair and
and Representative Hall, so.
Because these are consumable
products.
They're, there's something
you're gonna est. There's
portion of this that falls under
the food coat.
And so typically what would
happen if we much like when we
find it illegal food product on
the shelves.
We can essentially impound that
product, put a hold on it.
And that would happen.
Put a hold on that product
immediately.
And then work through the
Thank you, man. I'm sure that's
all.
Thank you. I have representative
Abeta another speaker. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative. I have one
question, uh, we had heard from
some of the public comments and
then some of the, some of the
pros and cons have been to the
adoption in those states, so I
can get an understanding of how
this is gonna look if it's
If it's signed into law or not,
thank you Madam Chair
Representative so in 17 other
states um have essentially
enacted a prohibition like this,
um, on, on the sale and
consumption of these types of
products, so the pro is that
there's, they're no longer
having to deal with um the the
confusion, I think a lot of it
for consumers is that, is this a
cannabis product, isn't it? Is
it THC derived? There's a lot of
real confusion right now, and
without the regulatory scheme
around um.
that we have for cannabis
products, um, children right
now, we know are are accessing
these products, they, they're
confused again with what it is
that's available, what's not,
and again, we're not testing
these rigorously, so all the
pros are about consumer safety,
child safety, um, the cons, as
you've heard, we have one
manufacturer here in New Mexico,
they would be affected for Delta
8, we, we've looked into that
company, they have a, a vast uh
vast majority of their products
are very diverse from just still
to 8, so yes, it would be.
removed um from that product,
um, availability, but thankfully
being that we're kind of hoping
to enact this quickly, there's
an emergency clause here that no
other folks get into the
business of doing this. So, yes,
well that is a con and um we're
aware of that, Madam Chair
Representative, we're we're
hopeful that the the pros
outweigh the cons. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative, um.
Mm, I just wanted to ask one
more question, and I asked
because I was a school board
member for 8 years for tribally
controlled school and we had a
huge problem with vapes and
confiscating these types of
items from students in
elementary.
And middle school and high
school.
And um a lot of times our
secured as they look like pins
and pencils, right? Uh, so my
question is,
How, how do you plan to uh
tribal entities, there are
tribal smoke shops, all of
those. How is that gonna be
folded in so Madam Chair
representative, um, again, the
intergovernmental agreements
that that are currently enacted
in law or with the cannabis, um,
I the hemp side of that I'm.
representative, it is written in
the agreement with our tribal
partners. And so that is
unchanged by this bill.
One thing I want to say about
that is um in working with them,
if the time comes, all of these
products from out of state are
currently unregulated, so this
would allow us to set
regulations for those products
coming in and work with those
partners to ensure those same
requirements from out of state
products are, are valid on
tribal land as well.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative for all my
questions.
Um, thank you. I just have a few
comments. When we, um, legalized
hemp.
I don't know what was it 5 years
ago or it was 2018.
2019 that was when we did it, we
were assured there was not gonna
be any.
Cychogenic type.
You know, components to this,
and what I'm hearing is, um,
processes are now being used to
ensure there are psychogenic
type components.
Mountain chair representative,
that's why we're here today that
that was never the intent, um,
as far as, you know, these in
specifically the synthetic and
semi-synthetic cannabinoids.
That's what we're seeing the
derivatives that are sort of
trying to convolute that and we
just want to be really clear
with this, I appreciate that.
move up.
To pass on house commerce and
economic Development Committee
substitutes with 346.
OK, we have a due pass motion
made by the speaker. Is there a
second madam? OK, so we have a
do pass motion on house commerce
and economic development
Committee substitute for House
Bill 346 made by the Speaker,
seconded by Vier Romero, what
you call the roll, please? Thank
you, Madam Chair. Representative
Abeta, yes. Representative
Chavez, no.
Representative Hull.
Representative Hockmanby Hill.
You know what I'd like to
explain my vote.
Representative Martinez, Speaker
Martinez.
Representative McQueen.
Representative Reeb, no.
Peter Sainsky. Yes.
phone.
No.
Madam Vice Chair, yes.
Madam Chair, yes.
To explain your vote Tamanby.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I, I
appreciate what you're trying to
do with this bill,
representative. I just had some
very emotional.
Um, constituents come and speak
to me in my office about how
some of these products have been
incredibly helpful and useful to
them, and it just seems like um
we're taking a sledgehammer to a
nail um when we could really be
trying to regulate and
understand an industry better
rather than killing it first. So
thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair. You have
a do pass on committee
substitute HB 346.
Thank you.
OK, next, do we have um
Representative Sanchez, is he
around?
As I said, we're juggling
people.
He's not, he's not readily
available, I take it.
OK. Sir, is he on his way?
OK, well, we can go to the next
item, but and then we can come
back to him. Um, so, we are now
on House Bill 131 caregiver
background checks.
Great to see you again,
representative.
The floor is yours. Thank you,
Madam Chair. So this bill, um,
Basically.
put some, some more things that
can be disqualifying in terms of
caregivers, caregivers for
people with developmental
disabilities, aging, those kind
of things. So I do have a
substitute, yeah.
And quickly I will um.
So one of the things that the
bill does is remove this.
function from Department of
Health to Healthcare Authority
because the DD waiver stuff has
moved that direction.
Um
So we, we got feedback that we
received during the pri prior
hearings, specifically on page
4, section E, where members
requested references related to
agency rulemaking be removed. So
that was done and replaced in
Section E, line 7 on page 4 by
permitting the healthcare
authority to disqualify an
applicant based on the
unreasonable risk standard.
Additionally, on page 5, line 3,
section 2 outlines the
strengthened appeals process for
caregiver.
applicants, which includes an
administrative reconsider a
judicial review, and then
lastly, sex trafficking has been
replaced with human trafficking
throughout the bill since, and
with that, I think we will stand
for so let's um go to the
audience, those wishing to speak
in opposition, please approach
the gentleman with the
microphone.
Today, Madam Chair and Committee
Jacob Smith from Sandoval with
the Government to Change
Project, former team compliance
and graduate clinical program
coordinator for Aval the PRM
programs for the University of
New Mexico. I hope you all
received my supplemental
information.
I am here in a post due to lack
of oversight of HB 131 in the
process of transfer from the New
Mexico Department of Health to
the Healthcare Authority, which
already occurred back in July of
2024. This is contrary to what
is stated under Section 2 and
Section 3. In January of 2024, I
reported a breach to the New
Mexico Department of Health of
the CCHSP system, compromising
all healthcare heroes, personal
identification information. This
has now been changed since it
was moved to the New Mexico
Department of uh Healthcare
Authority. However, the
healthcare heroes have still not
been made aware of this.
breach resulting in potentially
all of them being exposed to
identity theft.
I fear I fear if there's no
proper oversight that this
information will be lost forever
and nothing will be done about
it. Thank you for your time,
Madam Chair and committee
members.
OK.
else wishing to speak in
opposition.
Right, let's go online, one
online, anyone in the audience
wishing to speak in support?
I'm gonna limit it to 5 people.
OK, one minute each, so sort
yourselves out as to how you
want to be.
Yes, sir.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Mark
Schier. I'm the CEO of Clark and
Carlsbad. We serve
developmentally disabled uh in
that community.
I stand in support of the
committee substitute bill as
introduced, however, I do have
some concerns about the expanded
determination process and
administrative and judicial
review process.
The Existing determination
process is not a simple one, and
I've seen many employees give up
while waiting.
And they go and find another job
because that process takes too
long and we already have a
horrible shortage in healthcare
today.
While the HCA now
is supposed to be reviewing the
totality of circumstances,
including court proceedings and
charges, how much longer will it
take for them to make that
initial determination.
Also, with the addition of
judicial review process, I'm
concerned it will create an
additional roadblock to
qualified candidates for
employment, because that process
is not a quick one, and it will
probably include them needing to
get an attorney.
Thus
Having them give up and go find
another job. Thank you. Thank
you.
Uh yes, ma'am.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Kathy
Kunkel. I am a former secretary
of Health when the Department of
Health was responsible for the
caregiver screening program.
I stand in strong support of
House Bill 131.
No matter how scrupulous the
state agency is, whatever state
agency it is, and following this
act, and no matter how careful
providers are.
Uh, at training their employees,
abused, terrible abuse still
happens, and I think partly
because these caregivers are
alone with a very vulnerable
population who have limited
ability to speak or to or or
ability or to flee.
With the additional
disqualifying uh uh
Conditions, I believe 131 will
help both the state and the
providers to weed out bad actors
before they injure the people
they were hired to protect.
Thank you.
Madam Chairman,
Members of the committee. My
name's Jodie McGinnis Porter.
I'm the mother of a 32 year old
autistic son who relies on
Medicaid services.
I know firsthand how important
proper caregiving screening is.
My son Christian lives in a
group home run by Community
Options, is primary caregiver.
Salmon Sanchez was recently
charged with abusing his
roommate, a video submitted to
the Attorney General's office
shows Sanchez forcibly grabbing
the resident who's in a
wheelchair, jubbing his face
toward a table and refusing to
assist him to the bathroom while
making degrading comments, uh,
the Attorney general filed
charges on December 4th, 2024.
This happened in my son's home.
The abuse could have been
prevented.
Before working at community
options, Sanchez had already
been charged with child abuse or
foreseen soap into the mouth of
a seven year old autistic
student.
He was hired by.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you. My name is
Anastasia Martin. I'm general
counsel for the Age and
Long-term department and we
stand in support of this bill as
it creates additional safeguards
for older adults and adults with
disabilities who need
caregivers. Thank you. Thank
you, and I'll, I said 5, but
come on, Nathan, you can.
I'll make an exception
thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, uh, my name's
Nathan Bush. I'm staff at the
University of New Mexico. Uh, we
do believe this is good
patient-centered policy, uh, we
think that this is going to
encourage a well trained quality
workforce and provide safe
patient care. So thank you for
your support.
Let's go online, raise your hand
if you support the bill and
accept up to 3.
OK, um,
Jim Copeland.
Good evening, madam are members
of the committee. I'm I'm
Copeland executive.
executive director of the
Association of Developmental
Disabilities Community
Providers. We thank the sponsors
for addressing some of our
concerns with the amendments to
the House Bill 131. We look
forward to the opportunity to
continue to work with the
healthcare authority to provide
a stable workforce with proper
background screening to protect
the recipients of DD waiver
services. Thanks for the
opportunity to comment.
Thank you, Jim, um.
Um, Jason Corn.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Jason
Cornwell, and I am a provider of
services for individuals on the
DD waiver in the metro area. I
stand in full support of HB 131.
Anything that the health
authority can do to ensure that
That individuals enter our
system to provide care are not a
threat or a danger to those that
they are supposed to protect
will help all providers ensure
that we deliver quality services
that individuals stay safe. Uh,
thank you for addressing this
critical issue.
Thank you, um, one more, please,
Tracy.
Hi, Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Tracy
Perry. I am the CEO of a
provider in Las Cruces, uh does
DD waiver, me be it, and we
stand in strong support of
Hospital 131. Thank you.
Thank you. All right.
to the sponsor or anything else
before we go to the committee.
We stand for you, um.
Q
I, I have a question if no one
else does.
How did we get to a place where
Um, you know, on page 5.
The 2nd paragraph.
Um, administrative
reconsideration.
Um, a paragraph like that was
added. I'm just curious, that
was noticing something
legislation, so we're adding.
Some
Conditional
steps, I guess you might say,
potentially process, yeah. This
was brought up by um Jim
Copeland on the basically they
will, I mean, there's a shortage
of workers and they were worried
that we were gonna weed out
workers that we shouldn't have,
and they will work, they are
always worried about being able
to have staff, uh, enough to, to
take care of the folks. So this
was added um
If, you know, if, if for some
reason someone got.
got turned down, um, with their
background check, there would be
a way for them to
Perhaps cure that if, if, you
know, if it was a, a conviction
that was 40 years, I mean, I
don't know what it would look
like, but so to to make it up,
uh.
Uh
A wider net for the workforce. I
suppose it, it could be an
error. I mean, they get that
too. I mean, in that, yeah, you
got the wrong guy and I'm not
the guy with the the criminal
record. I mean there could be
instances, I suppose, a mistake
that could be corrected.
Um, OK.
Um
OK, um, representative beta.
Thank you, chair, and thank you,
Representative. My question was,
and I was trying to look for it.
How often are the background
checks going to be done, or is
it just the initial one? Thank
you.
I'm Danna.
I'm the director for the
division of Health Improvement.
And so these background checks
are done prior to employment,
um, so we process your
representative, so it's only
done once
represented the process is only
done once at higher, but you get
a report. Now I've been a
provider, uh, so you get a
report monthly report if if um
individuals uh have um
Uh,
Been involved with the criminal
process for them be only run it
once, you know.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. My last
question.
Does it only your report that
you're talking about, does it
only
Madam Chair Representative, it's
a, it's a national background
check.
You're welcome, Madam Chair, um,
Representatives just to follow
up on the chair's question.
Could you just explain why
we're.
Including on page 5, that same
section that the burden of proof
is on the healthcare authority
to demonstrate unreasonable is
that related to people who have
charged.
been charged with crimes and
And not convicted or or what
would be a.
what would
Man chair and representatives,
I, I do want Dan to answer this
question, but just to bring it
down to uh as a provider, I've
had individuals who may have
been convicted, um, of a crime
that was 10 years,
Man chair and representatives,
I, I do want Dan to answer this
question, but just to bring it
down to uh as a provider, I've
had individuals who may have
been convicted, um, of a crime
that was 10 yearsically
um uh identified here and so
then this gives an important
opportunity of appeal. What,
what is it convened that this is
a person that is a gal person.
I've also had in name and, and
that they have had that. So this
allows that, but please let
answered, thank you.
Madam Chair Representative, yes,
so.
That, that edition is related to
the, the preponderance of
evidence is related to the
unreasonable risk sections that
we added, so, um, under E uh
section 1 A and B, uh, those are
the ones that fall under the
preponderance of evidence and
that review process. And I just
want to clarify 11 point is
there is already a review
process established and, and
As it relates to these cases.
Um, what we added was the
additional.
OK, thank you.
Anyone else?
happy to entertain emotion.
OK.
So we have a Du Paris motion on
the House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 131,
made by Representative Hall and
seconded by Representative
Hoffman B. Hill, would you call
the role?
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Abeta, yes.
Representative Chavez.
Representative Paul
Representative Pachman B Hill,
yes.
Representative Martinez, Speaker
Martinez.
Representative McQueen.
Representative Reed.
Yes.
Leader Sainsky, yes.
Madam Vice Chair, Madam Chair,
yes. Madam Chair, you have a do
not pass on Hell School 131 and
a do pass on post judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 131.
OK. You have a deep pouch.
Thank you. We're gonna go back
to expand silver alert
definition, um, Speaker Martinez
will um present for a
Representative Sanchez.
So we're on House Bill 197.
Thank you, I'm presenting this
bill to Representative Sanchez,
who is stuck in a different
committee,
um, very briefly give an
introduction and then I'll hand
it over to
Mr. Tommy Hernandez with the
Alzheimer's Association. The
bill ofends um subsection and
where silver alert is defined,
um, and what it essentially
does, it strikes uh uh language
that refers to clear indication
that the individual suffers from
Alzheimer's and replaces it with
language that states who
The reporter believes displays
signs or symptoms of Alzheimer's
disease or other forms of
dementia, cognitive, that's the
only change in the bill. Did you
have anything to add, sir?
Uh, Matt and I do not, members
of the committee do I stand up
questions as well. Thank you,
very good, um, those in the
audience wishing to speak in
opposition to the bill, please
approach the gentleman with the
microphone.
Don't see anyone, those online
wishing to speak in opposition.
Please raise your hands to see
anyone.
Those in the audience wishing to
speak in support, please
approach the gentleman um with
the microphone.
a minute.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Anastacia Martin. I'm
general counsel for the aging
and Long-term Services
department, and we are standing
in support of this bill as it
broadens the definitions, uh,
for a silver alert, uh, we do
house adult protective services,
and we have run into challenges
with the current law and having
silver alerts issued. We would
urge you to uh do pass on this
bill. Thank you. Thank you.
Anyone else wishing to speak and
support in the audience.
I don't see anyone online. Those
wishing to speak AARP Jackie
Cooper.
Thank you, Madam Chair. My name
is Jackie Cooper. I'm a lead
advocate for AARP in New Mexico
volunteer, uh, with the
prevalence of people with
dementia wandering away from
their homes or caregivers, the
silver alert is common sense
tool to protect vulnerable
adults, veterans with PTSD and
the elderly, given New Mexico's
growing population of older
adults, it is our collective
responsibility to ensure that we
have the support that they need.
HP 97 helps achieve this by
broadening the scope of the
prevention for the alert to
allow for more inclusion of
individuals. We stand in support
of HB 197. Thank you.
Thank you. Anyone else? I'm
imagining we can go to
committee.
Representative Hall.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um.
Representative speaker and
expert real quick.
I support you. I think it's
outstanding in law enforcement,
we had people wander off and if
we can.
They didn't meet the right
criteria. My question is, will
we be able to re, I'm assuming
we can recognize because we did
a lot of stuff in the Navajo
Nation, another Indian nations
will we be able to recognize
this and implement this even
though they may be walked off
from a house on a sovereign
nation within the state of New
Mexico, Madam Chair.
Ma'am Charles defer to my
expert.
Uh, Madam Che representative,
thank you for that question. Uh,
it is my understanding if I'm,
again, if I'm understanding your
question correctly, I believe
there is a separate piece of
legislation making its way
through right now, that is, I
believe in reference more to I
believe it's short titled the
turquoise Alert System. I'm not
familiar with that piece of
legislation, but I believe that
maybe more uh
OK. Thank you. I appreciate
that, madam chair.
to pass.
OK.
We have a do pass motion on
House Bill 197 made by
Representative McQueen and
secutive by Representative Hall,
which you call the roll. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Representative
Abeta, yes, Representative
Chavez, yes. Representative
Hall.
Representative Homan V. Hill.
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen.
Yes. Representative Reed, yes.
Leader Sapansky.
Madam Vice Chair.
Madam Chair, yes, Madam Chair,
you have a due pass on House
Bill 197.
OK, next, uh, we have house
Bill.
112 representative Luhan
Um
Good afternoon. I'm madam chair,
uh, committee, HP 112 is
proposing changes to the
cannabis licensing statute with
the object.
Objective of being able to have
the FBI run federal background
checks as a requirement for
licensure.
Currently, New Mexico is only
able to do background checks of
activity in New Mexico, the CCDA
believes the proposed changes
will satisfy the FBI standards.
Um, madam chair, I have my
expert witnesses introduce
themselves, introduce
themselves, and then will take
questions.
members of the committee. I'm
Kevin Graham, I'm the chief
general counsel for the
regulation and licensing
department. Happy to answer your
questions.
Madam Chair, committee members,
my name is Todd Stevens. I'm the
director of the Cannabis Control
Division of the Regulation and
Licensing Department of New
Mexico.
Anything else committing. I
mean, to the, yeah, I have to go
to the audience, but.
here. All right, I guess we'll
go to the audience, those
wishing to speak in opposition,
please approach the gentleman
with the microphone.
Those online wishing to um speak
in opposition to those in the
audience wishing to speak and
support these approached the
gentleman with the microphone.
don't see anyone, those online
wishing to raise your hand.
Um, Ben.
Madam Chair, committee members,
Ben Loinger with the Chamber of
Commerce again. We stand in
strong support of this.
The ability to run federal
background checks was always
intensively original Cannabis
regulation Act, and uh we
believe that this bill fixes the
requirements from the FBI and
would make it possible for our
industry to, to have operators
as licensees search you to pass
this bill. Thank you.
Beacon support. I all right, um,
back sponsor and experts,
anything you wish to add before
I go to the committee.
Representative Blu Hun.
Thank you, ma'am. Uh, we will
stand for questions. Great. OK.
Uh, questions?
Make a motion for a due pass,
Madam Chair.
OK, I'm, I'm gonna give you this
one that's Representative
Chavez, so we have a motion for
a due pass. Well it is, it's
emotion for a due pass on house
commerce and economic
development Committee substitute
for House Bill 112, made by
Representative Hall and seconded
by Representative Chavez, would
you call it roll, please? Thank
you, Madam Chair. Representative
Beta.
Yes.
Representative Chavez, yes.
Representative Paul
Representative Homan B. Hill,
yes.
Representative Martinez.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen.
Representative Reed, yes.
Leader Sapansky.
Madam Vice Chair.
Madam Chair
Yes.
Madam Chair, you have a due pass
on committee substitute House
Bill 112.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you committee.
Um, next we have House Bill 431
and I just wanna reiterate, we
are rolling House Bill 124 to
Wednesday if there's anyone
wondering where we're at. Thank
you, Clay. Um, and so we'll
have, we have
House Bill 431.
Representative Doo.
And representative.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, um,
this is amending the watershed
District Act, providing for the
appointments of watershed boards
and directors instead of
elections of the boards right
now, a lot of the water
districts are so small that they
have a hard time even finding
folks to be on the ballot, but
ultimately the responsibility
falls on salt water conservation
districts, their statutorily
obligated to make sure they're
compliant. So this allows the
supervisors of the saltwater
districts to a point.
The watershed boards OK.
Anything to add represents data.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you committee for hearing
this bill. Um, you know, we have
one of the best soil and water
conservation districts in in the
north, uh run by Marco Valdez,
but I can say that it
You really have to kind of
appoint these boards. I mean,
it's not everybody that wants
to, nobody wants to go for an
election. I mean, it's just very
awkward the way it's set up now,
so it's really just to change
the statute so that we can
really appoint people who really
want to serve and who are
willing to do the task.
OK.
Let's go to the audience. Anyone
in the audience wishing to
oppose.
Don't see anyone.
those online wishing people
right, those in the audience
wishing to speak in support,
please approach the gentleman.
Getting bored. I know.
We need a little more. Come on
That was online wishing to to
support the bill, please raise
your hand. Yeah, OK.
All right, I don't see a hand
raised, um.
Anything else, reps before I go.
Sure you can introduce Madam
chair and members of the
committee, uh this is uh Debbie
Hughes. She is the executive
director of New Mexico
Association of Conservation
Districts, and she would have
spoken in favor of it because if
you have any questions, she'll
be happy to answer them. I think
we inferred her support by the
fact she's sitting next to you.
Um
We have a little fun here. Come
on, OK, so questions people.
No questions.
Comments people.
No comments. OK.
Um
This was an easy agenda today.
I'm sorry. I'm gonna have to
work on like getting harder
bills so that we can have a lot
of talk about, we could be here
till 8 o'clock, we, we're
getting used to that. Why don't
we? OK.
Yeah, yeah, exactly.
OK, so I'm happy to entertain
emotion.
OK, we have a do pass motion on
house commerce and economic
development,
is that right?
No, no, I'm looking at the wrong
one.
Yeah, I know. I'm trying to find
it.
So we have a due pass motion on
House Bill 431 made by
representative.
Reeb and seconded by the
speaker, um, when you call the
role. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Abeta, yes.
Representative Chavez, yes.
Representative Hall.
Representative Hoffman B. Hill,
yes.
Representative Martinez.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen.
Representative Reed, yes, Leader
Sapansky, Madam Vice Chair.
Madam Chair. Yes, Madam Chair,
you have a due pass on House
Bill 431. 0 yeah, I think we
are, I think we're going to,
yeah, I know. I don't know what
I'll do tonight, having all that
time. I guess I could read bills
for tomorrow. Um, OK.
So we are on our last bill.
Um, House Bill 125 liability
waivers.
For conservators, representative
Matthews.
venture.
This her Mica.
Oh yeah, all right.
Um
Man sure members of the
committee.
Um
This is, this bill amends the
probate code.
To allow conservators.
who have completed their job
duties to um uh be released from
further liability.
Um, the prior, the existing law
doesn't allow that.
And the conservators.
Uh
It, it's really hurt the
availability of finding people
to do this because no one wanted
unlimited liability.
For the rest of their lives, so
that's the bill and with that we
have
Uh, ma'am Sherreg McKenzie, uh,
here to speak in support of the
bill. I have hang on one second.
So, um, and we are prepared to
take questions at this point.
Great, let's go to the audience,
although I have an idea what
what what's gonna happen. So,
um, I was wishing to speak in
opposition. Oh, we, we have
someone think, OK, those wishing
to speak in opposition, please
address it to the fellow with
the microphone, John. Come on,
John
Are you opposition, John.
Well, you oppose everything I, I
work on. I'm figuring you're
opposed to this too
those in the audience wishing to
speak in opposition. No, I guess
not. So anyone in the online
wishing to speak in opposition,
please raise your hand.
No.
OK, John, you can speak in
support now.
That was my chance.
Try to leave, limit it to a
minute though. Of course, uh,
Madam Chair, members of the
Committee, I'm John Anderson, uh
represents New Mexico bankers
Association.
Uh, we've had for many years,
uh,
Really, no bankers are no trust
companies or no banks that were
willing to serve conservative.
And that's been a huge gap.
And in this sense.
Um, and we have the financial
world with and whatnot to do an
adequate job, obviously, and so
anyway, we're in full support.
It's been many years that we
have not been able to get
released from liability, and so
this basically corrects them.
Thank you. Um.
Yes, ma'am. Thank you, Mr.
Rodella. Good evening, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee, Debbie Rodella
registered lobbyist on behalf of
the Independent Community
Bankers Association of New
Mexico representing community
banks across our state, many of
which have trust departments
that serve as conservators for
vulnerable individuals, we
strongly support House Bill 125,
which takes the necessary step
in clarifying liability
protections for conservators,
while ensuring proper judicial.
Oversight. This legislation
creates a path for professional
conservators to return to
service in New Mexico,
reinforcing the critical
fiduciary role they play in
managing and protecting the
assets of those who rely on
them. Community banks with trust
departments regularly handle
conservatorships, acting with
integrity and in the best
interest of those they serve.
However, the absence of clear
liability protections has
discouraged qualified
professionals from taking on
this.
responsibility. So we urge the
support of House Bill 20125.
Thank you.
Thank you. Um, those online
wishing I don't see anyone, like
there are viewers, I guess
they're just viewing for fun.
Um, so, um, back to the sponsor
and expert, anything Ma'am, we
stand for anyone with questions.
OK, yes, Representative. Thank
you, chair. Thank you,
Representative. Um, I have one
question about
The analysis and how it had said
that.
Because of the change there was
a mass, um.
Exit of
Financial institutions.
In this workforce, and I'm just
curious to know.
Well, because part of it is that
they're looking for a waiver for
some.
liability wouldn't there in that
industry have to them for for
liability.
my expertise respond to that.
representative, uh, good
question, um, the uncertainty,
uh, in the 2018 uh amendments to
Section 42 I created such a a
cloud on liability and the
question about whether to get
that be able to put an end to
their liability or even to get
uh a court order, which would
approve an action by a
conservator of that many of
those professionals just simply
fled the marketplace. And so
even though those banks might
have had good financial bank.
backing and their own internal
legal departments, um, they
simply said, uh, a lot of them,
no thank you, and so we saw
after 2018 and Exodus of many of
those qualified uh players.
Thank you, Madam Chaian
representative and um Mr.
Stevens or no McKenzie McKenzie,
um, so my next question is, why
not a compromise then that at
least has like a year. Uh, madam
chairs representative, so what
this uh bill does is it
normalizes the fiduciary
courtroom practice that as it
exists with probate estates and
trust relationships and so the
procedure that is in HB 125 is
exactly the same.
type of procedure that all
professional fiduciaries are
used to doing, uh, and I would
note that, uh, a subgroup of
wings, um, vetted this language,
um, and that subgroup, uh,
supports it and during the
meetings uh in which this
language was discussed at least
2 judges during that subgroup,
said this is exactly what we're
used to seeing. In other words,
the procedure that's in HP 125
mirrors exactly uh what uh
happens right now in
trust relationships in prorated
states and so, um, it normalizes
those fiduciary relationship.
Represented McQueen, and of
course.
So I'm trying to, uh, uh, you
know, I must confess, and I
guess I'm the only one here. I'm
confused.
Um
There's a conservator.
We want to protect that person
or entity.
apparently from liability.
In all cases,
OK, tell me, how is the poor
person who's the object of a
conservatorship protected if we
have a liability waiver
potential. I'm
I'm really confused here.
Madam Chair, if I may, it's,
it's a good question. So the
reason, the, the way that the
protected person is protected by
this, is it, it broadens the
scope of qualified uh uh players
who are willing to serve in the
position.
Can I least
Can I at least
I think that would be more
helpful.
Yeah, I, I get that there are
people who are afraid of
liability, so they won't do
anything. So, uh, and I know
banks are really like that. So,
but tell me how we're protecting
the the person.
Who is the object of
conservative, not protecting the
conservator, but protecting the
person when we have such a
process,
Madam Chair, so the process
allows a conservator to come to
court and to get a court order
that approves an action, for
example, if there is family
fighting, uh, and the
conservator wants to do
something that that individual
thinks is in the best interest
of the protected person. This
gives uh a venue for that uh
proceeding.
be filed and to occur. There's
that. The other thing that it
does is it allows the
conservator to come to court and
say, I've been administering
this conservatorship for a year.
I'd like, Your Honor, I'd like
you to approve my report, and if
there are issues that come up in
the proceeding, those issues
would be corrected rolling
forward. The other thing that it
does, as I said earlier, is it
allows more qualified
individuals to step forward
because right now we
We are, we are protected persons
who are in need of protection,
there is a very limited pool of
professionals willing to step
forward and take up that role.
OK, so one point is, they can go
to court if there seems to be a
disagreement as to what's in the
best interest of the person
who's the object of the
conservatorship. OK, they do
that. What happens then? They're
immune from liability if they
get the court order.
Uh, Madam Chair, good question.
So a court order in this
scenario would would instruct
the conservator to move forward
and if the conservator moves
forward compliant with the court
order, they would not have
liability for following that
direction. That's correct. OK.
And if the conservator didn't go
to court, there's a squabble,
and then um in 3 years, there's
a debate about whether he but
that it's probably an it if it's
a bank, um, he or she or it
acted.
appropriately, um, that that it
could still be held liable.
Completely. That's, I'm sure
that's completely correct, and
that's the problem. The problem
is is that the existing statute
doesn't give a conservator, a
clear pathway for getting their
liabilities resolved if there is
an issue. OK. And if they choose
not to use this pathway, there's
still potentially on the hook if
they're deemed to have acted not
in the best interest of the
person, Madam Chair, that is
correct.
All right, um,
And then, so the 2nd point you
brought up was the the
conservative can issue a report
to the court.
Say all the wonderful things he
did, he or she or it did, and
then the court can what approve
the report and then the bank or
the person whoever is off the
hook then too, Madam sure, yes,
so the way it would work uh is
exactly the way it works with
trust in the states, uh, most
really, really trust, which is
the conservative files, the its
report, it asks for the court to
be to approve the report, a copy
of that petition is circulated
to all persons.
who have any interest in the
proceeding and then uh the court
has a hearing, and if the court
determines the report is
approved, then with respect to
what's covered in that report,
the fiduciary would be released.
OK, so people who are the object
of conservatorships.
Especially if they're
conservatorship is an
institution.
At least suggests to me there
may not have a lot of people
that are connected to them
anymore. They may live some out
of state or they don't have
close familial relations.
They're alone.
So you're gonna, who's gonna be
watching to see if that report's
a good report, uh, Madam Chair,
uh, so first of all, um, it's
not necessarily true that it
would be people that are alone.
It's very common in New Mexico
when families are fighting, uh,
for the, for the court to want
to appoint an independent
fiduciary, that's very common.
It's also very common for
families to say, um, we just
don't have the bandwidth to
handle this kind of financial
management and want a
professional to do that.
Um, so it's not only people who
are alone, but even if we were
dealing with a situation where
we just people alone, the
statute specific or the HP 125
specifically allows the court to
appoint a guardian lite or a
court investigator to fill that
void if it happens this petition
comes forward. Yes, ma'am.
And the third point is a
disappointing one because to me,
I'll just say, um, we're
bringing this bill because um
institutions don't want to be
held accountable, but we have to
have all these safeguards in
place for them, where I'm more
concerned about the safeguards
for the poor person who's the
object of the conservatorship.
I'm sure my is that a question?
I, I can, OK, thank you.
So, yes, Representative Reed.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. I'm just trying
to understand this, and I was
looking at the New Mexico
Department of Justice's
analysis.
Um
that stated the depending on the
circumstances of a particular
case, release or waivers of
liability may be considered
unenforceable in the courts, and
I kind of went through some case
law and then said, well, the
courts have not applied this
analysis in the context of a
conservator and a protective
person, these factors might be
implicated in this context that
could render problematic waivers
or releases unenforceable. Um,
could you explain that, but I'm
sure an expert representative
just so I understand your, your.
thoughts on that analysis.
I'm sure if I might, um, I think
that what that is referring to
is the concern that that was the
cause for the 2018 amendments to
begin with, anecdotally, um,
I've heard that there were
conservators asking their
protected persons to sign
releases of liability, which any
uh
Competent practitioner would say
should not be allowed anyway,
um, and so, um, because that was
one of the things that I think
initiated the 2018 amendment,
um, I think that that report
deals with that. I will note
that HP 125 continues that
language and specifically says
that releases signed by
protected persons in favor of
their conservators while they're
under a conservatorship is still
a void instrument. So, um,
assuming
that that's what that report
deals with. We've protected that
concern in HB 125.
Anyone else?
Don't see anyone happy to
entertain emotions.
motion for a do pass. OK. So we
have a do pass motion, we have a
second, people aren't rushing to
2nd.
And I, I, I had to just no,
we're in the middle of a motion.
OK, so we have a do pass motion
for house consumer and public
affairs Committee substitute for
House Bill 125 made by
Representative Hall and seconded
by the speaker. Did you call the
roll? Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative of Beta.
No, and I'll explain.
Representative Chavez.
Representative Paul.
Representative Hoffman B. Hill,
yes.
Representative Martinez.
Speaker Martins, yes.
Representative McQueen. Yes.
Representative Reed.
No.
Leader Sapansky
Yes.
Madam Vice Chair,
Madam Chair, no.
Representative Rabeta to explain
her vote.
Thank you, man. Thank you. um, I
hope that you will consider. I
voted no just because um I
understand that you've had
People in this industry leave,
but I wish that there would be
some compromise to still add
some protections for the
individuals who still need it.
That's my request and I hope you
take that into consideration.
Thank you. Um, you sure you have
a do pass on committee subhouse
Bill 125. We do. You have a do
pass.
I
I don't see, I see everybody
getting ready to go, so we are
adjourned. Thank you.
