representative of Beta.
Representative Chavis here.
Representative Hall here.
Representative Hochman Vi Hill.
Representative Martinez.
Speaker Martinez.
Sentative McQueen.
Representative Ree here.
The
Here.
Madam Vice Chair.
Madam Chair, here, Madam Chair,
you have a corn.
First on our agenda is House
Bill 428 rules, definitions for
corrections representative, vice
chair, Kadena
and Judiciary Committee. I'm
grateful for the opportunity
today to present House Bill 428.
Um, as many of you know about a
decade ago under Governor.
Under the previous
administration and Secretary
Marcantel. I served for a bit of
time as the bureau chief of
recidivism reduction of the New
Mexico Corrections department,
um.
This bill comes from my time
there and the learning I've had
since then about the work this
agency does every day. So in its
design and purpose, this is
pretty straightforward. This has
3 sections. Uh, what we're doing
is striking the exemption around
the New Mexico Corrections
department from the
administrative Procedures Act,
the state and the State Rules
Act.
So we've included those sections
there where we strike the
language but um.
Pertained to their exemption,
and then finally in section 3,
we are updating language, uh,
about the adoption of rules at
the corrections department. Uh,
the two things that I have here
that go above and beyond the
typical notice requirements for
the corrections department are
that, um.
public comment would be
available and open for 45 days,
and if the notice is published
would include a posting in all
correctional facilities.
With that, I'm ready.
Um, excellent, uh,
representative. Let's go to the
audience, those in the audience
wishing to speak in opposition,
please, um, step up to this
gentleman with the microphone
and limit your comments to one
minute, please.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Alicia Tafoya Lucero.
I'm the cabinet secretary for
the New Mexico Corrections
Department.
And right now in its current
form, I do stand in opposition
of this legislation. We have
been working with the
representative to add some broad
language we would like to see in
statutes, chapter 12 and 33
edition of the language, uh,
emergency response and
institutional security to be
added to the exemptions in those
two sections of the law, and
that's something that we're
working on right now, um I'm not
sure exactly where we sit with
that, but we're hoping that as
we
move forward as this legislation
moves forward, we'll be able to
make those modifications and
hopefully not be standing in the
opposition. Thank you, ma'am.
Thank, thank you. Anyone else in
the audience wishing to speak in
opposition.
Don't see anyone.
Um, individuals online who wish
to speak in opposition. Don't
see anyone. Those in support in
the audience, wishing to speak
in support, please step up to
the gentleman, um, with the
microphone and please limit your
Madam, members of the committee,
Carter Bundy with asked me, We
want to thank both the
representative and the
department, um, we do look
forward to working on this more.
We do, uh, we worked on an
amendment with the
representative, uh, our members.
I, I didn't write any of this
or.
really weighed in, uh, to try to
anticipate every single kind of
possible security threat where
you wouldn't want it to be done
in public rulemaking. There are
some things that have to be kept
confidential in the world of
corrections to keep our members
and inmates and other staff
safe, so we hope you'll consider
the amendment and support the
bill. Thank you.
Anyone else in the audience
wishing just don't see anyone.
Anyone online wishing to speak
and support re up to 3 people,
Diane McCash.
Thank you chair and committee. I
was pleased to see HB 428
because as the mother of a son
who's been more than once, a
guest in New Mexico Department
of Corrections facilities. I
would very much appreciate a
transparent rulemaking process
being put in place. Other state
entities are required to have
the same or similar rulemaking
procedures as are contemplated
here for the Department of
Corrections. Given the thousands
of staff inmates and families
and friends of those who are
directly and indirectly affected
by the department, this
just seems like good governance
to me. I hope you support the
bill. Thank you.
I saw a hand, but hand is just.
OK.
We will go back.
anything else, um
No, thank you. Sure. All right.
We have representative.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative.
Um, just to address, uh, the
secretary's concerns about
safety, um,
It's hard for me to back
something that they're not
behind. So could you address
whether you think that is gonna
be a change, um, there are
amendments that you might
possibly be able to get behind
those.
Dress that, ma'am. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative Reed, um, I
appreciate the leadership of Ask
Me the union that represents
correctional officers and the
correctional officers that have
weighed in from different
facilities across New Mexico.
Um, I just need to say out loud.
I have been so impressed and
appreciative of the leadership
of this secretary. I've learned
from her. I've seen her show up
in those facilities every day
trying to make sure that they
uphold their incredible
responsibilities. Uh, so this is
certainly for me about good
governance. Um, I appreciate.
The Union for working to help um
come up with a a list of what
what pertains most in
institutional security measures,
um, and I believe there will be
a friendly amendment offered uh
by another member of your
committee that was prepared, in
fact, with the inside of the
union to address some of those
concerns, and it will still be a
work in progress with this film
moves forward.
OK, and um I know we're gonna
get to this in a moment. Is
this?
I think I may have seen this
amendment. Is this amendment you
had shown Representative Hall,
just so I'm sure it is, um, I
was grateful that Representative
Hall spent a couple of minutes,
uh, more than that, with the,
the union representative and
providing his expertise with his
background to the kind of things
that we would fairly consider,
uh, institutional security in
these kind of situations. OK,
and um I know we're not on the
amendment.
Yet, um, but
And I'll probably just address
this in, but I, I I did go over
this amendment with the
secretary, and it did seem like
they weren't quite on board with
this, so, um, is that your
understanding also?
Many representative, it's been a
long hectic week, so yes, I
think we're making progress, but
certainly there may still be
some concerns that we can
address moving forward I'll just
wait for the amendment for
comments. Thanks.
Great, um, representative
Sapansy.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, uh,
Representative Cadena, um, I
heard this bill in government,
um, and there were uh some
concerns that were presented um
that and working with the uh
with our representatives of the
union and the sponsor, um, have
an amendment that is a test.
provide.
So I would like to move.
Give us a minute. I'll get it
out.
Representatives of skiing, um,
will someone move it for
consideration.
So move down.
Uh thank you Madam Chair. So
this is 231.
766.1.
Um, and the amendment, um,
Uh, I think it's a, a very
strong attempt to address the
security procedures. So
basically what we are doing is,
uh,
Creating exclusions to the rule.
Um, oh, I think, I think maybe
the sponsor may um.
Uh, so just walking through this
amendment numerically for
amending the short title of the
bill or the long title of the
bill, excuse me, um, we are
shortening the public comment
period from 45 to 30 days based
on commentary from the
department.
Uh, and then we are adding um
and exclusion to the rulemaking
that it addresses internal
security procedures related to
these 9 items, um, both to
maintain.
You know, facility security, but
also be more specific than sort
of generic uh general categories
um that may be difficult to
define.
Any were taught, we're
discussing the amendment, who
wished?
Madam of adoption. I have a
motion to adopt the amendment is
there opposition I don't see any
opposition to adoption.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um
Uh, I'll go to the person next
and of course you we welcome
we're welcome to come back to
you, Resentative Reed, if you,
OK, all right, that's fine.
Anything else, um,
representatives representative
Romero, Madam Chair, I'd like to
move a do pass on for me as
amended.
Right before they we follow up
on that. I'd like to see if
anyone else.
like to comment or question the
sponsor on the on the bill as
well, I don't see any. Do we
have a second on the emotion,
OK, we have emotion for do
barrows on.
House Bill 428 as amended, made
by Representative Romero,
seconded by Representative
Calder roll, please. Yes, thank
you, Madam Chair. Representative
Abeta.
Representative Chavez. No.
Representative Hall.
No.
Representative Hackman V. Hill.
Yes.
Representative Martinez, Speaker
Martinez.
Representative McQueen.
Representative Reed, and I'd
like to explain.
Leader Sapansky. Yes, Madam Vice
Chair.
Madam Chair, yes.
Madam Chair, you have a due pass
on House 428 as a minute.
Oh yeah, my.
Good. Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative of it still seems
the amendment is not really in
line with what corrections is
looking for, so I hope as we
move forward, that you guys can
still work together and, and if
you can get that amendment where
they're comfortable and, and
uncomfortable, I'd be happy to
support your bill, but that's,
that's my concern and why I'm
voting up. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Have a good day,
committee. Safe travels.
OK. Next on our agenda is
Welcome, Representative.
Little
Thank you, madam Chair. Good
morning. Very good to be here
with all of you.
Um, and members of the
committee, uh, I, I'm here
today. We are here today to
present House Bill 2 fortify the
chair of the Magic, Madam Chair
and members of the committee.
I'm Judge uh Jimmy Foster out of
Artesia. I am also the president
of the Magistrate Judges
Association.
And I'm also very seniors.
Is that
Good morning, Madam Chair. My
name is Michael Vihill. I'm the
senior Justice in New Mexico's
Supreme Court. I'm just here to
let you know that the court
All the members unanimously.
Strongly support this bill, and
uh I also come to introduce
Judge Foster from Artesia. He's
the president of the Magistrate
Judges Association and uh to let
you know that they also
Support this bill, so that's all
I have to offer, so thank you
very much for your time.
Um, thank you, Judge,
Representative and Justice. Is
there anything you'd like to
add? No, ma'am, uh, true, uh
Chandler, uh, this bill provides
for raising the minimum age of
magistrate judges to the age of
28.
go to the audience, those
wishing to speak in opposition,
please approach the general.
I don't see anyone.
Those online wishing to oppose
those in the audience wishing to
support the bill, please.
approached the gentleman with a
microphone and
Limit your comments to one
minute.
I don't see anyone.
Those online, wishing to
support.
Back to you, representative.
Anything before I go to the
committee.
Thank you, madam chair. It's
just to acknowledge my
co-sponsor who uh uh
representative Reed, who is also
doing it's quite all right, but
no, ma'am, thank you.
All right, um, members'
questions.
comments.
Represented
Madam Chair, thank you.
Representative, judges.
Um,
first of all, I support this. I
think it's phenomenal. I
I was, I didn't have a clue you
could become a judge at 18 years
of age, which is pretty scary.
Um
And they still be appointed,
however, if something were to
happen.
Can someone be appointed that's
under the age of
28
To the bench.
Madame Char like to defer to the
church.
Madam Chair, representative.
And to be perfectly honest, at
28 to be appointed as well. I
can help you, it looks like it
says elected or appointed on
line 21, page 1.
I'm sorry. Thank you.
I miss that my actor brilliance.
Thank you
ma'am, thank you.
Anyone else be too entertain
emotion as a motion for a due
pass made by Representative
Reed, seconded by. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Representative
Abeta.
Representative Chavis.
Representative Hall.
Yes.
Representative Hoffman V. Hill.
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen.
Representative Reed? Yes.
Leader Sapansky, yes.
Madam Vice Chair.
Madam Chair, yes, Madam Chair,
you have a due pass on House
Bill 244. Thank you have a
wonderful day I'd like to thank
the sponsor for the promotion
that she gave to me because the
magistrates are, are the leaders
of the backbone of the
judiciary, so thank you for on
both accounts. Thank you,
Justice and thank you,
magistrate. thank you.
Uh, next we have HB 269.
Healthcare Authority visit
verification.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee.
House Bill 269 provoked.
proposes transitioning to an
open electronic visit
verification model, utilizing a
data aggregator to streamline
operations, reduce
administrative burdens and
protect patient access and care.
This initiative is crucial for
safeguarding against fraud,
while ensuring the
sustainability of home health
care agencies across the state
of New Mexico. With me today,
Madam Chair and and committee, I
have Megan Lorino, who is the
executive director of the New
Mexico Association of Home
Health Care and Hospice. Um,
And with that, we're going to
stand for questions.
OK.
Thank you, um, Representative,
anyone in the audience wishing
to speak in opposition to House
Bill 269, please approach the
gentleman with me.
Those, I don't see any hands
raised, those in the audience
wishing to speak in support,
please approach the gentleman
with the microphone and limit
your comments to one minute.
Those in the audience wishing to
vince Moffett.
Yes, madam Chair and members of
the committee. I'm Vince
Moffatt, the CEO of Basin Health
Companies, we served San Juan
McKinley and Cibola counties.
Medicaid Home health agencies in
New Mexico are struggling under
the administrative burden of the
closed electronic visit
verification system.
And New Mexico is one of the
only 4 states with restrictive
approach, increasing our costs
and limiting access without
improving patient outcomes.
Our our systems that we
We all currently use are
different, but they're robust,
innovative, and expensive to
implement. By not passing House
Bill 269, we're moving backward
and available technology
enforcing providers into
inefficient systems instead of
allowing them to use the
solutions that enhance patient
care. House Bill 269 provides a
solution. It gives the providers
the flexibility to choose their
own.
Visit verification systems while
ensuring compliance with federal
requirements. This will reduce
inefficiencies, cut unnecessary
administrative work and improve
our access, especially in the
rural areas where we serve.
I urge you to support House Bill
269 to make home health care
more efficient, cost-effective,
and mostly patient-centered.
Thank you.
We have um Nat Dean.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee,
sponsors, and audience. My name
is Nat Dean. I'm a disability
advocate, and I'm a person with
multiple disabilities, the
checks and balances are
essential to be able to track
whether the visits are
occurring, the quality of the
visits, and also the
qualifications of the visitors.
Thank you very much for this
house bill29 as amended. Thank
you.
Um, we have Joyce's phone, uh,
oh, excuse me, Mitch, Mitch
first and then Joyce.
Um, Mitch Ferguson.
One minute, please.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
committee members. I'm Mitch
Ferguson with Matrix Home Care
Services in New Mexico and Las
Cruces. I just want to point out
that the EV the open EVV system
does not affect state control of
Medicaid nor its visibility into
the program does integgrade that
at all. And every HHA in New
Mexico must use an electronic
medical record. Those electronic
medical records became EVV
compliant in 2022. In 2025, the
state needed to close the EV gap
caused by personal care services
providers who did not have EMRs,
but instead of making
authentica.
that that platform available to
those who did not have EMRs, the
state required all of us to move
on to this authentic care
program, um, and, and really it
was just an EVV timekeeping and
billing platform. We're still
required to have those
electronic medical records and
keep them and pay for them, so
the Authenticare platform does
not improve customer outcomes
nor offer efficiencies. Instead,
it adds an additional cost
burden that is pretty
significant for us to to do
billing and complete care. Thank
you.
Se support, OK. Thank you. Um,
there's a lot of jargon in
there. Um, let's see, Joyce's
phone, please no more than one
minute, and I'm gonna take one
more after Joyce and that's it.
Yes, Joyce Munoz.
OK.
Uh,
yes, I do J and J Homecare in
the Southeast state of New
Mexico. The administrative
burden of the current visit
verification system. It
increases our home health
agencies's operational costs and
home health agencies' ability to
serve our Medicaid patients,
particularly here in our rural
and underserved areas and it's
limited and because of this
burdensome system. So we ask and
support of this field. Thank
you.
Thank you. One more MOV Hill.
Moy Hill. Good morning. Um,
Madam Chair and committee, thank
you guys, uh, for, uh, I'm, I'm
just excited that you guys are
even looking and considering
this bill. Uh, my name is Onsimo
Vel, and I'm the founder and
chief mission officer for
Intellicare. Uh, we've been
providing services, uh, since
2003 and um uh we, we've been,
our state has done a really good
job as far as the EBV, the
electronic visit verification,
um, we work closely with a lot
of
other states and, and we see how
their programs are running and
so while we're, I feel a pioneer
in foreign is compliance and and
the things that we do with EBV,
um, we're, we're a closed market
and so the fact that you guys
are considering to open the
market and allow us to use other
softwares that are a little more
robust and can allow us to do a
lot, a lot more, um, to improve
our patient care. Um, I'm super
happy that you guys are
considering this and I hope you
passed this bill. So thank you
for your.
ation
OK, that closes our.
public comment.
Representative of anything else
you'd like to add before we go.
The committee? No, thank you,
ma'am. We, we stand for
questions. OK, I see
representative Hall there with
his finger on representative for
a pass.
Unless there's other questions.
OK, we have a motion to um uh
for due pass in a second before
her, I just want to make sure
everyone else is.
With
I don't see anyone.
All right, uh, let's call the
roll.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative Abeta.
Representative Chavis. Yes.
Representative Hall.
Yes.
Representative Hochman V. Hill?
Representative Martinez.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen.
Representative Reeve? Yes.
Leader Sapansky.
Madam Vice Chair.
Madam Chair,
Madam Chair, you have a due pass
on House Bill 269 as amended
people in the seats. Thank you.
You're OK in terms of the vote.
I'm just saying. Thank you,
Madam Chair. I'm the next 10,
you're the, oh, sorry, I forgot.
All right, um, HB 366 veterinary
as health practitioner.
Pardon me one minute while I
answer Marian, Representative
Matthew's phone call. Uh, I
think she's on the list, so.
Thank you for your indulgence,
Madam Chair.
Um, I just told her I would text
her when she was calling me. She
was actually FaceTiming me, so I
love her. Yes, so, Madam Chair,
um, members of the committee,
this is House Bill 366. This
bill would simply add
veterinarians to the list of New
Mexico healthcare practitioners,
and the reason that um I, this
bill was brought to me is
Um, of, of healthcare
practitioners in general, but,
uh, veterinarians should be
included in that as well. Uh, a
lot of people believe that
veterinarians uh fall under that
category and we are um
Uh, wanting to list them under
that same entity, uh,
New Mexico across the state
needs more healthcare
practitioners, a modern
healthcare workforce must be
recruited and retained to meet
our growing demand in healthcare
and specifically in um rural New
Mexico. Uh, this promotes
competition and services,
retention, healthcare providers,
attacks, attracts and retains
more veterinarians to New
Mexico. So with that matter, uh,
Chair and representatives, I
stand for questions. OK, um,
those in the audience wishing to
speak in opposition to the bill,
please.
Approached the gentleman with
the microphone.
Those online, wishing to speak
in opposition.
Those in the audience wishing to
speak in support.
Please, um, approach.
those online, wishing to speak
in support, please.
OK, don't see anyone.
Anything else before we
go to the committee.
Um, Madam Chair, really, um,
nothing else except we do have a
declining um veterinarian
population in New Mexico. I'm
also working on another bill,
um, my co-sponsor on this is uh
former Representative Linda
Trujilel, now Senator Linda
Trujil, and um I'm also working
on a bill for a loan repayment
for veterinarians as well.
Oh, thank you, doctor.
Uh, question
Representative Hall.
Sure, of course.
I don't mean to be a pain, madam
chair.
representatives.
might think otherwise, but I
don't think so.
Um page on the last page that
section E.
Just, I guess, what is the
provisions of that chapter mean
for the veterinarians.
I didn't get a chance to look
that up. I'm sorry, Madam Chair.
Oh, Madam Chair, uh,
representative, this would, if,
if they get designated as the
same as a healthcare
practitioner. This adds that um
The non-compete clause, they're
not allowed.
Veterinarians are not allowed to
have other sign have them sign
the non-compete clock.
Thank you, man. I'm sure that's
all.
Um
So, um, representative.
What does it get them by calling
them a healthcare practitioner.
I mean, I, of course, I have a
vet, of course, I love my pet.
They're important to our lives,
but I'm trying to understand
what advantages we're gaining by
putting them in here. Thank you,
Madam Chair, that's a great
question. Um, it could possibly
get them exempt from some GRT.
It could do some whatever
category the healthcare
practitioners fall under, they
would be in addition to that.
So, um, that's just one thing,
um, and then adding the vet the
veterinary.
Payment could be possibly
another, but we are being
specific for veterinarians. So
Things like that. I get it. OK,
very good. Thank you.
Entertain emotion.
motion for a due pass my chair.
We have a motion for a do pass
on House Bill 366 made by Reent
of Reeb.
Um, would you call the roll,
please? Yes, thank you, Madam
Chair. Representative Abeta,
Representative Chavis
representative Hall.
Representative Hackman.
Yes.
Representative Martinez?
Speaker Martinez, Representative
McQueen.
Representative Reed.
Leader Sapansky.
Madam Vice Chair.
Madam Chair.
Yes, Madam Chair, you have a due
pass on House Bill 366. Thank
you, Madam Chair, committee.
with one of our sponsors or one
of our bill sponsors on the
agenda, um.
Representative.
Members of the committee.
Excuse me, this is the first
time presenting to justice.
Well, exciting.
Really? Yes, and you're really
excited. Wow, thanks.
Uh sure I house built 459. Would
you like for, I have an interest
in. Get it handed out.
We're about ready,
representative, to hear about
the amendment. Would someone
move the amendment for.
is yours,
the amendment, um,
Pretty much eliminates the
private public from age 1114
through 17 that um that whole
section is, is has been
stricken.
Page 11 lines 14 through 17.
And then also
And also on page.
like 12.
11 and 12 and private persons,
so.
Um, let me go to the audience
and we'll talk about the
amendment, then we'll talk about
the bill move forward.
Um, anyone in the audience
wishing to speak in opposition.
The bill.
I don't see anyone.
Anyone
Nope.
anyone in the audience wishing
to speak in support of the bill,
please um approach the gentleman
with the microphone.
I don't see any anyone. All
right, representative. So, um,
let's focus on
The amendment.
It's 42.1, correct? The last
three digits represented
let's talk about the amendment
first. Any questions?
OK. Do you have a motion to
adopt the amendment is there a
second, a second on adoption,
anyone in opposition to adopting
the amendment.
I don't see anyone.
to see
second period.
OK.
Um, we're now on the
Amended twice amended bill, are
there comments?
Interesting discussion.
speaker.
Good, yeah, of course, yeah,
that's absolutely.
Representative Reeve and then
we'll do Representative Chavez.
All right, thank you, Madam
Chair and Representative, you
just give me a kind of an
overview of trying to.
see all the different things
this bill does, but it seems
like it's changing. The one
thing I'm at is the board member
board members number. Can you
explain how this works now,
um.
As we know, the, the situation
at the border as far as
economics is always changing.
It's always changing, it's
constantly changing, so by
adding two more members and.
Of expanding the role of the
other membership to include more
local input into the, into the
decisions made at the at the
border as far as economic
development is concerned.
Uh, those are the biggest
changes or conditions that are
included in this bill because
I'm a representative that we
are.
and that we're able to move.
quickly as a state and as as a
state when, when things change
economically at more.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. So just, could
you give me kind of some
examples of what this board does
when you say economic reasons,
you know.
or economic changes or whatever
that might be. So I understand
kind of more what this board
does
representative the.
The Border Authority board.
What they do is they're they're
they are call an enterprise
agency, so they, they generate
res from, from the part that we
were to lease.
Uh, the border authority, it's.
two main purposes. Number 1 is
to promote and to work with our
partners in Mexico with the
economic development. And number
2 is to facilitate that
infrastructure.
So the border authority uh works
with the local entities and the
DOT to make sure that with that
they, that things get done
properly and that they go
through the proper channels as
far as as far as infrastructure
is concerned.
and represented, for example.
Order 30 was critical.
And putting together and working
with DOT and other stakeholders
with the border highway
exemption that's gonna take us
from the port of entry.
Madam Chair represents so this
really is just an economic
situation, not who's coming in,
who's coming out, any of those
decisions really economic and
infrastructure and things of
that nature. I understanding
that correct.
Manage representative, that's
correct.
I representative Chavez. Thank
you, Madam Chair Representative,
um, am I reading this right that
it would no longer limit the
number of appointees by one
political party. If you look at
page 53, you marked out or or
removed no more than 3 of those
appointed shall belong to the
same political party. So now it
could all be
Republicans.
Is that correct?
representative uh yes yes it
could go either way, yes.
Correct, yeah, but, uh, the
intent of this is to get the
best person
for, for the position
that worries or concerns me a
little cause I think that it's
always good to have a safe
number on both sides, and they
should limit appointees so that
they're not all one party or one
sided, so, OK, I was just making
sure I was reading that
correctly. Thank you. Those are
all the questions I have.
Thank you. Anyone else would say
no, so we have in front of us a
motion for a do.
A second to call the roll. Yes,
thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Abeta.
Representative Chavez? No.
Representative Hall
No.
Representative Hoffman v. Hill.
Yes. Representative Martinez.
Speaker Martinez, yes.
Representative McQueen,
Representative Reed.
No.
Leader Sapansky.
Madam Vice Chair.
Madam Chair
Yes.
Mad, I'm sure, you have a do
pass on House Bill 469 is twice
amended.
Thank you, Madam Chair members
of the committee. Thank you. So
was that a great experience or
what
it it was a great experience,
but it turned out aspected
well, thank you.
We all of our experiences are
great. Just a little
housekeeping we have.
Next on our roll and if she, let
me just raise an issue here. We
have 2 more bills on our agenda,
the Mobile Home Act, which of
course we'll hear, I see the
sponsor in the audience.
Um, and we have
House Bill 311, um.
That bill has been rolled a few
times, are the sponsor is in.
I texted him and, you know, he
is waiting for a querying the
members to see so I hope people
are willing to play because it
will be like the ever, what is,
what keeps popping up, you know,
there must be some scary thing
that keeps popping up. He
thought, yeah, we've had a
little bit of PAs. It's
everywhere. We can't get rid of
it.
So, I, I hope people are OK, you
know, we can take a break if we
have to, um, all right. So, um,
Representative Matthews. She is
here. I see her.
Sure.
Oh, OK.
She needs to log in to the Zoom
account. Maybe we can help you
with that.
All right.
How we do and represented.
OK, very good. That's all right.
Represent 42.
Sorry, do that.
Um, situations that have arisen,
certainly in my district, but
throughout the state.
Um, with, um, there's over
32,000 people who live in New
Mexico in
mobile home park.
Um, the most in any one county
is in San Juan County.
Um, these are people who
Own their home. They own the
mobile home, and they rent a
strip of land in a part from uh
a landlord.
A property owner.
Uh, and then the and then the
mobile home is attached with the
utilities and so forth. Once
that happens, it's pretty not,
it's pretty much not mobile
anymore.
Moving these is very expensive,
and not only probably 10 to
$15,000 to minimum to move them,
but there isn't any place to
move.
There's just these parks are
there and they haven't been
growing. And part of the reason
they haven't been growing is
because
There's um been a tendency.
Uh, in many of the parks.
Uh
We have a mobile home park at.
And, but it a lot, it provides
for 30 day leases.
And it has no restrictions on
how many times a year the rent
can be increased, and so what
People are finding is a move in
and a number of these.
Parks have now been taken over
by private equity companies who
are looking for cash cows.
Quite frankly, and so people
have been living in these parts
for years, happily living,
there's a rent increase every
year, it's no big deal. Now
they're finding they're they're
being asked to pay more rent 2
or 3 times a year.
Um, which is starting to make
them just unaffordable,
particularly,
Um
A number of the parks are are 55
plus, and so they're basically
retirees.
Um, who was limited incomes, and
so with these constant renting.
Um, other kinds of problems and
Uh, I think everybody knows Mr.
Bailey, who's the head of RLD,
um.
uh, is
it is the landlords require uh
duty to maintain the utility
lines from the utility hookup to
the mobile home, and what's been
happening in many parts of the
state, and he knows more about
this than I am, so I'm gonna put
this over to him in just one
second, uh, which is that we've
had people without heat, we've
had people without water, we not
for a day, not for a couple of
days, but for weeks.
Um, and in a few cases, the
Attorney General has come in and
um
tried to direct
But we're kind of in a world
here.
Of
Uh, beyond the manufacturer and
the installation of the home,
there's essentially virtually no
state regulatory authority.
Nobody's overseeing this
industry. Nobody knows who to
call when there's a problem. So
I'm gonna let Mr. Bailey talk a
little bit about.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, thank you for the
opportunity to sit here and
visit with you, Representative
Matthews called me right before
the prior to the start of the
session asked me if I'd be
willing to.
Work with her or look at some of
this stuff. So really what I'm
here is on section 5, where
they're asking uh if RLD.
with chair and get a workforce
or work group together.
Original bill doesn't reference
that. So that's where we're
working off of, correct? 03.
Yes, madam chair. OK,
OK doke. We need someone to move
the sub for a discussion.
moved by Representative Reed,
OK.
I'm sorry, um, Mr. Bailey to
interrupt you, but I wanna make
sure everybody understands
that's on page 6, line 15.
But what we've encountered, uh,
I don't know if any of the
legislators here.
Have been contacted personally,
but if not, they've probably
seen it on the news. We've been
in the news manufacturing
housing division was in the news
a lot this last year a little
mobile home parks. I'm I'm
sorry, we have a.4 and you all
should have received it.
231608.4.
As judiciary Committee
substitute for HB 4. So, um, the
issue with that representative
is
We received it at 4:27.
24 hours that we
expect to receive the only we
changed in section 5, we changed
the word task force to working
group. OK.
So let me speak to the members
if are we willing to tell me a
couple word changes. We don't
like to do that, but, you know,
when it's something small like
that, sometimes we can be
flexible. So with that, let's
all toss our point 3s, so we
don't get confused, and let's
take the.4.
All right, Mister Bailey. I
think we're still on you
members of the committee, so
anyway, like I said, we also
regulation wise we have
manufactured housing division.
Which, you know, regulates the
installation of homes, has
nothing to do with parks are
totally two separate items and
things, but everything keeps
coming back to us. They keep
calling us, calling us, and we
can't do anything about it, so
but I agreed with uh
Representative that we need to
do something. We need these
parks, these parks are
beneficial to the, to a lot of
the retirees, but we've had a
lot of issues too with being
without gas, being without
water, a lot of other issues
that we come across. So what I
told her I'd be more than
willing to head.
the test or the working group
and bring people together and
see if we can figure out what
needs to be done, what honestly
needs to be regulated and how do
we go about regulating it? You
got to be fair down the middle.
tenants and you got to be fair
with the, the landlords, uh,
we've got to figure out.
How, how do you get the systems
maintained when we're losing all
the, the gas for weeks and
months on a time. Uh, a lot of
times these repairs are costing
2 $2.5 million so that's why I
was here, uh, I'm willing to
take it on if that's what we
need to do, and you also choose
and uh rent is something that is
out of my.
you, but if we can get somebody
in the working group to work
with us and try to really figure
out what's fair and what can be
done and keep these parts safe
and still being utilized in a
fair manner.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Anything else
representative before I go to
the audience? Uh, yes, madam
chair, let me just uh highlight
a couple other points in the
bill. We do have
Um, is probably the most
controversial part, um, we have
on page 4 rent fairness, um.
Because we're in this crisis
situation with the
Uh, all these frequent rent
increases and so forth what we.
In the bill was less.
Let's have a 2 year
22-year period where the rent
increase is limited.
While we have the working group.
Figure out
What the best approach is that
and and how to balance the
rights of everybody.
Um, so I wanted to point that
out and then uh
I think
Um
We've got um
We've got, let's see, and then
we have some uh private remedies
in section 4.
Uh, for violations.
Of the act.
Uh, which right now,
Um,
There really aren't in the
current mobile homes Act
statute.
So that's a little bit more
overview of the bill. Thank you,
Representative. Um, those in the
audience wishing to speak in
opposition, please approach the
why am I not?
Um, please approach the
gentleman with the mic and
please repli your comments to
one minute. I'll do my best.
Go on
Doug Ottersburg, uh, my wife and
I operate communities in Santa
Fe and Albuquerque. Frankly,
it's the private remedies that
scare me most. We have a
community that has a gas system
like that, which we're required
to inspect every year and we
maintain that in this situation,
just like Superintendent Bailey
said, it's taking these
community owners, how long does
it take to find financing to get
that done. Find a contractor
that can and will do it, that
has labor and materials to do
this job. It's taken months.
And yet now there's, oh, now you
can withhold up to $250 a day.
So now it directly impacts the
our ability. So if all this did
was established a working group,
I'm for it. If not,
I'm not. Madam Chair, members of
the committee, my name is Brent
Moore, registered lobbyist for
the New Mexico Association of
Realtors, and we stand in
opposition to the bill, our
opposition is focused mainly on
section 2 of the bill, uh, in
the original bill, I believe it
was called rent stabilization.
Now it's called rent Fairness,
contained within those sections
or limitations on rent
increases. Uh, the realtors
stand in opposition to those
artificial controls on rent, and
we believe that you need to be
allowed to.
respond to the existing
conditions that exist for any,
any landlord or any property
owner, and that by including
artificial limitations on rent
that landowners are that the
mobile home park owner is not
allowed to respond to conditions
that are there. Um, I would say
that the task force that the
sponsor has proposed is a good
idea. Um, let's have discussions
about what's going on in these
mobile home parks. Let's, let's
talk about what, what is needed,
but the
official limitations in section
2 are, uh, what we oppose. Thank
you very much. Thank you.
Right.
Those online. All right, uh,
there's someone, this is an
opposition, someone named.
Uh, I'm not in opposition. I'm
asking,
I'm asking you, ma'am,
in opposition, please raise your
hand and if you're in support,
please take your hand down. All
right, so those in opposition
take.
All right.
Dana
John
All right, um, Rochelle Smith.
You're in opposition, please.
I'm, are you there? Can you hear
me? Yes,
ma'am?
I'm actually the expert witness
that just got off the train and
I didn't know how else to get to
you. OK, no problem. Just sit
tight or tight,
um, in opposition, please raise
your hand if you're not in
opposition, please take your
hand down.
All right. Leslie Gooch.
Hello, Madam Chair and members
of the committee, uh, thank you
so much uh for allowing me to
speak for a moment. My name is
Leslie Gooch. I'm the CEO of the
manufactured housing institute.
We represent all owners and
operators of land lease
communities in New Mexico, and
um I want to thank you for your
consideration. We, we are in
opposition of of the legislation
as it is currently written.
However, we do not oppose and
we're excited about this working
group. It's
sounds like you're going to hear
from those residents who live in
our manufactured housing
communities, and we want to be a
part of that dialogue right now
manufactured housing communities
are the largest form of
unsubsidized affordable housing
in New Mexico. Those communities
are aging, and as you've seen in
New Mexico, there are
infrastructure investment needs.
The earlier part of this bill
will unfortunately have the
impact of contributing to
further deterioration.
without the ability of these
park owners to do what they need
to do to keep uh the residents
you're getting ready to hear
from stably house. So we think a
working group dialogue to look
at all of the options to support
those residents, uh, who are
unsubsidized at this point, um,
from the state of New Mexico,
um, and consider alternative
measures like rental assistance.
Thank you. You're welcome.
Um, next, in opposition,
remember.
So is there someone named
Spencer?
Spencer, are you in office?
Yes, thank you. Um, Madam Chair,
and, and committee members. Um,
I am national council for the
manufactured housing Institute
as well as uh represents several
manufactured home community
operators around the country in,
in New Mexico. Uh, we are in
opposition as Doctor Gooch
previously mentioned to this
bill and that rent stabilization
and rent cap um increases have
unintended consequences that
ultimately end up in
impacting negatively the
residents, um, specifically if
park owners are not allowed to
pass through um capital and, and
preexpenditures, um, you know,
taxes, uh, insurance, you know,
all the things that in this day
and age have increased in cost.
Um, this leads to them not
having money to perform this
critical utility upgrades that
are needed, um, so we are
opposed to the bill, but, but
believe that a working group to
get down to the root.
issue. um, is a great idea and
we are in full support of that.
Thank you.
Thank you. All right, let's go
to the audience, those wishing
to speak in support of the bill,
please approach the gentleman
with the microphone. I don't see
anyone, um.
Let's, let me see some hands.
Let's let's limit it to
Harlan Plaza, Harlan. Thank you,
thank you, Madam Chair. Can you
hear me? Yes.
Thank you. Uh, Madam Kare
members of the committee, I am
speaking in support of this
bill. I live in a small 55 plus
mobile home uh in Silver City,
New Mexico. I'm unable to move
my home. I am on a fixed income
and disabled. I think uh one of
the salient factors here to ask
is who are we protecting and why
are we protecting them? I am not
opposed.
to
passing the working group, but
with the caveat that there
should be a 2-year pause because
we are actually in a crisis
situation. The largest
percentage of homeless people in
New Mexico are now 55+.
Uh, I think anything we can do
to prevent
This travesty, is well
worthwhile. I'm sure the bill
can be tweaked, but um, let's,
let's protect the most
vulnerable, even if it's for 2
years. Let the working group
work and we'll come up with
something that protects everyone
and not just people with deep
pockets. Thank you very much.
Next we have Mary Kay.
Mary Kay
Good morning, Madam Chair and
Representatives. I come to you
from a manufactured home
community in Las Cruces, New
Mexico. I bought my property and
signed a lease 6 years ago, and
my lease payment was $649 a
month. It's now $809 a month.
In the news, we keep seeing all
these problems in other states
where private equity groups and
Corporations from all over the
US are buying up properties
here. We're a cash cow. We are
not in a position where we can
just pick up our house and
leave, and I'm concerned and my
support is for this bill. I'm
tickled to death about a working
group. I want it to be fair to
the landowners as well as the
residents, but
I like opportunity for us to
purchase a mobile home park.
If that would be available to
the residents.
Thank you
support
um Kathleen Flynn.
Kathleen.
Uh, yes, thank you very much,
Madam Chair and Representative.
My name is Kathleen Flynn. I
want to thank you for your
service, all of you, to the
citizens of New Mexico. I'm soon
to be an 80 year old senior
citizen retired hospital and
hospice chaplain in 2023. I'm
grateful to have found
affordable housing in Silver
City in the only 55 plus mobile
home park.
Leaving friends and community of
Santa Fe was difficult. The cost
of housing without being
employed with my fixed income
warranted looking somewhere
affordable. After 3 years of
searching, I gave up renting to
buy a fixer-up mobile home in
Silver City. I invested
substantial savings in making it
livable. My adult children and I
have guarded enthusiasm about
this new living circumstance,
knowing I'm on leased land no
safeguards or predictability
about future affordability.
of the land beneath me. Please
pass HB 442 as a remedy for me
and my neighbors and all New
Mexicans who have suffered with
unfair rental increases. Many of
us are among the 42% of New
Mexico's senior households that
live on $40,000 or less annual.
Thank you very much for hearing
my comments. Thank you.
All right.
Questions, comments?
OK.
Representative Reed.
Um, mountain chair
representative he thought like
the comments suggested about
just doing this as a working
group for now and um cause I
myself would actually love to
see what the results of the
working group were before
deciding um some of
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
uh, yes, and uh the difficulty
is that these rent increases are
happening now, and which is why
In our section 2.
We do
And I, and I know this is kind
of a stress for New Mexico.
Uh
We do, we do impose some rent
restrictions, but one, the rents
are allowed to go up.
And it's only for a two-year
period that we're doing the
restrictions, and it is to give
the working group a chance.
To not have the situation.
Deteriorate on either side, and
I certainly understand that the
people who own the parks, um,
You know, they have to have a
fair way to return to,
obviously, or this isn't these
parts aren't gonna continue, but
what we're looking for is a way
to a little bit have our cake
and eat it too, get a working
group going, but at the same
time, don't
to get
really
Even worse than it is.
By allowing modest increases in
rent for that period of time.
And Madam Chair represented how
long do you anticipate it would
take to to get some actual we
think in about a year.
Uh, sure, yes, uh.
We asked for the initial report,
I believe it's uh
Let me look here, in section 5,
as for.
Let's see, let me find it.
That we have. Oh, here it is on
page 7, line 24. We asked for
the first report by December 1,
2025.
And then we asked for the 2nd
report by September 1, 2026.
So that I would, you know, it
would be up to the working group
how it wants to organize itself.
But I would, we set 2 dates in
part to allow some attention to
the more critical issues quickly
and then a little more time to
try to figure out how to resolve
some of these others. I would
also say that in other states,
Um, there are some
Uh, there's some states and
communities that have
restrictions the kind of
restrictions we're talking about
a separate it can't go up more
than a year.
Um, and those and those
communities seem to be doing
fine, and people adjust.
And um you know, you try to find
a balance where things, if
things get really, really worse.
Then these people are gonna lose
their homes, and so trying to
find some way that we can
fair and proceed and work out
this problem.
But it's gonna take them um it's
gonna take them a year or two to
figure.
Yeah, Madam Chair and
Representative, and so I here I
can also see the other thing
happening, you know, unforeseen
things happen.
You know, on the landlord's
side.
You know, they're kind of
limited on what they can do as
far as their increases, so did
you get any landlord?
Or input from landlords and this
type of situation, I guess or
manufacturing part, um, did you
get any input from them on the?
Uh,
man, uh, to some extent we did,
yes, um, most of the people we
were talking to were were
tenants, of course.
Uh, but, um, and, but in my
conversations with tenants, I
Yeah, I was very honest with
them. I said, you know, this
this is.
Landlords have to have fair
rates of return order or the
parks would deteriorate.
I mean, that's just the reality
of
Money.
And, and these kinds of
situations and um
Um, so this is not a cure-all.
A cure all for the problem is,
let's get a little bit of time,
try to be fair to both sides,
and
Really sit down and try to
figure out this problem. It's
been growing for the last decade
or two.
Um
And so Madam Chair and
representative and I yeah, I get
that, um.
What was the input from the
landlord, so when the ones you
did to to the madam chair uh
represented to the extent the uh
landlords were responsive and
they weren't real responsive.
Um
It was that they didn't want
restrictions, and they like the
situation pretty much just like
it was.
All right. And if, if we're
trying on this kind of fair and
at bay, you know, to this
working group gets done.
Um, what about the private
remedies where we're.
You're, you're kind of doubling
um penalties and that, and so
when you give us a little
background behind that.
care.
And that would be page.
55.
Section 4. Thank you. Give me 1
2nd.
OK, so,
One of the, one of the areas
that has been uh major concern
for in many of the parks, not
necessarily.
Uh, the one in my district, but
in in the southern part of the
state, um, 471,020 is a
provision that requires that the
landlord provide the utilities.
Um
And maintained them in good
condition.
And
Um, so what we, and there were a
lot of violations of this.
And so what we're trying to do
there
was put in
OK
penalty.
To encourage the landlords.
To get the repairs made.
Quickly.
And not delay. Now, uh, and
since we did that provision,
Um, Mr. Bailey has said our time
limit is too short. I think it
was 8 hours, and we should
change that and I'm happy to
make a change in that. Um,
Before the bill is finalized,
uh, and in consultation with him
as to what would be a reasonable
time.
But right now, there's just no,
there's no way for land for a
resident to be able to uh
Required
The there's there's no penalty
to the to the
Landlord for failing to maintain
the utilities and that without
water and so forth for months at
a time.
And so Madam Chair represented
this just.
finds the landlord, the longer
it takes to fix.
But this is just utilities in
that section. I, I, I was going
back to the Madam Chair
representative, the comment of.
Thanks to
It, I guess, mobile homes up to
par, whatever needs to happen.
So could you address that, that
comment.
And share the comment from uh
one of the uh
Yes, and, and manicure
Yes, and, and manic
Yes, and, and manicure
representative the way we
structured this, and I can
understand that.
Um, to replace a water system or
something could take a great
deal of time.
But
Um, you know, if you're not
getting water, you shouldn't be
having to pay uh.
For rent. And so,
Again, it was, it was a uh uh
trying to find a balance where
we're being fair to the tenant
who deserves to have water and
heat and so forth, and also
encouraging the landlord to do
it quickly, and we also didn't
want to create a situation where
everybody was gonna have to go
to court.
It's just a simple set off
against the rent.
Um
And encourage the the landlords
to to pay attention to these
problems, they said we're I'm
willing to uh certainly willing
to, uh, with Mr. Bailey's
insight, uh, changed the 8 hours
to a more appropriate time
before the the offset would take
effect.
All right, thank you.
Thank you, um.
Let's see, speaker, I'm a good
manager. OK. Um,
You know, I um am pleased to see
that we're now working on
manufacturing.
Home issue, we have, I have, we
have a couple district, actually
more than one, but I'm and
issues have been arising where
um there are utility stoppages,
um, the landlord does not, has
not addressed them. Um, I'm
hearing from people about
significant rent increases, and,
you know, it's very um
disheartening for individuals
who have purchased one of these
mobile homes, it's, and that's
not a small investment.
Um,
they attach the mobile home to a
lot and then it takes, it is
very expensive to move a mobile
home. So it's even worse than a
landlord, the usual landlord
tenant kind of situation where
you can at least move your
belongings with not always easy,
but with some ease, but to
expect someone who is a
basically at the at the cap is a
captive of the mobile home park
because of the huge financial.
issues associated with moving,
um, is really um difficult and
if anything needs regulation,
it's mobile home parks. Um, we
have one that's owned by Yes
Communities, um, which I believe
is a, a private equity firm and
it's been really hard on the
residents to address some of
these problems and I'm pleased
to see that we're moving in that
direction. I would love to see
rents fixed permanently, um,
truthfully, they are getting
very high.
for very minimal in some cases,
minimal services, and while I
recognize there are some, you
know, what you might want to
refer to as mom and pop mobile
home parks. Those, I think, are
going forward and out of state,
um, private equity firm up and
not providing the service that
our residents deserve, so I'm
very pleased to see um this bill
um move forward, but, um.
Anyone else wish to comment?
Ma'am, may I, may I introduce
you, given the effort that you
have made to come um, of course,
sure, Madam Chair, this, uh,
this is Rochelle Smith.
And Rochelle lives in my
district in a park called
Albuquerque Meadows that has
been there for a very long time.
And uh the committee still has
time and and would like, she,
she
has been very active, uh, in
working in the park.
Uh, as the head of a group
organized to deal with the rent
increases and so forth.
But I, I'll, I'll leave that.
And she came up on the train to
testify and given that, as I
said, the amount of effort that
you.
Yes, briefly though, please try
to keep it brief.
Madam Chair and Representatives,
thank you for the opportunity to
speak to you today.
My name is Rochelle Smith.
I live in Albuquerque Meadows of
55 plus mobile home community in
Albuquerque. I'm the chair for a
group of residents called the
Meadows Action Team or Mac.
Matt was created to respond to
the frequent rent increases and
other problems which began 4
years ago when a private equity
company Legacy Communities
bought the park.
Matt represents the 600 plus
seniors and veterans who call
Albuquerque Meadows home.
We believe passing this bill
will have a positive impact on
mobile home parks throughout the
state.
Many of us have lived in
Albuquerque Meadows for years.
Some 20 to 30 years, most of us
intended to make this our last
move.
We often refer to our park as
the last stop before heaven.
We all own our homes and many of
us invested our life savings in
our homes.
The only thing we rent from
Legacy is the tiny piece of
dirt.
Our manufactured homes. We all
are on a month to month lease.
Under the Home Act, landlords
can raise the rent as frequently
and as much as they want, as
long as they provide us with 60
days' notice.
In those notices legacy claims
that rent increases are based on
the current market rate unquote.
So a few of us toured 3
privately owned comparable
parks.
Within 5 miles of Albuquerque
Meadows.
All we're charging much less
rent than we were being charged.
With the latest increase rent
increase, legacy is now charging
new residents.
$1030 a month and continues to
increase the rents of those who
are longtime residents, as the
chart shows.
Many of our residents have been
forced to move out due to the
rent increases. Many are barely
holding on.
For example, one long-term
resident who receives 1400 per
month in Social Security.
is now paid 900 per month in lot
rent.
The average cost of an owner to
move a mobile home is between 15
and $25,000. I won't go into
that part since you I see you
have multiple pages there, so if
we could
drop all of this and just get to
the good stuff. Examples of the
suffering because I think this
is really important for you guys
to hear is the humanitarian
aspect of this that no one talks
about.
Um, examples of the suffering of
our residents.
They're being forced to move in
with or borrow money from their
kids, they're reducing utility
usage such as heating and
cooling.
They're cutting prescription
medications in half to make them
last longer.
Drastically cutting money spent
on groceries.
Having to return to work in
their 70s and 80s.
Depression, isolation, weight
loss, causing more mental and
physical issues. One lady had to
put her dog to sleep.
Because she couldn't afford her
food or medications.
Every time we get a notice of
rent increase, I received calls
from ra residents saying,
things such as I don't know what
I'm going to do, what's gonna
happen to me? I can't sleep
worrying about keeping a roof
over my head.
Rochelle, I appreciate it. I
think let's, let's move on.
We definitely understand what
you're sharing with us. So thank
you, um, all right, uh, I am
happy to entertain emotion.
Remember we have a sub that's
0.4 here, folks.
Representative uh Hoffman B
Hill, Madam Chair, I move a.
Do not pass on House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 442 and they do pass on
House Judiciary.
Committee substitute for House
bill for, I'm sorry, 4, yeah,
and not how she can make some
super house bill for 42.
All right, we have a motion for
a do not pass on House Bill. Oh.
Yeah, house build um 442, but I
do pass on House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 442, and we're talking
about the 0.4 version made by um
Murphy's inanski.
Um, when you call the roll
please. Yes, thank you, Madam
Chair. Representative Abeta.
Representative Chavis. No, I'd
like to explain my vote.
Representative Hall.
No, what I'd like to explain my
vote as well.
Representative Hoffman V Hill.
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
Speaker Martina, yes.
Representative McQueen.
Representative
Leader Sapansky, yes.
Madam Vice Chair.
Madam Chair. Yes.
Madam, you have a do not pass on
how Bill 442, but a do pass on
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 442
explaining to do
Chavez, yes, thank you, Madam
Chair Representative, um, well,
I support the not raising rent
more than once a year, um, I'm
just concerned about.
Mandating the caps and
percentages and, and making
those landlords abide by that
for a certain number of years,
so I'm all in support of of the
study. I'm, I'm excited. I can't
wait to see those results and
then hopefully we can move
forward from there. We
definitely don't want,
especially our senior
population, put in vulnerable
situations with their housing,
so thank you.
Representative Reed, I think, oh
hall, excuse me, forgot who
wanted to explain some more.
Thank you, Madam Chair, to echo
my
Bring's comments over there.
I think this is an outstanding.
Idea
And we need a working group and
I come, as you said, San Juan
County, I literally, I come from
the land of the, of the mobile
homes, trust me. And there are
some places up there that do it
right, and there are some places
that don't, so on this working
group.
I would like to see the ones
that
do it right, maybe have some
input.
With the state.
To set up a, a good example to
say, well, look, you know,
mobile home park, ABC.
Does these practice as well, X,
Y, Z, doesn't, so let's, let's
bring them into a line cause I
concur, raising rent by the
month it's crazy, but I, I
really would like to just see
this working group, how it's,
how it's gonna come out.
I just, I, I don't want to
hammer all of the industry out
there, but certainly there are
ones that need it, I.
So that's my explanation. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you for
your presentation. I.
Thank
Thank you.
I, I have been texting with
Representative Small, his ETA is
5 minutes if we want to take a,
you know, a little refresher
break, get some fruit, and um
come back and let's come back at
10:20. That should hopefully
Thank you.
We are back from our recess.
Represented small
311. Yes, please. Thank you so
much and I'm sure I want to
thank you and the committee for
the uh ability to present. I
know it's been
Uh
Thank you just for the
scheduling and we'll be very
brief. Madam Chair, we're uh
pleased. I'm here with Jennifer
Bradfield from the Water
Alliance and a water expert, um,
and attorney.
We're excited to present the 0.3
version of the house, uh,
judiciary substitute for House
Agriculture and Water Resource
Committee substitute.
Um
And I'm happy to go through a
few of the highlights, Madam
Chair.
Uh, then go to this Brad Pete
for any additional information.
If however you like.
OK.
Uh, great. Thank you, Madam
Chair, uh, Madam Chair, the 0.3
version of the House Judiciary
Committee substitute,
um continues on changes we've
made since introduction of this
legislation. I want to highlight
some of the most important we've
adjusted the definition of
reclaimed water to exclude fresh
water and further have clarified
that the definition of reclaimed
water meets and is fully subject
to standards that are set by the
state.
through the New Mexico
Environment Department and the
Water Quality Control
Commission.
Uh, in response to comments from
Western Environmental Law Center
in Amigos Bravos. We have, um,
added so only cities and
counties can initiate this
process, and we've added a
requirement that they issue a
statement about why formation of
a reclaimed water authority is
in the public benefit. Uh, in
addition, additionally comments
that were raised by those two
organizations, we've added
provision 9 a permit, um.
That enemy who grants a permit
finds that granting that permit
is not in the public interest.
We've expanded the board to 10
members, Madam Chair, committee,
and, uh, included a number of
members who are focused on
environmental stewardship and
environmental protection.
Um, we've added language that
would prevent an authority from
purchasing free and municipal
wastewater effluent, uh, uh
addressing a concern from both
of those organizations as well
as some of the assass and others
who didn't wish to divert
surface water flows that are
already coming from west
wastewater, excepted at its
frommacea's adding language to
specifically state that um
The municipal affluent shall
require a water right.
Uh, clarified that authorities
must comply the reclaimed water
authorities must comply with all
environmental laws.
Um, all permitting requirements
and reporting requirements.
Um, we've added clarifying
language.
that uh all water quality
standards are to be set by the
Water Quality Control
Commission, which is with New
Mexico Environment Department at
the state and um.
Included the ability once a
permit has been granted to
revoke that permit, uh, in the
approval of that permit, uh, if
an authority fails to keep the
standards to comply with the
Reclaim Water Act.
Last thing I'll say, Madam
Chair, committee, this is
focused on um news sources of
water for economic development.
And cleaning up contaminated,
uh, waters for economic
development.
It's very narrowly focused in
filling a niche that is
essential in the state, if we're
both able to grow economically
and add jobs, while at the same
time reducing pressure on uh
existing freshwater aquifers,
uh, and freshwater surface
flows.
I turned over to Miss Brad and
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you. So I
wanted to give an example of how
this bill has come about and why
it's necessary.
We are working with a group of
stakeholders from communities in
southern New Mexico, who have
had ongoing water quality
issues. There are water quality
so their water sources are
primarily brackish and they're
down by the border region.
Uh, they have had significant
water quality issues where they
are high in arsenic. They called
on special interest groups to
help them throughout the last
year, and EPA eventually entered
a fine against their water
authority there.
What they don't have is funding.
to actually help their water
systems down there. They have a
lot of brackish water, they have
a lot of water that exceeds 500
parts per million that doesn't
qualify as brackish water and it
doesn't qualify as fresh water,
but they don't have enough
funding to fix their water
quality issues. They can get
private funding. It's not an
issue of private companies not
wanting to come in and
contribute funds, but there's no
legal mechanism in New Mexico to
get those contributions in time
to the water systems. They can
go through the water project
fund.
But that's gonna take at least 2
years for them to get
significant funding to fix their
water quality issues. And so
what are these communities going
to do?
This provides a solution. It
provides a passport and it's
based on a statute that's
existed in New Mexico since
2003. The economic Development
Corporation Act.
It lays out a process for a
public private corporation in
New Mexico, they have not been
entities that have been subject
to a lot of litigation or
controversy. It's been a stable
form of legal entity in New
Mexico that helps get private
funding where communities need
it. There it was focused on
economic development. Here we
need investment to help economic
development for our water
infrastructure.
Thank you. Thank you, um, so
remember we're on um committee
subpoint 3. I don't know if we
had a motion to consider it,
just to ensure I'd like to move,
um, um, let's go to the
audience, those wishing to speak
in opposition.
Please uh approached the
gentleman with the microphone
and please Madam Chair,
committee members, my name is
Kathy Elliott, and today I'm the
registered lobbyist for New
Mexico Rural Water.
New Mexico rural Water is
opposed to House Bill 311 Commit
substitute as well. We support
the intent.
We appreciate the representative
to bring this for.
However,
We do not feel that the entire
bill is ready to be um pushed
through. For example, as an
authority, as a nonprofit
organization, but it acts and
looks like a state agency. It
gets money from the state.
Adheres to open meetings in
IPAs, etc. So,
Another question is, what kind
of 501C.
Question mark is this going to
be? Um, we have more questions.
The bill actually describes the
makeup of the board.
Although with up to 10 potential
authorities in the state.
Where will the specific talent
and skill sets come from.
Will board members be paid?
By having an authority's
jurisdiction limited to that of
just a municipality. Thank you
thank you.
Hi, my name is Bobby Bassold, I
am with Rivers run through us,
um, we're advocates for water.
And
And rivers and so on and the in
the state of New Mexico.
And I'm here speaking in
opposition to this bill because
as I see it, as we see it in the
community, um, this bill opens
up
Uh, it's simply reframes, uh,
Using water that can be that is
um from it's brackish, but from
the oil and gas industry fracked
fracking, um, fracking solution
is not
water, you cannot be considered
water, and the way this pill is
framed, it allows.
It's a very broad way of looking
at what water is. And in this
case, fracking.
Waste is not water.
And it cannot be reclaimed
because of the uh
The materials in that, um, and
as many of you, ma'am. Thank
you.
We
Online.
Those wishing to speak in
opposition, um, let's see.
We have Eric.
Lechner.
Adam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Eric
Schlinker Goodrich. I'm the
executive director of the
Western Environmental Law Center
based in Taos, will be direct.
We do not pass on the HB 311. HB
311 is an imprudent devolution
of the state's responsibility to
address well-founded concerns
related to reclaimed water,
especially those involving oil
and gas production wastewater.
We do not see how the state
could properly oversee HB 311's
new patchwork layer bureaucracy.
This creates a serious risk of
regulatory capture.
It also creates a serious risk
of harm. This bill isn't just
about brackish water. It folds
in produced water and New Mexico
does not have water quality
standards remotely adequate to
the task of protecting human
health and the environment from
the cocktail of known and
unknown contaminants in produced
water. There are debates to be
had regarding reclaimed water.
We should have those debates at
the state level. Unfortunately,
HB 311 would short circuit those
debates. We urge do not pass.
Thank you.
Who's that? Is, is that a person
from the outside?
Meeting house
Hi
Madam Chair and committee
members, this is Marielle
Nanasi. Can you hear me? Yes,
Muriel.
Thank you. Essentially, HB 311
is a whole new legal regime for
produced water because industry
has failed to make its case
under current law. There is law
already in place. It's the New
Mexico water Quality Act, and it
requires there to be credible
scientific data to demonstrate
that wastewater reuse will be
protective of human health and
the environment, and he and
industry has been unable
far to provide this evidence.
This bill creates new law that
is not protective of human
health and the environment. The
current water quality standards
are insufficient.
To meet the, the brackish water
and produced water, um, elements
in this bill. We must have um
water quality standards that are
up to the task, which include
1400 constituents that are found
in fracking waste. Thank you.
Please oppose this bill.
Thank you one more.
Norm,
No.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee.
The expert witness, uh, in favor
of this bill.
Used
The situation in the extreme
Laurer Rio Grande in New Mexico
as a reason to create 10
authorities across the state.
That essentially would bypass
the regulatory system, turning
it over to non-experts that make
up the voting numbers and
authority board.
With regard to the particular
example of the extreme lower Rio
Grande.
Then the Mexico State University
researchers know the technology
that would be required to clean
up that water.
But what I am told directly by
those researchers is the next
step is an expensive
geotechnical study including
well drilling to determine where
to source the water, the
brackish water, and where to get
rid of the waste. Those two
questions must be answered, and
those are technical questions
that should take place. Thank
you.
All right, um, those in the
audience wishing to speak in
support, please.
Line up
I'm gonna limit it to 5 people.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members. My name is Joe
Thompson. I'm a registered
lobbyist for Santa Teresa
Companies.
As well as Aztec wells, and we
very much appreciate the work
that's gone into the committee
substitute and stand in support.
Morning, Madam Chair, members of
the committee. My name is
Vanessa Lari and I'm the
registered lobbyist for
Borderplex Digital?
And we stand in strong support.
We want to thank the sponsor or
Dealing with all of the various
aspects of the bill that has has
changed, this bill is completely
different from the way it was
first introduced, the committee
substitute certainly represents
the
The things that we are in favor
of or committee substitute 311.
Thank you very much.
Thank you. Thank you, Eddie
Kelly Fajardo on the on behalf
of New Mexico IDE. This
legislation is just not about
water, it's about securing our
state's economic future has to
to this bill is critical to
projects like the Borderplex and
Santa Teresa, where water
recycling for cooling reflects a
commitment to sustainable
community first development. The
bill takes action by maximizing
the reuse of nonpotable water,
protecting our drinking water
supplies, and ensuring that
businesses looking to invest in
our state how the water
solutions they need. Unlike
strict man
this bill offers voluntary
opportunity-based approach.
Other Western states with
similar water challenges have
already implemented these
practices, and we ask for your
support. Thank you.
Morning, Matthias there on
behalf of the Water Alliance,
um, just briefly wanted to
articulate the fact that for the
last 150 years, the development
of Western water resources has
relied primarily on freshwater
resources.
and across the West, those
resources are no longer
available for economic
development.
Um, what House Bill 311 seeks to
do is give a tool to local
communities, the champion.
Non-traditional water resources.
Those water resources are are
articulated and identified in
the water reuse action plan that
EPA published.
Almost 5 years ago, and
I think it's what we know from
the science that's you. Thank
you so much.
All right. Um, those online, I'm
gonna limit it to 3, wishing to
speak in support.
Um, Linda Starr.
Linda
OK. Um, can you hear me?
OK. Yes. No, this is not in
support.
This is in opposition. I'm
sorry, Sarah.
Sarah
If you all are in opposition,
please take your hands down, and
I will call on those in support.
So if you're in support, please,
if you're in opposition, please
take your hands down. All right,
Sarah.
This is in support.
Thereof
All right, Jason Sande.
Jason.
Yes, good mor good morning,
Madam Chair and members of the
committee.
Um, I am in support of House
Bill 311, where it establishes a
water recycling framework
aligning with established
practices.
From across other Western states
including California, Texas,
Nevada, and Arizona. There are
approximately 16,000
desalination plants operating,
producing 25 billion gallons of
freshwater daily across the
world. The United States hosts
406 municipal brackish
groundwater desalination plants
with a combined capacity
exceeding 157 million gallons
per day, Simply put, New Mexico
is falling behind on water.
use compared to other arid
southwest states.
Several projects could benefit
from using reclaimed water in
the states of New Mexico.
Industrial sites could all use
reclaimed water, reclaimed water
could also be used in geothermal
development and by New Mexico
utilities and energy projects,
asking House Bill 311 gives New
Mexico the tools that are needed
to ensure we are not falling
further behind in water
recycling, I would urge the
committee to support House Bill
311. Thank you.
Um, let's see, I have Debbie
Hughes.
Yes ma'am, Madam Chairman.
Members of the committee.
Madam Chairman, members of
committee, can you hear me? Yes,
please.
Um, Debbie Hughes, executive
director with the New Mexico
Association of Soil and Water
Conservation Districts. We have
got to conserve our drinking
water. We've got to conserve the
potable water. This is a great
opportunity. We do have these
aquifers identified in most of
the state. This has nothing to
do with oil and gas, nothing to
do with fracking, um, this would
be additional new whales used
specifically to clean up this D
cell water and we need this
supply just like the last.
Speaker said, we are behind and
New Mexico is missing out on an
amazing water sources that we're
just not accessing. Thank you
very much.
Dustin
Uh, yes, Dustin Brownlow with
Mesa Advisors uh calling in to
support House Bill 311 to
Reclaim Water Act. Um,
reclaimed water has been used
all over the country and in
brackish water as well for
development for, for several
years, um, currently in Texas,
we're working on about $8
billion worth of projects that
are being supported by reclaimed
water and brackish Dal like
otherwise would not have been
able to be developed. And I
think that in New Mexico, if
this bill moves forward, that
will enable economic development
and will also allow communities
that have been water stressed
for for many years. Um, uh, to,
to find
sustainable sources of water, uh
for those communities to
continue to thrive.
Thank you.
back to the sponsor or anything
else, um, thank you, madam
chair. Thank you, Madam Chair,
the main thing I want to
emphasize is that all water
quality standards and are still
state standards through NMED and
the water quality Control
Commission. There's no standard
setting by any of the
authorities, those standards are
all done by Quality Control
Commission. Thank you.
So I have on my lists
representative McQueen, anyone
else?
wishing to get
All Chavez. Hold on.
Romero
OK.
All right, let's go. Oh, the
speaker. All right. All right,
so McQueen, representative
McQueen. Thank you, ma'am.
Uh, ma'am chairs in a small, uh,
I have
Um, I've read this bill closely,
uh, I've read closely several
times.
Uh, because we're keeping a new
drafts.
Um, I have, uh, a lot of, uh,
technical.
Comments, um, I think.
I'm very concerned about the use
of a nonprofit corporation, and
I don't think it's well
integrated with the public
process.
Um, I'm in the interest of time,
I'm gonna just go over some of
my high level.
Uh comments, but, but please
know, um, I think there are
In the bill as well.
Um, first off, uh, we heard a
comment just recently that this
was about brackish water, uh,
but
This is a produced water bill,
is it not?
Madam Chair, Sam McQueen, this
bill is agnostic as to water
sources, Madam Chair
because it's subject to the
water quality control
commission.
Um, there is a clear, uh,
prohibition right now to the oil
fields until uh the water
quality control commission
decides otherwise.
OK, and Madam Chair, there's a
small.
Supplementing that's fine, but
we don't supplement just for the
fun of supplementing, so
understood um that chair
representative. I just wanted to
add this bill is about saving
every H2O molecule that we can
in New Mexico. So it is, you
know, science defines what water
is.
Water is, yeah, so
the question is, does this bill
include produced water? I think
the answer Madam Char said
McQueen, this bill.
Yeah, only can uh use reclaimed
water that is approved.
By the water quality control
commission.
Madam Chair, Representative
McQueen, until the water quality
control commission makes an
affirmative decision to allow
the use of treated produced
water outside of the oil field.
That I think it is, well, the
use of produced water under the.
I think Madam Chair represent
McQueen is entirely accurate
because the water quality
control commission
until they make that decision to
be used outside the oil field.
To specify the, um.
Yeah, we, we have the, a, a
different bill strategic water
supply which had both brackets
and produced.
Um, in discussions about that
bill, I was asked.
Um, you know, what I thought
should be in there, you know
what I thought should be in
there were clear guardrails on
the use of produced water.
And I see this.
You know, water quality control
commission.
Will do what they do. I see this
as produced water bill, and I
see no guardrails on the use of
the, the reclaimed treatment
produced water. So that's,
that's
You know, big, big issue number
one.
Um
Uh, I would note, um,
The nonprofit corporation stuff,
I, I don't understand why
they're doing that. I, I don't
understand why we're not.
treating this as a public entity
or a private entity. It's, it's
a
Frankenstein. It's, it's a
little bit old.
Um, I know on page 3, we forward
the names and addresses of
proposed board members to the
public entity.
Um, we don't identify their
rules or qualifications.
I think that's a problem.
Uh, uh, we identify the
officers.
And yet later in the bill, we
say that the entity will, will
select its own chair.
Um
There is uh there was an
addition for the receipt.
A public comment.
Uh, the receipt of public
comment doesn't do much, if you
don't look at it.
Or if you don't forward it to
the department.
So with the way this is set up
is
The group of people who want to
set this up receive comments
about whether or not it's a good
idea to set this up.
And then we're done.
There's no, there's no actual
vetting or review of that
information.
So I think that's a problem.
Madam Chair, if I might respond.
Resist
man thank you McQueen, ma'am
Cherus and McQueen, enemy D is
charged with with approving or
disapproving of the boards, and
so Madam Chair, representative
McQueen, um.
received
Comment and they're, they make
the decision whether to approve
or disapprove.
have the ability to revoke.
If they approve and And uh Maner
is a small. I appreciate that,
but that's not what the bill
says.
It, it says that the entity
receives the information, and
there's no language in here
about forwarding it to the
department.
Um,
Mem chair, uh, res small and
perhaps Miss Bradfield, um, will
the nonprofit corporation be tax
exempt?
Madam Chair Representative, um,
so tax exemption is an
application process to the IRS,
um, and, and so the IRS's
process would govern that in the
response to public comment on
what type of 501c entity it
would be, that's governed by the
IRS's rules and regulations, New
Mexico has an application
process to become a nonprofit
corporation. Uh, I'm not aware
of other places in New Mexico
where we have stipulated what
type of IRS application, a
nonprofit needs to apply for.
Um, but I do know, and I have
researched that water entities,
water authorities, water
districts, conservation
districts, and eos in New Mexico
are quasi-public entities, in
fact, I, I am, it's hard to find
an entity in New Mexico that is
some sort of water related board
that is not a quasi-government
entity Aseas are actually
authorized to be corporations,
not, not even nonprofit
corporations, so they're
authorized for a for profit
corporation, or it's left open,
so it could be 4.
profit or nonprofit, um, and so
we feel like this is consistent
with the way New Mexico has
treated these types of
water-related entities in the
past. It's also consistent with
the way we have economic
development corporations
authorized in the state under
the Economic Development
Corporation Act, which is
actually a statue that we
modeled most of this bill after.
OK, so first off, um, Madam
Chair, the spreadsheet, the sick
kids are political subdivisions
of the state.
Um, that's different.
Uh, and that wasn't my question.
Uh, Madam Chair, Ms. Brad, um,
will these entities be tax
exempt?
Uh, I fully recognize that.
Nonprofit corporation status
does not get you tax exemption.
It tax exemption is a federal
designation.
Do you anticipate that these
entities would apply for tax
exemption.
And if so, under what provision?
Madam Chair,
um, nothing would prevent them
from applying, they would have
to meet the IRS qualifications
to get a successful application
established by the 1C3s have to
be focused on education,
primarily, uh, 501c4 have to be
social welfarefare organizations
to qualify, um, if they have
operations that put them outside
of those qualifications, they
would not.
but they're gonna have to meet
the IRS standards.
Madam Chair, uh, representative
small, uh, I see you've changed
the, um,
The board membership in uh
you've added up to 3 large
numbers representing local
government, etc.
Um, but as drafted that up to 3
could also be 0.
Um
The chair wasn't small thoughts
on that.
Madam Chair Representative, that
was language that was proposed
to us by the Aseas, um, so they,
that was their requested
language of up to 3, up to 3, I
do think counties will want to
have that large members I have
not seen at large membership
where people forego it. When we
were drafting the bill, some
cities did say that it would be
challenging to find a board
makeup and so that is something
that we were sensitive to with
different cities that did want
to find a public private
partnership pathway.
forward to help fund water
projects.
small Miss Brad, the, the
question is,
The way this is structured, that
could be zero. There could be no
local government.
Board membership on this entity.
Do you agree with him?
Madam Chair Representative, yes,
if you read the language, it
says up to 3. Yeah, so it's not
a minimum of 3, it's up to 3.
And so what, what we're creating
is
A private entity controlled by
private people.
That has
Uh, the benefits of being a
public entity, including
Protection uh under the tort
Claims Act.
And I'm really troubled by that,
and that wasn't a question.
Uh
And Madam Chaim McQueen, thank
you for
Uh, as we go through the
comments, we've very, we've been
very open to receiving. OK.
Thank you. Um,
page 7, appoint higher or
appoint a president, uh,
traditionally under non-profit
corporation structure present
would be a board member, um, and
you, you might have a separate
executive.
I would consider that.
Uh, in section 5,
ma'am chair represents smaller
you have a long list of
authorities. I, I believe these
are all inherent authorities.
Under the nonprofit Corporation
Act.
Um, so I'm, I'm not sure what
what listing them here.
gets you
Um
Ma'am chair uh represent a small
can, can I add brief just, uh,
Madam Chair, um.
Uh, represent McQueen on some of
those uh include as we go
through, um, section 5, many of
those were added at the request
of the New Mexico Environment
Department, including, for
instance, Madam Chair
Representative, engaging in
regional water planning and
community outreach and
educational programs.
to raise awareness about water
conservation. Representative
McQueen, that's part of the
water security planning, the
house funded this year with $5
million so many of many,
although not all, um,
Or some, although not all of
these were added uh at the.
And, uh, ma'am chairs in small,
I, you know, I appreciate that.
I, I still think it's redundant,
you know.
Nonprofit corporations have
broad authority as corporations,
uh, so.
We don't need to specify that
they can engage in community
outreach for them to be able to
engage in community outreach.
So you, I mean, if you're making
stakeholders happy. I, I
understand why that's in there.
Um, I did have a question as a
nonprofit corporation.
The uh entity of the authority
incurred debts that it could not
pay.
Um, who's ultimately responsible
for those debts?
Madam Chair representative, um,
if the entity incurs debts that
it cannot pay, it would be
subject to other areas of New
Mexico law, including, I think
the bankruptcy provisions as
they apply to non-corporate or
nonprofit corporations. So in
that sense it is a uh
truly nonprofit corporation, um.
Uh, ma'am chair resistant, uh,
let's talk about membership, um,
you, you've defined the term
called participating members.
Um
Uh, the, the term is used
sporadically throughout the
bill, not consistently.
Um, and then participating
members have a vote.
So
typically a nonprofit
corporation is governed by
Its board of directors, but you
have a structure where
participating members now vote
on
Major initiatives, contracts,
things like that.
Um, can you explain how that
works?
Madame Chair Representative, I'm
glad you asked that question,
um,
So there are.
One of the main purposes or one
of the desires to use this bill
is joint investment and
laboratories for water testing,
so New Mexico does not have
enough testing laboratories, and
as we look at non-traditional
water resources, joint
investment to increase the
number of laboratories is
desirable. Right now for water
samples, you have to mail them
out to Louisiana or up in the
northeastern part of the United
States and it's got about a week
turnaround time, um, but before
there is an investment in major
infrastructure since.
These are funded um from private
contributions, it was important
to stakeholders that there's a
membership vote in addition to a
board vote, um, that way the
members have a vote in that say
before in type of actual
infrastructure like laboratory
infrastructure is invested in.
And uh Madam Chairman strategy,
did you say in addition to a
board vote?
Madam Chair Representative, yes,
that was the intent.
And I, I don't see that. I, I
see a vote.
Majority vote of a board in the
authorities participating
members. Are those two separate
votes?
Madam Chair Representative, yes,
the participating members are
separately defined from the
board, and so it'd be a vote
from the board.
And the participating members,
so it'd be 2 votes.
OK, Madam Chair, Mrs. Brad,
that's not clear in the bill.
It says Ebo.
It doesn't say 2 votes.
So that, that's an issue. Um,
Madam Chair, Mr. Brad, it's
The uh
The board and the members can
adopt rules for the
administration of the authority,
that, that sounds an awful lot
like by laws to me is that
something different than biopsy?
Madam Chair Representative, um,
nonprofit corporations often
have rules of conduct amongst
members, in addition to bylaws.
The bylaws will tell you about
your governing, uh, committees,
the types of votes that the
board needs to undertake, but
there can be additional rules,
um, and here, one of the ideas
that a lot of members liked was,
could you have additional local
inspection authorities where
you've got the WQCC standards,
but what if people want to hold
themselves to a higher standard.
Um, and so that would be
incorporated through rules and
having local entities want to
raise them themselves up to a
higher environmental standard
would be a great thing, and it
would be a benefit to
participating within these,
these voluntary
in uh Maura, so, and then again
going back to the vote is that
determined by the board or is
that determined by the members?
Is it separate or is that the
single vote where everyone has
an equal vote.
Madam Chair Representative,
sorry, let me look at the
language here. So, if you read
subsection A, it says upon a
majority vote of a board and the
authorities participating
members, so that would be a
majority vote of the board,
which is defined in the
authorities participating
members, which is defined, um,
the authority is allowed to may
adopt rules for the
administration of the
authorities, so it would require
a vote by both the board and the
members.
OK. I, I appreciate that that's
your intent. I think that needs
to be clarified.
Um
So, can we talk about the uh
madam chair, we talk about the
Tort Claims Act, um.
Ms. Bradtree in your
introduction you mentioned uh
another area of law that I'm not
familiar with, uh, economic
development corporation, I
believe, um, I, I
And they were seen before
extending the Tort Claims Act to
a non-profit corporation.
Um, would you care to touch on
that? Madam Chair
Representative, so in 2003, the
legislature adopted the Economic
Development Corporation Act, um,
that provision is taken straight
from that existing statute. Um,
we did separately research water
authorities and entities and we
found that the vast majority of
them, in fact, I don't think we
could find any my partner with I
say or ran the research that
we're not subject to the Torts
Claims Act in New Mexico, so,
you know, typically entities
involved in water.
when you are um
Looking at New Mexico law are
subject to the Tort Claims Act,
but we did model this
specifically after this economic
development corporation statute.
So Madam Chairman's re, you,
you've mentioned quite a number
of water entities that I view as
public governmental entities,
and this is not that.
And so for them to be uh under
the protections of the Tort
Claims Act makes sense to me for
this.
Private entity.
To be under those same
protections.
Troubles me.
Uh, and I also think the, the
grant of protection is quite
broad. There doesn't appear to
me to be any tie-in.
Uh, to the activities of the
authority, says an authority or
a board in the authority's
officers directors and employees
shall be granted immunity from
liability under the Tort Claims
Act.
Right
Or activities done, you know,
pursuing.
To their scope of authority
under under the authority.
I mean, I think there should be
some limitation on that, that's
not just, oh, I'm a board member
of this authority, you can't sue
me because of this language.
Madam Chair Representative, so
in any corporation, whether it's
nonprofit or not, if you take an
action that is not authorized,
um, it is not an official action
by the corporation and is
subject to liability under every
state's law that I'm aware of
when it comes to corporate law.
And so board members, if they
step outside the corporate
authority, they can be
personally liable. They could
lose their homes, um, and so I
do think it's important to to
remember the scope of liability
that a corporation has and when
you exceed that liability.
in your authorized powers, how
you open yourself up to your
personal liability under New
Mexico law.
And ma'am Jeremy Brefield, so I
would suggest that that language
be in here because I don't think
it's in the bill. So
You know, I
familiar with nonprofit
corporate law. I'm familiar with
corporate law.
I've worked in these areas. Um,
I'm looking at the language of
the bill, so when you tell me
that, well, this is how it works
out in some other situation. I'm
still gonna come back to the
bill and I want to know whether
or not it's addressed in the
bill.
And I, I think the bill is
lacking in
Um
several areas.
Um
In section 9,
a caucus at 11:30.
I'm almost done, madam chair.
I'm doing my best. OK.
Um
Section 9.
Uh
I think you probably get rid of
section 9 of
Part A, I think has already been
done as part of the request.
parts B and C.
Um, don't seem to be part of the
authority.
They reclaimed water producers.
Acting independently.
Um, section 10, we refer to the
water quality Control
Commission. It's not in place
yet.
Um
Chairman, is there a reason why
you have the
Appeal going to the Court of
Appeals and not district court?
Uh, Madam Chair, representative,
so enemy Ds, most of their
statutes have appeals that go
directly to the Court of
Appeals, so I just copying the
other appeal statutes that an
immediate is subject to for
consistency.
In section 12.
Again, this appears to be a
section that applies to other
utilities, not necessarily to
these authorities.
Madame Chair Representative for
Section 12, um, we wanted to
confirm that if you have a
municipal wastewater system that
um this only applies to
non-potable water, not potable
water, but you have municipal
wastewater systems that supply
non-potable waters to entities,
they are regulated by the PRC
and so we wanted to make sure
that nothing is is seen as
superseding their price, their
weight making authority at the
PRC.
Invent chair Miss Brad with
these authorities be regulated
by the piracy?
Madam Chair Representative, yes,
if they acted like a public
utility, which is established
under the Public Utility Act,
you always look to the public
utility Act to figure out, are
you in activities like a public
utility as soon as they sell
water to an entity, a third, you
know, to the public, they become
subject to the Public Utility
Act.
OK, so, you know, I'm, I'm being
asked to cat over my question,
which is fine, um.
You know, if, if this bills
moving forward, you know, things
I would want to see are guard
rails on the use of water.
And I, I'm
Understand that
Uh, the water quality control.
Control commission's working on
that. That's not really.
Uh, sufficient in my mind.
Um
I'm troubled by the non-profit
corporation being treated like a
public entity.
Um, I'm troubled that there's
effectively private control of
the entity, not public control,
and not even necessarily public
input.
And the the fact that this is
our 2nd MIDI sub in uh
Um, two committees, uh, I think
it's a pretty good indication
that we're we're not ready, uh,
and that, uh, the bill does need
more work, so.
Uh, Russoon, thank you. Thank
you. Um, representative Chavez.
Let me see if I remember my
question around here, sorry.
Um, Madam Chair representative.
I just want to verify that.
This is not for use of drinking
water or agricultural water.
It's just for reuse of
industrial purposes, correct,
yes.
And Madam Chair, uh,
representative, thank you and um
I also know that it's um the
second sub we've received, but
um to me, I think that shows
that we're working with
All entities sponsors,
legislators across the board,
um, those are all the questions
I have. Thank you.
Thank you, I have.
Uh thank you uh expert for being
here, um, on this, you know, I'm
I really appreciate the idea.
But as defined, reclaimed water
is not limited to just
industrial for the definition
that I'm reading, it says any
type of water.
Other than fresh water.
It has been treated mechanically
or chemically.
It can be used for nonpotable
purposes.
That meets water quality
standards issued by the state.
Do we currently
Only use reclaimed water in
industrial use today.
Thank you Madam Chair, thank you
Senator Romero, uh, Madam Chair
Romero No, uh, freshwater in
some cases various industrial
applications, Madam Chair
Representative Romero, I think
that's one of my goals as we
move through this process is to
use less fresh water.
places where reclaimed water in
the in the inverse of that,
Madam Chair representative does
reclaimed water only get used
today with for industrial
purposes.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative
Romero, uh, in the example of
sort of um municipally trade
treated effluent.
That is used, that goes back
into uh surface water systems
and is part of Water Water
right.
Which is why we make sure that
that's not to be considered for
that that's not a source we want
to look elsewhere.
Madam, how would we distinguish?
Madam Chair representative, so
as we worked on this bill, uh,
people wanted a public-private
partnership concept to help with
a lot of projects. One of them
was um uranium mining
contamination to freshwater
sources. So freshwater does not
qualify as a reclaimed water,
but what happens when you have a
contamination site and you want
joint investment quickly so that
you can have parties
contributing into that clean up,
and it will help it happen
faster. Um, and so.
those words, if you dice it very
specifically and say that it can
only happen um with industrial
uses of water, you're going to
cut out those reclamation
projects, which were important
to some stakeholders. Right now,
as the law exists with the WQCC,
um, there are standards or we
refine the definitions if there
is no WQCC standard, it will not
qualify as a reclaimed water,
and so, so for produced water,
there's no WQCC standard right
now, um, there is a contemplated
notice.
of intent process for industrial
uses, and it would be no
discharging us so, um, other
types of brackish water use, uh,
I do think we want to think
about that, especially in light
of the crew example that I
opened up with. What happens
when you have a water system
that doesn't have fresh water is
higher than 500 parts per
million of total dissolved
solids in the water system, but
people want to contribute joint
investment to help those
communities clean up their water
systems faster. Um, I think that
that is a
real benefit and a real need in
New Mexico.
Madam Chair, representative
expert. I don't disagree with
that. I think when we're talking
about the standards though, and
we're talking about cons of New
Mexico.
And reclaimed water, which is a
new
concept, right? We, we adopted,
produced water as a new water
concept, and now we're saying
reclaimed sometimes is waters of
New Mexico, perhaps if we end up
using effluent in certain spaces
or if it's to a certain
standard, um, within a another
regime of oversight. And right
now, that doesn't, this isn't
described as to how we can find
what reclaimed water is or isn't
as to who's regulating it and to
what is constitutionally
protected.
what is in this new regime. Can
you help clarify that or?
Yeah, that's not in the bill.
Madam Chair Representative, so
we looked at a survey of Western
states performed a survey in
2022, 2023, looking at every
Southwestern state that is
defined recycled or reclaimed
water, um, the vast majority of
states have adopted a broad
definition of reclaimed water,
and so we initially modeled our
definition after some other
southwestern states that didn't
limit it to specific sources, we
knew the debate was more fierce
than New Mexico, so we knew that
we were gonna need to fine tune
it and limit.
That definition more than our
other southwestern states have,
but then what you have on top of
that is the WQCC standards and,
and it's always important to
think statutory language is
broad, it gets narrowed by the
body, the agency.
standards
have the WQCC that is charged
with regulatory standards, um,
and then, and then we confirmed
in this last round of edits that
um reclaimed water only applies
to sources of water that have
quality standards. So, so
reclaimed water cannot exist
without a water quality standard
in place.
Madam Chair Representative, I
think we, I'd just like to
understand what that means. I
think the broadness.
Confuses the, what the intention
really is as to what standard
we're trying to.
Match this to um as we create a
new definition of water so that
we understand again what the um
what we're, what the oversight
regime of this would look like,
and right here at this point
too, over reclaimed water, who
is the
Who is the overseer.
Um, of
what is or what isn't reclaimed
water and how we.
Madam Chair Representative said
the overseers ultimately gonna
be the WQCC because they're the
ones that set the standards, and
it can't be reclaimed water
until the standard is set and
remind me then to um
representative what they, uh,
who, which department oversees
the WQCC WQCC representative is
kind of a unique entity. It
falls within a board and
commission that reports to the
Environment Department, um, but
it actually can oversee the
activities of multiple agencies.
um
I nerd.
OSC
the Department of A ND they all
have appointees, um, I think DFA
may even have, I don't quote me
on that, they may have an
appointee on there. So Madam
Chair representative, we're
leaving it to this sort of
independent boarding commission
overseer, not a department to
actually ensure that the
standard of care over this.
Uh, now is, is not government
regulated.
Um, Madam Chair representative,
so the WQCC has
To my knowledge, always set the
water standards in New Mexico.
That's the commission that's
always been in place to set
water standards, um, not, there
are not standards for every type
of water, that's why we clarify
the definition in the ED will
oversee the creation of the
Reclaimed Water Authority and
then if the water authority does
not comply with any rules or
laws in New Mexico enemy deep
under this amendment has the
ability to revoke the authority.
Uh, where is that in the bill?
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
it is in section 10, subsection
C, and that is on page 14 of the
department.
Yes, the environment department.
Yeah it's unclear.
The chair um representative
departments defined up in the
definitions to be the the
Department of the.
Madam Chair Representative, so
when we were talking about being
independent authority piece on
how this gets designated I like
represented McQueen as um
You know, trouble understanding
the, the nonprofit elements and
again confining it to how this
will operate, you know, I, I, I
don't know the inception story,
but, um, you know, the, um, or
economic development
corporations and or um the type
of corporation that they are,
um.
But having that political
subdivision that perhaps we
would be more comfortable with
how that
How that operates versus, again,
a private nonprofit.
Um, and, and who they were, um.
I, I just feel like there's a
lot of holes and I appreciate
the story about, you know,
whether or not it's broad or
where that comes from. Um, but
when we're trying to look for
opportunities to protect waters
of New Mexico when we're.
Now defining a new type of water
just to be very, very clear
about that, and I would love to,
you know, just continue to see
how this proceeds, but I'm
uncomfortable with how it's
defined. Thank you. Thank you. I
have the speaker, then
Sapanskin.
Thank you, I'm sure I'll be
brief in terms of time. Thank
you, Chairwoman, and thank you
sponsor and expert.
Uh, I, I like to be.
Um, I think it's a creative
approach to a complex problem.
Um, I don't share the same
concerns over the nonprofit, um,
setup. I think it's a very
intelligent and elegant way to
uh set up what would be a
private public partnership.
Um, I think that, uh, you know,
not not for profits in the
state, um.
Have carried a lot of weight,
um, in terms of helping address
some of the more complex social
problems we deal with.
Um, whether it's
You know
Helping develop a childcare
system that every child and
family can access that is
affordable and high quality, uh,
to, uh, housing, uh, in this
case, water.
Um, water is one of our biggest
challenges. I appreciate you all
thinking outside of the box.
Um
I do think you've heard some
concerns, um, that I think are
worth.
Really thinking about and as I
as I read the analyses, Madam
Chair and Representative from
prior iterations of the bill,
um, it is clear that you are a
bill sponsor who is
Willing to
Listen
And not sit out the witness
table and just kind of.
be set in your ways, right? And,
and that's refreshing. I
appreciate that because I could
tell from all these analyses
that in fact you have been
listening and you've been
improving the bill, um, as as it
to move forward. I think you
heard some really good things
here today, uh, you know, that
may help you fine tune this
concept.
Um
I also, if, if you haven't
already, and I'm happy to share
with you the analysis from the
committee
analyst.
Um, you know, there's some
issues raised with regard to uh
some potential constitutional
questions that that you should
be aware of.
Um, if, if this bill should move
forward.
Uh, but Madam Chair,
representative and and expert,
um,
This is complex.
complex work.
Um, and you are literally
working to create something from
scratch.
Uh, listening to the experts,
listening to the stakeholders.
Um, that's important, Madam
Chair.
Because I think that
When it comes to water, we're
all stakeholders.
Right, um, I said yes.
Our stakeholders, probably our
most important stakeholders in
many ways.
Um, but so are the different
industries that operate in the
state.
Um, and
You know, I think that whether
it's agriculture, whether it's
oil and gas.
Um, you know, whether it's, uh,
you know, border communities.
I'm thinking of Santa Teresa and
the incredible work that's
happening down there.
Um, I think we heard from one of
the public comments.
Um, somebody from the, um,
Border alliance, I forget what
the name was, but um I've, I've
actually met with those folks a
few weeks back, and they've got
some pretty incredible high-tech
opportunities coming to a
community that has long been
divested from.
But
Water will be critical.
And are we just going to keep
pumping our aquifers and we're
just gonna keep pulling surface
water or are we going to find
creative ways.
to
reclaim and reuse some of these
resources.
Uh, Madam Chair, I'm not.
I'm not one to just say no
because I don't like an idea.
Uh, if I don't like an idea,
I'll propose changes and I'll
propose alternatives to help get
an idea moving forward. Um, and
I hope that, uh, every member of
this committee who has expressed
concerns to you, uh, is willing
to work with you to find ways to
make this more palatable, uh,
to, to, to their concerns, um,
and, and can help move this
concept forward because, uh,
time is ticking.
Time is ticking and, and not
only is is water.
scares.
Economic development
opportunities.
that are potentially coming to
our state may not be here. Um, I
was looking at a map earlier.
Of states with
Reclaim water.
Concepts, laws, statutes.
Virtually every state around us
as something.
We don't.
So I appreciate you taking on
this hard work, um, and I look
forward to the rest of the
conversation.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Speaker, um,
Representative Hoffman. Thank
you, Madam Chair, and I won't,
um, representative, Mr.
Chairman, I won't believe
belabor the point, uh, too much,
um.
I want to echo the comments and
sentiments of my colleagues here
today. Um, I do share the same
concerns as it relates to um
definitional uses and where
we're going in and literally
starting from the beginning and
an incredibly complex subject
that is a critical, I think, to
the future of our state. So I
don't want to, um, again, the
label, belabor the point, but I
do want to commend you, Mr.
Chairman. We have spent more
money.
On water and water resources on
the House budget side this year
than we have ever done before,
and that indicates to me, Madam
Chairman, Mr. Chairman, um,
expert that we are incredibly
dedicated as a body to solving
these issues as they relate to
water. We have to get creative
in our thinking, um, because we
simply can't afford not to. So,
um, while, you know, I know that
you've been working on this
tirelessly, Madam Chair, um,
Charming Small.
and dedicated uh a ton of time
to this, even though it sounds
like it may not quite be ready,
um, I know that you are, you
won't give up and you are one of
those sponsors that listens to
your constituency and everybody
else and takes every
stakeholder, uh, in mind and so,
um, I want to commend you.
Madam Chair, Mr. Chairman, for
that work. I want to commend
this body for its dedication to
um water and water issues in the
state, and I know that this is
just the beginning. I, I can't
support the bill as it is today,
but I look forward to supporting
it in the future, um, when
Representative Sapansky. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Um,
Uh, I agree with many of the
comments. I just wanted to
And, uh, Madam Chair and Mr.
Chairman, that I really
appreciate all the changes that
went into the 0.3 sub. I think
it really indicated the
direction that you all are
interested in going in. It's
much tighter, uh, responded to a
lot of the concerns that have
been raised, um, and I would
just offer the reflection that
Anytime you're sort of blending
public and private.
Whether it be membership,
decision makers, duties.
Um, getting that balance is
really hard, and I think that
for me, one of the reflections
um that I have in this bill is
that I think that.
The nonprofit structure may not
be the right structure. Um, one
of the things that uh I worked
on many years ago was a special
uh economic district for Roswell
Airport.
And I just wonder if, if maybe
that structure would be
something to look at, um,
because, uh, it had specific
conflict of interest provisions
that would have prevented anyone
from serving on the board. The
board had to comply with certain
pieces of uh things we expect
from government agencies or
local public bodies like Open
Meetings Act, um, yeah, certain,
certain kinds of notices it
also, but it also had authority
to bond, um.
which
I think can be really important
sometimes when you're looking at
outside funding, um.
For these kinds of initiatives.
So I just would, um, I've spent
some time thinking about the
structure that's here and, you
know, the, the, the
The non-profit structure is
unfortunately not as accountable
to the public as maybe a
different structure might be. So
that would be one concrete
suggestion I have for you, and
then I think.
Uh, for me,
Looking at how other states are
water recycling water, reusing
water, I mean in Santa Fe we
have many uses for effluent
water, um, that are really
important and I often wonder if
we could do more, uh, with that
affluent water, uh, there have
also been issues with affluent
water because our uh wastewater
systems are not where they need
to be in Santa Fe right now, so,
uh, you know, I do think we need
innovation, we need to be able
to think of ways to, um, you
know, the, the new wastewater
treatment.
facility in Santa Fe is gonna
cost something like $400
million.
And I don't know that we can
bond for that, but maybe some
kind of special economic
district or some other
governmental type entity could
bond for that and then
incorporate a recycling
component to that, so that the
water could be really easily
used for other applications, um,
so that's just something I see
in Santa Fe, um, and, you know,
certainly we have to have really
rigid protections if we're
talking about water that's been
used.
used for industrial purposes
that is now being reused again,
um, so, you know, agree with
some of the comments on that,
but I think.
Um, really admirable, um,
Start to the conversation and um
I think that we're probably
gonna roll the bill and we've
talked a little bit about that
representative, but I, I do want
to say something. I've worked
on.
And they are some of the hardest
bills to take on, um, there are
so many competing concerns, and
of course um we recognize it as
an incredibly important natural
resource that is scarce in the
state, so I just wanna commend
the the representative for
taking it on, we're starting,
you know, we've we've made
progress, I think over this past
session, and I imagine we'll
make more as we go into the
interim. So I just want to
compliment you for taking out
something I know it's so hard
and um.
Not always pleasant, so, um, so
thank you, we appreciate the
briefing. Thank you. Thank you
very much, Madam Chair. Thank
you committee members, truly.
All right, um, that concludes
our agenda, so we are a gent.
I
