Here
representative lane.
The.
The.
Thank you madame chair replics
in his life chair of
appropriations or she's tied up
right now so happy to be here
a little bit so happy to be with
you a hospital ninety three
attempts to amend the law
enforcement retention fund we've
been working with dps to try to
make it a little more effective
at a little more practical and
so with me besides our colleague
represented martinez is a soviet
sure the administration's
services division director so
any specificity I will have
resid.
Yes madam chair members of the
committee i'm grateful to have
the opportunity today to speak
with you about household when
ninety three which is a statute
that bear significant impact.
During the twenty two
legislative session hb sixty
eight charge the department of
public safety with the
administration of the law
enforcement retention fund in
the last two years we developed
this program from the ground up
I providing retention statements
to.
And it's at one thousand seventy
four.
Rules and developed standards
and procedures and provided
countless trainings it was
during the first year of this
program when we realized that we
weren't reaching the entire law
enforcement community and that
we weren't make and that we've
we were not reaching the entire
law enforcement community that
we intended while dps paid out
stopens over.
To over one thousand law
enforcement officers there were
still hundreds of officers that
were deemed ineligible for
statements because of the way
the statute was written i'm here
to date as support and propose
this new legislation that will
allow officers with twenty or
more years of service.
The ability to be eligible for
retention slipeness it will also
allow laterally hired officers
to meet the criteria for st.
These changes to the statute
will provide a monetary
incentive to hundreds more law
enforcement officers across the
state thereby increasing
retention rates resulting in
more officers.
It also helped retain our most
experienced and knowledgeable
senior law enforcement officers
who are the most deserving group
of officers that we all want to
hold on to you.
In closing I believe that it is
obvious that the immediate
benefit of this fund goes to the
law enforcement officers who are
receiving the statements however
let us not forget that the real
advantage of this legislation
goes to the citizens of the
state of new mexico when we are
able to incentivise more
officers to stay and work in our
state resulting in safer and.
I'm sure just one thing this
particular session and others
has lawmakers are will be
enacting a number of of bills
that are directly impact or a
law enforcement our citizen read
around particularly crime laws
there are two aspects that are
critical obviously beyond what
we do law enforcement is a
session in session will
component to that especially
when you consider the bills
that'll be passed shortly
at last year judiciary so our
judges so i've really been an
advocate to make sure that we
fund our courts are judges
adequately because at the end of
the day if we pass laws and we
don't have law enforcement we
don't have the courts with us we
might as well not have bought
thank you.
The.
Thank you madame chair and
represent
my name believed somewhere else
they said.
Okay
i'm sorry.
Anyway I fully support this.
Yeah.
I get it i.
Uh.
Manager i'm happy to withdraw my
my motion.
Thank you manager all heavy
experts.
Thank you mitter gives a minute
please.
Mad madame chair members of the
committee I believe the number
you're looking for is nine to
one point two.
Okay do are we.
Met madame chair members of the
committee in section and page
three
section d two the amendment
indicates that we will amend a
law enforcement agency
to read that same law
enforcement agency and what that
refers to is that with this bill
each law enforcement officer
will have to
upon completing four nine
fourteen and nineteen years of
service they will have to also
serve an additional five ten
fifteen or or twentieth year i'm
with that same law enforcement
agency the way that the bill
reads right now it indicates a
long first of an agency in.
Strikes.
Representatively promotional
chair
I move a two passive house bill
one eight three one ninety
three.
Representative.
Yes.
Yes.
The.
Thank you madame chair.
Our colleagues represent.
Yeah.
Members of the committee members
of the audience in this
listening
thank you so much for the
opportunity to present house
bill forty one their clean fuel.
Like for this committee to take.
Away three things from this
presentation today one a general
understanding of how the clean
fuel standard works how a clue
feel standard creates an engine
for economic growth for tribal
communities urban communities
and rural communities and how
these same communities will
benefit from the decreased air
pollution from the use of clean
fuels over time
first
how does this thing even work
in the spell.
An advisory committee including
representatives from fuel
importers and producers travel
governments utilities and
environmental groups will come
together to help the new mexico
environment department create a
clean fields program this bill
gives the statutory authority
and associated guard rails to
make this program work.
Under the program oh okay
can you not hear me I will I
just it's gets so screechy and.
I will do my best to not be
screening but louder that better
okay thanks under the program
and immediately with assistance
from the advisory committee will
create a carbon intensity
standard for transportation
feels the carbon intensity of
transportation fuels is measured
by calculating the life cycle of
the fuel's emissions based on
science based methods the
setting of that carbon intensity
standard creates the clean
transportation fuels market
which applies to transportation
fuels produced an imported for
use right here in new mexico.
Transportation fuels that are at
the carbon intensity standard or
produced you were emissions than
the carbon intensity standard
generate clean fuels credits.
For those transportation fuels
that exceed the carbon intensity
standard those producers and
importers have to go to the
clean fields market to produce a
credit to persues me to purchase
a credit if they'd like their
fuels to be used here in new
mexico over time the elaboral
carbon intensity of the fuel
gradually decreases.
The bill requires that the
carbon intensity of
transportation fuels use in the
state by at least twenty excuse
me requires the reduction of the
carbon intense that you
transportation fuels by at least
twenty percent below twenty
eighteen carbon intensity levels
by twenty thirty by twenty
thirty.
And at least thirty percent
below twenty eighteen carbon
intensity levels.
These are real tangible carbon
reduction and entity can not
generate a clean fuel credit
unless they reduce their
greenhouse gas emissions that is
what makes this clean he feels
program different from a typical
capintrade program with emission
allowances or an unverifiable
carbon credit offset schemes you
can not get a credit until you
reduce your green house gas
emissions.
Under this program real
emissions reductions must occur
over time in fact a clean fuel
credit cannot be generated by
the energy until such time and
actual.
The new mexico environment
department will oversee this
program and the program will be
reviewed periodically to ensure
program function.
Secondly.
This is one of my favorite parts
there I think the real beauty of
this program is that it's an
economic driver it creates
incentives for investment and
innovation in the clean fields
market and.
We estimated the program will
bring more than four hundred and
seventy million dollars in quick
start projects between now and
twenty thirty sixteen hundred
permanent jobs twenty three
hundred construction jobs and a
two hundred and forty million
dollar capital investment in
production and manufacturing.
Right now what we're seeing is
that those states that have the
program in place they're getting
the clean fields would they
literally driving through new
mexico taking the clean fuels to
california organ in washington.
I do not want to see that happen
I want to see those clue feels
right here in new mexico
benefiting new mexican companies
and new mexicans
and I would be really clear this
was the challenge I think we
faced in our last committee and
they think the rhetoric out
there is really focused on that
this is a clean car bill this is
an electric vehicle it is not
this is not a bill for you
everybody getting a lecture
vehicle in albuquerque this is
for rural new mexicans this is
an opportunity for farms and
ranches to sell agricultural
residuals and other ways into
buyer fields I think that this
bill gives our rural communities
access to the drop in renewable
diesel for vehicles and
equipment this is the the the
kind of thing that can happen in
rural new mexico.
It has also been pointed out
that this is a given.
This is
how can I put this just because
we have a conversation does not
mean that we divest folks of
accountability i'm i'm really
grateful for the support and the
interest and the conversations
that we've had with the oil and
gas community to make this bill
better
what we're seeing is that there
is an impact in of fossil fields
on our environment and this is
the pathway for the oil and gas
industry to
to get to the clean field
production in transition to.
Lastly.
Health is a huge concern for new
mexicans.
There are claimant impacts
associated with greenhouse gas
emissions and pollutants like
ground level ozone and particu.
New mexicans are experiencing
adverse effects one in seven new
mexicans have a respiratory
illness I don't accept this and
neither should you.
On a final note
i'm not quite i'm not quite done
yet but I am now with this with
this statement
i'd really like to address the
fear mongering that this program
will raise gasoline prices by
double digits.
Looking at the science to date.
What exists.
Our economic exercises.
That seek to calculate how much
a clean field program could
affect gasoline prices what
doesn't exist is real rural data
from existing programs and other
states that demonstrate that
those economic exercises
actually occur in the real world
marketplace.
Anyone who states otherwise
just.
And now madame chair members of
the committee i'd like to
introduce my expert witness
michelle m.
Manager sure yes they do does
anyone.
Would you like me to read that.
Think what I will do is explain
the changes in the committee
subway that would you like me to
do that that would be yes okay
so the committee served.
One it allows for this program
work in real time with
what the what the prc requires
so it doesn't it.
It now will lines with perceive
requirements.
We also wanted to make very
clear that investments that it
from utilities utilities that
are selling credits to have to
invest those are profits into
the communities that they're
serving i'm in particular low
income communities in in there
in their service area.
We ought the out the communities
have also allows rural costs
musical utilities non electric
utilities like
landfills in water utilities to
participate in the credit market
in addition we are opening up
we're opening up the credit
program to companies that do
that engaging that removal of
green house cases so released
with expanding the program to
allow for the reduction of
emissions in the removal of
emissions.
Thank you ma.
Thank you madame chair thank you
very much and.
My name is michelle miano and I
am the environmental protection
division director of the new
mexico environment department
this budget we have record
revenues again thanks to our
foster energy industry it is
vital to our state economy and
are continued prominence as an
energy producer that we enact a
clean fuel standard.
We listen to you
our department as listen to you.
And we have improved our bill.
In its current state the clean
fuel standard legislation well
reward the investments already
been made by oil and gas
companies in our state into
clean fuels.
I think this is a.
Point that is often forgotten
the oil and gas companies.
Are already investing in new
technologies and in a wide
variety of renewable fuels this
program rewards them for those
investments and helps them to
make even more accelerated
investments into those kinds of
technologies.
New mexico's economy depends on
energy production
the next era in the global
energy industry clean energy is
here and this bill allows us to
tap into it while still
supporting our oil and gas
producers we cannot afford to
let other areas reap all the
investment from our clean energy
boom while we.
In new mexico do nothing.
And remain where we are in the
statu.
Yeah.
Testing.
Madam chair i've heard that you
can't.
I would ask people to state
their.
I'm sir.
I am terrible members of the
committee my name is horrible.
I transported.
The.
And I have watched over several
decades now with promises.
And.
The.
I've reviewed.
It doesn't seem likely that will
have the infrastructure.
And that means.
What we do or.
Imposed ta.
That would be a very regressive
taps on roll new mexico.
The.
Good.
As a systems engineer I
expensively research the system.
Yeah.
Agriculture.
It requires a complicated
inexact carbon intensity of.
The.
The more I learn about this
proposal.
We need to reduce carbon
emissions by six percent.
The.
This bill reduces carbon
intensity.
I've just one sector of our.
Thirty.
Stopping at thirty percent will
not avoid climate breakdown.
For new medical climate
breakdown means in thirty years
new mexic.
With most of our forest burned
off our occupiers will be dry.
Just imagine the impact on the
state budget.
Why the us.
You for not protecting them
why does the carbon reduction in
each before you want to stop at
thirty percent x on and big oil.
Madame chairman of the commit.
We would like to think the
sponsor for all of the work that
she's put into this bill however
we do remain in respectful
opposition the mexico farming
live stock bureau opposes
environmental mandates and
instead.
Published environmental goals
should be voluntary incentive
based and provide for market
driven innovation we have seen
the impacts of these policies
implemented in other western
states and have negative impacts
that they have had on fuels both
which agricultural producers
relied heavily upon not only are
we concerned with the impact
that this policy will have on
fuel prices but also the
potential for a flood approach
to the carbon intensity score
which could create real winners
and losers among fuel types bio
fuels like those made from crops
based feed stocks like ethernel
renewable disall embarrassed he
saw our position well to help
produce submissions yet there
are no specific mentions of an
agricultural representative on
the advisory committee thank you
for the opportunity to c.
Madame chair members of the
committee thank you for the
opportunity my name is jim
winchester i'm with the
independent patrolling
association of new mexico we
represent small producers
throughout the state of of new
mexico and are very proud to
report back that over the last
ten years while production has
gone up emissions have gone down
the concerns that we do have
this bill are basically lied in
economics
i've heard the sponsors here say
that gas prices will not go up I
would just direct your attention
to organ dot com where they have
one of these
proposals in one of these acts
in place right now and they
report right there that the
average gas price per gallon
goes up seven to eleven cents I
would argue that's conservative
I think the estimates that we
have seen are anywhere from
thirty to fifty cents so for
those reasons we stand in
respectful.
The.
You have to do members of the
committee
madame chairman's paul guess the
president real graduate
foundation public policy.
I would echo what a gym which
has to just said about the state
of worded clearly on their
website we're going to dot
government clearly explains that
they do have cost analysis for
this type of legislation and
there are real costs to this
representative larry scott who
knows more about this industry
than most sense that.
I don't know what the real cost
is but we need to know that
number
also the environmental
improvement board to my
knowledge is not equipped as a
regulatory agency but according
to the FIR s and optus of house
bill at the bottom of heads one
of that document it says that
this legislation provides the
either with necessary statutory
authority to draft in enforce a
statewide clean transportat.
That's never been to my
knowledge the role of the
environmental improvement board
and I would also argue that
you've had bills like this
before you in the past I had the
legislature not at an elected
board should be in the business
of passing and enforcing lives
they did it with the
electric vehicle mandates they
should do it with fuel mandates
if they're going to be passed.
Oh is there a.
Good afternoon madame chair.
I've been a nurse.
With more than seventeen point
six million US residents living
within one mile of at least one
act of oil or gas well the
result is a public health and
climate crisis as documented in
more than one hundred studies
public health harms linked to
drowing fracking and associated
infrastructure are well
established.
They include cancers as ma
respiratory diseases skin rashes
hard problems mental health
problems preterm labor birthday
fix an increased hospitalization
rate children are particularly
vulnerable and are exhibiting
road developmental disorders
like artism.
I lost pediatric cancers like
colon cancer over thirty five
thousand new mexican children go
to school within a mile of oil
and gas facilities
if this bill does proceed please
amend.
An oil.
Yes thank you madam chair and
members of the committee and
beverly it's income with theory
producers of new mexico we
respect the least and an
opposition to house bill forty
one I appreciate the meetings
that i've recently had with both
secretary with the and secretary
kenny but we cannot support this
piece of legislation without
guarantees that will not raise
costs for our agriculture
producers gary has been
constantly mentioned but the
only project that is close to
coming to forestrand on
something that deals with
biodies all in byo gas has
experienced problems because
digesters do not work in open
lot dairies and in area climates
like we have here in new mexico.
Gary produces that been working
for decades to try to capitalise
on renewable energy credits but
have found it easier and more
beneficial to use those
nutrients on crop production for
feed while utilizing other
methods to protect the
environment while the
understanding appreciate the
intent of the bill we
respectfully stand in opposition
because it will add costs to our
producers and already and
further burden our attempts to
remain carpent neutral thank
you.
Yes hi there sorry this is
actually a hundred year alliance
of the new mexico no for
solutions coalition
our coalition I know there's
been a lot of controversy as an
environmental and climate
justice group who oppose this
this but we specifically oppose
the cabinet trade bits in this
bill because it does not address
the root cause transportation we
believe that strategic climate
policy planning and investing in
things such as public
transportation would do a lot
more for for our state so you
know what we have raised in the
last couple of years that this
bill has come to the legislation
is that evidence shows that cap
and trade enforces and worse and
actually localize pollution
disparity is and can bring him
on a larger scale in states like
california that's been shown
from two thousand eleven to two
thousand fifteen such cap and
trade investments have actually
raised air pollution and made it
worse for the low income
communities people of color and
those who live next to these
facilities so we are
specifically an opposition to
those parts of the bill we
appreciate the bill sponsors for
thinking of our climate but we
just hope that you advocate for
much more and not to invest in
market mechanisms thank you so
much.
Hello hello.
Chair tandem representative
thanks for your time
I just have concerns of this
bill and my name is anthony of a
figure by apologies.
I
I have some concerns with his
bill I mean as far as what i'm
reading in the fiscal report it
looks like there's going to be a
budgetary impact and
budgetary impacts I mean that to
me screams of taxes
when i've been seeing for the I
know that the coast wanter had
mentioned that.
The screen black gas is going to
california organic washington I
get some research here and their
gas prices have all gone up
california and general is known
to tax attacks and tax there
their people and I don't think
we should be like that I think
it's attacks on the court and
this is really ill placed in it
I would add also that there was
no data information on what the
negative impacts of burning
faster fuels has been on the
statement to mexico I mean
historical
evidence so that we could look
at it but I would say that why
it's actually youth thrive on
carpenter outside so i'm not
sure what the problem is here
why we need to tax that's all
about.
The.
Thank you chairman my name is
light summer health I have an
instrumentation across the
control.
I am opposed to this bill
because I believe that the bird
work increasing
disproportion
elderly back
in mexico is a poor state.
With
bridge
and most will not be
increasing prices
in addition by the but I really
do she actually effort and
they're great I think the bill
however another problem with it
in my opinion it authorizes
to adopt the rules regulations
i'm sorry but that's why we can
make it very much.
Announced her name i'd
appreciate.
Yes good afternoon my name is
seed lane chimi now
it's italian.
HB forty one is a maintenance
facility
card as sell of carbon credits
to utilities for reselling
two polluted industries I have
written out letter to you over
the weekend and I have four
additional points that I would
like to have a dressed are the
card and credit being earned and
traded a result of emissions
reductions that canable through
direct action and like
regulation and enforcement how
are the risk of market
manipulation being a trust in
the bill where entry cheese may
exploit loopholes and engage in
fraudulent activities to
generate and sell credit how
without a cheaping real
emissions reductions this bill
fells to a draft the complexity
of the carbon credit market and
therefore relax transparency
it's the complexity that can
make it challenging for business
and consumers to understand the
true environmental impact of the
credits they purchase and the
lack of transparency can
undermine the integrity of the
project the market and the
investment and finally how does
this bill address the volatility
and price fluctuations at the
market and who pays for the
losses of investment
One less.
Hi I madam chair and members of
the committee it's larry santage
here speaking on behalf of
carlos the president of new
mexico business politics nbc
represents hundreds of
businesses and thousands of new
mexicans and with respectfully
opposed hb forty one
all of her members and followers
support a clean vibrant
environment accomplished
responsibility responsibly
however this build is not
accomplished at this bill is
punitive and unjustifiable
against a mexicans.
Without the exact details of
fees and compliance class we
don't know exactly and but as
you've heard there will be a
cost for gasoline and others and
when you consider the fact that
gasoline has recently been over
four dollars a gallon in the
last year this could cripple
personal budgets of new mexicans
financially who are challenged
just trying to feed their
families HB forty one works to
appease climate activist but it
ignores the true environmental
and socio economic car that it
will class on behalf of hard
working new mexicans and
businesses and for the reasons
others have previously stated we
strongly approp oppose he forty
one and encourage you to do so
as well thank you.
Fifteen minutes.
I'd like to get a sense now.
So what I would suggest we do
is.
Remember the shorter you keep
your comments the more.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Again we're going to allen ten
minutes for those in the room
and I would suggest that to you
that shortly you keep your
comments the more.
Your first patrick.
Thank you madame chairman
members of the committee my name
is patrick killing registered
lobbyists for chevron
server believes that the future
of energy's lower carbon we are
currently in the process of
developing a low car in fuel
portfolio in renewable fuel
options and policy enabled
markets around the world and we
have a goal to grow our
renewable fuel's production
capacity to a hundred thousand
barrels per day by twenty thirty
we believe a transportation
policy approach and embraces
diverse technologies and
solutions is critical to
achieving climate in their
quality policy goals and that's
why sharon supports hb forty one
we appreciate representative
where terse chairman channeller
the governor in the environment
department for bringing it
forward and we are just.
The.
The.
Better chair members of the
committee my name is jerry bell
design and executive director
with the department of
transportation now i'm here
represent the department in
strong support of health bill
forty one the clean
transportation feel standard the
transportation sector is one of
the largest contributors to
greenhouse gas missions
accounting for the largest
portion of greenhouse gas
missions over twenty nine
percent we were closely with our
system agency at the environment
department to reduce emissions
and get house gases for that
reason we in strong support of
the passing of house be.
The.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is joseph
hernandez and I am with enemies
of vote I live in ship rock new
mexico hospital forty one will
help many travel communities it
is important that we do
everything we can to reduce our
emissions especially in heart to
commonise communities like the
four corners.
Combation feels here in
communities like mine on the
naval nation will take time for
the transition to zero missions
which we are actively pursuing
the cost of pollution is too
high at the.
Sponsors of this built
recognizer and also the naval
nation.
Thank you very much manager.
The.
Good afternoon madame chaired
members of the committee i'm
shared road.
He and and stands the support of
the house judiciary community
substitute for HB forty one as
it will benefit our state and
along in the long term pns
committed to moving toward a
clean carpet free future in this
bill is a compliment to this
effort I might add as we
continue to see these electric
vehicles on the road this bill
supports efforts to increase
needed eb.
Thank you to the sponsor in the
environment department for
accepting suggestions in making
the bill better.
I think it's worth remembering
that the st.
And this bill just looks at
transportation in the fall we
saw the uptake.
Body is considering tax credit
which incentivise
electrification for buyers of
car.
To utilities and all sorts of
other industries to help bring
along clean transp.
Madam chair members of the
committee of charles good marker
lobbyist i'm speaking up you
have to too.
Energy efficiency project this
bill will help accelerate.
Municipal governments school
districts.
Frankly other businesses
including oil companies that
have.
You will help up pollution
particularly.
Hello madame chair and members
of the committee my name is erin
lee indigenous policy advocate
with animated vote here to speak
and support for HB forty one
transportation fuels are one of
the largest sources of air
pollution here in the state in
mexico and I believe a
collaborative effort
of diverse fuels can help to
reduce green house gases and
toxic emissions in order to
protect our vulnerable
populations so please support it
before thank you.
The.
Hello madame chair members of
the committee my name is anal.
We are here in very strong
support of the bill for all the
reasons previously stated that I
do want to briefly mention that
the increased very.
Having many different low carbon
fuels will increase energ's
ability to administer a federal
statute which guarantees that
seventy five percent of.
A lot of d.
Would love this bill
thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee i'm a listen kenny guy
with a masters and public health
speaking and supported.
Health professionals for
climate.
Fourteen hundred legislative
members across the country.
State representative for ten
years.
Policies.
In its first six years.
Opponents when we pass this bill
said it would cost a dollar.
It in fact has been pennies for
gas we put in a trigger to make
sure that if and when over a
certain amount.
Gas price.
Renewable diesel.
Certainty to the market to help
our transportation.
Thank you thank you.
Thank you madame chair members
of the committee jared is our on
behalf of the past or l.
A whole bunch of people that
want to speak so i'll just say
we think the sponsor for working
with us and we support the
committees up.
Your members can make it after
you.
That's on mobile stands it's
part of this legislation the
clean trans.
Important cost measures that
will limit those increases to
reasonable and with the stature
in mexico.
Across the fuel supply adjuster
if we're serious about
addressing transportation
related missions this standard.
Madame chair members of the
community obtaining people corn
with restored resource advocates
obviously we all want to reduce
the carbon intensity of fuel but
I want to point out something
special about this.
You told.
Into low income.
Those communities have been.
In all the other re.
How him the climate energy
climate and energy.
Highs bills.
Sorry reduce green house gu.
Do you just that by.
Um.
And thank you very much thank
you.
So two more.
Person speaking madam chair
members of the committee on mark
roper and the acting secretary
of economic development for the
state of new mexico this
legislation there's a couple of
really really important things
why does it take a good approach
at how we're going to reduce
green house gases it doesn't
look at just cutting off what
has been very good into mexico
we're looking at reducing carbon
intensity across the board on
all fuels it takes a real common
sense approach in addition to
that as you've already heard
from multiple utilities it
creates new opportunities to
create electricity in the st.
And finally it creates economic
opportunities not only in the
urban areas but most especially
in the rural sectors of new
mexico it's going to create
economic opportunities and job
opportunit.
Thank you.
And it was rub black and
president and.
Laying it is pleasure to be here
instead of supported this bill
appreciate that the hard work
that the bill sponsors have done
over the years.
To really craft a bill that
makes sense and we are very
pleased about the market based
mechanisms as you could probably
imagine around this we think
that's the most sustainable way
to drive environmental change in
new mexico so thank you for
bringing the forward a very
strong bill please sustain the
support.
We have five minutes allocated
to those on.
Hi my name is new york.
Can can you hear me yes I can
okay and thank you chair tambler
in the committee for the
opportunity to testify quick my
name is robin on the executive
director of the low carbon fuels
coalition we are an industry
trade association with the birth
member for pretending the entire
range of queen goes industry as
well as large well known
corporate fuel users the
coalition strongly supports HB
forty one for its all of the
approach to lowering cargo
missions and transportation
similar programs and other
states have borated expectations
by reducing carbon intensity
part more quickly and cost
effectively than justice to pay
thank you to it thanks to
innovation and integrity of
companies inspired by the market
based policy design
and are you heard a lot about
the benefits today I won't go
into that but one thing that
will say
on the gas prices you feel
priced issue there's only one
study that's out there that is
actually looked at real world
data and as reported said and
that said he had found that
there's no correlation between
gathering prices in the state of
california and the credit price
is in the low carbon fuel
standard program thank you very
much for your time and we need
men pass the bill.
Hi
my name is patrick surface sam
executive direction to the
american biographs council and I
was asked to speak because that
subject matter expert into some
towards some of the opposition
that we heard earlier and I have
to say it's it's frustrating to
hear because there's a lot of
misinformation that we shared
with some of the opposition
testimony this is not a mandate
for agriculture the bill is not
a mandate to drive other
vehicles and will not add
additional class to farmers the
only people that would really
add initial constitution are
some of the companies that have
already spoken and support of
the bill like chevron and
excellent the energy company is
that I need to buy the credits I
also would love to talk to some
of the farming organizations
that spoke an opposition because
I think the opportunity is much
greater than you think I think
at a minimum you can reduce
carbon emissions by as much as
smaller wind to battery electric
vehicles which means you can
generate credits which means you
can generate new revenue on your
firms and at best you might be
able to generate credits that
are two to four times what a
solar wind the battery electric
vehicle project could do if you
use by our gas and renoval
natural gas to recycle your
manual so I think the
opportunities much greater and
some people have said in the
opposition and that is just one
of the many reasons why we need
to pass the spell thank you.
Hi yes
this is travelers keller with
someone solar where a renewable
energy company born in new
mexico I I just want to know
that california's market is
shown the the benefits
opportunities and both the
quantified and significant
decargonization standard like
this can have so we are a
renewable energy company but in
transportation we're helping to
build out an even charging
network across new mexico and we
really want to include co
located green hudget in fueling
this standard creates the
foundation for that it lets us
decarbonize as we move to full
electrification and every
represent significant act
economic opportunity for a lot
of the communities along these
major transportation routes so
yes covering markets are complex
but we have to start now we have
models and we have real world
data that show how they work
which really derise this move
for new mexico sired you to pass
this bill and let us accelerate
the clean energy economy and
also the clean the energy
transition here in new mexico
thank you.
Yes
madam chair members of the
committee my name is christian
according to hall and I work for
nest day the world's leading
producer of sustainable aviation
fuel and renewable decision we
stand here and strong support of
each b forty one along with all
the other individuals you've
seen here today we appreciate
the bottleness of the sponsor
and creating a tech neutral
scientific based methodology for
decarbonizing transportation
feels in new mexico for this and
for all the other reasons that
you've heard here this afternoon
we asked for your support on
this bill.
Thank you we will now go.
Thank you madame chairman
members of the committee i'm
donor voucher with real valley
bile
I want to take a minute to
explain a couple things about
how the standard should work in
real life.
The bill will not require any
ranchers to purchase electronic
vehicles or any new vehicles
also folks driving gas lane and
disability that new mexico will
not receive any penalties or
taxes under the spell the cost
of the clean fuel credit is paid
by the patrol and fuel importers
and producers under a lot of
carbon fuel sent standard.
But this price is not passed on
to the customer because the
price of the credits does not
result in an increased cost of
the blended fuel sold to the
consumer.
Let me explain renewable fuels
are sold at a discount to their
petroleum counterparts biodison
renewable deself have
historically been thirty to
forty cents below the market
price of december the same with
athenal compared with castle
prices when these renewable
fuels are blended into petrol I
am fuel the rat price is much
lower without a low carbon fuel
standard that blenders of the
people normally pocket the
difference as a profit in states
where there's allow carbon fuel
standard that patrolling
companies are required to bring
renewal while fuel into the
state or purchase credits from
those who do.
Night.
Hi good afternoon members of the
committee may name is page night
with new mexico with your
children and the standard
support of house still forty one
I want to think the sponsors for
this legislation which we
believe after is the right to
reduce carbon emissions and the
transportation factor which is a
necessary and effective step to
protect item via and improve the
community health in the area in
addition to these benefits this
legislation and offer bring
about economic benefits to jack
creation and your investment for
these reasons we urge you
support thank you.
Madame would you like me to
address some of th.
I would suggest you we.
Chair representative this bill
does not amend that section
at all.
It just doesn't amend the
section so we're we're not
regulating.
Changing anything with the
regulation of that.
Madam chair representative this
is the existing statute already
were not amending it other than
changing see as far as the
lettering.
And chair representative can
you.
Please expand on your question.
It is being admitted into the
atmosphere.
And when we.
Other than the cor.
Madam chair representative any
this bill is written so that any
wine that is produced.
That is in the definition of
transp.
And so it's a broad range of
view of that can be incorporated
under
our definition it means
electricity or liquid gasious or
blended fuel including gasoline
diesel liquid fired petroleum
gas natural gas hydrogen sold
supplied user offered for sale
two power vehicles or equipment
for the purposes of
transportation.
Representing.
The.
And currently.
The.
Those are.
Madam chair reps I actually have
a lot of comments on that I love
math
really and complex math it's
it's it's amazing sometimes
though it's magical and in this
case the numbers that you're
using the factors that you're
using in this couple in this
complex calculation are just I
just don't square with what
we're trying to do here.
First of all.
The prices of gas fluctuate on
the daily you know I use this
example a couple of days ago
when I drove down to session gas
in the spaniel which is where I
put my gas is was like two
eighty two that morning and then
I wanted to fill up before I
went back and had dropped
significantly like fifty cents
in a day or that's just in a day
so gas prices go up and down
lots of factors go into play
when setting gas prices
including taxes of which this is
not not a gas tax
I I mention this another
committee if we want to talk
about gas taxes we can but not
in this bill because that is not
what this is how often you
charge us fifty eight cents per
galan for tax we charge
seventeen cents but again that
is not with this bill
to show i'd like to treat it go
into the carpet market the
carpent credit scenario we're
talking about madam chair
representative I just want to be
clear that this is not a carbon
credit that spends.
Confusion about the bill this is
a clean fuel market and so there
are a lot of different kinds of
markets
that exist this is the clean
fuel market
there are also a lot of
different hypotheticals that you
can create around the cost of
what a clean fuel credit is and
those clean fuel credits do go
up and down because it's a
market mechanism
just like gasoline p.
Is that the up and downs of the
clean fuel market and the up and
downs of the gasoline and diesel
price market have no quarterly.
What so ever.
They're completely separate up
and down so when you look at it
share if there was a correlation
you'd expect the gas price to
rise when the clean fuel credit
rises under this hypothetical um
that's simply not the case in
the materials that we have
produced in the near mexico
environment department
there's their component clean
completely different directions
all the time so while I
appreciate the hypothetical and
the concern I can tell you that
we are as concerned about clean
fuel pretty about fuel prices as
anybody here in this building we
are in administration that has
promoted free lunches and
breakfast republic school kids
are opportunity scholarships for
education wrap around services
for families
we are here because we think
this bill is good for new mexico
we would not bring it if it
meant the
price increases that have been
discussed by opponents here
today.
I also want to know that the
organs study previously
mentioned that itself is an
annual report that is on the.
Website and they discuss the
hypotheticals of what the clean
fuel credit could increase in
gas in the economic model.
When you look at the actual
market and how the clean of your
credit market works none of
those costs are passed on in the
way that the work in economic
model presents and so when you
see the one study that has shown
the market the how it works and
how those costs are or are not
passed on
there is no correct leash there
and so even in the organ report
that spend reference to here
today the actual real world's
scenario does not show what the
economic oregon model projects
annually we've put in our bill a
provision that requires consumer
cost containment annual review
of the program to furl of the
program based on emergency or
forecasted conditions for
exactly consumer protection
purposes we also have consumer
reports and almost one hundred
year old consumer research
advocacy and
research organization they're
only job is to provide truth
transparency and fairness in the
marketplace they are in support
of our bill they have taken out
these ads that have appeared in
new mexico papers that says a
clean fuel standard benefits
consumers and our futures this
is the premier consumer advocacy
organization that has also
supported the spell we have
protection measures in we have
heard the consumer price
concern.
This is why we've made the
changes to this bill this year
this is why we have the support.
For this bill this year and this
is why we ask this committee to
pass the bill.
The.
Internet.
Yeah.
Will th.
Mention representative rain.
What we've seen in the other
states that there's no evidence
of.
I'm unincreased in gas tax in
gas use me in in gas prices we
have not seen that tied to the
clean fuel or low carbon.
And madame chair representative
we have put in statute the cost
containment and deferral
language to ensure with the
periodic review to ensure that
the program that's developed
under this structure does not a
fact consumers in the way that's
been presented.
The.
Thank you.
The.
Um.
It doesn't.
From.
What have you done to include.
Representative thank you so much
for that question this is a
really important question for us
we have worked at the
other programs and the other
states were this
where this clean fuels market
exists the dairies in those
states will love this program
because they have anarobic
digesters and they can decide to
participate in the market of the
clean fuels market and this has
actually become a new revenue
stream for their operations and
that is what excites me about
bringing this program to new
mexico because I know that our
dairies here suffering and there
are pressures along the supply
chain to decarbonize right we
every corporation has
shareholders that are putting
pressure on the board say what
are your goals why are you doing
to help the environment
after the last committee hearing
my colleagues and I we heard the
concern about the dry dairies
because we know that that is
something that makes many of our
dairies here in new mexico
different from those dairies on
the west coast and you need
water to operate and anarobic
die juster and in a dry dairy
environment and operation it's
really hard to make that as
successful as those other
markets where those steries are
enjoying that supply that
revenue stream from the clean
fuels market and so my
colleagues and my colleague and
I we met with colorado state
university to really understand
the science behind where dr.
Dry daries are and to see why
what we're missing right and we
contacted the reference
raceline or company to talk
about their digester and what's
working and what's not working
and what we can be doing to
assist and help develop the
income streams for new mexico
dairies so they can benefit from
this program should they decide
to
like the other day.
I want to make clear that for
folks that are eligible for
january credits it's a voluntary
market so they don't have to
participate if they don't want
to
in addition to the cost
protections that we've put in
for consumers and the deferral
of the program we heard that
last year and that's why we put
those in
we learned at the environment
department that perhaps
you know the dry dairies operate
in a different way than the west
coast stereos do and
it might not be as methine
producing as the west coast
theories are but what we want to
make sure is that when the
technology gets there if the
technology gets there which we
think it will and.
Even if there are other ways
that dairies can benefit from
this program as they are
receiving pressure to
decarbonize from the supply
chain we want to make sure that
pathway for them to benefit is
open and so while it may not be
tomorrow that though diechester
indextor will be able to be yet
a hundred percent we talk to
them and they say later this
summer I also talk to the
american bio gas council about
this concern and they said look
when i'm hearing is that you
know there might be a difference
here between new mexico dairy
and west coastary he said i've
talked to my team we still think
and this is monora the monora is
the most of it I think waste
water facilities and food waste
also constitute this number but
their calculation is that new
mexico can produce twenty one
point forty five billion cubic
feet per year of methane and
those gent those can generate
credits that we can sell in the
market that those entities can
sell in the market.
Madam chair representative both
okay because the the
constituents that I have like
far bureau.
I know their concer.
The representative that I do
believe.
When they transfer.
The.
They are already having freight.
Yeah.
Moved in.
Great group.
Madame chair representative yes
we've been working on this bill
for four years and so we've been
talking to the daries and the
farm and agricultural community
for four years before my time at
the department i've been here
about a year.
And so this is an ongoing
conversation and
you know we're committed to
working with them despite their
concern because we want them to
be a part of this we've provided
the cost containment and
deferral mechanisms in response
to their concerns because we
hear them and we continue to
have an open door to continue
those conversations.
Madame chair representative
listening to the representatives
of those
groups here today they stood in
opposition but we are having
conversation ones with them and
were committed to bringing in
whoever we need to whether it's
colleagues from across the
country who already are
benefiting from the program or
have been using this technology
for years or there might be a
knowledge share
if this program gets developed
and we'd like to include them
in the advisory committee that
helps develop the program
because we want this to benefit
so even though we heard today
that they third standing
opposition that does not deter
us from our efforts.
It's like a.
Will this affect the added
anyway.
Madame chair representative
for ethernel they
bring I believe my understanding
is that they are bring in
ethernet right now from the
midwest and that a lot of that
ethernet was produced with
agricultural ways and other
products for blending are in
gasoline and december other
markets and so
I don't anticipate there being a
effect but if there is an effect
that's why we have a periodic
review of the program built in
to statute so that we can
address it should that affect
arise and be detrimental to the
program as it operates a new
mexico.
I'll just.
Thank you madame chair
reference representative.
We should really should stop
meeting like this
but I apologise.
Idle last time.
Well
you don't want thing madam chair
and and repres.
Manager didn't say it was good
at it
was thinking yes and and and
madam chair representative
director mia.
But i'm glad you said math was
magical
week we did we covered quite a
bit on this.
The.
And I understand
that this is not an electric
mandate and i'm not suggesting.
But one of the things you you.
Said kind of.
A lot to answer to as answers to
questions was it.
We don't know exactly.
Madame chair represented him
i'm not sure if I said that a
lot but I will say that we don't
know all of the details that the
program but we have put some
pretty important guard rails in
the legislation as it goes
through the rule making process
to ensure you know that we can
hammer out those details with
the wide variety of stateholders
involved.
The.
And.
And I think those that
discussion we have on
electricity is important
because.
But ID.
And what we talk.
You know in the definition of
transportation.
And I learned.
Right that the battery.
Is that correct.
Madame share representative
sorry you please just the last
question yes and m.
That I I sort of had a little
confusion about the battery
being the fuel versus the
electrici.
Madam chair representative yes.
Thank you madame chair rep.
So.
Um.
So then so electricity the
electricity generated for the
charge is the fuel the
transportation for.
That definition.
And and in that correct it
correctly if I brong we have to
look at all the direct and
indirect and m.
Madame to represent him that is
correct.
And so.
Madam chair.
Current make up.
Representative yet it yes it
depends.
Madame chair representative
director so it's a moving target
at all time.
Throughout the state.
Madam chair representative
i'm not sure if it's a our
describe it has a moving target
but there are different
fluctuations and how the greater
works at any given particular
moment.
Representative director right
now on pm dot com.
Renewable energy.
Earlier when we came.
The.
So it it varies so what what
worries me about this.
Is that that.
Matrix continues to move and so
an assessment of what the
electrical charge is or have
been very difficult to do
because it nev.
Does that make sense.
Madame chair represented him
break I understand what you're
saying.
Okay thank you so madame chair
representative.
So.
Comes very difficult to do that
assessment for electric cars is
much easier to do it for
gasoline powered diesel powered
biodies
so I I think there are.
The.
With performing that assessment.
What do you envision in the rule
making process will address
those issues.
Thank you
for electricity we understand
those fluctuations like you
described there are many ways to
address them including.
And so.
There are ways to address them.
That could occur and.
The other point to know is for
the utilities there is also a
higher archi that other programs
have in their rules that dictate
who gets the clean fuel credit
and so the utility can decide to
capture the clean fuel credit or
can decide to pass it on to the
um operator of the charging
station that's dispensing the
electricity so there is a lot of
variables there but um
fortunately we have the benefit
of how some of the other program
works for ideas to think about
when we create our program
speci.
Thank you madame chair
representative.
What one of the things.
I found the answers interesting
when he asked directly will this
effect gasoline prices.
Answer.
I expected.
But the answer.
So something.
Was
not in the way th.
Which to me means that there may
be a other ways that costs.
Don't think.
Represent definitively and I
think that's because as as we
said we don't know what the rule
making process is going to look
like yet that there will be no
cost to consumers.
Is that a fair assessment of the
testimony madam chair
representative.
My response was in response to a
representative reams math
and as far as pricing
nobody knows how gasoline
pricing works it goes into a
black box nobody.
And so when I can tell you was
that those gas prices go up and
down the clean fuel market
prices go up and down there is
no correlation between the two
and if there is any of fact at
all.
We have deferral of the program
and cost containment mechanisms
that we can address and rule
making so we can have this
conversation a rule making to
insure that whatever the
concerns are our addressed.
And madame chair representative
we will keep having this
conversations every year as the
advisory committee meets and
looks at what is happening in
the market and I think
importantly what this bill does
is allows for options of many
different kinds of fuel rate is
not just electric vehicles
fields not just by odisal it's
all kinds of different fuel so
there are going to be options
that that will help the
consumer.
Yes and at thank you I I
appreciate that madam chair and
and so repr.
So I
want to briefly interest one of
the types.
I think quite a bit that was a
long day
I know
for you and and probably more
tha.
The.
An in one that you mentioned and
and spoke about was a.
Madam chair represent him yes we
talked a lot about droppings yes
and so.
The.
My understanding of sorry madam
madame chair thing madam chair
representative or ta.
The.
I don't fully understand.
Drop in bio fuels but i'm
getting trying to get up the
speed but my sort of rudimentary
understanding is that you have
to susport start with some sort
of.
Some other.
Madam chair representative it
could be vegetable or I wouldn't
say vegetable it could be
agricultural residuals vegetable
oils it could be animal fats
there's a range.
And madame chair representative
and director and so.
Then to to process that.
Because it needs to be
processed.
The.
Madame chair representative it's
actually a refining pr.
And but at some level sorry.
Still trying to get the hang of
this thank you
so but they're they're.
Representative.
There does have to be some
refining process but then at it
level oxygen jan has to be
removed.
The.
But m.
Madam chair repres.
I'm not sure exactly how the
refining process works both I do
know it becomes a hydro carbon
and that is how it becomes the
drop in fuel.
Actually the
I believe it's the port of new
york has converted to all drop
in renewable disall fuels and so
yeah that's the big that's the
magic
of this particular kind.
So.
The.
We start.
The.
They have to be the oxyg.
Yeah.
I drew processing is
is that hydrogen.
Is added.
Do the f.
The.
Combined with.
Create w.
Cleaner.
The.
Um.
The.
Okay yes i'm getting
project but maybe we could
actually talk.
So what are trying it in to is
that.
To have the.
It has to be produced.
And the primary way to produce
that hydrogen.
Is separating it from.
And I would suggest.
That that is a very energy
intensive process to create
hydrogen is it not.
Madam chair representative I
think it depends on the type of
hydrogen that you're producing I
think that's what's really
interesting about this bill make
me I finish it because I would
think what you're concerned with
is the is how we're going to
calculate the carbon intensity
right in that I think what's
important is that we do
calculate the carbon intensity
of how all the feels are
produced including you know it's
hydrogen fuel cells which is
which is one of the you know one
of the potential fields.
And.
It that is part of the process
that the eb will be looking at
is how to calculate that and
looking at the full sort of the
full spectrum and from start
to finish and that goes into the
carbon intensity yes okay thank
you thank you
and and madame chair
representative and.
My that is part of my point
the other point is.
The.
What economic benefit is really
coming to new mexico.
Yeah.
The largest
biofuel refinery is in.
The largest producer of
biofeels.
Renewable energy group.
And so I think we see why.
Big oil companies are standing
up in front and favor of this
because they will be using this
to claim credits.
Those who cannot reduce their
emissions effectively will have
to purchase credits.
And some of those will be
agriculture.
Trucking companies things like
that that will have to be buying
the fuels from the barrier
companies that they're buying
the cr.
And that really concerns me and.
Together
don't speak very fast.
Thank you madame representatives
thank you rep.
We got a string of republican
socking and no democrats almost
like you guys got your votes
lined up.
So i'm sure
that this statute in anothe.
Surprisingly when I look.
So the way I understand the
statute.
We're going to essentially get.
The.
Madam chair representative floor
leader lane you.
And so many insurance.
Philosophically.
Getting that to an executive.
Madam chair representative lane
that that is a really great
question I I really appreciate
it you know we already give the
board a lot of duties and they
are
promigating rules and standards
for all kinds of things related
to water supply food protection
are quality management I think I
was my first year in the
legislature when we did just
that grant them more authority
and I think it it speaks to
well I will say this in a weird
session thirty and.
We are folks who
some of us are experts in this
field some of us are not
the eib is the body may have
made up of experts and the
advisory committee is made up of
people who represent various
industries in various sectors of
life in new mexico so we already
give authority
to the ib.
You know we.
I don't think it's possible for
us to flesh it all out here we
don't have the time to do it.
What made insurance.
The.
The rallies that.
Our policy.
Part time.
In a bird
but it's frustrating to me that
we don't take time.
Where my.
And if you've ever participated
in the executive role making
process right wrong here in
different.
I want to ask about this advi.
The recommendations of th.
Present of lane.
Can you please ask that again
i'm just trying to am just
getting to the.
I'm just curious that this.
The.
Adviser.
The findings or the
recommendations they put out
those things binding on the
board to adopt those.
Madam chair representative um we
have on page e and section be
the creation of the advisory
group um to inform how the
program works
ultimately
the new mexico environment
department will have to bring
rules forth with the input of
these stake holders in our
capacity in what's best for the
state of new mexico which each
of these stakeholders although
they contribute to new mexico
aren't held accountable to as a
government entity so um.
Although they have input that
will be
insuring that the program works
it is under this bill the new
mexico environment department
that's responsible for bringing
the rules and then the
environmental improvement board
as the entity that are reviews
and issu.
Care representative correct yes
it's this is a government
authority
and madam chairs that look
through sort o.
The.
Share lady or.
The.
Because the way the link.
I do worry about th.
Madam chair representative lane
from my understanding the I b
has to be by partisan
so that's that is I wouldn't say
it's taken care of what it's I
think I hope it will be at some
of your concerns and I am open
to ensuring a fair and just
process that includes a range of
a few points including
political.
Understand the.
But there's nothing to.
Open to four m.
Manager to answer that question.
People have answered.
Madam chair representatively and
I I have been open to many of
your amendments
from the very beginning.
So okay manager so what's the
consumer discussion about.
Represent.
The.
I'm i'm manager and.
Lawyer I can i.
The.
The way I understood the res.
Studies or.
Evidence to suggest in other
states.
Representatively
and madam chair i'm i'm
obviously not.
Even the science behind it but
one of the things that struck me
madam chair was when excell.
And mind you these are folks who
the greatest fuel.
They're going to try to limit
it.
But.
When you have.
And there's standing in support
my new of your bill.
That to me is pretty good
confirmation that the.
Madam chair.
Rabbit not not by someone who's
actually tra.
Madam share representative
I did I don't think that's
exactly what they said but I
will say this it's really
important that we have that
language in the bill that looks
at the really kind of contains
the fuel costs
even was looking at we can make
adjustments as needed to the
program in the direct
serve answer to the concerns
about your consumer consumer
price.
We're building and works in that
in the system.
Just you know their **** are
deal with those fluctuations
potential fluctuations potential
increases you were looking at
we're looking at the program on
a yearly basis we can stop the
program with their emergencies
or if there's some forecasting
that shows that fewer prices are
going to rise.
I don't know that's the nature
of.
But I don't.
And so manager I just worry
about.
The impact this is going to have
on working cla.
Mandates.
New cars also going to
negatively impact the use car
market and now we're talking
about these type of fuel
standards that are going to
seemingly increase the cost of
your.
And it's wanting for us to see
her in santa fe.
But many of our considerance
cannot and so i'm worried that.
Yeah.
Me and i.
Thank you madame.
As much as.
When we
eliminate idea.
I mean i've heard this went in
the word over you know.
You have any idea.
Madam chair ram represented
welcome.
From my understanding their lots
of factors involved in fuel
fluctuation and prices you know
it's taxes from various states
rate it's the global markets I
think there are lots of there is
lots of reasons to be there also
you know at the realtic retail
level you know in touch I never
put gas in touch because it's to
ninety nine but in this but
you're let's do thirty two so I
drive down to espanal and put my
gas when i'm coming to santa fe
I may think there are lots of
different factors involved here
in the price of gas.
And good the manager I just I
guess really managely you know I
i'm negated since third cost
before thirty minutes to save a
ninety six
you know because I catch up on
on the.
And.
Just driven up to the serv.
Ask though
well when I really really w.
We were in the last exact cycle
the price of.
The.
I'm i'm not okay so i'll see
yes.
But we who try to mentally
understand why.
How do.
Election time for the gas
companies.
Or
and after the election they can
live with less money
i'm just trying to bring that
through my mind because it now
in this bill the big complaint
that I am hearing is that.
But yet nobody can really
explain.
Wider price of.
Actually from the morning to the
evening I reckon
is to extend a fake in the
morning stop at costco in the
morning.
But yes this price and my way
back home for it up again it's
what I can.
And.
Or eight dollars.
I guess i'm never okay
but I just want to leave
your over and over again.
That the price of your is going
to go up.
I mean if you get explained to
me.
Why the price of your jumps up
and down then i'll believe the
story that the price of yours
going to go up because of any
reason what's whatever that's
the only comment I am at him
as a response
and I don't need.
Representative lane.
Yes.
No.
