If we present.
Representative Rehm.
Representative Sebasti here.
Madam vice chair.
Madam chair here we have a
couple.
Well welcome back Representative
is see you understand on.
Yes we do madam chair and you
should have it there on your
desk of the two two numbers two
two five seven zero one point
one.
And madam chair we did the role
the amendment into us
and that's what you have before
you but it was a collaboration
between the resentment queen
our director of market words and
myself and the this is what we
want to present to you today
madam chair what those changes
were so you'll to mark Edwards
with the Legislative Council to
reflect on and those are.
changes madam chair.
Thank you madam chair.
Once again my name is mark
Edwards and Legislative Council
Service I'm here for the sole
purpose of providing technical
assistance on the matter before
the committee did not appear in
support or opposition.
Madam before.
Okay
So.
The main changes in this
committees
are to subsection a which is
being updated to account for the
fact that Congress really never
had had the time or inclination
to try to figure all the complex
histories of land grants and to
figure out okay this one belongs
this one doesn't so.
Now subsection a basically says
if you're in within lands that
was recognized in some form by
the federal government by
Congress or by the surveyor
general.
For the private land claims in
furtherance of the treaty of
Guadalupe Hidalgo then you could
become a land grants were set
under state law the second
component of this is that you
must be designated in this
section I just because I
legislature to become a land
grant Miller said under state
law which is a state term does
not exist in.
After that the and.
On the home page to line six and
seven the C. pursuant to another
section of chapter forty nine
yes.
That's part of the clauses this
section doesn't apply to land
grants the recognized under
other articles of chapter forty
nine Chilean chopper read to
have their own separate
particles.
And then and has Representative
McQueen pointed out on page
three line twelve that
subsection have and then on page
on line twenty five subsection
page those had not withstanding
clauses in the original bill
that have been taken out because
they know.
And with that manager we stand
for questions no it on the
surface and the queen wishes to
also.
Representative Madam chair of
the reason for the structure of
the language as it is is to.
Prevent
Communities that were not
historically land grants from
seeking to be recognized as land
grants when you say see you as
more community
Stanley for example in my
district small community been
there a long time not this story
plan grant and there could be
some benefits being recognized
as a land grant and we're just
saying that you know this
provision is for playing grants
their land grants and not other
communities so I I think it's I
think it's good fix thank you
madam chair.
Thank you for working with a
sponsor and that uncertainty
appreciate to we appreciated as
well so yes Representative
Nibert.
Thank you madam chair just one
question our.
Madam chair representative of.
With this change.
As I read the language.
There's no claim by the land
Grant that it owns the entire
original area that was subject
to the land grants you're not
making any claims the on the
lands that you just currently on
that right Madam chair
representative Nibert that's
thank you very much.
And your questions.
The best no no I'm not positive
we would do not pass on House
Bill to succeed and you pass on
the house Judiciary Committee
said the festival to fifty.
Okay a motion made by
Representative McQueen do not
pass on the original bill and I
do pass on the house committee
Judiciary Committee substitutes
seconded by Representative Sapan
ski so
but.
Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane yes.
Mr speaker Representative
McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert yes
Representative Lee.
Representative.
Representative said Penske yes.
Madam vice chair yes.
Yes.
The US goes to sixty eight but
in to us she despaired Committee
says to.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
With that madam chair I just
want to say thank you all you're
all invited to a to into
anniversary Development said if.
Thank you very much was nice
meeting you thank you so let's I
just want to talk a little bit
with people about where we are
in terms of the agenda we are
rolling house bill one ninety at
the request of the Sanchez.
and we are going to then proceed
and also we got we've been
getting Committee subs for House
Bill to thirty two so that will
not be here today.
So what we'll be doing is public
private partnership and then
we'll go home inspector and last
but not least is House Bill
three sixty four and madam chair
yes we should be I wish to be so
accommodating under on some of
our.
Those yeah okay.
To
yes I'm sorry I forgot about
that we did it's not on our
agenda but yes we'll do that
after we do that private public
private sorry about that guys
would.
That's the it was on our agenda
yesterday.
Thank you.
Okay.
The floor is yours
representatives.
Thank you madam chair thank you
committee Representative brown
and myself are back here with
our Canadian are House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill to win three which reflects
of the feedback you gave us
also from NMFA Marquita Russel
work with us on it
and so if you're ready I'll go
through the changes it's not
really changes that some
amendments yes I ready
with someone move the.
Session.
Thank you the floor is yours
Representative okay on the first
page there's two things added
authorizing administrative
administrative fees and
providing a pledge not changer
and pair bonding agreements that
came directly from NMFA.
on page three.
A section three D. O. T. wanted
us to add three eight in order
to provide economic and
administrative efficiencies in
connection with the development
of public projects a public
partner may instead of just
authorized we also took out the
word published which was on.
Line nine we checked that out
Representative McQueen this
request.
The on page nine of the
committee substitute we added of
provisions that were suggested
about board members that's E.
and F. members who are not
public employee shall be
governed by the gift act in
government told conduct act are
entitled to per diem and mileage
is non salaried public officials
cetera and then F. all meetings
of the board shall be open to
the public and subject to open
meeting at six on page ten per
the request of NMFA we added I
online fourteen that NMFA can
charge and collect reasonable
fees necessary for the
collection review and
dissemination of public private
partnership agreements also in
section both section five and
six have that so section six on
page eleven I repeats the
charging collective reasonable
fees.
And then the other change of
Kerr and this was on page twelve
of the FY are section twelve
it's the agreement of the state
the state does hereby pledge to
and I agree with the holders of
any bonds or notes issued under
the P. three partnership act
that the state will not limit
are all to the rights are going
to read the whole thing but that
was also the request on the
first and
our expert witness would you
like to add anything about.
No thank you madam chair all the
all the concerns of NMFA have
been addressed in the committees
up great gives thank you
Marquita have that madam chair
we stand for questions are there
questions Representative
McQueen.
Madam chair representative here
it.
It from removing the word
published what what page was on
on I I didn't quite get to the
patient to have coverage for.
That is
Page for the it was the notice
was eight and nine the notice
shall be published for three
successive weeks in a newspaper
of general circulation in the
county it it had previously said
published in the county and you
asked us to remove it in case
not all thirty three counties
have a published newspaper of
mentors and here I think credit
to that because the
representative Nibert but okay
just a couple quick questions
so there's still no formal
process for partner selection.
Correct madam chair that would
be decided Representative in the
rule making by the board.
Okay.
The manager isn't here it's
still exempt from the picture
procurement code secretary it's
yes it's in Madam chair
representative as alternate form
and as a miss Russell stated
that that wouldn't go until
after the agreement was actually
made.
Madam chair representative Gerry
if the agreement was over ten
million yes Representative.
Still have multi million dollar
agreements but Madam chair
representative the board does
review those as well they are
reviewed after the
meeting today so I I mean we we
but I I don't need to reflect
the current
one question on the changes on
page nine members who are not
public employee shall be
governed by the gate that can
the government conduct act
alright public employees
governed by the gift act in the
governmental conduct act.
Madam chair representative this
is the refers to those who are
not public employees.
The others are.
Covered by that.
Which consists of secretaries of
the departments other designees.
So madam chair reserve your chin
it just say members shall be
governed by the I mean.
Is that because what I read that
as.
Members who are not public
employees.
It makes it sound like the
public employees aren't governed
by those acts.
Please.
Madam chair and
Representative.
Because members who are not
public employees it's two things
they're not if they're not
public employees they'll be
governed by the gift acting
governmental conduct act and
those will be entitled to per
diem and mileage.
As non salary public officials
all the other board members our
cabinet secretaries who are
subject to that already is as we
understand.
Okay
Madam chair of the year and I I
don't think that wording is
ideal it's
to the thank thank you mentor
thank you.
Just texting Representative.
K.
season another.
The governor asked.
Multiple versions we are with
this we're doing multiple
committees there's lots going on
so I just what what yes
Representative Representative
Romero while I'm texting Madam
chair representative I guess I'm
just checking back with the
reporting mechanism on.
Just one the process for to see
the selection and then how does
the public understands with the
commission or whatever the
formal title is of the selecting
border how how the the reporting
mechanism works when someone
selected.
Madam chair representative the
how the reporting of the five
appointees no after the
appointments madam chair
representative when when those
partnerships are made and
selected and basically they're
already undergoing a project how
what it what are the sort of
mechanisms for the public to
engage in understanding how
they're doing what's going on in
the same way that we I'm I am
vision something like a capital
outlay process or you know where
there's checks and balances
along the way Senator fusions of
funds and such can you just
describe what that's like yes
Madam chair representative that
will be in the rulemaking that's
one of responsibility through
making classes open meetings act
so that people will be able to
attend the meetings as well as
whatever the board determines
the rules are.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative I look forward to
the rules that.
Anyone anyone else with
questions.
You give us a minute I
Representative Chasey knowledge
receipt of the note and I did
ask for that Representative
right now as well so hopefully
just give us a couple minutes.
I'll keep asking questions and
thank.
Representative so are there I
guess when you use the create an
example are there folks that are
already have requested this type
of responsibility like this type
of actions there are there for
contractors in the queue that
want this opportunity.
Madam chair representative the
office of broadband
accessibility and expansion
I don't think they're here today
but they spoke in favor of it at
our other committee and the
committee last Saturday.
Madam chair representative is
that so it's the office or
they're like private actors.
It's it's an example where the
office could work with the
private entity.
He built okay okay.
That's true to come in now I
guess I'm just trying to you
know understand like the outcome
part of this better I don't know
for I can keep asking questions
but.
Well I mean if you have
questions you I'm not about is
so out of that and practice
house.
Bit of minute I understand
Representative is aware
Representative Chasey did inform
and he is on his way we think.
Okay.
Okay of the.
No I think we're fine that I
think all right so I'm ready to
entertain a motion for.
Madam chair that House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill to thirteen to pass we need
to do that too part of one I I
madam chair hi
Okay recommended do not pass on
house bill two thirteen a do
pass on House Judiciary so
Committee sub for House Bill to
thirteen thank you Mr secretary.
a motion made for a do not pass
on house bill two thirteen but I
do pass on House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill to thirteen and it was made
by Representative Romero
seconded by Representative
fifteen states
call the roll please
Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey.
This
is a yes.
Representative Lane yes.
Mr speaker.
Representative McQueen no.
Representative Nibert yes.
Representative Lee yes.
Representative Rehm yes ma'am.
Representative Sebasti yes.
Vice chair yes madam chair yes
both of the to to be able to not
follow those bills to thirteen
that is to pass on.
The committee steps to.
Great thank you thank you madam
chair thank you for.
tools can.
Great.
Representative Ortez thank you
madam chair we're on house bill
two oh seven.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee nice to see you
all again I'm here to present
proposal to seven which would
amend the Human Rights Act
before I get into the details of
the bill I'm gonna tell you why
and carrying this.
My parents divorced when I was
seven years old and my father's
side of the family didn't have
much to do with me and my
brother except for a few people
including my this is the.
She moved to San Francisco when
I was eight years old this is in
the very very early eighties.
I got to spend a lot of time
with her in her new life as.
As a fashion show designers at
Macy's.
She had a whole new crew of
people that she hung out with
mostly gay men and women.
These folks my new friends
Patrick Roger Frankie.
They welcome me they showed me
love and compassion inclusion
they made me feel like I was
accepted which is really
important for me growing up at a
place that didn't
Didn't show that kind of love
and affection for a poor young
women of color.
I didn't know than what they
were going through
I didn't understand the
discrimination they faced in
society or at the hands of the
government.
Nor did I understand until much
later the pain and suffering
they experienced through the
aids crisis.
But these folks.
Thank you Patrick and Roger
really shaped me and helped me
become the person that I am
today and now that I have two
children who are navigating
their own journey of cruise
eight are and who they love I am
dismayed and frankly outreach to
see legislation all around the
country that that seeks to
discriminate further
discriminate gets the L. G. B.
T. Q. community does this
doesn't represent.
My values doesn't represent the
values of our state and that's
why I'm bringing this
legislation forward.
H. B. two oh seven amends the
Human Rights Act in four
different ways it updates
outdated definitions of sexual
orientation and gender identity
it adds definition of sex and
gender and as both to the list
of protected classes updates
language from handicap to
disability.
It closes a loophole that allows
public bodies of the state to
discriminate against protected
classes which will ensure The
New Mexicans are protected
against taxpayer funded
discrimination madam chair that
committee I have two expert
witnesses Marshall Martinez of
EQ and Jim and Kathy love who is
on zoom if she can be promoted
madam chair that would be great.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and members of the committee as
Representative Ortez setting
Marshall Martinez in the
executive director of equality
New Mexico where the statewide
LGBTQ civil rights organization
The New Mexico Human Rights Act
was adopted in nineteen seventy
one with a small set of
protected classes we
continuously added more over the
last fifty years in two thousand
three were the fourteenth in the
nation to add sexual orientation
and the third in the nation to
add gender identity.
In nineteen eighty the New
Mexico Supreme Court read the
term public accommodations to be
extremely narrow and determined
that it applied only to private
entities and that state
government and public entities
such as local school districts
public universities municipal
governments were exempt from the
discrimination prohibition in
the Human Rights Act for example
the City of Albuquerque acting
as an employer is prohibited
from discriminating against
their employees on the basis of
anything listed as a protected
class they are not by law
prohibited from discriminating
against those same protected
classes in the provision of
services this has been true for
the last fifty years while many
protected classes in the Human
Rights Act are also covered at
the federal level LGBTQ people
are explicitly left out which is
most evident right now when
we're discussing public
education institutions and the
need for essential services
across our state in a pot
politicized environment around
us across the country.
As Representative Ortez said
this bill amends the Human
Rights Act to close this
loophole and include the
prohibition of discrimination.
This bill will help protect
LGBTQ students and seniors from
discrimination this bill will
help provide access to justice
for queer and trans homeless
people and those impacted by
children youth and families
department this bill will give a
new more accessible path to
justice for New Mexicans who
have experienced discrimination
at the hands of their government
a door which is otherwise closed
forcing most of them to interact
with a complicated federal legal
system of discrimination law.
And lastly before I turn it over
to our second expert I just want
to say very clearly to every
LGBTQ young person out there who
is feeling the brunt of these
politicized attacks every single
day.
We see you.
We at a quality New Mexico and
so many of our champions and
allies in this building and
across the state are with you
and we will fight for you until
New Mexico says very clearly
that your life is full of value
that you were only deserving of
love acceptance and affirmation
not in spite of who you are but
because of it.
Thank you.
and then cast the economy I
think was gonna talk very
specifically about the new
definitions ms love on would you
like to add something to our
conversation.
Briefly thank you chairperson
Chandler and committee members
my name is Kathy love I'm a
lawyer and practicing it law in
New Mexico for twenty seven
years Mr Martinez has told you
about
how these proposed amendments
refines to make clear who is to
be protected from discrimination
and I'm here to briefly explain
to you how these amendments are
intended to close a loophole and
make clear who is prohibited
from discriminating and I'd like
to try to make the amendments a
little bit easier for the
committee to follow and so I'm
going to direct you first to the
last page of the bill and under
letter M. we're this is this is
this thank section two with
page that were all of the
different entities that are
prohibited from discrimination
and there are several
definitions within the bill that
are amended in this proposed
bill and they all are
encapsulated under this last
section and we're refers to a
governmental entity for a public
contractor that is prohibited
from refusing or to otherwise
limiter put conditions on
services I just want to explain
to you that.
Governmental entity is defined
in definition B. B. and it
encompasses states for public
bodies.
Date is defined under a eight
and public body is defined under
CC and what I think is important
for the committee to note is
that under CC it refers to J.
it's a little complicated this
is why I want to try to make it
easier for you it refers to J.
which refers to publishable
subdivisions and so what this
does is it kind of closes a
loophole it provides for the
fact that political subdivisions
smaller government entities are
prohibited from discriminating
it goes on the also Sander and
it refers to a public contractor
that definition appears under I
of the definitions and Public
contractor includes entities
that contractor receive benefits
of government benefits from in
benefits from the government or
money from the government to
perform government services to
this basically closes a loophole
that existed previously where
private entities were not
allowed to discriminate against
people and public contractors
who took public money were
allowed to and so this is
intended to close that loophole
just like many of our federal
laws provide for example like
with title nine if you're gonna
receive federal money you can't
discriminate on the basis of
stacks or for example under
section nineteen eighty three if
you were going to act as a state
actor under color of state law
you can't discriminate so that's
the the purpose of these
amendments and the other thing
that I want to draw your
attention to is on page two
under age is the definition of
public accommodation.
since nineteen seventy one it
has been unlawful for private
entities discriminate in
providing goods and services to
people in New Mexico
interestingly that didn't apply
to government entities until
this amendments and so we're
proposing to add this ammendment
the provides that in addition to
public entities for private
entities a government entity
cannot discriminate in providing
goods and services to the people
of New Mexico and so this this
amendments this bill is intended
to tell everybody in New Mexico
that if you want to.
Why in New Mexico you have to
play for our by our rules and
our rules are that we don't
discriminate against anyone on
any of these species.
Thank you ms love have you
concluded your presentation you
Madam reason for questions very
good before we go to questions
let's go to the audience those
wishing to speak in opposition
to house bill two of seven in
the audience please raise your
hand.
In opposition okay I don't see
any hands raise those online
wishing to speak in opposition
please raise your hand.
I don't see any hands raised
those in the audience wishing to
speak in support please raise
your hand.
Let's start right over here
Mariana.
Yes in support okay.
Okay go over.
Members of the White here's a
Mike for you.
Thank you.
C..
Hello madam chair members of the
committee my name is heather
Smith I'm from bold futures of
it we're a statewide health
reproductive rights organization
ran by black indigenous and
women and people of color many
of our leaders around the state
are part of the queer community
and in our leader gatherings
we've heard that their
experience with the gender based
discrimination has been met
with.
No accountability so adding
gender to the Human Rights Act
and expanding the Human Rights
Act removes the loopholes that
allowed the discrimination to
happen without accountability so
this is a piece of legislation
that both teachers in strongly
would love for you guys to pass
this on thank you appreciate it.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Naomi
Valdez I'm the director of
public policy at the ACLU of New
Mexico I am also the mother to
two girls who are clear and we
strongly support this much
needed update in the legislation
filling these gaps is really
necessary to make sure that the
intent of the original statute
is really mats it's also really
important to affirm our LGBTQ
neighbors and loved ones in a
time where other states really
seem to be going backwards in
this in this area thank you
thank you anyone else in the
audience good afternoon madam
chair members of the committee
my name is Alexandria Taylor
executive director with the New
Mexico coalition of sexual order
programs we stand in support of
this bill and recognize that
preventing sexual violence means
that people get to live whole
and healthy lives free from
discrimination I also just
wanted to share that I just
spent time in my hometown of
Alamogordo this week witnessed
first hand outside people
standing on the sidewalks right
outside of the high school
they're yelling at queer and
trans students as they went to
access education and so we are
wise to send the message and not
think that this isn't happening
here in New Mexico it was deeply
deeply saddening for my active
witness that in my home town.
Anyone's yes madam chair members
of the committee Planned
Parenthood of the rocky mountain
supports this.
Thank you anyone else wishing to
speak in the audience and
support before I go to the
online director Schlegel we have
heard your bill already and
passed it out so I just wanted
to know because I saw you in the
audience and you're welcome to
stay but I thought maybe you
want to spend other time doing
other things I just thought I'd
let you know sure okay.
you do okay
we have now going online those
wishing to speak in favor I see.
Patrick claim to lean Patrick.
Yes ma'am sure can hear me okay
yes.
A good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Patrick Killen registered
lobbyists for chevron as a
member of the business community
that strongly protects LGBTQ
employees across all
jurisdictions including here in
New Mexico chevron urges you to
vote yes on H. B. two oh seven
we believe it is time to close
the state's current loophole for
discrimination against LGBTQ
individuals Senator is very
proud to be the first major
integrated energy company in the
United States to offer domestic
partner benefits to all
employees fully implement trance
and clues of health care
benefits and include sexual
orientation and gender identity
in our nondiscrimination
policies as a company we assert
the passage of HB two oh seven
will send a clear signal to
other businesses with strong
discrimination policy
nondiscrimination policies
looking to invest in New Mexico
that this state is truly open
for business and does not
tolerate discrimination in any
form we thank Representative
Ortez for bringing H. B. two oh
seven forward and we urge the
committee to vote yes on the
bill today to protect all New
Mexicans thank you.
Thank you
I think the name is Gage
Burnett.
Hello yes my name is gauge for
that I'm a graduate student at
New Mexico State University of
arm also the president of
students for reproductive
justice which is an organization
that was founded by students
under the LGBT programs or
office heading I I want to in
particular thank the speaker
from the quality New Mexico for
mentioning the important impact
this bill will have on young
adults I like so many other
trans and queer students came to
New Mexico State University
hoping to build a better future
for myself and for my family and
as much as we'd like to hope
otherwise the fact is that New
Mexico and university system is
not immune from the issues of
discrimination that we've seen
across the country and so for
young people like myself it is
absolutely critical that these
protections appear in the law us
so that we can a so the state
can fulfill that promise of a
better future that it is made
both to the residents of New
Mexico open here their whole
lives and to those like myself
who have come here.
To to build a future as
authentically in use as
possible.
Each thank you.
And we
believe they were of our own.
Thank you madam chair my name is
really big about and I'm a
workers rights attorney from the
New Mexico Center on poverty we
thank the sponsors for
introducing this important bill
we stand in support of H. B. two
oh seven because of modernized
the current Human Rights Act to
ensure that all government
entities and those receiving
taxpayer dollars including state
agencies state contractors and
grantees are prohibited from
discriminating against
individuals based on certain
personal characteristics the
Human Rights Act is importing
body of laws that protect
Mexicans from discrimination and
enforces those protections laws
currently read by many public
entities six groups and this
results in long protracted
litigation to determine who is
covered the bill would ensure
that the act is a holistic one
stop shop for comprehensive
nondiscrimination coverage for
all New Mexicans it New Mexicans
but clearly including public
entities additionally by
expanding it further defining
certain protected
characteristics of the act such
as gender gender identity and
sexual orientation this bill
ensures that as many New
Mexico's possible protected from
discriminatory behaviors for
these reasons we support this
bill and urged committee to Pat
that's it thank you thank you
that concludes our our public
comment and back to the sponsor
anything you'd like to add
before we go to the committee
thank you madam chair.
All right questions
Representative night for.
Thank you madam chair
I do have one concern and and
that is.
Way public contractors to
provide.
You it seems to me that that
could include.
Religious organizations who
have.
Programs that have been
established or contracted with
the state to provide.
And my concern is that that you
would have.
That religious organization then
having to.
Go against its own tenants with
respect to certain issues.
And would have to maybe give up
that governmental contract it
was that your intention Madam
chair representative Madam chair
representative Nibert Nibert
our intention is for public
contractors and anyone receiving
taxpayer dollars from the state
to not discriminate on the basis
of what's in the Human Rights
Act and what was added to the
Human Rights Act.
We we hope that any anyone who
receives our taxpayer dollars
are not discriminating and
that's that's what our intent is
so not using our taxpayer
dollars to to discriminate.
So madam chair representative
that that's my concern is that.
The the breadth of this is
basically to put.
In this instance religious
organizations.
At the decision making point to
either continue to supply those
services that they're receiving
state monies for forty give up
those programs.
If they.
Wish to continue to practice
whatever tenants that they may
have M. and this is not just
with respect to the services are
providing but I read this is be
much broader employment
practices and all of those
things that would go hand in
hand and and so I'm I'm
concerned that the breadth of
this
Deborah I didn't see a religious
exemption and here I didn't see
any any exemption there and so
on I'm concerned that maybe
some communities may.
Not have service some services
that they're currently having
and I don't think.
I I guess I didn't read this is
they be discriminating against
people that are getting the
services but I'm more concerned
with their employment practices
and I just don't see an
exemption for that and and maybe
you can enlighten me or I think
I I understand your intent is to
to use to include them and force
them to make that decision.
Madam chair representative
Nibert I'd like for Kathy love
to to answer that question.
Madam chair person and
Representative I would also
direct you to section and I'm on
the last page of the bill and
the very last provisions of that
section provides that nothing in
this subsection shall be
construed to require a
governmental and fewer public
contractor providing services or
programs beyond those services
or programs to the specific
populations that that that they
are tasked with serving and so I
think that this gives some
comfort on that issue certainly
if that if a religious
organization decides that it
wants to find say a homeless
shelter this law is intended to
prohibit them if they're taking
government money from
discriminating against people
however they are not required to
provide services that are not
within their typical we'll house
or within their their typical
function.
Madam chair and representative
and and what's your name is love
yes.
Is there anything in here about
the employment aspect because
I'm less concerned about the
services because I think the
most organizations are providing
services should provide them.
Not worry about any any of that
stuff but but I'm more concerned
about.
Their employment practices
because I I think a religious
organizations probably not going
to want to.
Be in the position of having to
hire someone that their tenants.
Are adverse to if it is that I
make myself clear and am I don't
I don't know whether there's
other laws that cover that or
whether the this is the
The piece of legislation that
deals with that but that's
that's my real concern and if
this love would have a COVID of
that I'd appreciate it.
Madam chairperson and committee
members and Representative I I
think the answer to that is that
if they are accepting government
money to do the functions that
they are doing then they cannot
discriminate however if there
are lots and lots of services
that faith based organizations
can provide that are not under
the rubric of accepting
government money and that's a
different story.
Thank you madam chair that's.
Representative Sapan ski.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative
I
am really glad that you brought
this legislation forward I think
it's.
Right update to the Human Rights
Act.
I think anything we can do to
make our communities safer more
welcoming
and free of discrimination is is
really really important work for
the entire state as we heard
from some of the public comment
today madam chair I just had a
technical fix to propose.
That I believe we could do on
the fly if madam chairs willing
it's page seven.
Line two.
you have.
Governmental entity means a
state or any local public body
however in the next definition
you have public body needs a
state or local government so I
would just propose that page
seven line to we would strike
the word local.
and.
I would propose that as an
amendment for the committee's
consideration.
So we have a I guess
interpretive.
A motion.
I would move that amendment
madam chair on page seven line
to just removing the board of
local the second.
Representative night for
would you like to explain your
thinking presented.
Thank you madam chair I believe
since public but it's sort of a
circular reference that but the
way that it is drafted right now
so.
Click body is defined as
including a state or local
government and so I think to
make that a governmental entity
definition consistent
we can just remove the word
local because otherwise local
public body is not defined in
the bill.
The discussion of Representative
Lane ventured thank you I had
flagged the same thing I was
gonna ask question about because
I when I first read the bill
about this is there's a
technicality in there that I
don't think was intended I think
either have to strike local or
somehow and local into the
definition of public body
because right now
I think there's a there's a
technical so I agree.
The other question about the
proposed amendment.
So what's the.
He is.
Madam chair yes it is thank you.
So we still need to vote on it
so.
Let's call the roll
Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane yes Mr
speaker Representative McQueen.
Representative Nibert yes
Representative read.
Representative Rehm.
Representative so fancy yes
madam vice chair yes.
Madam chair yes.
By a vote of seven to zero we
of top to your amendment.
Thank you madam chair
representative.
For.
I am concluded okay
Representative Romero just a
couple comments I am so grateful
to be signed on to this
legislation madam chair
Representative this is so
critical I think and.
The world that we're in today
and to outwardly show our
support protection for services
that we a want the government to
adhere to in non discrimination
and the values that hopefully we
share as New Mexicans and to
ensure that you know of in what
we're propping up and endorsing
meets those demands and I'm just
grateful to all of the advocates
all of those in support and
fighting for this and just
really grateful to be part of a
contract thank you other
discussion of the bill.
One of line.
Thank you madam chair.
so I heard in the presentation
that there's a there's a
The state of either was an
appellate or Supreme Court I
don't know that it really
matters for purpose my question
in some around nineteen eighty
early eighties.
As.
Has there been any decisions on
the books regarding
I think this is for
accommodation or notices for
services to the rent any
decisions on the books regarding
services.
And discrimination as it applies
to the state since this act was
updated.
And madam chair and
representative lane I think I
just want to be clear I think
what you're asking is since that
Supreme Court case in nineteen
eighty has there been anything
else madam chair so my
understanding is that we've
updated the Human Rights Act
quite a bit since that decision
came out and so I'm a little
surprised to hear that.
Of governmental entities could.
to deny services based upon a
legal definition of
discrimination and so I'm just
wondering if there's been any
cases that upheld that practice
since.
I understand Madam chair
representative lane so there
have there have been a number of
District Court cases that were
dismissed because of that Reid
because of that ruling in
nineteen eighty and that I am
aware of there have not been any
appeals or attempts to go back
and revisit that
to the judicial channel.
The manager so when you say
number discord cases this
mystery saying that somebody
brought suit against a
governmental entity claiming
discrimination based upon the
Nile Services and that case was
dismissed and madam chair
representative lane in fact I
just over a year ago Albuquerque
public schools was accused of
discrimination racial
discrimination by a student
in the classroom and and the
District Court judge dismissed
the case and said racial
discrimination is covered at the
federal level but you'll have to
go file at the federal level
that is not prohibited and
state.
madam chair so page fourteen
paragraph M..
So we're talking about
discrimination in providing
services in this context that
right.
Madam chair yes Representative
Eli.
And madam chair so.
Why does the bill limited to
only government entities are
public contractors.
Madam chair representative lane
because of private entities have
already because private entities
recovered and public
accommodations and so this was
the only loophole that existed.
Madam chair.
So then why is there a need to
loop in.
Contractors I mean these are
private companies.
Madam chair representative lane
because we since we're making
these updates we wanted to be
clear about contractors because
no cases been brought forward it
was my hope not to come back
again down the road and have to
close another loophole and so
our our feeling was that when a
private entities acting on
behalf of the government that
might that that might still be
read as as permissible without
explicitly stating that it was
not.
Thank you madam chair.
Others wishing to discuss the
bill as amended Representative
local.
Two zero seven and then.
And seconded by Representative
Romero yes that's right okay
very good.
One moment sure we will wait for
Representative ring.
Fair is fair Representative.
Jessica.
And.
The fund.
Are we good to go thank you
thank.
Yeah.
Okay.
okay
would you call the roll please
Senator Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey yes.
Representative Lane no.
Mr speaker yes.
Representative McQueen.
Representative Nibert no for.
Representative read no.
Representative Rehm
representatives of Penske yes.
Madam vice chair yes.
Madam chair yes.
I oppose six.
We have to pass.
All school.
Thank you thank you madam chair
members.
That is what is
going back to our agenda we are
now on house bill one fifteen
home inspector licensing
examination changes.
Representative good to see or
not have I guess we've had one
you've had no this is your first
bill okay.
All right the welcome feel free
to start your presentation.
Thank you very much madam chair
this is my first bill in front
of this committee and I think
you today I am here presenting
house bill one fifteen
it is regarding the home
inspectors licensing act which
is legislators legislation put
in place and was adopted and and
twenty nineteen
this bill as amended will
require the board for the New
Mexico home inspectors to adopt
to improve a licensing exam and
insurers and clarifies that the
approved exam is cycle
metrically sound
which I just learned the state
so cycle magically sound means
that a legally defensible and
protects the board and the
department from legal
liabilities for claims real
illegal discrimination and bias
and examination that is required
for licensors I have a an expert
witness today and I'd like him
to introduce himself thank you.
Thank you hi Randy.
Good morning good afternoon
madam chair members of the
committee already trainer
Richard lobbyist for the
examination board of
professional home inspectors
I I
I just thanks for the question
you have an.
Thank you before we go to
questions I'll ask if there's
anyone in the audience in
opposition to this bill.
I don't see any hands raise this
year when anyone online in
opposition to this bill.
No interest if paid.
Clean.
So we have a good.
We have a committee so and two
people have a copy of the
committees of.
Do we have a committee substance
this was substituted in commerce
okay okay okay okay great thank
you so.
Anyone in the audience wishing
to speak in support of the bill.
Anyone wishing to speak in
support of the bill.
Right.
The comment that was made to me
maybe you heard it is the term
psycho metrically has is not in
the in the committee so that we
have in front of us correct Mr
madam chair and representatives
that was part of the state we've
decided that to remove it.
given that all of us had to use
a thesaurus.
Really hard and I don't see.
Yes yes ma'am.
I think that's wise.
Of anything the concluding
comments before we go to the
committee thank you very much of
Madam chair and committee the
thank you for passing this
adopted act originally and I
hope to amend it it has given
months consumer confidence in
this industry as a as we deal
with not just our own of buyers
and sellers but people from come
from other areas.
Okay
Questions.
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair.
I won't use the word that's not
mentioned in here because I
can't pronounce it but you you
mentioned that the it was to
comply with the legal
requirements but there's a word
that you did use in here that I
think.
Is going to attract litigation
and that's on page seven line
nine.
For the first word.
What.
Madam chair representative isn't
the word adopt page seven line
line.
One we're not in this.
The words strict.
You put a word like that in and
you are guaranteed litigation on
this issue.
Madam chair
Representative Nibert
I agree with you.
This language it was provided to
us by our LD and I agree with
you I think we that that does
students would work without that
word.
Chair representative as we could
use that as a friendly amendment
then I will make the motion to.
Remove on page seven line nine
the word strict.
And we have a motion.
motion to remove the word strict
on page seven line line made by
Representative.
Representative.
Further discussion on a.
Could you call the roll Senator.
Representative Vodafone.
Representative Chasey.
Right yes.
Mr speaker.
Representative McQueen.
Representative Nibert yes
Representative three.
Representative cream.
Representative said yes.
Yes.
Chair yes.
Is there.
In order to.
Representative Representative
Nibert thank you madam chair of
Madam chair representative of.
Did you get any feedback from
people who are currently home
inspectors and whether they
approve it or not if so do they.
Are they of proving of the
language to to come up with.
Madam chair representative I.
I have had new feedback although
my expert witness me from an
inspector's as a group it
individual inspectors in
industry are very grateful for
this written requirement since
twenty nineteen as it is
professionalizing them in
industry and build credibility
all you'll to my expert witness
if he has a further
clarification Madam chair
representative
not specifically no
I I I should share with all of
you why we're doing this the
minutes of probably pretty good
question answer for you
the the concern here most of the
exam for licensing in the state
of New Mexico if not all of them
I should say or I hate to say it
psychometric we sound basically
they've been vetted by people
who who
make these exams to build these
exams and they make sure that
they're not biased
discriminatory or anything like
that is a whole network of
people who do that and a very
smart people to do these things
and we were recently
confronted with a situation
where someone was trying to take
their membership organizations
licensing exam other membership
exam and make that the state
exam.
And so this would this would
prevent them from doing that
unless there bill is and Mr exam
is complying with the standards
for educational and
psychological testing so what
we're doing here is is we don't
care of what yes we use we just
wanna make sure that it meets
certain standards and have been
certified by third party so we
know we have an exam that is a
fair exams again not
discriminatory not biased and so
this the situation that occurred
in this occurred over the last
year and a half it was in order
to it was a person on the board
who was trying to do this in my
client challenge them and they
we're stopped twice because the
challenges were successful and
so we decided to step forward
and just put this with
requirement in place Mr chair is
but the test we have is it being
used for membership.
I'm sure that's all the
questions I have thank you.
Any other questions I have of
Representative Romero thank you
madam chair so I'm also trying
to understand impetus for this
at this time as well and how the
qualification Act or
qualifications being that we're
kind of in a desperate.
state with having qualified
inspectors even at the level
that we are now I know that
building inspectors are of R. as
in much need
And in high demand and there's a
lot of delays because of can you
know just the explosion of
construction but also the need
for these folks to come and so
does this help.
And is there any reason why this
is going to make it easier for
these folks to become certified
so that we can help this
industry that's really quite
suffering from not having as
many inspectors we need right
now.
Thank you madam chair and
representative so this is for
home inspectors which is
different than building
inspectors and I believe it will
help because as the consumers
from not just all around the
state but also from other states
they would want to know that
words like home inspector and
certification and what their
knowledge and education is has
some level of standard and this
will require that I don't know
if it's an additional
requirement it is just the
certification that we make sure
that we stay at it and care
reviewed a national standard and
and I will stand in case my
expert witness has any further
clarification I think that into
the questions Madam chair
representative then what is the
difference between a home
inspector in a building
inspector service thank you very
much madam chair and
representative so a building
inspector is usually used for
commercial or large buildings
and you have to use them for
every stage of building they'll
make sure concrete is said to
have we're the right Ryrie
before their and it's called the
green tag it before you can go
to your next at home inspectors
when you're making the largest
purchase of your life which is
usually home and you want
somebody to go in and make sure
that that your foundation is
solid and that there's no right
honor what the or there'd be
different different types of
inspections that happen the two
general inspection for you
provide you that feedback while
you're still in your pending
period so if you want to make an
adjustment on your home price or
actually walk away from the deal
you to have that opportunity
given their information.
So madam chair Representative
Does this examination require
additional fees for being that
it is a third party what on the
consumer side for those who want
to become a home inspector to
questions first is how much does
it cost with the imposition of
this exam third party.
Second is what advantage of
having the third party
valuation what does it find and
then finally do of the folks
that are currently inspecting
have to now be subject to this
in order for them to continue
their licensure.
Thank you so much madam chair
and representative so B. for
twenty nineteen there was no
certification program but
through the wisdom of this
legislature the the now required
home inspectors to have
certifications to get certified
for a basic certification is
about two hundred and fifty
dollars it is overseen by a
panel this additional it's not
really additional it's we're
just making sure that how the
certified.
The legislative original
legislation did not specify how
the certified home inspectors to
do making sure that that
certification is peer reviewed
and nationally accepted
I am so sorry I know I missed
one of your questions.
and they're grandfathered in
Matt and sorry madam chair and
representatives and the current
inspectors are grandfathered in
there's no additional cost with
the imposition of this bill
that's currently in contact and
then on the page one home I
believe them sorry Madam chair
representative makes point here
you mentioned about a building
inspector in a home inspector
the home inspector all
specifically
for bids the home inspector to
do any inspection on echo
related items.
Process.
So madam chair Representative if
it's not necessarily up to code
is it more so just like
habitability here what's the
sort of.
What is the level of you know
interest that why would hire a
home inspector over a building
inspector.
So madam chair representative so
I I I I feel like I've asked you
to ask that question because I
am a licensed realtor and so I
would advise you to never make
large and it purchases unless
you have them inspected they
might be able to tell you if
there's cracks in the foundation
what your level of termite
activity is if there's a leak in
the roof how many skylights are
cracked
and and so on and so far before
you actually close on that
purchase so madam chair
Representative they wouldn't be
able to get you up to code or
verify that it is of code but
they're able to understand
whether or not they're
pre existing issues with the
home itself so madam chair
representative that is actually
a bigger question and so there
are certain things that they can
tell you that don't require to
put a hole in the wall they can
say that hot water heater is not
at the current level of code but
you can be grandfathered in
because that hot water heater
was eight years ago and it was
installed eight years ago now
and is no longer button they
can't put holes in your wall or
see like what type of studies
were used in the construction
okay
I guess I'm still trying to
figure out the difference
between the two overall but I'll
move on on page eight madam
chair Representative they talk
about New Mexico specific
examinations prescribed by the
board can you just describe what
that would be like.
That would be New Mexico
specific.
Madam chair representative I'll
defer to my expert witness Madam
chair representative
choose the I'll use the New
Mexico building codes as an
example to answer this question
we have a when you get a lot of
money or a license the
contractor's license to take a
an exam and then you may have to
take an exam that is taken
exempt this specific to New
Mexico because we have a unique
building materials the state
particularly strawberry and
adobes etcetera the exact that
is this the New Mexico portion
of that that may also exist in
the home inspection world in
that provision was just and when
they're to allow them the
opportunity to provide not only
a national exam for home
inspectors but one that might be
more specific to New Mexico I
really couldn't I really don't
think there would ever be one
but we put it in there just case
they wanted to for the two thank
you madam chair that's it thanks
thank you other questions.
Venture move into passive house
commerce and economic
development committee substitute
for house bill one fifteen as
amended.
We have a motion to approve.
prove house commerce and
economic development committee
substitute for house bill three
sixty four as amended made by
Representative lane seconded by
Representative Sapan ski to call
the roll please Representative
Alcon.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane yes yes
speaker.
Representative McQueen.
Representative Nibert yes.
Representative we.
Yes.
Representative green.
Representative once again yes.
Representative madam vice chair
yes.
Madam chair yes.
Vote of seven to zero we have
with us.
Many substitute for house bill
one fifteen.
We're plowing through these
bills thank you thank you thank
you thank you.
Of the I.
Could he be in a room at
actually we did have more to
roll that's great so just to
clarify again we have rolled
house bill two thirty two we had
a a substitute come in that we
need to address so we now are on
house bill three sixty four.
Nothing but love in this
committee like it actually madam
chair I was resident I was
raised in a family where they
make fun use the weather show
you love so.
The love in jail come.
Yeah maybe a little too much.
Representative it is a Saturday
Representative Lane thank you
madam chair so.
Madam chair this bill brings
parity to classic county so as
the panel will recall in twenty
one this this legislature passed
some pretty extensive fledged
place regarding alcohol and that
provided for alcohol delivery
which we're currently doing but
one of the weird part about that
we did is if your class state
county and you have a billing of
more than ten thousand square
feet you're not allowed to do
alcohol delivery so what that
means as a practical senses
Smith up in Farmington is
prohibited from doing alcohol
delivery but this very same
Smith's down to Roswell is free
to do alcohol delivery and so
we're just trying to do away
with that disparity.
The other thing I'll highlight
is there's language in the bill
that protects advertising for
these alcohol delivery side so
what happens a lot of times is
the big boys will come in and
pay a large fee to get their
product place at the top of the
website and that hurts our local
growers are local breweries so
so that was negotiated with
local stakeholders and make sure
that they are being unfairly
treated so and what can with me
madam chairs Kerry robin brindar
as my my experten with that will
stand for questions.
We twelve years with.
I know just enough to be
dangerous only.
everybody on the committee how's
that.
All right
That initial presentation why
don't we go to the audience and
those wishing to speak stand in
opposition to this bill and
speak in opposition to the bill
in the audience please raise
your hand.
Anyone online wishing to speak
in opposition to this bill
please raise your hand.
Okay.
Anyone in the audience wishing
to speak in favor of the bill
please raise your hand okay when
we start with Jason and go back
thank you madam chair members
the committee Jason Weaks
registered lobbyists for both
the distillers guild and the
brewers guild in New Mexico.
We send it's we're this
legislation
the provision that got put in
the liquor reform bill covers a
couple years ago that
differentiates between class and
other counties was actually to
try to protect local distillers
members unfortunately didn't
really do that it is such
unworkable language that home
delivering classe counties just
doesn't happen and actually
that's to local that's to the
small local brewers and
distillers detriment because we
do place our products in whole
foods in another larger stores
the anti shelving provision in
there is specifically protecting
us so that we are an equal
footing the other thing that I
would point out about this bill
and this is unique is that it
requires a server's permit for
an individual to actually
deliver at home which means that
when you have the deliver
delivering you're having
somebody who's actually a
certified server doing that
delivering which is important
this is a public safety issue to
going beyond just what you get
with the store clerk at a store
so all those reasons we stand
strong support of this and hope
you pass it.
Madam chair members of the
committee Jason Espinoza
president and CEO The New Mexico
retell Association this tennis
trucks for the legislation is
noted this really just brings
parity in terms of size and
geography so the all of our
members here in New Mexico are
treated the same thank you.
Madam chair and members of the
committee my name is Amanda
Eragon and I work for tractor
brewing company and tribal my
distillation small business and
we have four locations in the
state and we support this
legislation we would like to
thank leader lane for working
with us on this bill to make
delivery more accessible for
small businesses and in
particular for the language
around advertising thank you.
A good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee and Pat
block registered lobbyist for
Walmart I think that the those
who spoke before me covered it
very well so I'll just echo the
Sanchez say this bill will
return us to a place of parity
and remover we're to carve out
thank you very much.
Thank you.
Anyone else in the audience
wishing to speak in favor.
Those online wishing to speak in
favor of this bill please raise
your hand.
Okay we'll go back.
To.
We'll go to the committee chair
that we stand for questions
thank you.
Thank.
Representative number wanted to
continue and with comedy
routine.
One of the madam chair.
Please at the minority leader
had a long line of experts in
the subject matter is favor of
but but the you know this is one
of the few areas where I can say
the rural parts of the state.
Actually get treated better than
the urban parts of the state and
for once you guys complete feel
our pain so no I support the
legislation and of appreciate
doing that but
Usually the tables are turned
were the the large urban centers
get the the benefits of a lot of
this legislation and we're left
hanging to dry so I just like to
point that out thank you madam
chair.
Anyone else with questions or
comments on the bill.
I I just had a question about
the delivery
so.
stores.
Use outside do I read the FIR
some the analysis I just want
clarification do these
deliveries happen by independent
delivery people or in store
delivery or you know employees
of the store or both could you
explain how that works the
material in my experience in the
madam chair and members of the
committee in my my externalities
no so it can happen one of two
ways so that there may be
individual retailers who have
hired staff who are drivers who
have their servers license and
they're the ones who were
driving in order to actually
deliver on that that alcohol
purchases there is already in
the statute the ability for
third party delivery so thank
GrubHub right GrubHub has to go
to the state and they have to
actually get a third party
delivery permit which we already
have the rules promulgated for
in which all of their drivers
would have to meet that
requirement around the server's
license so you could then have
you know that alcohol be picked
up by a licensed third party
delivery permit holder to then
make the delivery using the
server's permit under that
delivery permit that they
receive from the state so can
happen one of two ways okay so
it's either or in a state and
there's no distinction between
the size of the store or any of
that okay okay got it okay thank
you very much that was helpful
clear for.
Any other discussion on the
bill.
Boy you got off light.
All right if you call did anyone
make a motion.
The
past.
Our.
do pass made by Representative
Sapan ski who seconded over here
Representative Nighbor seconded
from would you call the roll
please.
Is.
The.
Representative yes Mr speaker
is Representative McQueen.
Representative Nibert.
Yes.
Representative read.
Representative green.
Representative pants yes.
Madam vice chair yes madam chair
yes by a vote of seven to have
fun.
Committee substitute for House
three sixty four okay and you
have a duty manager you're
welcome.
Thank you.
Should your.
