Representative Cook is here now
Your.
We.
So I wanted to let everybody
know we have some interpreters
on for the for.
Bill and our agenda
and it would be very helpful we
tried to speak slowly.
However we have another item
that's really first but it's not
listed on the agenda it's to
take action on house joint
resolution nine for which there
is now a committee substitute.
And I.
Well let
We will begin with that.
And.
And I'm going to let
Representative Chandler and
Alison speak if they want also
our chief analyst Allan is still
who prepared who sent the
request to the Legislative
Council Service what explains
the changes and you should have
it in your share file and
with that we turn it over to the
representatives.
Thank you madam chair.
I would like to ask my co
sponsor to explain it.
Okay.
Right.
Thank you madam chair and I am
unit I'm I have been I am a
technically challenged person.
Thank you madam chair as you
will recall during a hearing on.
We received a very good
suggestions from the committee
that we change the language some
want to include or other
services if you look online
fourteen and fifteen fees
something to.
Those items were suggested by I
believe speaker in golf and also
I believe added to the the
substitute madam chair was
Services provided by law and I
believe that was the suggestion
perhaps of your staff I'm not
quite sure who it may be and
have been in Legislative Council
or staff but those that's the
essence of it and
with that we're happy to answer
questions.
Before we go to the questions
madam chair.
The last suggestion that my co
sponsor mentioned adding the
words or other service provided
by law the way I had written
down what was suggested was or
other services as provided by
law I'm wondering if the word as
makes a difference.
I'll go to Representative
Allison I will go to L. L. N. K.
Cristea hello our chief analyst
on that.
You're good now we can hear you
hello okay thank you I'm still
showing a new time
Representative Allison we had
what the drafters calls and
statutory style issues and so
between the drafters and the
speaker's office and Committee
and minority analysts we work
out the ledge the language that
here we believe it needs your
intent and
as far as back little group of
people knows it should all be
good.
Okay madam chair thank you very
much for that in this case still
because I just didn't want to go
into of a big debate over the
two letter word.
Thank you madam chair.
So the Charle entertainer motion
for a do not pass on house joint
resolution nine and to do passed
on the house Judiciary Committee
substitute for House treatments
late will reach the line.
Madam chair representative.
Motion by Representative Lewis.
Second second by Representative
you lie.
So is there for the discussion
on the house joint resolution by
committee members.
Madam chair.
Just a point on the share file
for today that bills not listed
you have to go back to the prior
committee meeting to get that
bill on the share file.
You are absolutely right
representative Nibert and I said
that.
Without making that clear.
Will the court please call the
roll.
Representative okay yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Cook yes.
Mr speaker.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Lewis yes.
Representative Nibert.
I'm not ma'am.
Representative main no ma'am.
Representative Townsend.
Thanks.
Yes.
Please go back to Representative
Representative Cook no.
Madam chair yes.
This photo sixty three we have a
do not pass on H. J. R. nine and
to pass on committee substitute
for HDR nine.
Thank you very much and thank
you Representative for coming
back to us today we'll see
another time thank you very
much.
North.
I I I.
I want to buy the reservation I
wanted to let everyone who might
be in attendance now what are
order is going to be today I did
analysis on the floor the
sponsors for.
And one eleven asked that they
be moved to on Wednesday.
And so what we're going to do
now is begin with our first item
house bill one twenty four our
next item after that will be
almost so one twenty nine.
Then we will do house bill one
ninety three.
And house bill sixty and house
bill one sixty six it gives you
an idea of where you might.
Come in on the.
Agenda and
The needs to step out for a
minute
to do that and then we'll you
know we'll come back to you let
us know when you're back.
Let's begin with Representative
make all Garcia.
And his
Expert witnesses.
Thank you madam chair.
The committee.
I'm and I have
Gabrielle you binance goose mon.
And Marcela Diaz they should be
in the attendee.
Column.
Madam chair representative
Garcia did you see someone was
with essential they what do that
I see them as an organizational
participant.
I don't I don't have.
Kind of
Information from Gabriela or
Marcella.
That there's somebody else to
kind of fill their.
There's if not if they're not
available.
There's also so most
employability and all.
So that might be one of your
experts.
Madam chair
And and Marcela Diaz from so
most as well I see my selling
out in the attendees.
Okay.
Okay madam chair I think once we
move our overall start.
Okay.
She's here with us.
And.
Just reminding everyone to speak
slowly.
Okay.
somehow my son was on board and
madam chair we have a
substitute.
So if we could move the
substitute for discussion
purposes and I'll go straight
into the presentation on the
some.
Vice chair will move that right
yes.
Was not in my phone may mute but
madam chair.
I thought.
Please proceed Representative
thank you thank you madam.
The committee.
Madam chair of the cell for
house bill one twenty four we'll
create a privacy policy for all
state agencies.
And madam chair the this up for
one twenty four reads that no
public officer or employee can
disclose sensitive personal
information acquired by virtue
of his or her position within a
state agency to anyone outside
of that state agency madam chair
this up for house bill one
twenty four I would also require
state employees to keep
confidential the sensitive
personal information they
acquired through their jobs I
will provide for limited
exceptions for sharing and madam
chair sensitive personal
information quote on quote is
defined as a social security
number.
An individual taxpayer
identification number also known
as the nineteen.
And sensitive personal
information is defined as a
person status as a recipient of
public assistance or as a crime
victim.
And let me Madam sensitive
personal information is defined
as a person's sexual orientation
gender identity immigration
status and national origin or
religion and madam chair I will
turn it over to my experts.
To explain why we are going with
the sub.
Versus continuing with the
original piece of legislation
and also go into the exceptions
that we have in this legislation
that did not comply with the
legislation before us so if we
could allow Marcella to come on
board.
Hi madam chair members of the
committee my name is my Senate
test was almost of what you'll
need all our other expert
witness who is the technical
expert witness is on her way and
I believe but I can starts with
the committee substitute to what
you have is the committee
substitute to house bill one
talk to for some of the key
differences between our original
house bill one twenty four in
this is slightly significant
change and that is that we
remove the prohibition of
disclosure of sensitive
information from the
governmental contact act and it
is now placed within chapter ten
as a standalone bill there were
concerns expressed by members of
both chambers that it would not
be or should not be in the GCA
the governmental contact that
because that applied to not only
state employees but all public
employees of local jurisdictions
and elected officials we wanted
to make sure that this act would
only apply to state employees
and be very clear about that so
that is the the major shift
since our bill is no longer in
the G. CA we also have to add
penalties and enforcement
language which track with the
penalties in the G. CA
but and otherwise the substance
of the substitute is essentially
the same an additional change
that we've made in the committee
substitute is in response to
some of the concerns that
brought forward by members of
state government and elections
in Indian Affairs Committee and
some of you are on that
committee as well as the
department of health and we
wanted to make sure that this
act clearly only applies to
intentional disclosures we
wanted to ensure that employees
making in a verdant disclosures
were not being penalized and
then after many discussions with
the department of health we also
included an exception in
addition to the.
exceptions that got a lot will
go through at that we would that
we would exempt
Disclosure is expressly
permitted by HIPAA the federal
health insurance portability and
accountability act so that is
what's going on with that major
changes and of course the reason
why we're doing this is to
ensure that people in our
communities have that with their
vulnerable and that have
information that they think
would make them vulnerable that
when they interact with state
government agencies including
the department of health
particularly important now with
are COVID health public health
measures and vaccination it's a
truck that they feel confident
that that information isn't
going to get shared and be
shared outside those agencies
and so that is precisely why we
are moving this forward at this
time and the if if if you would
permit madam chair members of
committee Gabriela can talk
about some of the key exceptions
that have been coming up for
people.
Chair I yield to up elect to
kind of wrap up our presentation
on this up.
Thank you very much go ahead
Gabriele line is good afternoon
thank you madam chair members of
the committee as previously
mentioned this bill does provide
a number of exceptions
including most importantly
number three hundred exception
to IPRA
this bill will not change
anything about how state
agencies currently handle it bro
and in one of our previous
Committee hearings there was a
question about specifically
about the State Land Office and
we've been able to address that
concern and they clarify for us
as well that nothing will change
in terms of the inspection of
those records at the State Land
Office and other important
exception is number five of
court documents we had a
conversation with the AOC and
two thousand and nine to ensure
they don't have any concerns
either and so we're providing
this exception because they want
to ensure that
during the daily work of court
clerks and they handled many
documents do not have to go
through every single page and
redact documents redacted.
Personal sensitive information
and other exception within this
bill was one that was placed on
the house floor back in two
thousand nineteen an exception
for the whistleblower protection
and Miss India's also referenced
an exception of disclosures are
expressly permit permitted under
the federal law commonly known
as hippa and with that I will
you look back to Representative
Garcia thank you madam chair
that doesn't in our presentation
we stand for questions.
And I'm going to go to the
audience and Representative
Garcia and I talked about the
fact that you had a lengthy
hearing the last time and he's
has fewer people who are
intending to speak the statement
in the interest of time.
We will go ahead and do a poll
of those in attendance.
If you favor the bill please say
yes are you know vote yes and if
you're in opposition based now
we'll have that vote for fifteen
seconds.
Look says it all in attendance
are in favor of the bill and I
will go now to public comment
and see if we have any hands
raised people who wish to speak
in favor I do.
The first one is galaxy S. ten
E. you may speak but you need on
your you have a minute to to to
speak to us.
And please introduce yourself.
I had.
We might have a difficult to
hear I'm gonna go to the next
person in line just Clark.
I had just.
Yourself thank you madam chair
and members of the committee my
name's just Clark and the
prevention manager for solace
crisis treatment center as the
Santa Fe area sexual assault
service center we're proud to be
a partner in the deep
collaboration that went into
creating a protective resolution
here in Santa Fe making it safer
for all community members to
report crimes in access the
support it's needed help from
violence.
We work with rape crisis center
statewide and unfortunately not
all of their clients can feel
confident that their immigration
status will not be used against
them when reporting outside of
locally protected jurisdictions.
With U. visas specifically
victims must be able to access
state agencies for certification
without fear especially for
communities that are targeted
for violence at disproportionate
rates.
No they can survivors have to
hesitate accessing support for
fear their status being
disclosed outside parties.
Hearing from violence can be a
long and painful journey and
your support of H. B. one twenty
four will help ensure that the
jurisdiction in which a crime
takes place doesn't make that
journey working full thank you.
Thank you.
Neil rocker.
Go ahead.
Good afternoon everyone my name
is Neil Rucker I'm the policy
council and regional manager of
the ACLU of New Mexico I'm
currently located in Los crucis
and I'm here to support this
bill on behalf of my
organization and our membership
of the ACLU of New Mexico we see
this very strong need and the
state to have a policy that
covers all New Mexicans private
in the sensitive information and
so I'm just here to support this
bill today thank you.
Barbara Schroeder.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members I represent
the Santa Fe faced network for
immigrant justice and we
strongly urge you to.
Of support this bill too many of
our immigrant neighbors have had
their families torn apart by the
actions of ice which were
facilitated by members of the of
New Mexico state agencies so.
We urge you to.
Issue a do pass for this bill
thank you very much.
Thank you Andrés someone who.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Andrea just about on the
executive director will they for
all of the reasons stated we
stand in support of house bill
one twenty four as amended
especially in regards to the
health and safety of all of our
our communities including
immigrant communities we thank
the sponsors and the community
members for bringing this
forward.
Jessica.
Go ahead.
Users.
When.
Yeah.
The committee.
Yes yes it comes out of the yes
I'm not a customer.
We're getting better
yes there I mean that's cool but
if you think I'm an employee of
the company that.
Representative Lujan activation
twenty quadruple activity that
the mi familia you make a
money that emergency water they
don't accept that at the moment
provided will be well what about
another corner
I'm gonna let it send them in
administrative here if it's
economical get me for my soonest
F. in the combat.
Is it.
You also will need I'm looking
at I will be able to and then
there
will be looking to stop going
looking.
In Spanish so when to let you
know that do we have anyone else
who wishes to speak.
I think we're ready to go to the
committee members.
All right let's see.
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative.
I'm.
We we've debated this bill
before and I guess we're gonna
do it again
A couple things that I'm still
continue to be concerned with is
the inadvertent dissemination
of.
Personal.
small.
Sensitive data that would
include social security number
or individual tax ID number.
And I'm continued debate concern
with that and not withstanding
the response you got from the
commission public lands are I
think it's too.
On the ship.
For more sheeter her role.
January debate concerned with
that issue.
And.
I'm not going to rehash what
I've already stated that the
statement made earlier was that
you've one of this limited this
to
make it knowingly unknowingly
dissemination of information and
I look at and section three of.
The bill.
And the only time we see
the word knowingly disseminated
is.
Online nineteen page three.
And so it seems to me that Bob
was standing what was stated the
only way a state employee gets
out from under some penalties
for a foreigner um.
The dissemination of personal
sense or sensitive personal
sensitive data is that they
Fall under this provision which
is.
if they disseminated not
knowingly or not willfully then
of that they would not be
subject to the misdemeanor of
the thousand dollar fine but
they would still be subject to.
Subsection Beijing would start
online chat right above that
which which basically allows the
institution of civil action for
the violation so the.
Statements that you've wanted to
knowingly and willfully.
I don't I don't see you that
that gives an employee very
much.
Comfort because I can still be
disciplined including the
discipline before court if the
actions brought in my reading
that incorrectly.
Representative Madam chair
representative Nibert
sh we answer that in terms of
the different differentiation
between items B. and C. E. R. X.
three an ideal to lock up area.
or more set up to do that.
Madam chair.
Hello you're on.
Thank you chair Representative
night bird if you look.
On page one.
Section two line twenty one.
The language is a state agency
employees shall not
intentionally disclose sensitive
personal information
and the sentence continues on
and on the recommendation from
Legislative Council Service we
only included intentionally
there there was a conversation
or debate whether we needed to
insert intentionally
throughout the built
specifically and section three
the enforcement section because
the fault was it would be a
redundant and since it's a
standalone Act that the
intentional
aspect would carry throughout
the legislation.
Madam chair and.
Thank.
Of.
Intentionally disclosing is.
If I contact the state land
office and ask for a document.
they're going to intentionally
seven after.
I guess what you're you're
saying is that the act sending
the document is not the that
Act that you're referring to but
it's it's they have to know that
the document contained sensitive
personal information and yeah
I'm I'm not sure you get their
online twenty one and twenty
two.
You certainly get there toward
the end and and that one
subsection I'm not sure you get
there and you're more widely
John.
Page one lines twenty one of
twenty two and so far we're
state employee I'll be a little
concerned about that because.
The.
Our enforcement provision.
A violation of nondisclosure.
Of the non disclosure of
sensitive and that ought to be
the disclosure not brought to
schools but violation of the
disclosure of sensitive personal
information
Which is a that is grounds for
decibel so.
No I'm if I'm the state employee
I. I would still be a little
concerned about the.
Representative of that and in my
mind that was your intention
I've been lines twenty one
twenty two of of page one
knowingly and willfully
Language ought to be reflected
there.
And.
Madam chair representative
mention was made that the.
The employees are I believe it
may have been a court contacts
but I think it would like water
supply to
the state land office which is
also a repository of public
records that they do not have to
go through the document to
determine if they need to read
that something that I hear that
correctly madam chair
Representative.
Madam chair representative
Nibert
I am here to hook up a lot.
In terms of responding to that
My understanding from the email
that was sent by the deputy
commissioner was that.
Our legislation really didn't
have an impact in terms of how
they.
Carry on business in a normal
fashion when it comes to.
what we're asking for is that
they automatically already have
in place the reduction of the
sensitive information that goes
up on a on a public request but
I know to Gabriela to also
elaborate on your question.
madam chair Representative
Representative Nibert I think
you were referring to the
concerns expressed in two
thousand nineteen by the
administrative office of the
courts we want to have a
conversation with them and from
that conversation was the
creation the insertion of the
exemption for
Court employees who as you know
have to handle hundreds of pages
of court documents so it wasn't
practicable for them to redact
all personal sensitive
information from those
particular court documents.
It.
Madam chair and and our
representative I would argue
that same
Analysis should apply to the
commissioner of public lands
because there are very large
documents
Some are maybe Dawn hundreds of
pages in length that are filed
with the commissioner of public
lands and am I I agree the state
employee you should not have to
read every word of a of a
hundred page document to
determine if there is a tax ID
number or social security number
are buried within that Dr and
that's that's my whole point.
we the state is a repository of
public information and we as a
state and trust barriers
entities with.
Not only in the repository but
receiving and disseminating our
public records and not just
public records of the agency
generates but public records
that are private individuals
submit to to those entities are
as part of the as part of the
public records and and so when
when I was a lawyer prepare.
An assignment and I put
information that may be.
Personal sensitive information
according to the staff according
to this bill
Frankly I want that information
made public.
I want to know that that people
are dealing with the ride
Institute and and you know I've
made this pitch before that we
as a state have that I'm done
some this service directive
folks on occasion by being
overly sensitive to what the
gets the gets disseminated or
what
it is capable of being reviewed
of those public repositories and
it does have an impact on on
actual people
and so when when I see that
we're trying to protect the
dissemination of that
information.
As a as a.
Lawyer who prepares documents
and puts some of that
information then
are you at all I I think it
ought to be disseminated now if
we want to therefore want to
really do something I can
suggest to you that in Texas
there is a statute in Texas that
basically says that when I
record when when I recorded
document.
On behalf of a client involving
a transaction.
That the client and the other
party have the right prior to
recording to read that in the
tax ID numbers or social
security numbers but it's it's a
burden on the that people
recording the instrument or
recording the pleading to do the
reduction not a burden on the
state or the state's employees
at and so if you're looking at
the documents a Texas lawyers
prepare there's always a blur
but the time that the parties
can can redact that information
prior to our our reporting the
instrument without the building
came to be altering the final
instrument.
Yeah
you know I wouldn't have a
problem with that but I do have
a problem with now all been
allies in state employees are
making them subject to this up
on.
For.
Disseminating public records
that may contain
Personal sensitive our our
information specifically tax ID
numbers and social security
numbers which would be the two
things that are commonplace in
the instruments that I see and
deal with on a daily basis I
made those arguments before it
continues in its present form
and not much is done about that
the I am concerned about setting
state employees up for a fall
with legislation such as this
thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative.
Care.
Representative
C. Representative Eli.
Madam chair I'm looking to see
if there's anyone else that's
ready to speak not only do pass.
Madam chair thank you they do
not have us I'm sorry yes yes
yes the committee substitute yes
madam chair okay.
And a second Representative
Lewis is that.
Right okay I'm.
If there's no further committee
discussion I just want to say I
think actually
Representative nine but I think
they tried to address the
concerns that you raised in the.
The state government ended in
Affairs Committee and
I appreciated the fact that
just because one explained that
by it's we're all just putting
it in the one placed in the
in the legislation right there
no not section two subsection
eight.
But
I know that we're on.
It will disagree so.
What we do so it depends what
you look at it this way or this
way
without I think we're ready to
call the roll.
Representative our current yes.
Representative Alcon yes.
Representative Cook no.
Mr speaker.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Lewis that.
Representative night there are
no ma'am.
Representative rain no ma'am.
Representative McQueen is joined
us Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Townsend.
Now.
Thanks.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Yes.
Seven to four we have a do not
pass on house bill one twenty
four able to to pass on the
committee substitute.
So thank you all very much
Representative Garcia and I know
you all worked hard on this and
I appreciate the the way you
economize your time to thank you
so much thank you madam chair
and thank you committee and god
bless you and another
difficult the need for for your
committee happens to all
thank you I understand that
we're well my next bill is house
bill one twenty nine and I think
we're getting the co sponsors
representatives are hard out and
Senator Ivey Soto joining us
shortly here.
For.
Thank you.
My dog was barking often on so
Representative Fajardo thanks
for being here thank acting
Senator Ivy Soto are you ready
to go we can go ahead and go he
is actually in the chair right
now it's if he pops out please
bring him into the room
he's gonna try and and and
dropping to three witnesses if
you could bring in as well.
Ralph McLish.
Make any and Caitlin look at
look at Rio.
Committee I think is is with us
and.
And I see Senator Ivey Soto
okay.
Welcome.
I'm not see at is Caitlyn a look
at Rio.
She she's here okay awesome she
was great okay perfect go ahead.
Awesome I thank you madam chair
and thank you members of the
committee this is H. B. one
twenty nine I'm this is a very
it's a it's a it's a and having
bill I've been spent a lot of
time reading looking at graphs
and
in state and all kinds of our
info grant with pictures and
it's still hard to hard for me
to actually really breaking down
understand some we're gonna do
our best today to to to break
this down to you this bill as a
result of some of the language
in a resolution passed by the
nationalists that copies of
state legislators you all know
that our own Senator Ivey Soto
is the current president.
I'm we always hear from my
constituents that about their
ability or lack of ability to
afford medicines some people say
that this is all the
manufacturer's fault some people
say this is the fault of the
pharmacy and some people blame
the insurers.
What this bill seeks to reduce
how much patients have to pay
for out of pocket for the
medicines at does three things
madam chair committee members.
Pharmacy benefit managers to
report how much they receive in
aggregate I'm sorry from
pharmaceutical manufacturers and
how much of that they pass on to
the health insurance it requires
a hundred percent of rebates to
be passed through to patients to
help them at the pharmacy
counter with the amount they pay
for out of pocket and ensure
that any payments and patient
makes or that is made on their
behalf by employer a patient
assistance foundation and
manufacturer copay assistance
counts towards the out of pocket
maximum the deductible or the
required cost sharing and madam
chair members of the committee
I'm going to let my co sponsor
center Ivey Soto speak as well.
Much of Madam chairman of the
committee so just read recently
this is so we've got we've got
from.
In order to takes.
Rates.
An inmate.
The best time so because
available to people as they're
trying to get to through their
deductible items over companies
and our pockets.
I'm
here.
Tapi have them is that that the
pharmacy benefit managers.
Europeans rebates.
This doesn't have this you pay
this.
So.
More insurance working.
We.
The for our the
Insurance kicks are present
right.
As.
That's a problem because we
because we're
in Stockwell always start up.
It's not what's wrong with with.
When my daughter was born.
And and and and more Mr spittle.
We are called there are not been
ruined and the second person you
want to come to the second floor
of the hospital to talk to the
business office.
Once we're done it because I
just assumed that one dollar
come almost a million times
and somebody to give us once and
so on I remember gestures to do
that and and I Senator one
real respect your business much
in your current state and
religious March popped.
As it comes out of the pocket of
your.
What
part of
the Senators.
Is is what's sure on the side of
the consumer that's what they're
intended for whether it is a
technical architect and
technical competitive that's a
lot of work to assist the
consumer.
Ops.
Actually take with regards that
are prescribed to them they are
called the.
What sets.
Since.
A partial server version of.
Sharks.
I want people to do.
Hi
this is what we know that for
instructional.
The products.
To what is happening here.
Some times on the side of the
consumer.
Osteopathic medical association
and our physicians are concerned
about compliance medical
compliance and their patients
who can't afford their
deductible.
Being able to stay compliance
with their medical regiment many
of the patients have chronic
illnesses and utilize many
different medications in order
to
Have a good quality of life and
they depend on paying off their
their deductibles and meeting
their out of pocket
requirements.
Up early in the year you know
like in January and February so
in the past I've been able to
use copay coupons from the
manufacturer what these coupons
would do what it would allow the
patient to pay only the copay
that's on the cards so it could
be like five dollars and the
rest of the copay would be
covered by this coupon and but
because they were able to apply
that payment to the to their
deductibles and their out of
pocket maximums.
They would reach thirty double
early in the year and then be a
hundred percent covered because
they have reached our out of
pocket limits it would be a
hundred percent coverage for the
rest of the year so many of us.
Never even think about are
deductible may be when Senator
Ivy Soto of child was born that
probably was the first time he
ever reached his deductible as
out of pocket expenses the
patients with chronic illness
think about thirty doctor bowl
every year.
And it seems very unfair.
That regardless of where the
payment came from it's not being
applied to their deductible and
I'll stop there because there's
many other people who have
really good information for you.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative Fajardo I'm
getting please.
Thank you doctor.
Yes sorry.
That's okay I answered anything
close madam chair members of the
committee I am barber mac in any
I have been a cancer doctor here
in New Mexico for thirty five
years and I owe former president
of the American medical
association I have first hand
experience with pharmacy benefit
managers locally as a cancer
doctor because I created a small
in house pharmacy in my practice
to help my patients get and be
able to afford expensive
chemotherapy we fill out the
paperwork that allows them to
get the coupons that Ralphs make
place was referring to.
I also have experience from the
American medical association
where we studied the pharmacy
benefit managers and we
estimated that forty two percent
of the cost to the patient is
added once the drug leaves the
manufacture.
Pharmacy benefit managers are
companies that were created by
the insurance industry to
negotiate discounts with the
manufacture however they have a
vault to become extremely
profitable they've acquired
commercial pharmacies
distributors created specialty
pharmacies and are now large
enough that they are buying the
insurance companies PBMs
negotiate discounts as a
percentage of the list price
they keep some of the discount
and passed some to the parent
insurance company and none to
the patient the higher the price
the more money the PBM makes
sometimes their markup has been
so high that the copay that is
charge the patient is higher
than the price of the drugs and
the contracts with pharmacies
for bid the pharmacist from even
letting the patient now.
Because a percentage based
discount on chemotherapy is
highly profitable PBMs have now
persuaded insurance companies to
mandate that all purchases must
go through their specialty
pharmacy they added dispensing
fee and they lower the price
paid to independent pharmacies
until they cannot afford to stay
in business the PBM that invites
the pharmacy to join their
network adding more profit to
their bottom line data sales
both to the manufactures a to
the insurance at another revenue
stream to the PBMs and last but
not least PBMs call back direct
and indirect remuneration DIR
fees from the pharmacy also in
months after the drug was
purchased this is why the AMA
opposed CVS Caremark PBM
purchasing at the insurance
company because we are very
concerned about keeping prices
low the copay accumulator
process that Mr McLeish
describes so well means that
patients will never get the
benefit of their insurance
because they will never be able
to make their copays and
deductibles as a cancer doctor
without giving the chemotherapy
that keeps patients alive they
will not be able to survive this
is a very elegant Bill I think
that house bill one twenty nine
is a remarkably good most
effective first step and the
best step the the New Mexico
legislature could make to lower
drug prices for New Mexico
citizens I urge a do pass thank
you.
Thank you madam chair.
Weekly introduced herself as
well with regard to public
comment thank you.
Thank you hello madam chair
members of the committee yeah my
name is Caitlyn Morello and I am
the director of state policy for
the pharmaceutical research and
manufacturers of America
spending on medicines is growing
at its slowest rate in years not
spending on medicines grew just
one point seven percent and
twenty nineteen which is below
the rate of inflation for the
third year in a row
unfortunately and I think you
likely hear less from your
constituents all the time it
does not feel that way for
patients and this is because
insurers and PBMs are
increasingly subjecting patients
to deductibles and coinsurance
which require them to pay the
full price of their medicines
even as they receive really
significant discounts to the
tune of a hundred and seventy
five million dollars and twenty
nineteen.
Compounding this issue of course
as the other two experts have
said we're all insurers and PBMs
excuse me are also restricting
the use of costsharing
assistance like copay coupons by
prohibiting the use of these
programs known as accumulator
adjustment programs requiring
rebates to be passed on the
patients at the point of sale at
the pharmacy when they pick up
their prescriptions and then
ensuring patients can benefit
from those rebates by requiring
to be I'm reporting this bill
truly will help patients pay
less for their medicines
immediately thank you so much
and look forward to questions in
the future.
And madam chair we stand for
questions.
Okay we're going to do is go to
the audience and will take a
little call first just if we
were in a committee room and
saying how many are here in
support how many in opposition
so we'll have that up on the
screen for fifteen seconds.
If you are in favor of house
bill one twenty nine please say
yes it here in opposition the
same now.
And we will get folks a chance
to speak briefly.
Okay are fifteen seconds is up
we had.
Seventy four percent in favor
and twenty six percent in
opposition let me go to the
opposition first if you will
please raise your hand you may
have a minute
so I if you are in favor would
you put your hand down please
and then I'll come.
Back to you when we're in favor
okay.
It
positions first I have read more
you have one minute please make
yourself I'm.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Roy
Moore I'm a registered lobbyist
for America's health insurance
plans and other respected the
sponsor of the bill needs some
more detailed examination during
the inner true transparency in
this area would look at all
parts of the supply chain
including the pharmaceutical
manufacturers and the pharmacy
service administrative
organizations I'm gonna point
you to one particular part of
the bill because I don't have
much time that's in section four
and I'm looking at.
Talks about amounts paid by
other persons if you look to
that piece what that is getting
at is coupons and coupons are a
huge issue if there were up to
insurers coupons would be banned
the way they are and federal
programs the issue there is that
coupons are there because the
manufacturers the price so high
please remember that the the
whole issue here is that
pharmaceutical manufacturers
price their products high
coupons or use selectively and
create problems and we would ban
them the same way they do and
federal programs I see the my
minute is up I would say that
there are lots of issues in this
bill even though it is very
short it needs more time and
examination and we would ask
that if you look at it anymore
thank you so much.
Joe Thompson.
Go ahead.
Thank you very much madam chair
members show Thompson I'm a
registered lobbyist for the
pharmaceutical care management
association also known as PCMA.
PCMA is the national association
representing pharmacy benefit
managers who administer drug
plans for over two hundred
seventy million Americans.
We definitely appreciate what
the sponsors are trying to do
here of this morning
Representative Fajardo made time
to visit with us we're grateful
for that and we're hopeful that
we can continue to work on this
issue preferably in the interim.
As written we have some concerns
with some of the requirements of
the PBMs and we believe it's
unlikely to improve transparency
or provide benefits to consumers
and we appreciate the
committee's interest and we look
forward to continuing the effort
to collaborate thank you.
Thank you I'm Marla Schultz.
Madam chair members of the
committee Marla showed
registered lobbyist Blue Cross
blue shield of New Mexico we
stand in opposition to house
bill one twenty nine we have
several concerns one is the lack
of transparency that is not
imposed upon the pharmaceutical
manufacturers there currently
exists transparency and
accountability measures along
the entire drug supply chain but
stops the pharmaceutical
manufacturers the point of sale
rebates and manufacturer coupons
are both cost drivers that
affect the insurers ability to
manage prescription drug costs
and overall health care costs
okay coupons are designed to
mask the high price established
by pharmaceutical manufacturers
encouraging patients to use more
expensive brands instead equally
effective less expensive
generics the chairwoman of
health and Human Services
Committee has expressed interest
in evaluating pharmaceutical
costs during the interim and
would ask that you oppose
passage of this extensive bills
now and that'd be evaluated with
all stakeholders during the
interim process thank you.
Thank you I'm next I have
Patrick lock.
Good evening madam chair I'm Pat
block with their terror
consulting registered lobbyist
for prime therapeutics a
pharmacy benefits manager and
tonight I speak in opposition to
house bill one twenty nine first
let me express my appreciation
to Representative for her to go
for being willing to work with
us to refine this legislation
and for the amendments placed in
the last committee however
they're still quite a bit of
work that needs to be done on
this bill and we look forward to
continuing that work well I
can't detail all the concerns of
cost Representative the built in
this bill in the time allotted
I'll give one example.
We're concerned that removing
plans ability to use rebates to
control costs for plan sponsors
and subscribers.
Will will cause harm right now
prime pass is a hundred percent
of the rebates on the Blue Cross
blue shield of New Mexico and
right now plans can direct
rebates to customers at the
point of sale many choose not to
do this because they retain the
rebates and allocate funds
across all plan members to help
contain premium costs so for
these reasons and the others
that you heard respectfully
request you not pass this bill
and we do commit to working with
a sponsor during the interim
thank you for your time.
Next I have Keith Gardner.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair members the
committee Keith Gardner Rachel
this for cigna.
Health insurance is also the
owner of express scripts and I
will continue to repeat the
things have been said before
about the concerns we appreciate
the sponsor willingness to work
with us and we look forward to
continue that working
relationship.
Two years ago Senate bill four
fifteen was passed and made
significant changes in how the
PBMs worked in the state of New
Mexico but at that time there
was a lot of discussion about
how there's three legs to the
stool not only just the PBMs but
also how the health insurers the
farmer and the
the pharmacist and the costs in
each one of those stages and so
this bill although it we and
understand the intention is good
but it also needs to look at
what the cost of the drugs are
from the suppliers this is at
the end stage with the user and
hell that being study together
during the interim thank you
madam chair.
Thank you I thank those in favor
of the bill to raise their hands
now.
robin greater.
Hello madam chair and members of
the committee Kerry robin proved
are registered lobbyists but the
New Mexico Medical Society we
think all the expert with
witness witnesses explained this
bill very well the New Mexico
Medical Society specifically
support section four of this
legislation we think it's
incredibly important that as
patients are using any kind of
coupon or other payer that that
count towards their deductible
because meeting that deductible
is often a very big barrier to
accessing the rest of their
health insurance plan and for
those reasons we support the
legislation thank you so much
madam chair.
Felix Garcia.
Present yourself.
Thank you madam chair.
I mean Garcia I'm a husband
father and I'm a working member
ID is thank the ability to act
my treatment to a genetic
disorder and up in their
complications I'm of maintained
very good health insurance R.
without which and I've become a
burden to the fighting.
Yes ma'am I did that both high
monthly premium.
I nine thousand dollars a year
over the year is that the issue
is the problem and I have to pay
at the beginning of the year.
I need to be able to act my
medication in January February
March and every month after
would work for these
In a bid what they call coupon I
would be able to the request of
the rate of the coupon for life
saving medications that I would
not have acted the to give you
an example might.
January bill of eight thousand
five hundred and fifty dollars
without that I don't have the
care and I am but I.
All right.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Vanessa bloodied and I'm a
registered lobbyist for farmers
Fizer pharmaceutical I want to
thank all the members it took
time to talk with me about this
bill and they're communicating
in person by telephone by text
or by correspondence via email
house bill one twenty nine will
enable patients to better afford
their medicine by prohibiting
health insurance carriers from
unfairly increasing cost sharing
burdens on patients by refusing
to count third party assistance
toward patients cost sharing
contributions it will also lower
what patients pay for out of
pocket for their medicines by
requiring PBMs and health
insurance.
Health insurers to make
manufacturer rebates are shared
with patients it will also limit
opaque PBM practices and ensure
that patients benefit from
significant discounts and
rebates that manufacturers
provide.
To date I other states have
passed similar legislation to
ensure that all copays count
towards the deductible and out
of pocket maximum the federal
notice of benefit and payment
parameters for twenty twenty one
makes clear that it's up to the
individual states to regulate CO
piculet adjustment programs.
Thank you and Jason Thompson.
Thank you madam chair can you
hear me.
We can go ahead thank you madam
chair members of the committee
my name's Jason Thompson a
lobbyists for the Sinope
pharmaceutical company and I
like that thank the sponsors and
all the experts for taking the
time to bring this bill forward
in for the committee's time and
considering this piece of
legislation I think the bill's
sponsors and the experts
explained it very well so for
those reasons I'm interested
time to allow for debate Sanofi
stands in full support of the
bill Maher's the committee's
passage thank you.
Thank you I don't have any of
So now let's go back to the
Sanchez and see if they will
with minute one more raised his
hand our call.
Don't miss your window there
are.
Go ahead.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I apologize for
not getting my hand up quicker
we are whole representative
Glaxo Smith Kline and we stand
in strong support of this
legislation for all the reasons
stated by the experts and the
previous supporters thank you
very much ma'am.
Thank you let's go back to the
Sanchez.
The committee.
Madam chair just on a very
quickly and then all of the
prior to a Representative part
of your work with things that I
am hearing from the people who
are concerned about this bill is
two things one is the concern
about the overall structure on
health care costs.
The scope of this bill.
Learn from them is that is that
they seem to think that if I
have a coupon for five dollars
off of the grocery store
right click on general to the
grocery store that's the
registration so thank you very
much whether legislative part
orders from the side quests are
very bright grams does not
support thank.
It's not just that was not for
services market today and
regardless of what they're going
to come off that's my part
bottle for five dollars off.
To support.
Understand what they're doing.
And that's exactly sure that
we're trying to raise what this
bill thank you Representative
Harper.
Thank you Representative
Fajardo.
Thank you madam chair and I I'm
I look forward to hearing what
they the committee members have
to say you know I like to
describe this this legislation
is almost like the double
dipping you know you have you
have people who are giving these
we're getting these benefits
from co pays are are we make
cards are different types but
the insurance companies are not
counting this towards your
deductible.
And so it makes it harder for
the consumer they think they
finally reached the point where
where they're Mediterranean all
together Maez and they're
they're able to balance their
entire life and and pay for
everything and then they're kind
of and and they're shot in there
it's kind of not so I look
forward to we we rest according
to the committee.
I I needed myself because the
dog barked again
I have a little bit of trouble
and so did representative Nibert
understanding Senator Ivey Soto
this is very rare.
Because we can actually hear you
so well but would you would you
repeat because I think your
settlement offer was good would
you would just repeat what you
said and stay close to your
speaker.
Sure madam chair and.
This must be better.
What was wireless ones that was
that if if I'm going to the
supermarket and I've got a five
dollar coupon.
What the serial.
It doesn't make sense for the
supermarket to say thank you one
hundred dollars off of breakfast
cereal
what part of the five dollars
session or a smart primary
single person who comes to bite
in one thing in the supermarket.
Make any sense.
This.
Most.
Thank you senator and now I'm
going to go to my committee last
first I have Representative
Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair and I'm
gonna keep my video off because
my internet still unstable
still.
so I apologize for that
we did hear this in health and
Human Services and madam chair
and Sanchez all say the same
thing that I I said two of them
there the whole drug pricing
scheme.
the drug pricing of the drug
industry yes our own worst enemy
it is so complex and convoluted
it's near impossible to track
all the discounts and rebates
and Mark ups and different.
things said and so it is
difficult and I did tell
The sponsors that
We would talk about drug pricing
in the interim
that was not however in lieu of
passing legislation and this may
be a little bit
a piece meal if you will because
I do think we need to look at
the manufactures but I think
this is a big big staff and this
does seem to be where the whole
issue around the rebates for
discount of drugs lies.
Is that with the PBM so
it and
if you didn't have insurance you
could or I am previous to the
affordable Care Act a lot of
people didn't or previous to
part D. of Medicare people
didn't and the manufacturers
would provide discounts on their
drugs so that people could
afford
And a particular specialty high
cost drugs and now all those
rebates four of those now that
most people have
have insurance coverage are
buried in there somewhere and
don't reach the individual and
even then chair it's impossible
to reach get across what's
called the donut hole of where
you have to pay it all out of
pocket before your insurance
kicks in and that's that's the
problem here it's really hard to
reach
the deductible and that you have
to pay before you get
full benefit of your drug plan
so I do support this legislation
and I also support that we look
comprehensively at the whole
system of of of drug pricing in
the interim thank you.
Thank you the next our vice
chair representative Cadena.
Thank you and I'm grateful that
I got to follow Representative
Armstrong because she certainly
articulated some of my
overwhelming concerns and
considerations when we think
about drug pricing and country
and in New Mexico as you all
have heard me a debate
extensively has recently as last
week I am a bit frustrated that
we have some really good ideas
but are still somewhat stuck in
these what I consider piecemeal
approaches
that's how I took some those
last week that's what I'm
thinking about today
overwhelmingly our families need
access to affordable
pharmaceuticals to affordable
health care to affordable health
care coverage and I'm worried
that some of the strategies are
only addressing parts of the
problem and not getting us out
to big substantial transport
solutions madam chair.
Answers I have worked including
Sanchez on other bills to try to
control drug costs including
importing work.
Insulin pricing over the last
session but moving forward I
continue to hear some debates
like this where we hear farm on
one side and the PBMs and the
Insurance companies on the other
and I want to see some more move
to the middle because yeah when
I hear that farm of the bill and
insurance doesn't I keep
thinking there's probably
somewhere in the middle that's
going to do better by our New
Mexican families just lastly I
want to add I want to see more
transparency I want to see
transparency all the way up and
down from the manufacturing to
that price that our families are
paying when they're trying to
find medicines to be alive and
be here with us and somehow
managed to cover their expenses
for for for what they need so I
I appreciate the intention I
want to keep working towards the
overall structure that Sanchez
and others have mentioned on
this and I very much look
forward to the conversations
hopefully led by Representative
Armstrong and others with needed
expertise in the interim thank
you madam chair.
Thank you madam vice chair I'm
always you Representative night
birch is on the list now go
ahead representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair and.
I think what Representative
provided just that boards are
spot on that we have.
we're looking at a piece of the
supply chain and not the whole
supply chain and that in and of
itself.
Create some distortions as we
try to deal with the issue.
And.
We are Senator Ivey Soto
mentioned are an example about
grocery stores and and so I'd
like to explore that issue a
little bit.
When okay.
Food manufacturer issues coupons
and you go to the grocery store
cash does that I always thought
the manufacturers of food items
issue coupons to drive all your
to try to get people who may not
otherwise purchase that product
to get them to purchase a
product to increase our demand
for that product and and in the
long run
you know allow you to reach out
and touch new customers in a
pharmaceutical situation.
That's not necessarily what
what's being done with these
coupons and and so it seems to
me that that what happens areas
the manufacturers are are.
Creating a very high price for
their drugs they're giving a few
people maybe a coupon but it's
not a coupon that's being
applied across the board yeah
and so there there.
Pricing still it is is higher
than that maybe what it should
be at and and so few people get
to take advantage of the coupon
but all the people who get that
drugs are able to use the coupon
and so that's that's our concern
you know the offer was made
earlier to look at the interim
and I appreciate the
representative Armstrong
suggestion that this be
considered in the interim and
look at maybe the whole picture
not just this is one portion of
the picture and.
The NMAA
That seems to be an important
exercise that but we look at the
entire picture bring all the
stakeholders together to see
what can be done to to address
the issues because at the end of
the day we only address one part
of it but the manufacturers
continue to have our prices for
New Mexico drugs higher than
what they otherwise should be
that's a problem and then the
other thing
you know some of those coupons
are don't work so well on on
generic drugs so.
I would.
You know I I'm.
I'm somewhat.
At a loss here is where we go
but it's certainly
Important for us to look at the
issue as a whole and would
encourage the interim committee
there that are with respect to
the peace million of our I'm a
little hesitant to do that I'd
rather tackle the issue R. and
the grass all the issues because
what we do here may make
complicate what we do what we
really need to do in the future
and it could have have some some
negative impacts so I'll be
interested to see what others
might have the state on this
issue but
it's an interesting debate and
and interesting.
Yes you I just wish we were
looking at the whole is not part
thank you madam chair.
Your.
Thank you very much I actually
Just wanted to.
Re flat Senator Ivey.
Hello.
With Senator Lopez and I were
freshmen legislators are first
interim.
We were working on Medicaid
managed care and I remember
being at an internal committee
meeting in Las Vegas.
And getting out.
It was before we used white
boards we use the flip chart
kind of paper that
Where we were.
Just writing on paper and the
turning the page and so forth
and what I realize we were
talking about is just creating
process is not about drug.
But we were creating all these
levels of.
Of administrative expenses.
I do think that I I look forward
to rejoining the health and
Human Services Committee I did
just checked.
Your woman I'm.
In the next interim because I do
think it's a very complex
picture now we've just made it
more and more complicated all
the time at the same time I I'm
not inclined to want to put this
off and I I support this
legislation as well
Representative Lewis.
Thank you madam chair I move a
do pass on house bill one twenty
nine as amended.
All second.
Thank you.
Representative Armstrong Madam
chair representative of United
your request.
Senator Ivey Soto did you want
to make a comment.
Yes if I may just very quickly
before you go to the.
Your.
Issues that were raised.
Whilst of Bill so when staff
rushed the practice of coupons.
Okay.
Get your microphone Senator.
Really your microphone when
you're breaking up a little bit.
Want to talk anymore okay.
Okay technology it's great I
know.
We were we were we were saying
not everything is.
this way and not everything is
better the other way but here we
go let's call the roll please we
have a motion for the past.
Representative Alcon yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Cook no.
Mr speaker Y. E. S..
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Lewis.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative night there
House.
Representative Rehm yes.
Representative Townsend.
Representative Townsend.
I'm.
Our.
Thank.
Vice chair.
No.
Madam chair yes.
Tended to we have a due pass.
Okay thank you very much.
Vice chair is going to take over
for me for a minute or two but I
will be present just not visible
thanks committee members thank
you.
Thank you all very much good to
have you.
Thank you committee next on our
agenda if I've gotten this right
after lots of shuffling today we
have a house bill one ninety
three or that one eighty three I
can't remember I wrote it down
right.
It's one ninety three ninety
three okay I'm reading my
scratchy writing out what you
need the three members and
sponsors do we have you all on
with us let's see Madam
chairwoman we have an expert
witness sheriff Kim Stewart I
believe she's in the attendees
my home town share thank you
Representative Garrett let's see
if we'll get well wait a second
for.
Shares your to be moved over and
she's with us now Representative
Garrett if you're ready please
go ahead on house bill one
ninety three.
Yes thank you madam chairwoman
and committee.
February twenty twenty last year
The New Mexico state legislature
enacted the extreme risk fire on
protection order also Nick named
Paul some people on the other
states have called at the red
flag bill so this authorizes law
went into effect in may twenty
twenty the law authorizes law
enforcement officers to petition
courts for a simple order to
temporarily remove guns from a
person who is now through a
process to pose a significant
imminent risk of violence to
themselves or to others and also
this law has been carried out
however in the process of its
implementation which has
happened four times throughout
our state in different counties
our law enforcement brothers and
sisters brought some concerns
about the actual herbal process
to in order to make it more user
friendly for families for law
enforcement themselves and also
for the courts so we're
presenting these changes to your
tend to.
to improve and tighten up all
the procedures and with that
I'll turn it over to my
colleague representative Ely who
will go through some of those
changes.
So madam chair and members are
real briefly the FIR has it
exactly right in terms the
changes are there pretty easily
outline and I'm happy to well to
get professionals to tie them to
the bill itself but what's
happening is is that the
reporting party is redefine but
remember the reporting party
can't go directly to the court
they've got to go through a
previous job a law enforcement
officer and what this allows is
a law enforcement officer not in
the original bill it's a law
enforcement officer actually
personally sees that someone is
an imminent threat to themselves
or others Hey can report that
directly to the court and
exercised this Act the dust the
AG's will no longer be tasked
with relinquishing
which I'm sure taking possession
are relinquished firearms they
don't do that law enforcement
does that show was really a
mistake in the bill we've
corrected the administrative
office of courts and every other
the HSD is involved decided that
the AOC would be responsible for
learning the FBI's and I see a
system not the rest of law
enforcement as currently done
and they give them a little more
reasonable time for that from
one day to ten days
other reporting requirements
will be removed because frankly
they don't exist here we we
don't have the kind of complete
database the state that we would
need to have evidence of change
through this process can not be
used for criminal prosecution
and finally law enforcement
officers if they see if they're
exercising a warrant under this
order and they see a fire arm in
plain sight they can take the
fire or and that's also outlined
in the of our and with that I'll
turn it back to my co sponsor
Representative Garrett thank you
madam.
I.
Chairman thank you
Representative Eli and now we'd
like to invite our expert
witness sure can Stewart Dona
Ana County to address you with
some additional points.
Welcome to House Judiciary good
to see you.
Thank you vice chair of thank
you for inviting me and good
evening to of the vice chair and
to all committee members I'm
going to turn my camera off for
this as well so that it I don't
get a
inconsistent
audio.
So first of all I would like to
thank Representative Garrett and
the life for giving me time
today to speak to the amendments
for house bill one nine three I
was at the signing of the
original legislation last year
when the governor was asked by
the media how many times she
will leave this order would be
used and New Mexico her comment
as I recall it was I hope never
I'm quite confident the governor
did not mean it would not be
used because it was not workable
as it was originally written.
I applaud Representative Garrett
for reaching out to better
understand how this legislation
could be improved I am pleased
today to tell you I support this
amended version one four spent
has been hamstrung by the
original bill as it does not
allow us to present to the court
in the form of a petition
information we in law
enforcement had personally
observe to establish probable
costs the current amended
version allows law enforcement
to use personally observed
information whether or not we
receive additional information
from a doctor mental health
provider we're any other person
with reliable information this
petition can only be filed by a
law enforcement officer and that
remains the same from the
original version.
What challenges in my County
after last year's PO was to get
by and from the District Court
and the district attorney's
office because that legislation
did not make clear the rules
each of these entities had to
play in the process of obtaining
a petition these changes clearly
define the role of the courts
and the district attorney as
well as for law enforcement
court in the amended version
further defines it as District
Court despite the fact that the
penalty for violating this order
is a misdemeanor this helps to
maintain the distinction between
the domestic violence order
protection law and the Paul with
the only correlation being they
both involve firearms it gets in
the proper court District Court
not with the domestic violence
commissioner approving are
reviewing these petitions
finally with respect to the
reporting requirements it did of
provide reasonable time limits
to report to certain databases
and as Representative Eli
mentioned it recognizes the fact
that one of the databases we
were to report to does not exist
in our state so thank you for
providing me this time today to
support this important
legislation I will remain
present should there be any
questions for me.
Madam chairwoman we stand for
questions thank you we're going
to go to public comment now for
those of these are joining us on
zoom this evening we're first
going to put up a poll and it's
like to you can weigh in
indicating whether or not you
support or oppose H. B. one
ninety three.
We'll get that up now.
We'll leave this for about
thirty seconds after that we're
going to go to the public for
COVID just like in the previous
bills we ask people to be a
thoughtful about weighing in and
and trying not to be repetitive
on the on this long evening
we're going to go first to those
that stand in opposition so if
you'd like to make a comment in
opposition to H. B. one ninety
three raise your hands now well
but the time revenue.
You shortly.
So we had about twenty people
weighing in about sixty five
percent of those folks that
participated are in support of
this bill thirty five percent in
opposition.
So we're going to go to public
comment now.
First on the list we have terra
make a.
You'll need to I'm you yourself
we've given you permission to
speak.
Can you hear me yes sorry about
that madam chair committee
members Terry Mitchell
representing and remembers in
the state of New Mexico we're
opposed to house bill one ninety
three it's disturbing that the
main argument I've heard by some
some of the advocacy groups for
this bill is that we need to
make the state's red flag
statute of more user friendly
the bill started off allowing
police officers to become
reporting parties under the law
but now under the committee
substitute it's been expanded to
look to allow anyone to be
reporting party including
individuals who have no intimate
or working relationship with the
respondent or no mental health
training or experience with
people suffering mental illness.
So that is one of our concerns
about the bill
advocates argued in the last
committee that reporting parties
must sign a sworn affidavit when
submitting facts to support a
request for an order
and they said that this would
ensure that the now expanded red
flag petitioner claims are
legitimate but if you look at
section five of the bill it
actually.
The last thank you
we have Patrick Brenner.
To be promoted.
Okay can you do that please
judges thank you.
Right now.
I'm sorry about that I'm using
an old version of Sam and I
don't know how to get that
updated.
Madam chairman members of the
committee my name is Patrick
Brenner I represent the Rio
Grande foundation we are a non
partisan constitutional think
tank and free market research
institute that is registered as
a five oh one C. three nonprofit
this bill seeks to expand police
power while simultaneously
reducing police accountability
for these two reasons alone I
urge opposition to the bill.
Thank you next we have that
fort.
Yes.
Right madam chair members of the
committee thank you for the
opportunity to testify in front
of you today my name is Zach for
time the president of New Mexico
shooting sports association to
collectively we represent about
thousand gun owners here in the
state of New Mexico we urge you
to oppose house bill one ninety
three the expansion of the your
pro log in New Mexico for a
number of different reasons as
as as has been touched on before
additional would reduce police
accountability by allowing
police to directly petitioned
the court of the bill would
allow potentially police to
confiscate firearms that do not
belong to the individual pre
order order after a particularly
bad individuals out of their own
home when the order in order and
it could catch up firearms of
unrelated party that then they
would have to petition the court
to recover their firearms even
though that no one had been
fought against them and we are
incredibly concerned about the
about allowing unrelated parties
with but only a critical first
hand knowledge to ask to see in
order.
Thank you next week have
looks like Charles and really.
Yes can you hear me.
Yes we can.
Lows law because the I don't
believe that is constitutional
that you can take away any item
from a person without the
seeking a court order with that
person being able to speak for
themselves or have a.
An attorney present thank you.
Thank you and lastly we have
Tom's other.
And I'm going to.
panel.
It.
Now you can hear me right yes we
can go ahead Tom thank you my
name is Thomas Selter.
I'm the legislative affairs
officer for the New Mexico
shooting sports association
representing New Mexico gun
owners and shooters since
nineteen thirty five we oppose
H. B. one ninety three changes
relating to extreme risk farm
protection orders in its
entirety it adds negative
position provisions to existing
red flag laws if passed eight
New Mexico is B. one ninety
three would add police officers
is reporting parties of the bill
would also require police to
seize all firearms are
specifically subject to red flag
protective orders this would
include fire arms that aren't
even known by the person which
amounts to a taking of property
of somebody not named in the
order without due process
without a means recover their
property.
H. B. one ninety three takes
already unconstitutional red
flag law it makes it works we
oppose H. B. one ninety three
and ask you to vote against this
bill thank you for your time.
Thank you now for those that
would like to speak in support
of H. B. one ninety three these
are and.
And I want to appreciate folks
so far for being concise first
we're going to go to Maranda
fiscally.
So I can you myself on madam
chair members of the committee
I'm co president of New Mexicans
to prevent gun violence we stand
in full support of house bill
one ninety three these are
simple amendments to the herbal
bill that was passed last year
New Mexicans from gun violence
is not with law enforcement
shares per the request as well
as AOC and spoke with medical
professionals as to the issues
with the regional bill we are
confident that these changes
will help us to keep guns out of
unsafe hands will serve as a
better and safer tool for law
enforcement thank you very much.
Next we have an S. eight.
Madam chair and members of the
committee I Representative up
Everytown for gun safety hazard
lobbyist but I am not speaking
as a lobbyist but as a family
member of a cousin who's raise
as my sister that committed
suicide I knew she was going to
commit suicide I'm a very
empowered individual that could
have called my DH Shera
police chief and all sorts of
other individuals but they did
not have the ability to help so
the bill before you would have
saved my cousin's life and I
strongly urge your support of
house bill one ninety three
thank you.
Thank you next we have high
number link.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Hannah
Burling I'm speaking for the
league of women voters of New
Mexico the league stands in
strong support of this bill.
We advocate in favor of
regulation of firearms for
public safety thank you.
Thank you next we have drew
setter.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Bruce
Center registered lobbyists for
the difference organization
founded by congresswoman Gabby
Giffords and dedicated to saving
lives from gun violence give
sports H. B. one ninety three
the organization helped pass the
original legislation last year
and as work with the Sanchez to
address concerns raised by law
enforcement over the past year.
Thank you when you're to
support.
You and lastly we have Barbara
on Jan Energy.
Getty the members of the
committee madam chair I'm
working with New Mexicans to
prevent gun violence centers
support this bill to make these
changes to make our herbal wall
more workable thank you very
much I look forward to your
support back.
Thank you we have one last hand
being raised that and Maxwell
and go ahead.
And if you'd like to make a
comment you do need I'm you
yourself on your end as well.
Sorry about that good evening
madam chair and members of the
committee I'm with New Mexicans
to prevent gun violence as well
and simply put the court will
sit will just have more more and
better information
it just makes sense but under
this bill an officer would be
able to present the court with
information that here she per
personally observes as well as
any information here she learns
from a doctor a mental health
provider or any other person who
has reliable information that
gives an officer probable cause
to file a petition it just makes
what was passed last year a
better a better bill in a better
law thank you.
Thank you we're going to turn up
first to back to R. Sanchez is
there anything else you'd like
to add before we go to
committee.
Madam chairwoman I have nothing
to add Representative Eli or
sure Stuart would be there you
like to add anything before we
go back.
To the committee.
No ma'am.
Okay thank you we're going first
to Representative Rehm.
Thank you madam chair and.
Representative Garrett which go
to page three.
And one eight well we're I guess
we are just look at one two
reporting party and this is
something that I warned us about
last year
that.
What you have done is you have
now opened it up to anyone that
can file a complaint.
Is is that a fair reading of
what this now says.
Madam chairwoman Representative
Rehm.
In one sense it's true but I'll
give you an example one of the
people that came to me about the
reporting requirement is the
location manager for a major
movie company when they were on
the property that they had you
know all of their permits for
the property manager often
became inebriated with alcohol
and brought out a gun and
threatened to shoot so in that
case this this happened over and
over again so that's an example
of someone who is related to the
person threatening the business
and they are lawyer but I would
have reason to possibly go to
law enforcement and do a
petition so remember that to get
the petition you have to and
this is on page.
I.
Your petition has to be made
under oath it has to be
accompanied by a sworn affidavit
and you have to spell out you
know your name the purpose the
relationship it is not approval
less possibility but but when
you say only an employer all
this it prevents somebody who
would have an extreme reason to
be concerned about potential gun
violence they wouldn't be able
to to go to officer for petition
Representative Ely or share
Stuart would be there if you
want to add to that I think
thank you Representative Garrett
and chair representative the
short answer questions no down
open it up what what's happening
is is that you'll get to file
anything as the reporting party
you have to go through law
enforcement.
That's the check and the
additional check is the court.
So remember anybody the files
and after the which is what they
have to be willing to do it is
subject to both criminal and
civil penalties so the idea of
opening it up to final is
objectively I'm not correct you
did a check on this is law
enforcement officers the first
check that the courts is second
but nobody gets no reporting
party other than a law
enforcement officer and even
then they have to go through
another law enforcement agency
guests to do things directly
with the court so I hope that
helps thank you madam chair
thank you Representative.
Chair and Representative Garrett
or Representative Eli.
What.
They are this example if you've
made why did they call law
enforcement I mean you either
have an aggravated assault or
you have a negligent use of a
fire.
Madam chairwoman Representative
Rehm and the example I gave they
did call law enforcement
numerous times
and they could not file an
herbal because they didn't fit
the person nobody for that the
reporting party definition as in
the statute currently in force.
Madam chair and Representative
Garrett.
That person violated the law the
criminal statute why did law
enforcement do something on
that.
Madam chairwoman and
Representative I don't have any
further details this was a
person that came to me asking
about the reporting party.
Madam chair and representative I
think that's covered already in
criminal law so that would have
taken care of but let's move on
to.
Age six.
And we'll go to war in nineteen.
Aware of the new language that
award force but officers seized
a firearm can go ahead and take
the session.
Are you meaning at the time that
he serves the petition.
Madam chairwoman and
Representative you live would
you like to answer that Mr chair
and representative here's what
he's borders work your petition
you served on the person if they
don't voluntary would relinquish
your member this discussion last
time in a search for as you what
this does is it doesn't change
any existing law but it makes it
makes sense if the officer goes
in with the search for and seize
in plain sight a weapon remember
we're talking about someone who
is in imminent threat to
themselves or others it made no
sense to say well we'll have to
we'll have to leave that gun
there because it's not covered
by the search for and so the
idea is if there's something in
plain sight grappling because
that's the instrumentality that
we're worried about we're
worried about that because you
imminent threat to themselves or
others and and madam chair and
representative remember this
bill protects law enforcement
officers and that's something
that doesn't get emphasized
enough if if law enforcement
officers can go in and take
weapons away from dangerous
people to themselves or others
remember if you're giving them
enough time if they're really a
threat to themselves or others
the one other thing they can do
is bear keep themselves now and
there isn't a law enforcement
officer the will tell you how
dangerous that is to that person
and to law enforcement so yes it
just makes sense to add if you
see a gun while you're executing
Paul Warren you take some time
so was just a mistake in the
bill that's being corrected now
to make sure that it just makes
sense you know when we were gone
back because it's not otherwise
covered in the war.
Madam chair and representative
maybe wide I was unaware of that
officers can't.
sees items that are in violation
of the law when there.
Opened in the presence we've
always done that so I didn't
know that that changed yeah
that's that's a very good point
and let me see if I can answer
is not a violation of law the
violation of any law there's no
madam chair and representative
there's just not a criminal law
here that's what we're talking
about this is ultimately a civil
proceeding so they're not going
into drugs robs or gravel listed
weapons that's not what this
test they're not in violation of
the law by having a gun.
We're taking the guns away to
protect them from themselves or
others this is ultimately
acquired by Senator proceed so
it is a misunderstanding with
all due respect Representative
I'm sorry madam chair
representative to think of this
in a criminal context it is not
the only way some goes to jails
at the violence or not by having
possession of a gun that doesn't
make them criminal and that's
not what the statute is about
this statue simply is about
saving lives really just.
Representative by the officers
there with the search warrant
and it says pick up all the
guns.
I mean.
What more is a need to say.
Madam chair representative your
member in the petition the the
reporting party has to talk
about what they see what they
have sure what they know to be
true so if the search warrant is
very specifically Paul Warren I
should say specific this allows
the exception to the officer
obviously it says pick up any
guns you could do that but if
it's specific if the court says
no we want to get these guns and
the officer happens to see it
gone there they can take that as
well because at that point it's
just a safety measure.
Woods let's go ahead and move on
madam chair and.
Representative so we go to page
seven we go to line twenty five
and this is for terminates the
one your extreme risk.
Why do we need one here can you
terminate an extreme risk
protection order sooner than one
year.
Madam chair representative yes
you can.
So madam chair and
Representative Eli I think one
year is not needed.
Okay I mean I eight Madam chair
representative I think it is and
we just have a gentle
disagreement Madam chair
representative but but I I do
think it's there but yes it can
be terminated earlier if the
court finds that you know sure
petitioned that the the
emergency the earth and the
urgency the imminent threat to
themselves or others are way
that that protection is built
into the existing built into
existing law.
Chairman representative of the
Ely will start at age nine.
One sixteen in that paragraph
out.
So.
How do we know this protection
order is going to be remote.
At the end of if Madam chair
representative that I remember
the original bill that was
passed last year at the end of
one year if it hasn't been
extended and that means another
hearing that automatically is
removed by a court and so the
court it extends it extends I
remember right and you're
testing my memory chair
representative but if I remember
right what happens is it is in
order that expires of its own
weight and can only be extended
if there's another hearing
that's where remember.
Madam chairwoman I share Stewart
has their hand up
it was just gonna offer their
expert has the so
representatives if we can turn
to share your we on this point.
Thank you madam chair committee
members and Representative it's
a automatic Sir it's entered
into the court record or into
the database that the order is
banned
Formalized in is in place and at
the time of exploration it's an
automatic assignment that it
becomes a notice to everyone
involved at the order has
expired so we really don't need
a human involved in that that
part of it it would be an
automatic notification and then
we would the court would take
action to.
make contact on that and to
return the weapons.
You care Stewart
Representative I just think we
ought to leave the check in
there to make sure that there's
follow through we all know that
the things seem to slip through
dance.
Madam chair and.
Representatives if we go to page
ten.
Fourteen in that section five.
Would you explain to me the
rationale of that paragraph.
I'm Madam chair representative I
can unless they sure did such a
good job that she's like to
again I'm having a letter do it
which is our hand up so let me
try I'm not a criminal lawyer he
can play one on TV madam chair
representative but I will tell
you that you're the two
situations are trying to address
right the C. drugs as a result
of this right that's a separate
problem that's established in
criminal law the fruit of the
poisonous tree so that we're not
trying to address that issue
what we are trying to address is
they take the gun and then the
question is does the ownership
or possession of a firearm can
that be used in a subsequent
criminal proceeding so to take
that question away we have added
section five this is no you
can't do that we we don't want
this to be a kind of excuse for
a criminal proceeding we got we
really don't we want this the
sole purpose of saving lives
either the person suicide or
from some kind of mass shooting
so that's what this was really
about so when the at when it
says evidence establishing
ownership or possession of a
firearm presented a hearing
pursuant to the protection order
shall not be admissible as
evidence in any criminal
proceeding it's to do exactly
that is to take away the fear
that has been expressed that Gee
maybe law enforcement would just
use these quarters to establish
somebody on checkout this takes
that away and I hope Madam chair
representative that answers your
question but that's that was the
reason for.
Representatives thank you that's
all my questions for today thank
you.
Thank you next you're going to
speaker it off.
Thank you madam chair I just
have a couple one point and
maybe a couple questions.
I'm.
My question is.
Where.
We
want that we created the
extreme risk protection order
bill.
Well last year two years ago.
We.
Included in that that modify the
tort claims act.
To allow for.
Waiver sovereign immunity for
violations of the New Mexico
constitution.
When.
Hi member of law enforcement.
During the proceedings of the.
New Mexico Civil Rights
Commission ended during the
consideration of the proposed at
New Mexico Civil Rights Act.
That.
Provision of the tort claims
act.
It cited as a reason.
The
war.
Not to proceed with the creation
of the Civil Rights Act because.
Claims allegedly can be brought
against law enforcement.
Through the tort claims act
thanks to the provisions that we
put an extreme risk protection
order bill
passed.
Representative you remember that
provision and that it is now
part claims act.
Madam chair representative I'm
cheaper egolf I certainly do.
Yeah and the reason is
It is signed by.
Sure Stewart was on that was on
the Civil Rights Commission.
That provision in the proposed
bill claims act is you signed by
commissioner.
Sure.
Sure Stewart as a reason why not
receive Civil Rights Act I'm
curious madam chair
representative and sure if
you are aware of the city of Los
crucis and the New Mexico
municipal league arguing
current.
Radiation.
At the provision placed into
tort claims act by one I think
recalling insight.
Is I'm able to be years as a
standalone cause of action under
New Mexico law.
The provision.
According to the city of Los
crucis cannot be years.
Because the city of Los crucis
and I understand sure Stewart
the your Dona Ana County share
your your answer for the city of
Los crucis their separate
government entities it is in
your neighborhood and.
The argument that the city of
Los crucis advances currently in
court.
Yes tort claims act nearly eight
per year.
It is not create any.
Because of the action it's a
tort claims act in waiting
sovereign immunity for
negligence claims merely wait
sorry merry for negligence
claims.
You can advance to see a client.
Well as underlining negligence
claim to search.
Are you going to the city of Los
crucis.
Because there is not a
standalone because of the action
to enforce the New Mexico
constitution the city of Los
crucis is now arguing that the
provision now that he's still
curious your Madam chair
representative sure sure if you
have any thoughts.
She.
This Mr speaker chair and
representatives of I'm sorry
Sir.
I don't have any knowledge of
the city of Los crucis as
actions
maybe if you could just direct.
Question to me that I could in
my non attorney mind.
Figure out then maybe I could
give you some intelligent
response but right now I I'm
kind of lost in the weeds with
this question.
Mr speaker I am madam chair
Mister speaker I I can't address
the answer I I would just.
Is she much questions directed
at the sure solution like take a
stab at it the the New Mexico
tort claims act is simply a way
as a vehicle under which
government entities that had
muted I'm going back to a time
of England now is transferred
from the crown to governments
including the federal and state
government this waivers certain
immunities for certain sex it
doesn't mean that by itself it
creates a cause of action cause
of action has to then be created
either by common law by statute.
So the first step really is for
the entities are in this case
state and local entities to
waive sovereign immunity for
specific actions which is what
was happening in the first
I think we're calling it
enactment but it does not by
itself created cause of action
that's correct unless the cause
of action somehow existed and
was barred by immunity but it
doesn't in itself create the
cause of action it just says in
fact we are willing to be sued
for certain things if the cause
of action were to arise from
either a court decision or from
statute or from the development
of law and I hope madam chair
and and speaker that answers
your question.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Eli.
I only mention it because here
is the proposed New Mexico's
right staff continue to proceed
through thirty.
Legislative process and I just
hope that is sure Stewart and
others offer yes on your bill
are they understand that.
More call the skin in fiscal
government at the very least are
arguing.
At one hand at the New Mexico
Civil Rights Act is unnecessary
because we have this new
provision tort claims act just
tell legislators at the same
time you want to tell the judges
that the provision in New Mexico
tort claims act is meaningless
unless we adopt the New Mexico
Civil Rights Act.
So that's that's the.
You'll be competency assistant
position the municipally.
Is is taking the association
counties my understanding takes
a similar position and so I I
thought you said that this
managers of the directly to the
subject matter of the bill in
hand which is why I'm gonna keep
my comments very brief just a
few minutes.
I think it is helpful to me.
This conundrum.
That we see.
Counties cities arguing two
different diametrically costar
it's depending on the audience
this one.
Make you say yours are yours to
be district judges.
In in state court thank you
madam chair thank you for to
supporting your bills.
Thank you next we have
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair representative
Mr and you are a director
tension to are the same
paragraph that Representative
ring was talking about on page
five the new paragraph the which
is on winds to through nine of
age I.
One question originally maybe
Google then.
one or two questions following
the answer that I thought I
heard when when Representative
Rehm aspect of first first thing
that stuck out to me when I read
this paragraph was at a law
enforcement officer who
personally has probable cause to
believe that this person poses a
risk to others and.
Wired with the officer go
through the process that's
required in paragraph the what
why would they not immediately.
Arrest that person why did get
the order.
On.
Madam chair and representative.
I do think that this bill keeps
getting confused with the
criminal process we're not
talking about arresting people.
If there is an imminent threat
to themselves or others
I'm I'm not seeing what the
crime is here there's been no
crime committed we're not
talking about arresting people
what would be Madam chair
representative the crime that
the officer.
Person for.
Madam chair representative Ely
the the crime would be.
If you're an imminent threat so
someone I would assume that that
would at least be assault.
I'm going to kill myself I I
mean it I'm I mean I don't I
don't get that I mean at that
point you have two choices and
this is what we covered with all
the bill last time I mean there
were there was serious madam
chair representative service
arguments that was somehow
constitutional takes a whole
person lock them up for seven
days and return them back to
their guns as opposed to taking
their guns people are less
concerned with taking people
away and involuntarily
committing but nobody's talking
about resting.
Crimes crimes are different that
is a law enforcement officer
sees someone who is committed a
crime
Madam chair representative is
representative of Reno's officer
personally wished someone
committing a crime they can rest
no question about what we're
talking about crimes that's a
different matter we're talking
about somebody was an imminent
threat to themselves or other
either you know they have mental
health problems or they are drug
abuse problems or whatever's
going on the officer is
concerned enough about what he
or she is witnessing to be
concerned that there are
imminent threat to themselves or
others and under the prior under
under current law that we
passed.
On the it's only are you
supporting party that goes to
the office of the office for him
or herself can't do it and so
we're changing that to allow the
officer to do it directly but
nobody's talking about arresting
people that some of this bill is
about.
I can Sir certainly say mac
madam chair and representative
Ely that but when it comes to
I'm going to kill myself.
It it's a lot more difficult
that if you're standing next to
the person and the officers
seize your bank some threat I'm
going to kill the person next to
me.
It seems to me that the officer
that turns back and walk away
and say I better go get in order
the the thank the response is
going to be put that person in
handcuffs and get him removed
from that person so that
the probable cause of imminent
threat that other person is not.
Does not become.
Actual battery.
Chair representative we don't
just great that's right that's
what this bill is intended to
cover that situation requires an
arrest got a totally.
And that's how I'm reading the
the language there it's it says
probable cause to believe that
the respondent this is a
significant danger because we
I'm gonna.
Personal injury to self I will
agree with you self has some
problems but to others.
That's that's what.
So.
Senator let me see what I can
say this way let's say that the
officer has credible information
that he's witnessed the person's
going to go to the U. S. capitol
Goshen of a bunch of senators
and congressmen you straightened
and he's worried that maybe the
guy is not actually going to do
that but he's crazy enough that
are on the way for can I use the
politically correct term origin
drops retire whatever but he's
worried about it and not that
it's not a crime yet.
But it's a real threat to other
people or in south this gives
that wiggle room for that
situation with the officer says
to him or herself this is going
to be a problem but it's not
necessarily a crime.
A crime you can arrest people I
get it that's a hundred percent
this is for the **** of a law
that is created by the
possession of weapons to take
the instrumentality of danger
away from that person until that
correct is removed that person's
own safety or others if there's
a criminal behavior we don't
disagree the officer gets to
rest at first period that's not
the discussion discussions what
short of that examples you can
give me all the officer arrested
you and I would agree but if
there are situations are shorter
rast we don't want to handcuff
the officer because ultimately
that person in addition of
posing a threat to themselves or
others could pose a threat to
the officers and that's why this
bill initially came to me from
from law enforcement that's
working for because they were
concerned that people have
weapons that work directed them
selves for others and if they
didn't get the guns out of there
it could escalate to a point
with the officers themselves
were danger and we have
unfortunately seen that not just
around the country but in New
Mexico in Albuquerque and other
counts as to conclude.
So I hope that answers your
question.
Yeah Mason clarity
Madam.
Chair and Representative Eli
when you were discussing this
program Representative read
I thought this was a paragraph
to more pointing to that would
allow an officer to pick up
again that they saw in in the
The house or wherever that may
not have been included in Google
search form the but I don't see
anything regarding that what I
see is if that occurs that I
have to file the petition for
the order yeah and I didn't
quite understand how your
example
Covered in this what I thought
was in this program you maybe
you were discussing some other
questions I I Madam chair
representative excellent
question it's on page six line
nineteen the law enforcement
officer or law enforcement
agency shall also take present
any firearms are discovered by
law enforcement officer in plain
sight or discover pursuant to a
lawful search that's that's the
paragraph Representative Freeman
I we're talking.
Okay Mister the the job from
paragraph the to them the.
Section three so I was trying to
figure out how that that
intellect that make it that.
Madam chair that's all the
questions I have on this thank
you.
Thank you Representative.
I don't see any other hands with
the pleasure of the committee.
Move it to pass.
Second.
I have a two passed from
representative Armstrong I
believe with a second from
speaker in the office the one
voice I heard clearly.
Seeing no further discussion
Secretary might be please call
the roll and just to be clear
this is a do pass on H. B. one
ninety three.
Representative Akan.
Yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Cook no.
Mr speaker.
Yes.
Representative Eli.
Representative Lewis yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative nightmare.
No.
Representative green.
Representative Townsend.
Yeah.
Thank.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Madam chair.
Eight to four we have a due
passed on committee substitute
for house bill one ninety three.
Representative you have a do you
need a substitute for house bill
one ninety three
congratulations thank you very
much of Madam chairwoman and
vice chairwoman and committee.
Thank you madam chair.
Chair Chasey do you want to take
the next done I don't mean to
keep going.
Can you go for ten more minutes
yeah sure.
Okay I'll be right I'm here just
not on camera.
Thank you Committee next on our
agenda for tonight is house bill
sixty Representative Rehm are
you ready with that bill.
Back to where I am if you could
let Charles inserm.
And senator Charles appears to
be raising his hand in the
attendee list of we unfair mark
how and Vanessa I'll read you
know.
Experts if you're on the
attendee said can you please
raise your hands we can move you
over.
Okay see we have an S. on and it
looks like we're still working
on mark what was marks last
name.
How.
Madam chair.
Nor do I Representative every we
don't quite see a mark on yet
but if they do pop up in the
attendee list mark long please
raise your hands and we'll get
you moved over Turrell terms.
Already.
Are in.
Okay.
Go ahead if you like to begin
over thank you madam chair house
bill six the is to address so
what is called curbs.
And there's two different ways
that current stoning occurs so
Charles you madam is a new car
dealers Mr palettes with used
car dealers so why is that if
you sell five or more cars in
New Mexico in a calendar year
then you must become an auto
dealer.
So I could become an auto dealer
and list my place of business as
my home residents.
Now rather than having a lot
more I display them I taken
spread around around town on
different street corners and
advertise them for sale she
called me and then I come on
over and I show you that
vehicle.
So that's one way of curbstone.
Another way of current stoning
is let's assume that you have
your car for sale yeah I can do
and I purchased your car but
what I do is I tell you don't
put in those sold to one or the
dollar amount here's your money
just leave those blank all fill
them in.
Now I take that car and I'm not
a licensed dealer but I go to
the corner lot I put it up there
and show what.
Now the new buyer that comes to
me I feel their name then.
And the dollar amount so it
appears that the car you owned
you sold to them and I wasn't
involved in the transaction.
Not only does that violate our
current law that we have on
title transfer but it also stops
fees from going into the
apartment a motor vehicle.
There's another issue that this
also brings up.
Under the attorney general's
unfair trade pact practices a
woman of vehicle.
What we have now circumvented
that as well.
And madam chair if we can let's
have Mr Hanssen and then then
just a at anything they'd like
to.
Certainly Mr Hansen.
Mr Hansen you should have
permission to speak but we do
need you to amuse yourself on
here and there you go.
Thank you it's it's like math
first.
Say hello to.
Chair woman Chasey it's nice to
somewhat be back in front of you
again.
R. madam chair members the
committee let me think
Representative right one of the
scenarios that hasn't been
mentioned yet.
Is that curbs starting is the
way the most predominant way
that stolen vehicles salvaged
vehicles.
And of.
Flood damaged vehicles are sold.
To unsuspecting consumers.
But this bill by making the
person with the car and the
title in here making them appear
before in V. D..
will greatly reduce the.
The problems that these vehicles
percent out on our streets.
not every state every car that
you see on the street corner.
Is out there from up apparently
showing juniors Kerr who only
needed for high school or
college there are still one cars
damaged cars there are all sorts
of abuses taking place on street
corners and when you have a
problem.
And you go back to that street
corner.
You're going back because you
may have a problem with the car
such as it stolen or it doesn't
work it has no demands that did
a dealer has.
Well this time of year the only
thing on the street corners
gonna be a policy.
Our with.
So we applaud the sponsor for
his tenacity and bringing this
forward
Certainly available free
questions but the we support
this bill wholeheartedly thank
you.
Thank you and Miss Vigil right.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I am
the registered lobbyists for the
New Mexico independent auto
dealers association as well as
Garcia on a motive that
represents both new and used
cars this bill in particular is
a consumer protection bill as a
sponsor definitely discussed any
person that sells more than four
vehicles per year has to adhere
to the New Mexico regulation
licensing department and it be
registered as a licensed dealer
what we're seeing is folks are
selling more than four vehicles
and they're sort of fly by night
individuals so they don't have
to adhere to the lemon law
provisions where a consumer has
the ability to return the car to
the seller within five hundred
miles or thirty days if there's
a technical problem with the
vehicle so this is a way
certainly tend to catch those
individuals and make sure the
current consumers protected and
I whole heartedly stand behind
what Mr Hansen stated as well as
a sponsor and we're very
thankful for the sponsor for
bringing this to our attention
thank you.
Thank you Representative if
you're ready will go to public
comments.
The only thing I'd add is the
actually passes out of the house
two years ago and it went over
to the Senate where all bills
die on the vine.
Thank you Representative we're
gonna start again with public
confidence so we will put our
for those that want to weigh in
on please indicate your support
or opposition to HB sixty.
I believe this for about thirty
seconds after that we'll go to
public comment.
So far we have a handful of
people weighing in
About eighty percent of those
are in support of this
legislation and twenty percent
in opposition.
So I'm thank you we will now go
again to a public comment for
those joining us space do if you
are here in the audience and
would like to speak in
opposition to HB sixty please
raise your hands now you'll have
one minute and please follow the
time around the screen.
It doesn't look like we have
anyone here to speak in a or
that's a interested in speaking
in opposition although they did
participate in the poll if
there's anyone here that would
like to speak in support of HB
sixty please go ahead and raise
your hand now.
Okay I'm not seeing any hands
that go up on the site either
Representative are you ready for
us to go back to the committee.
Yes thank you thank you.
Committee I don't see any hands
raised.
What's the pleasure of the
committee then.
Do that.
Secretary.
So we have a due pass on house
bill sixty from Representative
I've gone with the second from
speaker Egolf.
Might we please call the roll.
Representative Alcon.
Yes.
Representative Armstrong.
Yes Representative Cook yes.
Mr speaker.
Yes Representative Cook voted
yes so questioning how to
proceed.
But I think I will go.
I will of.
Yes.
Representative you want us.
Representative Lewis.
Representative Lewis.
Yes.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative nightmare yes.
Representative Rehm yes.
Representative Thomson.
Yes thank.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Yes.
I am voted twelve to zero we
have to pass on house bill sixty
as amended.
and committee members.
Thank you HB sixty twelve to
zero congratulations.
We're on our last item right.
You house bill one sixty six.
Thanks.
I'm in the other room and I'm
not looking.
Are you.
The.
We have Representative welcome
to House Judiciary I will turn
this over to you.
Thank you.
The
In my expert witness and your
Karofsky.
Can you hear me.
Madam chair you still with us.
I was just locations.
Are you ready to go
Representative Lujan.
Yes.
Okay yes.
Karofsky.
Well he's here.
Great.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Canadian at night I'm presenting
on.
Consumer Public Affairs
committee substitute for house
bill one sixty six.
What is commonly referred to as
a ghost gun.
It is creating at home or
anywhere if iron by you being a
three dimensional printer to
create a gun out of plastic
material and pressing it into
the shape of a gun anyone with
code or instructions and a three
dimensional creature thank you
this today including minors Alan
sex offenders or others that
would otherwise be prohibited
from owning possessing selling
or buying a firearm.
According to the U. H. three D.
technology has made it possible
to produce a three dimensional
object such as a farm much in
the way that traditional
creatures Committee produced a
printed document the three D.
printers can produce fire arm
components that are not as
durable as traditional metal
frames or receivers that can be
just as deadly and assault
rifles using a three D. printer
has the ability to far over six
hundred round.
It just all made by a three D.
printer using almost entirely
plastic had the capability of
firing eight thirty eight
caliber bullet.
Anyone with a three D. printer
could produce a fully functional
and and he realized for our
without a background check each.
Been used in multiple recent
shooting by individuals who fail
background checks and could not
legally purchased a gun.
In twenty nineteen is sixteen
year old for a U. S. backed.
A self assembled untraceable
firearms in the school shooting
in two students and injuring
three others.
This is why we are.
And this legislation and we now
stand for questions.
My.
I would use it if you if you can
just
He did not the bills thank you
madam chair.
Representative did you want your
witness to speak at this point
before we go to the audience.
I think.
I prepared to give the purposes
in office now if he's able to.
Going across the.
You.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you members of the committee
my name Xander across the I am
the deputy director of state
policy in every town for gun
safety which is the nation's
largest gun violence prevention
organization please to be here
with you and please to speak in
favor of this bill
because guns are one of the
biggest got and safety threats
that New Mexico in this country
as a whole face goes constrained
undermine all of New Mexicos
commonsense gun laws I'm
including the strong laws passed
in recent sessions like the
extreme risk law in the
background check law for of mice
and sales as a representative
alluded to go to guns are and
serialized cons they can be
easily made with parts purchased
on the internet or print at home
with a three D. printer these
parts can be shipped to a
person's door they can be
assembled in a matter of hours
with little mechanical knowledge
our little technical expertise
and because they are largely
unregulated they're quickly
becoming one of the favorite
tools of violent criminals
domestic abusers and other
individuals who are legally
prohibited from having guns
they're increasingly being found
by law enforcement act I'm
seeing I'm because they lack a
serial number they are
untraceable may frustrate law
enforcement's investigation I'm
so the bill before you today
would regulate ghost guns it
would create a strong regime to
prohibit the manufacture of on
your device firearms to require
a license to manufacture
firearms it would prohibit three
D. printed guns from being
created in less the person has
at federal license to
manufacture firearms it would
create a strong regime to insure
that prohibited purchasers I
can't circumvent New Mexico's
gun laws again like the
background check law and it will
help keep guns out of the hands
of people who should not have
them so it's important public
safety bill it's and timely bill
is.
The cities across the country
are dealing with the rising
specter ghost guns and urge you
to import passes important
legislation and I'm happy to
answer and stand for any
questions on the bill itself
thank you.
Okay we will go to the audience
first and up for those who are
present I would like to weigh in
if you are in favor of house
bill one sixty six please about
yes that you aren't opposition
this vote now after we have the
full then I will don't start yet
still.
Wait.
I just wanted to fifteen seconds
I'm gonna let those in
opposition speak for
Yes and there will be time
limits one minute and then those
in favor will speak okay so
let's go ahead and start will
now.
Okay
we have more here in opposition
fourteen and eight people in
favor still sixty four parties.
Begin with comments from those
in opposition so
First on my list is hating
Kauffman.
Hi can you hear me.
Yes awesome hi my name is Hayden
Kauffman and my spare time I'm a
firearms instructor who focuses
on teaching folks are left of
center and marginalized people
how to.
safely and effectively owning
use firearms and I have serious
concerns about this bill and
urge folks to go
this this bill has serious
serious first amendment problems
with regards to sharing plans
related to building firearms it
additionally it provides no path
to compliance for folks who
currently own guns they have
built themselves at home so if
you currently have a government
is and serialized thank you home
bill yourself as is currently
legal there is no legal path to
compliance there is no federal
firearms license holders do not
provide serialization about
serialized guns.
It's just not a thing that
happens so it gets those who own
these guns already into kind of
a catch twenty two situation
where there's nothing they can
do to comply they're they're
just criminals thanks for your
time.
Thank you Charles and.
Charles and ray alley.
Yes can you hear me.
Yes.
Basically this is a law that for
the looking for a problem where
there is no problem is goes guns
of not now nor they have they
ever been a problem you cannot
make a reliable firearm with the
with a three D. printer and you
certainly can't make an assault
weapon with a three D. printer
as far as the other homemade
firearms are perfectly legal
under current law they are not a
problem the people of New Mexico
are not as supporting this bill
of the only people in the
supporting is built Bloomberg
organization the people that
wrote the bill and handed it off
here this bill was not written
by anybody here in New Mexico
I move that you the do not
approve this bill thank you very
much.
There had.
The panelists that.
Madam chairman members of the
committee stoppage okay.
Thank thank you for this
opportunity to speak to this
evening my name is Patrick
Browne representative Rio Grande
foundation we're a
constitutional thing taken free
market research institute I
think that this bill was trying
to do too much it will cost
confusion the unintended
consequences of this legislation
includes criminalization of an
extraordinary number of New
Mexicans that might not
otherwise realize that they've
broken the law a very particular
example of and I quote other co
that may be used to program
three dimensional printer close
quote includes a mandatory
Microsoft Windows prints with
our software package this
software is included on all
major distributions the
Microsoft Windows operating
system and is in the presence of
many homes with the building
happens possess firearms or not
so people that have no firearms
experience have never held the
fire engine on a fire and have
no intention of ever exercising
their second amendment right but
they have a windows computer in
their home would be
automatically guilty of
violating the firearms law so
now is not the time to enact
this legislation is a spill
exist in a state that is not
ready for consideration by this
committee on behalf of the
rerunning foundation I urge the
committee to vote now.
Gartner.
Maybe kids took his handout.
Thomas other.
Can you hear me now.
Yes thank you.
Madam chair and committee
members my name is Tom self
serving on the.
It seems Mexico shooting sports
association representing New
Mexico gun owners and shooters
since nineteen point five we
oppose New Mexico H. B. one
sixty six which is assault on
the right of individuals to
manufacture their own firearms
making them entirely dependent
on commercially available
products in fact simply
manufacturing single component
rules are are at home so this is
a barrel or slide would result
in up to six months in jail.
Well meeting for right to keep
and bear arms would require the
preliminary steps of being able
to create and obtain guidance
notes from one of the few
Supreme Court cases presenting
pertaining to gun control DC
versus Heller.
Section one CD of the bill is a
blatant violation of first
amendment rights of free speech
as the gentleman in question is
myself was retired after thirty
eight years from Sandia national
laboratories I can assure you
that the technology necessary to
manufacture firearm at home is
readily available and.
Kevin Sanders.
Hello can you hear me go ahead.
Yes my name is Ken Sanders I'm
an attorney and Democrat in
these rounds here of New Mexico
has been pointed out this bill
would criminalize a great number
of New Mexicans leaving them
without a path to compliance.
Further it throws a bunch of
issues all under the umbrella of
ghost guns where are verifier
arms all already illegal under
federal law so I would urge
everyone to vote no on this bill
thank you.
Zacks fort.
Madam chair members of the
committee on the backboard and
the president of New Mexico
shooting sports association so
this bill is dealing with a
highly technical area already
subject to numerous regulations
at the federal level the bill
would put New Mexico law into
conflict with ATF regulations on
firearms Eurovision and firearm
definitions for example you can
serialize a homemade fireman
register with media that is a
valid serial number with the ATF
but anyone who possessed a
firearm that was serialized by
someone who is not a licensed
manufacturer would be criminal
intent in New Mexico under H. B.
one sixty six even though that
serial numbers ATF compliant
further to Mexico's not a point
of contact for next New Mexico
is not have the ability to even
attempt to enforce that part of
the law under the bill the
definition of fire receiver
would be different and to Mexico
law under federal regulations
that means the New Mexico would
have to independently determined
one of Walker plastic or metal
pieces to be just a block buster
Google constitutes a pharmacy
river tens of thousands of fire
besides other states have
adopted similar bans given the
highly technical subject the
nature of the subject read
eighty of struggles with
numerous workarounds have
already been found.
Thanks.
You need yourself.
Mr thanks.
Can you limit yourself on your
end.
I'm gonna skip to the next
person Valerie with the.
Good evening madam chair members
of the committee that we weren't
there as during this for New
Mexico crime livestock bureau we
strongly oppose H. B. one sixty
six the language in the bill is
very broad and could potentially
prohibit firearm transfers from
within families for this reason
and for the reasons previously
stated we respectfully ask that
you oppose H. B. one sixty six.
Keith Gardner.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee name is keep
Gardner registered lobbyist for
the national foundation this
bill claims outlaw the
manufacture or covered or
undetectable firearms but it
does much more than that these
farms are already required to be
registered with the ATF under
the national firearms act and it
is already illegal to own or
transfer them if they are
registered HB one sixty six will
make criminals out of
individuals were hobbyists that
enjoy assembling component parts
to build their own weapon or any
individual who wants to change
out any component part of a
firearm they currently own what
happens to the tens of thousands
of self made farms are currently
legal owned by law abiding New
Mexicans what is a process to
get so many farms a serial
number the fact is there is no
process in New Mexico to do this
this bill will and a tradition
that has been in our country
from the very beginning the
ability to make firearms for
personal use for these reasons
we respectfully ask you to vote
no thank you madam chair.
Barbara Chatterjee.
Madam chairman members of the
committee thank you for letting
me Madam on this bill up my name
is Barbara chatter G. I've
worked in injury prevention for
over forty years and I oppose
this bill not because of the
general intent.
Of making sure that we have
Guns that are able to pass
through that cannot that can be
detected and security systems
but because of the many reasons
that have already been stated
about the and workability of
this bill and also the clarity
is to have This bill relates to
already existing federal law and
what New Mexico needs if
anything to enhance our position
in relationship to that law
therefore I urge you to oppose
this bill thank you.
We will now go to those in favor
if you're in favor of the bill
please raise your hand.
Listen rigor.
Good evening my name is
Limburger and I live in
Albuquerque I'm a volunteer with
moms demand action for gun sense
in America and I urge you to
vote yes on this bill thank you.
All.
Yes okay very well.
Moms demand action and I urge
you to vote yes for this bill
thank you.
Gandhi because.
Yes.
Yes ma'am.
This is true.
This is.
I
was so so just getting some
reference.
Students that.
suffers so much less violence.
Respectively that states.
This.
It's just.
Since for some.
Just remember.
Santa Claus street program
skills shortage.
Interested.
It is just a X..
The movie.
This.
This.
So if.
Most of.
Thanks.
We have concluded with the
public comment we were taking
We were taking.
Comments in favor of the bill
and some folks who previously
had been on the bill in
opposition.
We're certainly appreciate.
So I want to go to the committee
now out for questions and I
think first
I know what and so I started
Representative Lujan would you
like to respond and out also
have Mr across the.
Well state funds.
Thank you thank you madam chair
I I'd like to go into what H.
the wanted to six committees of
a man does
Okay and then and you may be
able to respond as well thank
you madam chair
HB one two two six at committee
your amendment code to create a
new misdemeanor firearm offense
that prohibit manufacture
firearms by an authorized person
used three D. printer I am an
authorized person to manufacture
if our our part.
Distribution of instructions for
programming a three D. printer
to manufacture a far apart and
in fact your seo approaches and
a covert or undetectable
firearms and possession and sale
of farm kids to make a farm
frame or receiver they lacked a
unique serial number eighty one
sixty six we need to exclude
manufacturer of props and in our
pro firearms and firearms
manufactured prior to nineteen
sixty eight.
Any antique firearm thank you
madam chair and you would like
to add anything.
I thank you madam chair thank
you Representative members of
the committee
no I think the representative
outlined a
a great synopsis of what the
bill does and I'd be happy to
answer any technical questions
to the best of my ability but I
do just want to make the point
that the bill is designed to
address goes guns and all of
their various forms those again
are on you know serialized
untraceable firearms that can be
manufactured at home with a
three D. printer or can be
purchased online are part the
parts that can be purchased
online again without a
background checks so the bill is
designed as an effective regime
to
regulate ghost guns and help
ensure that they don't fall into
the hands of people who are
operated by law from having guns
such as violent criminals and
domestic abusers so thank you.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you.
So we.
The computer.
It was first here.
First Representative would you
like to go first.
The the night is getting longer
and I'm trying to be articulate
still thank you madam chair
representative.
Just say very clearly I am so
grateful for you in the ways
that you've brought this much
this is.
I absolutely believe.
Problem I do have some questions
tonight Representative and I
have had a chance to speak with
the your expert today as well as
other advocates because I want
to get this right eight also
Madam chair representative I
believe I look today at the
committee so I'll we moved a
committee set for discussion yet
madam chair.
It's not.
The judiciary
okay.
The sentence last thank you
again I'm trying to stay of
Cokie coherent today so I'm
looking at the bottom of page
one and section one.
Section B. starting online
twenty three of page one and
going to the line one of page
two I believe so for me it does
seem the essence of this bill
here is captured and what I
asked advocates and experts
earlier in the day first of all
is how one becomes a federally
licensed gun then then
manufacture so earlier I was
told we get some more info on
that so that's my first question
madam chair and representative
on.
Thank you thank you madam chair
thank you representative of vice
chair
I'm going to do for that would
you my expert witness.
Eight thank you Representative
madam chair and vice chair so to
become a federal ice and a
federally licensed firearms
manufacturer you have to apply
for the license through the
bureau of alcohol tobacco
firearms and explosives that
requires you to fill out a form
to submit that form to the a TF
pay a fee which I believe is a
hundred and fifty dollars and
bill licenses good for three
years
in the process of that license
the lights and
they travel conducted background
check they will conduct
interview and then they will
issue the license and I believe
the processing time that I saw
was sixty days I think that can
depend on ATS workload but
that's the latest info that I
saw and then again you do have
to qualify for the license so
you do have to make sure that
you're not legally prohibited
from having guidance that you
are a suitable responsible
person who can engage in the
manufacture of firearms so there
is a regulatory process involved
with getting the license but
again the bill I think is
designed to really make sure
that there are loopholes which
people can you know circumvent
the intent of not only this law
but out of the background check
an extreme risk laws so it's a
comprehensive Regina it's it's
really designed to make sure
that there is a process in place
if you want to make manufacture
guns you can do so but you just
have to be licensed in that
process comes with the
regulatory process associated
with it so I'm I hope that
answers your question and I have
an answer any follow up.
Thank you madam chair and
representative and this cat
question remains key for me
alright because some of what we
hear in this conversation and
debate is the ATS
has potentially interpreted
different authorities different
in a way that wasn't expected or
statutes differently and I want
to make sure that we are
creating a solution that's long
term and comprehensive and
hopefully I as a policy maker
here in New Mexico something
that we can turn to and rely on
at the federal level because as
we know if we have a state by
state approach to preventing
violence I don't believe we're
going to get as far as we could
otherwise so madam chair
representative I do have
concerns that responsible gun
owners that I know that are in
district thirty three in
constituents across New Mexico
don't quite have a path to
compliance with behavior that's
currently lawful today so today
where they could otherwise
manufacture or prince a firearm
in a responsible way I'm still
concerned we don't have a past
or procedure to capture those
those well intentioned law
abiding responsible gun owners
into a situation that would then
make their activities unlawful
but I also do have concerns that
if we're not addressing this at
the federal level we're telling
again those law abiding
responsible gun owners in New
Mexico that moving forward they
may not have a path to do what
they might have been
participating in today so I've
heard the concern is with a TF
but also hear the solution
somewhat lies with ATF in the
process that would put
individual of federally licensed
gun manufacturers
I'm not sure if you want to
comment on some of those those
questions I absolutely
fundamentally agree this is a
problem but want to make sure we
get it right so that we can
continue to engage.
Age with and and respect the
constitutional rights of our
responsible gun owners and make
sure we're we're closing
loopholes for folks that are
going to cause harm in our
communities thank you madam
chair and representative.
Thank you thank you madam chair
thank you for that for those of
COVID and for the information is
shared in the concerned I think
that that's always a concern
madam chair that we have here we
closes Federal Republic of
course that we do here for New
Mexico state to get it to get a
hold of hand of what is going on
with it the case here here in
our state I mean when.
When New Mexico
We get information from the
department health states that
the farm age adjusted death rate
in New Mexico with eighty six
percent higher in the US in
twenty nineteen that twenty two
point five deaths per one
hundred thousand verses twelve
point nine deaths per one
hundred thousand respectfully
According to the CDC are wide
ranging online data for
epidemiologic research The New
Mexico agent Justin right
performs recaps with twenty two
point five deaths per one
hundred thousand.
In twenty nineteen the highest
rate in at least twenty years.
I mean this is that it ninety
percent increase over twenty
eighteen so which shows how the
it that we have a great concern
here already with firearms in
our state and that this is a
responsible measures that we're
taking to get to get a hold of
this issue before it's a hold of
us we have reporting information
on on the internet we're they're
saying we have successfully
under cut every value of a
grandma in America I need
implications there
Tell us to take action and how
to control and regulate the
uncontrolled undermining gun
manufacturing problems.
And not just wait or the accu
something horrible that it's
inevitable with with firearms so
that's that's what I want to
stay at and I totally understand
what you're where you're coming
from Madam chair representative
it's hard to it's hard to the
state tax laws in states
and you.
We we are doing it in a
respectful way it as best we can
so that we are not
those.
Those numbers that are doing you
know there are law abiding in in
doing everything that they're
doing respectfully within the
laws so that's that's really
where I'm at with this I want to
say that and you madam chair if
my answer with you would like to
say anything out that would be
up to him right now thank you.
Thank you madam chair thank you
madam vice chair and
Representative members of the
committee no I mean I will echo
everything Representative Lujan
said but I I do just want to say
again like the the intent of
this bill is to really close
loopholes for people who are
exploiting the law who are
prohibited by law from having
guns in the first place and
they're using you know the
internet to have these parts
shipped to their door build
these guns and undermine all of
New Mexicos work you know over
the last several years to pass
strong gun violence prevention
also the intent is certainly not
to you know criminalized law
abiding gun owners I think the
intent is to create a pathway
you know and a clear regulatory
regime for those gun owners so
that they can you know do what
they need to do under the kind
of
the regulatory framework of the
law so I again I think there are
there is some
you know and it's also important
I think two addresses on the
local level because again you
know Congress and the ATF have
one version of the law but it's
really important to empower New
Mexico law enforcement to
enforce it on the ground because
that they're the ones who are
going to be ultimately dealing
with the problem so I hope
that's helpful.
Madam chair and Representative
thank you it is and I certainly
again appreciate your intent for
me at least this bill is not
quite there in capturing what it
is that you all set out to do
and and I I believe what we New
Mexico need to do so I'm not
sure if you consider rolling
this over for additional work
I'm I see many of my colleagues
have their hands raced I I will
definitely continue to listen to
the discussion but might suggest
would be appropriate to work out
some of these details because we
want to get this legislation
right but thank you madam chair
and representatives I'm done for
now.
Thank you next I have
Representative Rehm.
Thank you madam chair and
representative
So.
Your expert is said that these
guns are showing up crying
students can you tell me a crime
scene in New Mexico where
there's got to spend found.
One of the so go scripts.
Chair of Representative thank
you I'm just making sure you can
hear me I've been having some
audio problems and sorry
The issue that we're having
right now is that this is this
is happening
All over and you when it comes
to come by in gun violence
the vice president is the
fastest growing gun safety
problem we've seen in years
this isn't this isn't
theoretical up these departments
are recovering the gun that
crime scene and you're
interested in and the recent
interview with the CBS sixty
minutes at the most honest
answers the central for county
sheriff there reported over the
last year number of ghost
country covering up in long
first investigations has
increased by fifty percent.
These are these are these are
done that are not being are not
traceable and this is the issue
that we're having as part of the
problem madam chair and.
You.
This is something that we need
to be proactive with your New
Mexico instead of reactive and
that is that is the problem that
we have faced and the statistics
that I just mentioned and the
high volume of
incidents that we have in New
Mexicans Mexico with
With the problems of of gun
shooting this is the this is
what we need to be focused on it
and how we can be corrected with
this and I would also like to
thank you for to my experts to
add to that thank you.
Thank you Representative thank
you madam chair and thank you
members of committee you know I
I I am.
I agree with everything the
representative said I think it's
very important that the that
this committee be proactive
again the representative
highlighted that if you have a
set of their ghost guns turning
up all over California there's
been cases in Arizona there's
three hundred percent increases
and Washington DC and Baltimore
I think soft four hundred
percent increase in these guys
gone so you know I as a national
expert I'm I'm not familiar
exactly with what New Mexico law
enforcement our have recovered I
would be interested and hearing
from them I do believe that this
is a real threat for them and
for you know the folks on the
ground but I do just want to
make clear that you know this
isn't something you know I think
this is something that.
Actor approach is warranted and
I do want to make sure that the
committee understands that you
know it and in my conversations
with law enforcement officials
across the country they say this
is you know one of if not the
biggest threat to gun safety so
I hope that helps answer the
question.
and Representative we want to I
have to the compact what New
Mexico thank you name.
One case where does gun was
found at a crime scene or used
here Mexico now what they do I.
Is that persons are prohibited
from possessing a firearm will
purchase a stolen firearm.
Or they will take the firearm
that stolen and liberate the
serial number.
I'm gonna spend a lot of time we
need to we need to go ahead.
And get ready for tomorrow so
you know federal law regulates
how firearms will be
manufactured.
Law regulates where and how they
can be cared.
And there's plenty of federal
laws already on the books on on
what we can do.
You know I think that it's if
you go to the FIR and you go to
page two wind to FC.
Wage.
Of free speech so how we can
address that.
Representative what is the
question I'm sorry Sir.
Okay so if we look at the FY we
are madam chair Representative
Lujan we go to page two.
One to that paragraph she.
Violates free speech.
How are we going to answer that.
Madam chair Representative.
That section our state in in a
sense for a person to District
distribute did you so.
Direction in the form of
computer aided design files.
Or other code or instructions
stored or displayed in
electronic format is a digital
model that may be used to
program a three dimensional
printers manufacturing for
buyers range or receiver other
major component of a firearm to
a person New Mexico is not a
federally licensed gun
manufacturer so I think the
operative word there is
just your view and in doing so
it is yeah I don't I don't see
how it is well it's the first
amendment and I will defer
against you my expert witness
thank you.
I thank you Representative I'm
and thank you madam chair I get
I I will echo what the the
representative said I I again
the intent of the provision is
to clearly regulate the
distribution of the three D.
printed gun plans I I don't
believe there is a first
amendment violation there north
second amendment and violation I
think it's fully compliant with
the constitution I think it's
narrowly tailored in a manner to
be and I think it'll help make
sure that you know these guns
aren't falling into the hands of
sex offenders violent criminals
and other people are prohibited
from having guns so thank you.
and Mr for us are you a lawyer.
Thank you madam chair and
representative yes I am adjourn.
Madam chair and.
Mr Krauss you used you disagree
with the analysis from the
attorney general's office said
that this violates free speech
that's what you're telling.
Thank you Representative thank
you madam chair my understanding
with the Attorney General said
is that there is an active court
case challenging under the first
amendment I again in my opinion
don't believe it violates the
first amendment and I believe
it's drafted I SO again I would
tourney I I'm not a first
amendment attorney and I'm here
as a policy advocate so I don't
want to get too far into the
first amendment we needs
although I'd happy to discuss
further with that at a later
date but in my opinion the
language is crafted is it's
fully constitutional.
Representative Rehm on that
point I just want to.
Mentioned that our committee
analysis also states is probably
right.
Our first amendment issue but
other issues that that so there
are attorneys disagree all the
time.
Okay sure and Representative
Lujan was of on
our page to wind well which is
paragraph to do so this says.
That.
Anyone who possesses a far are
basically that was lawfully made
since nineteen sixty eight or
even before nineteen sixty
eight.
Is now in violation of this law
done grandfather those firearms
in is that correct.
Madam chair
Representative is.
State it is in the center person
to possess manufacture cost to
be manufactured in our arms that
lacked eight unique serial
number engraved cast first down
on the frame or receiver by an
overview federally licensed gun
manufacturer or importer who
complies with all applicable
federal laws for manufacturing
or importing the fire on.
So.
We we
are we say that your question
there.
Representative Lujan.
Right now it's waffle to make
these fire correct.
Madam chair
Right now we don't have the same
work you
To bring any kind of
The people that are in under the
current our laws right now
that's that's where we're at
yes.
Madam chair and representative
will on I took that as a yes it
is lawful to manufacture
assemble fire.
Right now for personal use.
Yes.
Okay.
Madam chair and Representative
Lujan what this paragraph
doesn't do is those persons who
will actually assembled a fire
are.
Since nineteen sixty eight
basically is when the regulation
came in but it could even be
before that.
It does not grandfather those
people in.
And therefore it makes them in
violation of the law correct.
I'm not sure I I will defer to
my expert witness on that
question thank you.
I'm thank you madam chair and
thank you Representative for the
question so does it under
current law I yes people can
manufacture firearms at home for
personal use but again the
intent of this bill is to
provide a clear regulatory
regime I will help keep guns out
of the hands of felons domestic
abusers and other people so who
are created by law from having
those guns so I'm I think the
bill does establish a clear
regime for people to comply with
and I hope that is helpful and
and answer your question.
Mr Kerensky the people who are
assembling these guns are people
who are precluded from
firearm possession is that what
you're saying all of those
people are those that one group.
Madam chair Representative.
I will again defer to my expert
witness what you're asking.
Thank you Representative no I
again I I think the intent of
the bill is a provide a clear
framework for people who are not
prohibited to comply with the
law and to make sure that guns
that are manufactured by people
who are legally prohibited from
having guns can't access them by
again logging online or printing
them at home I think it provides
a clear regulatory regime for
individuals to comply with is
what I was saying.
Madam chair Mr Krauss he was go
back to my original question
now.
Since nineteen sixty eight.
It is been waffle to assemble
these guns at home.
This.
Here grassy yes not grandfather
those firearms in or it turns
people into criminals is that
correct.
If you could let me in here I
think what Representative Rehm
is trying to the point he's
trying to make for you is that
as we work through this bill
you're going to need to.
You're a grandfather clause
because people are going to have
things in their possession that
word against the law and then
suddenly they are.
Right so one of the things we're
going to have to have you work
on so that you can move on from
Representative right because I
think certainly major.
And as someone more.
Something you have to.
It.
Madam chair
The retro.
Representative to act I mean
that's why I think I'm I'm
having difficulty with with the
line of questions from there
Representative you
representative madam chair so
that's what I'm kind of
dealing with I am trying to
understand that that position
there so.
So we'll
acted there would be a need for
that with their and I will
write.
Expert witness on that.
I'm sure.
No let let me talk because I New
Mexico okay okay thank you madam
chair.
When we bill they'll either be
an effective date that we stayed
in the bill or it'll be
effective at a certain period of
time after the governor signed
into law.
But it's going to apply again.
If Representative Rehm has one
of these guns that he
manufactured.
On his printer.
Somebody finds on July second
after the new law takes effect
you have to account for the fact
that it wasn't illegal when he
had.
So that's something that we need
to work on as you do your work
on the bill okay.
Thank you I appreciate that
thank you Representative Rehm if
you want to give Representative
Eli your other feedback that
would be helpful.
Your help verify the question.
Let me move on to page three one
seventeen.
And
digital media company can that
be some kids in the space then
that is home.
Madam chair representative that
that line you're taking from
transaction I and our to the
paragraph reads nothing in this
section shall be construed to
prohibit the manufacture sale
purchase or simply of an
inoperable fire or the parts
necessary to create an in
operable firearms that is
created solely for use as a prop
in a film production by digital
media company that is engaged in
the business of producing
digital media intended for
found.
The special effects.
The computer vision of virtual
reality television and online
with eight production to in the
context of that paragraph.
can you please rephrase your
question Madam chair
representative.
Madam chair and Representative
Lujan can that be a thank you
who's making a movie in his
basement.
As long.
Madam chair Representative under
these.
The guidelines here at that it
is that would be covered on the
to prop an inoperable.
And madam chair and
Representative Lujan let's go to
line eighteen.
The business of producing
digital media so if you use the
thirty five millimeter camera or
eight millimeter camera that's
making actual film.
It appears that would be a
violation.
Madam chair Representative under
this section it that way that
that is not that would not be a
violation.
Okay.
Thank you the.
Let's go to page four one twenty
four.
We're gonna talk about of major
components.
And.
Is it your testimony.
That a complete firearm can be
built out of plastic every part
of that farm could be built out
of plastic.
Madam chair representative and
our definitions on the bill of
fire frame or receiver mean the
part of a fire arm that provides
housing for the fire and
internal components such as a
hammer old or breechblock action
and firing mechanism includes
without limitation any object
you part.
Or part it is not a firearm
frame or receiver in finished
form that is designed or
intended to be used for that
purpose and that means we do
need a fire arm frame or
receiver two million or other
means a major component means
the slide cylinder frame or
receiver of the fire arms and in
the case of a rifle or shotgun
to Terrel this call your
trucking in additional.
and Representative Lujan.
Can we Madam chair
representative.
Can you madam chair and
Representative Lujan can you
make.
Safely make an operating barrel
out of plastic to the animal
lead you on here for a moment
you understand what yes this
pressure per square inch.
Madam chair representative that
is regarding.
What if you would please okay
entertaining with that nation
okay so Madam chair
Representative Lujan so a barrel
in a fire or has to with stand
a PS are up thirty to sixty
thousand pounds per square inch.
Are you saying that you can make
a barrel.
Thank you out of plastic that
can withstand that pressure.
Madam chair representative
Representative I'm gonna refer
to my expert witness on that one
thank you Sir.
I thank you Representative and
thank you madam chair members of
the committee you know to my
knowledge in with existing
technology at I don't think so
but again I think the bill is to
I designed to address a fast
emerging technology that has
probably has advanced by leaps
and bounds and several years so
I I think it's better ultimately
to be comprehensive and just
make sure that you know there
are no loopholes created in that
you know that would have to be
addressed someone thank you.
in the Representative Lujan I
think that's right.
Thank you Representative Rehm Mr
speaker I have your next thank
you madam chair thank you
Representative.
Representative one of the things
that we have made a.
All market value or were you
just committee is making sure
that when we are creating
crimes we.
Special attention to the men's
raha requirement I'll take for
example when we look at the.
Session of narcotics we have
worked for several years as part
of our criminal justice reform
efforts to decriminalize simple
possession R. N. M. to make all
of our statutes.
Why is nothing less than intent
with possession with intent to
distribute.
For if we talk about
Position of the family you.
There are many many crimes where
we have to say that you are
going to be yes.
Work is just saying some
instrumentality of a crime with
intent to cause that to commit
that crime.
You see here that each of the
elements in this bill are.
You will be called strict
liability costs.
It is made misdemeanor.
Is a crime without the person
intending to do.
Now we.
For example if we talk about.
The serial number.
provision.
As it's read.
There is no reads.
It taking up.
Firearm to lax the serial
number.
Would be a misdemeanor.
Under this bill because it
doesn't say the F. to knowingly
possessed more possessive
firearm without a serial number
in order to have committed the
crime simple possession.
Is is more crime.
So I would suggest Madam chair
representative if your medical
we might we apologize for the
consideration of the bill so
that we can get into
a conversation with you Madam
chair representative in the
analysts the committee to make
sure that we are addressing the
intent required I don't think
it's it's been a practices of
the committee the last four five
years.
To create new strict liability
crimes in any area of the law.
As I said you know areas where
we're dealing with.
Session is the first one comes
to mind where we are.
Trying to decriminalize simple
possession there are other areas
we get our this criminal justice
reform package back in twenty
nineteen.
Where we wanted to make sure
that each crime in the criminal
code has requirements.
You madam chair of that reason
and and a few other issues
dealing with some of the
definitions Madam chair
representative I'm wondering if
you might.
In the call so that we could
work on that aspect at the very
least the bill before we might
go forward.
Madam chair
Mr speaker
I think that that you brought up
the an important issue in there
and you we worked on this is and
and the committee that and then
we reduce the felony to
misdemeanor thank you your
within your own conscience is a
lot of the things that you've
been that you just mentioned are
talking about so
I would I would be in agreement
with you that that that language
and and would be are we needing
to be worked on yes Sir Madam
chair representative thank thank
you for that I ain't I agree
that the idea that someone can
turn on a three D. printer and
walk out of the house with the
firearm intended to commit a
crime is a problem I'm gonna
want to make sure that we're not
they were keeping anything you
might to narrowly tailored
focused on public safety as well
as needed for the criminalizing
folks who are otherwise
innocent.
In lacking crucial is madam
chair.
I appreciate you all to.
For the consideration of bill
and we will work on this.
In the coming days.
Mr.
What I was thinking is that
perhaps I know right
Representative I don't want to
us questions you might have some
records that he would like to
given the Representative now not
representative I right now
To consider
But.
If there are if there's anyone
else who wants to add to the
discussion before we send
Representative Lujan.
For her bill.
That's really what I think are
vice chair with suggesting as
well that that she wanted to see
that you.
It is such a way that people who
work and no yeah we're.
No certainly no criminal intent
for sure I would not be
prohibited from from doing
something like that people
texting think you're wrong about
this you're right about.
What.
It's a very top top one it
really is.
So is there anyone else who
wanted to search and we'll be
happy to share the analysis with
you from the committee and.
And that the majority.
If that would be helpful is
there anything else we can help
you with.
Just.
Sure go ahead.
Representative Lujan I'm.
Yes thank
okay.
Yeah I.
I'm not sure.
Thank you I would like to live
in that that direction I think
that that is a very valid point
nine and I am I value that
information and and the thing is
that today thank you.
Madam chair.
Myself and then I think I've
unmuted and I haven't
so that concludes the agenda for
the state.
And thank you all very much
unfortunately we won't be here
till ten because we had to book
two bills pulled so that's good
news for us see you on Wednesday
and thank you very much
everybody.
Especially the analyst.
And our committee staff thank
you all right the hardest
working and most of the
Legislature madam chair they
are.
Everyone.
