Here representative
representative
not invice chair here
matter chair here we have the
forum very good so an interest
of order it is a little bit
fluid but we are going to start
with
senate bill six
we will then probably go to
senator fifteen.
Senate bill one or sjar one
senate bill one twenty seven and
then on assessor were at we have
to be on the floor it
five thirty.
So.
Senator and representatives
madame vice chair the floor is
yours thank you madame care.
In front of you a senate bill
six
you've seen a lot of the changes
through this committee that we
proposing to the count of us
regulation act
much of this is the same we do
have an amendment to propose for
senate bill six a couple of them
that we'd like to deal with
upfront to beat basically get it
in line with what we've seen
previously in house but one
twenty eight.
Umm do you want me to introduce
that amendment manager
yes please while at least let us
know what number it is because I
have been in and we have been in
date with amendments and then
there had been withdrawn and
then we've gotten different
amendments so we really need to
be very precise in which
to to I guess we're calling up
two two eight numbers now that
would be two to eight three four
six point two and I believe
staff has those so if we could
hand that out and I do believe
we have.
So the amendment is being handed
me to school first we need
emotion to for discussion
purposes to consider their
members.
And and a second from.
All right we're ready to hear
your first amendment because I
understand there are others as
cracked manager so this is
essentially
doing a few things on we're
clarifying the section on it
that you heard from fog we've
spoken to
or at least agency has spoken to
them about the changes that were
made
this also clarifies
the juvenile detention facility
contraband situation that we
worked with our colleagues on
the other side of the chamber to
clarify
and essentially brings both
bills into correspondence that
we had heard previously again
house but one twenty eight and
senate bill six so this clear
clears the up that language.
The.
Will hear all of the proposed
let me think about this you have
a proposed member and I think
represent a ream does but we can
get to that when we get into do
course are there any other
sponsored mendance and then
we're going to go to the
audience okay so all right so
this one has been
introduced as as a discussion
item I would suggest that we
won't actually get to adopting
it until we get through the
public comment peace house out
so those in the audience wishing
to speak an opposition to the
bill please raise your hand in
limit your comments to ninety
seconds if you will so
yes
melanie.
New mexico process so.
We are we are very concerned
we'd like to see the if we're a
exception struck.
A news media to cover
stories.
Strong
and there's no reason for us to
we could.
Melanie I don't think you made a
chair of members the committee
my name is melony major
scientific director of the new
mexico foundation for open
government and we echo mister
lopez comments we would like the
part about it for a strict and
we don't field it this agency
needs an exception that is not
even afforded to law enforcement
and so if this would pull out we
would remove all of our
objections to this bill thank
you for your thank you anyone
else in the audience wishing to
speak an opposition to the bill
I don't see anyone else.
Those anyone online wishing to
speak an opposition to the bill
please raise your hand.
Anyone with their hand raised
those in the audience wishing to
speak and support of the bill
please raise your hands.
Dan and then we'll go around the
room and then this way thank you
my name is down weeks I
represent the
light of dent as far as.
The.
I think this bill
the agency to do a much better
job.
Was done fairly quickly rolled
out very fast.
Yeah.
Thank you jesse.
Thanks madame chairman members
of the committee we appreciate
all of the work that the
sponsors and the cd have done on
the spell over conversations
over the last full year and
leaving up to this point I think
there are some critical
components that were stripped
out of the bill that we hope to
address and subsequent sessions
but as it stands it's a really
good step and helping the c c d
at a regular industry and
support the industry so thank
you for considering thank you
anyone else in the audience on
the side of room
yes yes you're definitely cheap
method stay police we appreciate
the sponsor would you stand
support and then some of the
tools that are allowed that cc
ourselves to come back with the
others it was a market
anyone else on this side of the
room wishing to speak an
opposition I mean in support
okay now on this side of the
room scott scott scanned rich
obvious for every.
We appreciate the the sponsor of
the department.
We would like.
Topics be discussed.
So the issue of of.
For thinking
love the build all right anyone
else
in the arty
support okay now let's go online
I see a few hands raised online
let's see jeffrey castio.
Yes yes can he I mean yes
thank you madame care thank you
committee members I wanted to
just think the sponsored the ccd
for but he everything that they
had to this bill we we are in
full support and we look for you
working with ccd and
representative for medicare in
the interim for micro businesses
thank you
and we have been winger loinger
will enjoy unchecked committee
banks my name is been lewinjure
on the executive
of his chamber of commerce I
really regret that I could not
be here in person today to
support this bill on senate bill
six and it's a accompanying bill
on the house side have benefited
from both sponsors
representative and senators do
hig really doing a lot to engage
the industry and understand
where the industry is right now
and the spill addresses some of
the very necessary components
needed for this industry to
continue to grow in a healthy
manner but also does a good job
of balancing the immediate needs
with what we expect to need in
the in the near future to
continue the growth of this new
industry and we stand in strong
support of this bill and we
encourage the committee to pass
it thank you thank you.
I don't see anyone else online
with their hand raised back to
the sponsors so we have a bill
and we have a on an amendment
maybe we should talk about the
amendment to see whether or not
we can adopt it and then move
forward with a full discussion
of the bill committee members.
I have a is there a second I do
have a question about okay okay
is there any discussion about
the moment representative of
queen
think you meant your mentioner
sponsors only if you could just
walk me through the the
language works.
Madam chair representative so
this was crafted by looking at a
combination of
msa.
Ah fourteen dash two dash one
point two which is the new
exception for law enforcement
records that was adopted by this
body last year I which does
allow for.
I
non public
records that include
confidential sources methods are
information to be withheld as
public records are redacted
and then looking at actually the
i.
The court rule that applies to a
I was trying to think of where
other confidential sources come
up and it's a news media so rule
eleven dash five fourteen talks
about confidential sources and
information and so looking at
both of those kind of.
Merged them together to only
address the situation where you
have a confidential source which
would be someone making a
complaint I get the two c c d
about a violation of the care of
us regulation act.
And or information that is
confidential information would
be developed while they are
doing investigations or
inspections that related to
potential violations of that act
these and this information and
and the source information would
be confidential for a maximum of
thirty days if aid notice of of
action
contemplated action goes out
they are no longer confidential
if no notice goes out then
within thirty days either of the
four speed revealed two ccd or
of an inspection or
investigation commencing that
information would become public
so this basically gives ccd.
A thirty day window to feel
with.
Deal with complaints and
investigations involving a
violations of th.
So ma'am chair center either way
that the information does become
public.
Madam chair represented yes.
In
obviously the
comments from the
more publicity rather than list
but I ask is there ever a
situation where.
The identity of the source is
sensitive that they could be put
in the danger if their
identities reveal madame
chairman of yes that's exactly
the kind of situation that we're
trying to address with us as
that what happened right now is
someone sees a violation they
call up c c d and report it and
then whoever got reported all
the map and says who reported me
and that is is posing safety
concerns for quotes the other
thing that's happening is that
cc will go out and do an
inspection and find violations
and before they're even back to
their office they have an
iprequest already for the
results of that inspection or
investigation and folks are
using that then at their other
locations to get rid of it of
evidence
because they know they're
they're going to get cut
so this yes ccd the breathing
room they need to make sure
people who report violations are
safe and that they can actually
complete an investigation when
they find violations
manager center that but.
The period of safety only lasts
for thirty days
mountain representative you're
right I and that was essentially
offered as a compromise given
the concerns that were voiced by
far okay thank you matter.
Thank you I had a questions
about the upper piece as well
does this language that you're
proposing in this amendment in
this is it exactly like the
language in your bill
representative it's not manager
it's it's slightly different
based on the fact that we're in
that sort of web of
who is able to respond and who
essentially how these complaints
are
now processed so that's that
cave out there madam chair and
and manage her the the language
that was an hb went there
commute sub that came out of
this committee for one twenty
eight it protected personal
identifier information personal
identifier information only
means like the last four of your
social or or other it does not
protect the name of the person
so that approach does not fix
the problem that ccd is is
trying to fix here.
Well it sounds like if we have
an acception to reporting I
guess crimes or
I don't know legal issues I
don't know how we want to
describe that it sounds like the
problem is broader than just the
canous act if if the case that
you're suggesting is.
You can get investigatory
records and no person I
identifies will be provided
except for the person's name
somehow that doesn't make sense
to me that we say a personal
identifier is not a name
and so madame chair it's because
the ccd does not have law
enforcement powers yet so for
everyone doing investigations
who does already have law
enforcement powers then they are
under that
right the law enforcement
records exception we there is
that bill but some going to make
it through the session but will
come back with next session that
would give ccd law enforcement
powers because they also need
that for
to do seizers and embargoes when
they they see illegal canous but
out as of now and over until we
give them on forcement powers
that would not apply to them so
that's why we are doing this
specifically for them in the
canvas regulation act not in
epra itself
okay so when you come back next
year are you going to strike
this provision.
Madame chair if assuming they
get law enforcement when they
have long forcement powers yes
that provision should be
stricken because it would then I
it would it would conflict with
the overall law enforcement
exact records exemptions.
Okay
just a month i'm sorry speak
purchase.
Okay
yeah why I guess.
So something is happened in
between when we passed your bill
representative
we're considering this bill now
in terms of enlightenment and so
feed applicability of it brigas
is what i'm hearing is at
essentially the case accurate
matter sorry to put it that way
but you know how in art full am
so do my best okay thank you for
that clarification speaker
martinez thank you I will be
amendment
it is three four six point two
is amendment proposed by the
sponsors god it thank you matter
emotion to consider it is on the
got it thank you thank you
senator in representative
can you walk me and I apologise
for walking and leave but can
you walk me to through what's in
the amendment.
Madame chair speaker so this
amends the upper language there
we just debated a bond as to why
it's a complicated situation for
reducting information when it
comes to complaints and
investigations within the c c d
and then we also add contraband
language from our house bill one
twenty eight regarding juvenile
contraband.
Thank you madame chair and
representative now
i'm looking here at and I know
we're not in the bill yet
synergy should community
subsuper central six I believe
the bill itself among many other
things lifted the cap on
licensing fees madame chair and
representatives that still the
case madame chair smister
speaker we have a second
amendment to propose to be able
to not touch any of that
language is that is in current
law but we're not there yet
thank you madame chair
presentative and then lastly do
you have another amendment to
deal with what I thought was a
very good amendment put on on
the senate floor and we passed
the bill a couple of years ago
by senator ingle prohibition
members of this body from
participating in that industry
for a number of years was that
provision stricken from were
proposed to be stricken from by
senate bill six and if so do you
have an amendment to fix that
matter sure
mr speaker we don't it's on
pages twenty two and twenty
three it's currently stricken
from the
what we're looking at on senate
judiciary committee substitute
but that's not in this amendment
came I would like for us to
revisit that when we get to the
manager because that's an
important point in something
that I think we should we should
keep in in the statute i'll stop
there think you manage her
thank you any other discussion
on the this amendment I don't
see any I think there was a
motion from representative read
and second advice represented
hembry of any opposition to
adoption of
this amendment which is too two
eight three four six point two.
No opposition to adoption of
this amendment
maybe I misunderstood you
earlier representative I thought
this was the only amendment you
were proposing there's another
one to additional o two
additional okay
okay two eight three seven point
one.
But madam chairman understand as
we are not proposing this
because this is unfriendly one
so representative okay so
represent ream has an amendment
i'm aware of that and he did
tell me he thought it was
friendly so do you want to
propose the amendment since he
he had the step away to go to a
n.
I'll let it get all have it
handed out and then.
The amendment we're talking
about the two two eight number
is two two eight three five two
point one is everybody in
agreement on that okay very good
we have a motion for to discuss
the amendment do we have a
second.
The.
The floor is yours madam chair
this is a friendly amendment yet
the men maybe we can talk about
what it does
because I was part of that
conversation but others don't
matter
members this essentially
clarifies one of the questions
that was in the language on
background checks that we
look at biometric staff scans
since that's not well defined
it's the better use of the word
data biometric data is what was
recommended we we completely
find that friendly.
The other questions about this
I was in a conversation with
representative read this morning
and
the point being apparently that
the word scan is not found in
our.
Our statutes but data is
another.
Any other questions or
discussion any opposition to
adopting represent.
Opposition to adopting this
amendment okay very good so now
we're back on the amended bill
we know of no other amendments
at this point is that right
there's one more I think that
the speaker has already
managed here absolutely.
Hey i'm gonna move.
The numbers point two to eight
three seven one point one
has been passed.
Three seven one
yeah we don't okay
it's appearing okay we got it.
Three seven one point one.
In madam chair I believe this is
the amendment that is going to.
Uh keep the status school in
terms of licensing fees in
place.
Um at least for the foreseeable
future with an understanding
that this is something that has
to be worked on over the course
of the interim with RLD with
experts with
the same legislators at the
witness table
as as the industry rose in his
industry up takes more route in
new mexico so that the amendment
would remove that section out of
the proposed bill entirely.
Is there you have proposed the
amendment speaker is there a
second for discussion purposes
second and by representative of
him brief discussion of the
amendment
at speed
sponsors your reaction is it
friendly manager no
unfortunately this is not a
friendly amendment where in
disagreement of this because it
was in house for one twenty
eight we had already amended it
okay all right
well this is an interesting we
have to cosponsor to different
positions on an amendment
so I
represent a remarried to share
your perspective and then we'll
hear from senator do heg and
then the committee can have a
conversation hazard thank you
madame chair so we had already
removed this section from
discussion in our previous
meeting being that there was a
discussion between our micro
businesses and our
uh agency that we would
basically review fees we would
review caps with a review plant
count in the interim and revisit
that in the next session being
that there's a lot of
complication in question as to
what the rate i'm equal liberian
would be in understanding the
market so we had removed that
from household when twenty eight
and agreed that we would move
into the interim to have that
discussion
okay so that sounds to me like
your supporting them
yeah it's friendly to me
friendly to you not friendly to
you senator yes madam chair so
the language that's been taken
out as language that caps
licensing fee is at a hundred
and twenty five thousand dollars
that is corporate welfare that
advantage the only only up until
recently only one company in new
mexico got the benefit of that I
learned this morning now there's
two
but this gives the really really
big guys a massive advantage
over literally everyone else.
And there's no good reason to do
that
if the goal of this this
legislation was to make it so
the everyday new mexicans would
have a meaningful opportunity to
participate in this market then
keeping language in the only
benefits the biggest of the big
does not comply with those goals
and manage her I I think a lot
of people don't.
Don't know how play accounts
will necessarily plant fees and
and fees for canada license in
work so because we say that
folks pay their fees for much or
each mature plant at one time
that means that and let me back
up a little bit especially for
these big really big guys they
are growing and green houses
there.
Plant limit of matrit went time
means that they actually have.
A lot more plans the master
let's so you have five hundred
plants which are at one time
that means you actually probably
have two thousand to twenty five
hundred plants because they're
doing perpetual harvests only
five hundred and return at one
time but there's a whole lot
more plants involved but that
means that it's that for these
big guys because they're only
being charged from a trip one
time three fourths of their
plants are already free they're
already getting a huge financial
break this is then giving them
an additional financial break I
on top of that.
I don't think that's good policy
and I don't think that it's
there I too everyone else in in
the canvas industry and new
mexico
thank you so we're on the
amendment i'm speaker over back
to thank you manager yeah I
think points well taken and this
is a brand new industry it is an
industry that is taken off
rather successfully clearly
there are some issues that we
have to address that I believe
this bill addresses things like
background checks and what not
I think it's premature to jump
into discussions of
of a licensing fees plan counts
that's why we took out the
microwave license
that the increase in plant come
from micro licenses because
there's a lot of work to be done
and for us to be new doing it
three days for the end of
session
I think is is an issue and look
there's going to be a lot of
work in the interim around this
question but also in terms of
taxation
we have a twelve percent excise
tax that then increases over the
next few years I think it's up
our question as to whether or
not that step latter is the
right way of doing it but I
would also argue it's fair to
think about whether or not the
existing tax rates are fair to
the people in new mexico because
right now we're going through or
we were at least until the end
of the last week through a
debate around all call taxes and
these are all things are we to
be thinking about making sure
that we get ahead of otherwise
we're going to have a.
Checkered board approach to the
statute that I don't
particularly
that out of particularly like so
I hope I would move on adoption
the amendment of a motion to
adopt them and we'll have more
discussion more discussion is
there a second okay so we have
emotion to adopt the amendment
we have a second now we
certainly can discuss it further
representative hembry
thank you madame chair
so on the mature versus non
mature plants is that only for
the large growers or is that for
all growers madam chair
representative that's for all
growers okay it's the large ones
that get the biggest battle from
that.
Thank you and and madam chair
senator and and representative
as I understand this and I think
i've expressed this to the
representative a couple times
right now the
fee I believe by rule making is
at five dollars per plant is
that correct mental
representative yes madam chair
senator and representative
but under the statute it can be
up to fifty dollars per planet
is that correct manager
represented yes thank you and
and madam chair senator and
representative my concern on
removing the cap and then
possibly going to fifty dollars
per plan is that the price
for legal marijuana will become.
Hi to a point
and that was not I did not
intend to use that pun
to a point where we are driving
people away from the legitimate
market and to an illness at
market and that's my concern and
why I think that why i'm in
favor of this amendment thank
you
anyone else wishing to talk to
speak about the amendment
alright
is there opposition to the
amendment.
Okay let's do a role so we can.
Representative all con.
Representative chassis.
Representative hemre
also I have to be first now
yes
representative lane.
Speaker martinez yes
representative mcqueen no.
Representative read yes.
Representative of green
representatives the tansky.
Representative alcohol.
Representative.
The.
Understand.
Sound elected
representative chase.
We have four years did you even
know some sorry
matter yes yes.
Madam chair.
Yes.
Six to two.
Okay
before we go on are there any
other amendments
speaker martin thank you map
chair unfortunately I don't have
it but i'm we're getting the
drafted now maybe during this
debate we can get it down here
but if you go down to page
twenty two line twenty four
the bill proposes to strike the
section that reads a person who
is a member of the new mexico
senator the new mexico house a
representatives on the effect of
date of the candidates
regulation act.
Shall not apply for be granted a
license to engage in any
commercial kind of is activity
prior to july one twenty twenty
six
this was an amendment
this was an amendment too the
original c r a on the senate
floor by
senator stewart ingle it really
in an attempt to
create a bit of a cooling off
period given that this industry
so new and potentially so
profitable
and I took it as a friendly
amendment that the time I think
it's still a good idea perhaps
we can revisit this in the
future but I would like to
I don't have the amendment now
but if the amendment comes here
over the next few minutes i'd
like to
to unstrike the proposed
striking of the language
so just declarify mr speaker.
There was a kind of a more how
do I see this there was a
prohibition for a certain period
of time for legislators to be in
the business account there there
still is this the bill is it
stands right now would lift that
prohibition.
I'd like to keep the prohibition
in there
you'd like to keep the provision
which means that we have to
amend the bill good and madam it
was afraid I was going to.
But i'm glad you clear wouldn't
be the first time now it's not
the first time you're right so
we'll be waiting for that
amendment
which I think we could probably
do it on the fly but it's if
there's something coming written
then that's great all it's going
to say is
strike the strike okay
okay
let me limit all right so let's
go back to the sponsors anything
else you'd like to raise before
we go to the committee.
No matter and I don't know if
you want me to address the
the speakers amendment now or
wait until wait until we get to
if a formal one comes will deal
with it then if by the time
we're in were completed with our
conversation hasn't come well
talk about it
I guess we call these on the fly
amendments and at.
So we're on the bill
represent mcqueen
maintenance I have two questions
one of my questions is relating
to this provision do you want me
to hold off on that question
yes let's hold off on the
participant.
Okay alright now i'm cheer
sponsors is there anything in
the bill that limits the number
of license madame chair
representative now.
Ma'am chair thank you.
Okay anyone else with questions
on the amended bill yes a
representative for him bring
thank you madame chair
representative senator
I
have some concerns on ages
twenty six and twenty seven
we have
beginning on page twenty six
line three.
Right there there and and like
three and four that the division
may refuse to suspend or revoke
a license and then in several
places uh lines twelve
on page twenty six lines ninety
or nineteen on page twenty six
line two on page twenty seven
pending investigations and I
have real sort of due process
concerns about revoking a
license just based on a pending
investigation could you address
that why we have pending
investigations for madame chair
representative so first all
dressed why we have pending in
there you might have heard about
the banali I over the summer
there was a bust of a gentleman
who is licensed who had a bunch
of human trafficking victims
about of chinese immigrants who
he was was using essentially a
slave labor I for his canous
enterprise his case is going
moving very slowly through the
system and but we know that this
is a bad actor that we don't
want acting in our markets so
it's for situations like that
that we included the pending
language as for your concerns
for due process all of this
happens under the rubric of the
uniform licensing act where
that's where the due processes
is built in so just the fact
that there is a pending
investigation that is not
disposable that doesn't mean
you're automatically going to
have your license revoked or not
granted or anything like that
are suspended all that means is
that that's something that c c d
can better look at assessed
whether that may be something
like with binally where we know
that's not a good actor even
though he has not gone to
completely through that process
yet and then under the terms of
the uniform licensing act they
could then move to revolk or
suspend the license.
And but that's where all the due
processes built in and of
someone disagreed with that end
result they could then appeal it
to district court.
Thank you
sorry thank you senator madame
chair senator representative and
then I guess that would
they on page twenty seven
line fourteen it just says any
other governmental action
pending I mean that seems very
very broad to me
and and I just have concerns
about sort of
the vagueness of and and
broadness of any other
governmental action if you could
sort of walk me through that
police sure so madame terrible
and if you have to read that in
conjunction with the language on
page twenty six in that
subsection d where it says all
of these things have to be
substantially related to the
qualifications functions or
duties of their business of
their can of its business and so
so yes that language is some
catalan with which which we
frequently do in our statutes
but it is catalan which that is
still has to be about their
canaba spit related to the
careless business that can't be
that you went hunting without a
license and that's something
that you're going to get your
lesson you're campus license
taken away.
Okay thank you senator madam
chair senator representative
on on page thirty one lines
twelve three fourteen where we
are now profit from hebreen
drive up windows
and and I know we've had I have
had some discussions about
possibly you know an exception
for for medical care about an
and I
replace I might be able to save
you some time that taken out on
the senate floor so that that
section six provision you see
there is no longer in the bell
okay thank you very much senator
okay and then the
the last thing I had madam chair
and senator representative was
I believe and I was looking
through and I mean
they're there in the current law
there is a maximum plant.
Count and then that is september
sunset
in a year at the end of next
year and
so is that remaining in effect
madam chair representative yes
so it would santa at the
beginning of twenty twenty five
I believe I so and we have a
situation now where we have a a
super flooded market taking away
plant limits where you have a
super flooded market is a really
good way to destroy that
perfect thank you very much.
Other representative read
thank you madame chair I just
want to thank you both for your
work in the interim on this and
mean you really seem to listen
to everything that was a concern
to law enforcement you were very
adaptable I think three of my
bills are in here which is
obviously great
you have law enforcement
regulations penalties I think
this is a a great start to
fixing something was pretty
messed up
and I know there's probably
still going to be more step
that's going to come up but I
just wanted to thank you for
working with me and my issues
and all the work you put into
this so thank you
anyone else wishing to speak
about the amended bill will get
to the the second the third
fourth amendment
I just have a question about the
bill in that so did I hear you
correctly senator on page thirty
one
there was it had originally.
We we haven't currently a
prohibition against selling
canabas from dry through windows
we do not
so madam chair
this was something that was
added in in senate judiciary
right now the ability to have a
drive through or not that is a
local time place and manner
determination so in los cruces
they have said yes go ahead and
do that I believe here in santa
fe as well and almost they have
not a but it's a decision for
the local government under our
existing law and senator just
sharing this was added in
including a ban on drive up
windows and that it was taken
off on the senate floor but it
was never part of the original
bell alright well I have to say
I think it's concerning that we
have.
Speaker martinez I take it the
written amendment has income so
maybe you want to walk us
through maybe
oral and then yeah it's very
simple and and if it's okay with
you I mean we have a long agenda
we could.
Go to the next thing when it
comes back we can put the
amendment done but it's real
simple okay if you go to page
twenty two
page twenty two of the bill.
Mine twenty four.
Starts with subsection and it
person who is a member of the
new mexico senate or house
representatives on the effective
date of the actual not apply for
a license to engage in
commercial activity canaba's
activity prior to july one
twenty twenty six my amendment
would simply lift up the
proposed strike through that
language
so if it's okay with your
congest oh I see what you're
going on to twenty three we can
pass on this bill away for that
amendment to come we can get
back on the bill debate and
consider that amendment and then
at that point I think we can
take on the bill if it's okay
manager okay if you that's your
preferences that okay with
I guess it will just move along
we're not taking votes on
whether it's okay
so we'll move on to the next
item and hold this item in a
bands until the written
amendment.
Matter did you say that this be
fifteen was the next item yes fs
I will stay here now fifteen is
the n.
Yeah.
The.
The.
Yeah.
The.
Yeah.
Okay.
Hello
whipsapansky
we are on fifteen thank you
madame chair and things to
sponsor senator duhig this bill
is about health care
consolidation and how we
address that the appropriate
role of
our regulatory atmosphere with
regards to that matter we
currently have the highest
percentage of private equity on
hospitals in the nation
and what this bill is attempting
to do is strike a balance
between ensuring that hospitals
are able to move forward with
transactions how while still
maintaining appropriate review
for.
Access cost and quality of care
for new mexicans
we are one of only eleven states
that don't have any oversight of
major financial transactions
involving hospitals
and we are certainly working
very very hard this session to
improve the financial status of
our health care institutions
including hospitals what this
bill does is create a review
process at the office of the
superintendent of insurance to
ensure that access to care for
new mexicans is not compromised
when hospitals are engaging in
major mergers are acquisitions
I would like to turn to you are
my co sponsor or the primary
sponsor senator due hig to see
if she would like to frame the
bill and then we can introduce
our expert witnesses madam chair
yes thank you manager thank you
represent enough so the building
that you all have in front of
you is is a real compromise I we
started out trying to address
this net in a comprehensive way
and there wasn't time to do so
so this bill is only good for
the next year it make sure that
any of these transactions over
the next year I will get that
appropriate review from the osi
and the plan is over this
interim for all of the
stakeholders to work together to
come up with a comprehensive
approach that will be bringing
to you next year.
Thank you
matt and madame chair and
members we have with us we have
alice came soon retention of
insurance colon bio deputy
superintendent of insurance and
jean which wishener who is a
health care expert
and so I I turned it over to
superintendent keen to make her
statement thank you madame chair
members of the committee i'd
like to thank you for your time
senator build fifteen as you
heard is an oversight bill that
it's intended to give us osign
notice of major transactions
that could have impact on
availability of essential health
care services affordability and
quality for new mexicans osi has
been reviewing these types of
transactions in the insurance
industry for decades therefore
we have the the expertise than
the mechanism to take on this
additional
oversight the purpose of this
bill is to ensure that there's a
fair review process to perfect
to protect the interests of
patience when the mexico
hospitals have a change of
control we need this oversight
system for large health care
transactions
according to a recent study
published by health affairs but
the share of community hospitals
in the us that were part of
hospital systems increased from
ten percent in nineteen seventy
just sixty seven percent in
twenty nineteen consolidation
has wide ranging impacts on both
patience and providers and new
mexico currently has no
oversight of these transactions
I interfare is we also have
studies that show a growing body
of evidence that this
consolidation has increased the
cost of health care particularly
in the private insurance markets
were individuals and local
businesses pay for coverage
according to recent research
to increase revenue many of
these hospitals are brought by
private equity firms.
Who appeared to make several
changes including shifting their
focus from outation care to more
licratic impatient care services
there's concerned that the
quality of health care is often
impacted by these types of
transactions
some research shows that after a
hospital was acquired by private
equity admitted medicare
patience had a twenty five
percent increase in hospital
acquired complication another
issue that we are concerned
about his reduction and
healthcare services one recent
study found that merged hospital
more likely than independent
hospitals to eliminate and
maternal neonatal insurgical
care
with this in mind the problem
we're trying to stop today is
that new mexico has virtually no
oversight of these transactions
and are are concerned where
hoping that this bill will
provide that oversight but it is
a bill that sunset as senator do
he says and which gives oside
time to engage in a wide engage
or wide range of stay colders
over the interim and return to
this body next session with the
comprehensive legislation we
initially hope to present
thank you madame chair that
concludes our presentation.
Let's go to the audience those
in the audience wishing to speak
an opposition to senate bill
fifteen please raise your hand
yes.
Madame chair members of the
committee in my name is chelsea
canada and i'm the director of a
public policy of the new mexico
chamber of commerce we oppose
the bill and have concerns that
it will not only impact access
to care but also sat precedent
where state government has final
approval and control over
private business transactions in
any industry in the state we
believe in supporting health
care providers and entities
which in terms on private
improve access to care and
health outcomes in the state we
have concerns that is written
the bill could discourage
investments in new mexico that
could expand access to care.
For example should a new mexico
system wish to contract with a
large out of state tell a health
provider or expand primary care
coverage by partnering with the
national chain
in fact the american hospital
association shares that health
system integration may offer
financial stability for
struggling hospitals provide
access to health system
resources and provide equipment
in facility upgrades adding
continued burdens on her
hospitals works counter to
making us competitive and
growing healthcare.
Thank you anyone else in the
audience wishing to speak an
opposition.
I don't see anyone those online
wishing to speak in opposition
please raise your hand.
Those in the audience wishing to
speak and support of the
legislation please raise your
hand okay we'll go on the side
for.
Bill
of balance
transactions are looked at not
only through lens of return on
by the acquirer but also the
triple and better health their
care and lower positives
stability in healthcare system.
Anyone else on this side of the
room wishing to speak in support
of the b.
See anyone anyone on the side
wishing to speak and support
okay we'll start with dan and
we'll go down the matter of
damage representing the systems
we appreciate willingness and
responses to work with this on
this field it is a temporary
measure we support it we are
looking forward to the internet
we can co.
Oh leary.
Thank you madame chairman
members of the committee larry
horand registered obvious
prespecture and health
indeed when we started on this
piece of legislation we were
really far apart so we
appreciate the conversation with
the superintendent of the
sponsors of the legislation to
come up with something that we
can live with with established
parameters a good timeline and
and predictability so we know
what we're looking at so as we
go into the inner as mister jar
said we can work on a
comprehensive solution so this
was almost instances where we
had a couple kind of really long
meetings to really has that
language and and ended up with a
piece of legislation we can all
support thank you manager
support the legislation thank
you anyone else on this site.
Yeah.
Mexico is one of only eleven
states
process.
Markets become increasingly
consolidated state regulators
need to protect competition and
customers from the possible
make.
Including downstream.
On health care access.
Thank you anyone else in the
audience wishing to speak and
support the bill
let's go online
please raise your hand if you
list a speak and support I see
barbara machina.
Barbara.
The.
The.
The.
The.
The.
Thank you now i'm unmuted madame
chair members of the committee
on doctor by remaining any i'm a
past president of new mexico
medical society in the cell new
mexico and college and
humanology consultants and
albert kirkin gallup I also
served for twenty years in the
american medical association
leadership including his
president and I used that podium
to speak extensively on the
damages caused by consolidation
health care particular hospitals
and insurance company mergers I
testified before congress in the
opposition to the anthem signal
merger and the ethnic human
order human and merger in twenty
fifteen in the cds at nine
merger and twenty eighteen there
is a growing body of literature
as the superintendent said that
shows that merging hospitals
into health systems causes an
average of fourteen percent
increase in the prices charged
with a decrease in access and
quality profitable portions of
the hospitals are frequently
sold and other services become
underfunded in the name of cost
efficiencies position practices
cannot complete economically
because we do not have the
market leverage to command these
high prices and to therefore pay
higher salaries and we become
acquired once acquired the price
for the same position services
before doubles for medicare and
can be as high as five times
more for commercial payers when
a private equity thank you thank
you sure.
Anacus sanchez.
Madame chair committee my name
is erica sanchez with new mexico
center on long poverty we
believe new mexicans deserve
access to quality affordable
health care well the bill is
introduced was much stronger we
support the committee substitute
for senate bill fifteen as an
initial step toward address in
the impact of consolidation on
access to health care in our
state research tells us that the
consolidation of health care
entities increases costs
decreases access to health care
by eliminating services that
aren't profitable such as labor
and delivery and emergency rooms
has a severe impact on rural
communities where patients are
increasingly being forced to
travel long distance is for care
and undermines workers and
communities values priorities
and decision should make when at
a state corporations move
hospital management outside in
mexico since consolidation
happens through confidential
business deals are communities
and state agencies have little
bit visibility into major
changes to the healthcare system
although we're disappointed in
the removal of provisions that
would provide opportunity edit
for public comment and deeper
transparency this bill will help
move as closer to the oversight
that is needed to protect the
availability accessibility
affordability and quality of
essential services for patience
we ask you to vote in favor of
senate build fifteen and we hope
the legislature will well more
thoroughly addressed health care
consolidation accession thank
you thank you
we have one more person in the
audience who wishes to speak al
park thank you good afternoon
manager members of the committee
for so I apologize for being in
the huawei
I represent the new mexico
hospital association and we
stand at support of the
legislation I want to think the
sponsors in the superintendent
for working with us diligently
over the last few weeks to come
to this compromise legislation
as well as the commitment to c.
Continue to working on these
issues during this interest
coming up to the next
legislative session we think
that this is something that we
can work together on to ensure
that we provide both goals of
access to patients as well as
consumer protection thank you
very much thank you.
The.
Wish to provide before we move
on.
No manager thank you.
Committee questions
representative mcqueen
thinking manager i'm sure.
Just looking at the time frame
there's an emergency clause the
deaths are you know.
So this would take effect
may fifteenth.
And.
This is take effect me fifteenth
and survive until the july first
twenty twenty five.
Madame chair representative
mcqueen yes so you made since
been to you put in a lot of
pressure on to do a
comprehensive building
accession.
Madame jeer and representative
yes and I think all the parties
that worked on this version are
committed to you ensuring that
that comes forward.
Okay thank you manager
first representative of remain
then represent chasing thinking
madame chair and madame
superintendent after we met
today tried to call you to give
give you here's if we go to page
six and we go to line sixteen at
least one person that is a party
to the proposed transaction
shell submit.
To the office a written notice
of the proposed transaction so
what I see is you need to have
both parties because one party
could save the point I thought
he was doing it no he did do it
he thought you were doing that
and there's no penalty in this
for not reporting the other
thing is I think one side is
going to say the reason why we
want to acquire you is x and the
other side is going to say we
want to read acquire you because
of why
manage air representative
you're correct to that either
party can submit the notice and
there is no
enforcement provisioned during
this interim.
However in our experience that
we've had with the four maze and
the insurance code there hasn't
been a problem about a
disagreements in the application
because both parties want to get
approval.
Thank you chair thank you
representative chasing
the command chair and thank you
very much senator doing
representative sapansky
we heard a lot about this issue
in the legislative health and
human services interim committee
and I I just want to repeat one
thing say I missed it how many
states.
Were one of very few states who
do which does not have this kind
of oversight madam chair and
leader chassis were one of
eleven they do not have a
process to address these kinds
of transactions thank you very
much
here in representative and
senator
I think this is this was kind of
the theme of our interim
committee this year that we need
to get a handle on this and I
think it's led to a lot of
dissatisfaction and exits.
Unwelcome exit of professional
so
I appreciate your work I
obviously you have more to do
have to this but thank you very
much the manager.
Anyone else with questions about
the bill.
Looking at my perplex members.
Okay represent him thank you
madame
I guess i'm just thank you
madame chair representative
senator in and superintendent I
I appreciate it I guess i'm just
a little confused as to
why we need this when it's gonna
sunset in just a little over a
year
and not just you know work and
hammer out what what really
needs to happen in the interim
before the next session.
Madame chair representative
because we there's good reason
to believe these transactions
are coming over then this next
year before next session and so
we need something in place to
address these coming transit
transactions before we can come
back next next year and do.
And and thank you and madame
chairman and and senator then
it in this current
uh bill.
There.
There's a review process.
And then there's.
Approved the transaction
approved the transaction with
conditions or disapproved the
transaction.
What what happens what happens
following a disapproval.
Madam chair representative that
transaction would not be able to
go forward.
But I I will not manage here.
Disapproval will be the very
rare circumstance
if there's a way to ensure that
new mexicans still have the same
access
access to quality after
affordability of health care and
access to a central services
than and it's probably going to
be approved with conditions are
just approved it's only if those
if health care is getting worse
in new mexico as a result of the
transaction that it would be
blocked and there's no way to
put conditions on that would fix
that that thank you madame chair
senator if there is a
disapproval is there.
And a pellet process for that.
I would soon under the
pardon me
madam chair representative I I
think the traditional
administrative processes that
are under the insurance code
would be available
thank you superintendent.
This.
So I wanted visualise this
you're done
sorry I just want last night now
i'm sorry i'm sorry okay so
I excuse me i'm sorry
matter chair and and uh.
Senator representative what.
What more did you want in this
belled it i've heard a lot that
it's been scaled down with so
what are you envisioning that
after
july one twenty twenty five the
new
what you work on on in the
interim if that passes what will
that look like.
Madam chair representative I I
think that's going to largely
depend on on those meetings with
stakeholders that's that's why
we want to bring all the stake
holders together to make sure
that that we do that everything
were including in the
comprehensive bill I is
appropriate I bite if you look
at the original version of the
bill some of their I think the
big things that are taken out is
transparency enforcement
community engagement which are
all important things to have I
and they they're only taken out
here because this is essentially
a stop gap for the next year to
deal with the is coming
transactions.
Thank you senator
madame representative i'm sorry
but I I just want to follow up
on on that but what types of
inforcement I guess is is that
like not complying with the
conditions of approval or or not
reporting
enforcement or all of those
things some madame chair
representative so yeah so it
could be let's say someone
doesn't who required to give
that notice to start the whole
process in the first place
doesn't or maybe then they're
notice they lie.
Or there there's any any any
number of of things that could
go wrong and and when they do
there should be some enforcement
available there but because of
the short time line of this one.
We didn't think it was was as as
a satural.
And and superintendent might
want to out to that and it's
manager represented it we're
following pretty much along the
lines of the insurance company
holding act where you have
noticed and and applications and
enforcement that's what it was
pretty much what we looked at in
the comprehensive bill and
as we discussed this with the
stakeholders they understand
that's what we that that was our
beginning model we also looked
at the organ model which has a
similar comprehensive review and
those are the kinds of issues
we're going to be talking about.
Going forward.
Okay thank you all very much and
thank you madame chair
thank you so i'm trying to
visualize this so there is a
hospital in the state let's say
in the
may be acquired by a larger
outstate hospital that's a
hypothesis that we've seen okay
so they have to file a dison and
announce that with you or intent
to merge or whatever is that
right
it get madam chair yes that's
the idea they find one notice
and also some of the the
agreements and understandings
that they have so we understand
the complexity of the
transaction and we can obviously
ask questions about going
forward what are their intents
and supports continuing
essentially health services and
not closing certain down certain
not practices okay and what if
you get information you don't
like you can.
Say what
manager are intent with the to
have a discussion with whoever
is acquiring the hospital and
basically put conditions on the
approval like you must keep this
essential healthcare service in
place what we've seen another
this is in that comprehensive
this one we don't get a report
on condition if we put
conditions and how they were
going to be how they continue to
be maintained in some of the
more comprehensive bills that
we've seen conditions are put on
for a number of years
okay and can you require them to
provide certain services in
addition to not eliminate
certain services
madam chair that was that's not
in this bill
okay and you have this authority
by virtue of this bill only.
Correct.
You would have it only to mental
chair yes yeah sure okay and
are there.
Criteria that within
that set boundaries for you in
terms of what you can require
them to do and not do
manager we're looking at it
through the lens of
affordability accessibility
reduction and essential services
we would assure report based on
you know and
and make our reasons known about
why with that there was a
problem again we are modeling it
after the holding company act
which has you know language
along the lines if you feel
itself unfair or to the
policyholders you should put
conditions or prevent the
transaction so those are the
types of principles that we
would be following
that sounds pretty open ended um
so
it gives a lot of discretion it
sounds like
to the superintendent of
insurance would you agree the
manager I would agree
I would think that would be of
some concern to those who might
be the subject of this bill
manager we discuss that with the
state cultures they understood
that this was the lens and this
was the compromise that was
reached over the last few weeks
okay
and is the expectation moving
forward that any future bill
after this one expires would
have.
More specific criteria that that
superintendent would have to
apply because.
I'm not sure i've ever seen
anything like this before but
not that i'm all that well
versed in their in every aspect
of lobber it just seems.
Rather loose
senator did you wanna I see you
you do what I do is nod so
and madame just and and I I
would direct you to page nine
section seven to see what
criteria are laid out here in
this bill by but yes overall
that the comprehensive bill that
you are going to be seen next
year will be much longer much
more detail
with with with all of those
things worked out
okay another question I had is I
believe when
the interest in pursuing this
from the executive was announced
it was a lot of discussion about
transparency and publishing
various things and ensuring that
the public was aware of
that kind of the parameters of
the potential merger or
acquisition and so on and
my sense is that so longer in
the bill is that right sponsor
madame chair know that was that
was taken out as part of this
compromise but it is language
that I will be
advocated.
The.
Okay well I understand there's a
sense of urgency here because
um it seems to be the way of the
world unfortunately we're
hospitals and venture capital
firms are gobbledging up what
used to be smaller local
institutions.
Which frankly that's my
community it's unfortunate and I
certainly have seen
a decline in service and
interest in serving the
community because of that well
in part because of that and so
like comment your efforts thus
far but and I will be looking
forward to
further conversation maybe a
topic for us having for ccj this
year so i'm seeing a lot of
topics i'd like to have for c j
this might be one because I
think it would be very
interesting to have a better
sense about what's going on in
the industry and how we can as a
state and protect our our
citizens and our patients so
do we have a motion I don't
matter okay I like to have
senate health and public affairs
committee substitute senate bill
fifteen was amended as amended.
We have in or do pet.
Do pass.
This is the second
gate emotions bear made by
representative remarries second
by representative of chasing for
due pass on this bill
would you call the role please
representative of
representative chasing.
Representative of him bring.
Yes.
Representative lane
speaker martinez.
Representative clean yes
representative.
Yes.
Representative range yes
representative sapansky yes
matter vice chair yes madame
chair yes.
By vote of nine to zero years
old do pass on committee sub per
senate fifteen k very good thank
you
you have a do pass.
Are we back do we have an
amendment yet ready up for
speakers amendment apparently
not.
So let's go to the next item
which is a pellet judges
nomination commission.
Are manager going to be second
senator show today.
The floor is yours thank you
manager and i'm joined here by
the dean of our law.
Um.
Camill terry apologized in
so senator resolution wine
allows the let me back up a
little bit the dean of the law
school is who chairs the
judicial nominating commissions
and it takes oh i'm sorry my my
custods are
represented
by doing these jewish alarming
commissions takes a lot of time
and it takes the deal away from
the law school and her duties
there and so senate joint
resolution one would allow her
to use a designer when
appropriate I too to fill in for
that role and it would be a
former professor current faculty
member I
can't remember the rest of the
folks that we listed associated
in and retired
and that is all this built as
many.
Any other comments and
representative chase they can
out of chair and I want to think
that do you know the law school
can carry for being here today
senator doing and I were in the
same law school class and.
You tell me that about a lot of
the really
smooth here this
mount her.
Are the dean of the law school
has a lot of work to do and this
is just unbelievable that the
the burden on the law school in
quite frankly there should be an
an additional faculty funded by
by the state for what is being
required of the work here
in interestingly how to
commission this morning and so
she was worried that she might
not be here in time
so this I think this was an
oversight that we didn't allow
for a designing in the first
constitutional manager.
And that's all I just stopped
thank you senator and
representative why don't we go
to the audience now those
wishing to speak in opposition
to the proposed constitutional
amendment please raise your hand
see anyone those online wishing
to speak an opposition to the
proposed constitutional
amendment please raise your
hand.
Those in the audience wishing to
speak and support of the
proposed constitutional
amendment please raise your
hand.
Those online wishing to speak in
support over the proposed
constitution I will moment
please raise your hand.
The.
There's a lot of controversy on
this one it's so
back to response or is anything
else before we go to the
committee
no matter okay questions reviews
on
the commander
to the.
So currently we have the dean.
Which is sort of a known entity
even though we are different
teams over time
the designing could be it's
pretty brought
any faculty member or former
factory member I mean that to
much larger universe of people
um.
I guess that gives me a little
bit of aus just that we no
longer know who the person
running this commission will be.
And that's on that and
madame chair representative
over to the dean but I will say
the dean only votes in the case
of a tie they they have a pretty
limited role that you tell us
about the bar about it
madame chair representative
thank you for the very good
question i'm it is true that uh
the law school runs the
commission's organizes the
commissions and the dean shares
the commissions but I do only
vote in the case of a tie
we did put in the limitations so
that it would not be someone
with a political agenda who
would be charing the commissions
but it is really the
commissioners who drive the
selection of who will be
nominated nominated to the
governor for appointment.
The.
Manager
center dean
you said he did paid the
limitation there wouldn't be a
local person did I miss that
where is that madam chair
representative i'm sorry that
what i'm said was that we
limited it to a faculty member
former faculty member or former
dean so that there would not be
a concern that someone with a
political agenda might be in
that rule.
So
ma'am terrorist center india
that planning faculty members
have a political agenda
just my thought and and only
other than this is
I I hate to go the voters on
something like this.
I mean this seems like this
should be in that you should be
an easy fix but because it's in
the constitution we're gonna go
the voters and
it's like.
A bill understand thank you
matter
of chair I move a due pass.
Yeah.
I just wanted to make I just
wanted to make a point about
this I served on a committee
that was looking at a number of
things affecting the due this
area and this this came up and
it was made very clear and are
discussions I would say actually
more than one discussion
multiple discussions about how
time consuming just organizing
the panels to to review the
applicants for the judges which
is telling in a couple of ways
one is we weren't thinking very
clearly when we will put this
responsibility on the dean him
or herself but it also is
indicative in fact that we're
having a lot of turnover in the
judiciary that's requiring a lot
of effort to appoint people so
just those two points but I
think this is a as a helpful fix
to help alleviate some of the
the problems or some of the
burden on the dean who I imagine
has a few other things to do at
the law school so without and no
other comment would you call the
role.
Representative of one
representative chassis.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes
yes.
Yes
yes madam chair yes so we have a
go ahead a vote of ten to zero
we have a we have a do pass on
senate rules committee
substitute for senate joint
resolution one thank you
thank you madame chair thank you
committee
so we are net next up is
professional psychologist act
changes senate bill one twenty
seven
and then we'll go back to.
Senate bill six.
The.
We are on one twenty seven
senate bill one tw.
Our rate before is yours they
can add in chair and very happy
to be here in the committee with
you the professional
psychologist act changes this is
a bill that is substantially the
same as last year's bill that
went through without opposition
all the way the governor's
office and then was pocket
vetoed by the governor in
discussion for the governor much
of that was because it put
prescribing psychologists which
are a very specialized area of
psychology that are highly
trained in being able to
prescribe any minister the sake
of probably drugs in the
particular area of behavioral
health that they deopian out in
the governor was unhappy that it
was foot under the medical board
for some of the supervision and
this allows the prescribing
psychologist to supervise their
own under the aspects of the
medical board the governor was
unhappy with the medical board
and that's why we were told it
was vetoed this particular bill
comes back and has the
prescribing psychologist under
the site culture you helped me
with make sure I get the right
group the psychology board which
still has would have some
oversight certainly the
prescribing psychologist helped
meet the incredible need for
behavioral health particularly
out in the frontier and rural
areas of new mexico and that
allowing them to supervise their
own greatly supports access to
that group
and my expert linda sigo most of
you probably know linda but she
has been very actively involved
in this for the last couple of
years as we tried to get this
through madame chair members of
the committee lender sigo
representing the prescribing
psychologist and so what this
bill does is allows the
prescribing psychologists who
have been in a operating and new
mexico since two thousand and
four
expand their ability to
prescribe.
The.
Drugs that address the side
effects of the psyched tropics
that they prescribing for years
so how it works now they give
the patient of prescription they
have tremendous they have some
kind of side effect that person
has to that patient has to go to
their primary care provider and
get the prescription to address
the side effects it also creates
a two a four person board to
psychologist now not really a
board like a committee and two
prescribing psychologist two
medical doctors determined by
the medical board those four
people make recommendations on
the type of education and
additional training that the
psychologists may need and then
that training is approved by the
medical board so this involves
the medical board in all of
stages we have worked with the
medical society and worked out
any language issues and we hope
for your support.
Very good let's go to the
audience those wishing to speak
in opposition to the bill please
raise your hand
those online wishing to speak an
opposition to the bill please
raise your hand.
Those in the audience wishing to
speak and support of the bill
please raise your hand.
Those online wishing to speak in
support of the bill please raise
your hand.
Okay we have no public input at
this point any
more comments before we go to
the committee
made of chair no I have no
comments to make about the no
comments that were made
alright
questions for members
representative mcqueen
just the comment.
Managed here which you won't
appreciate
it's great that you've got an
explanation after a pocket
veteran so many times we don't
get in the explanation
thank you manager I just I
appreciate it representative
remarries think you manage her
thank you senator so do you have
it clear that under the super
worry
taking it removing it from the
medical board and putting it
under this part of the statute
that it will be it's agreeable
to hear administration that rate
madam chair and representative
rometo the governor did give us
a message for this bill are
understanding is she is full on
board and with this process in
everything else she recognizes
the need for the prescribing
psychologist out fill the lack
of psychiatrists and behavioral
health people in the state
appreciate that think you made
him chair pushing the clear any
anyone else on the committee
with questions represented ream
manager I move it do p.
We have a pass motion made by
representative ring seconded by
representative himbry so the
motion is do pass on senate bill
one twenty seven as amended
would you call the role please
representative
representative chasing.
Representative hamree yes
representative lane speaker
market
representative yes.
Yes.
Yes
yes.
The.
Yes of ninety zero pass on
senate bill one one thank you
thank you manager and thanks for
getting us in your welcome thank
you.
Okay
we're not ready yet to deal with
to address the amendment on
senate bill six okay so let's go
to the next item.
Do we have aging department
background checks
you do okay.
The.
Representative think you madam
chair and members this bill is
it's actually we're pretty
similar to a bill that we
recently had before this
committee regarding cyfd
a major difference here is were
actually establishing the
authority of ageing a long term
services department to conduct
these background checks and have
access to you
the federal background check
information
in partly at the need for this
is great because a ltsg has
hundreds of employees agency
volunteers.
And programs to benefit the
aging and disabled population in
the state and so this bill gives
the department the authority to
conduct background checks on
staff potential staff and
volunteers that have access to
vulnerable doubts and their
personal information and the
legislation is modeled after
similar legislation that we have
looked at over the last couple
of years
excuse me for cyfd and ecd
and I have a as an expert
witness
there are secretary of aging and
long term services a gentle
thank you madame share members
of the committee
this is really just making sure
that our agency can do the due
diligence and make sure that the
people that we are hiring and
recruiting for volunteer
programs that have access to
vulnerable adults do you indeed
are we do are do you diligence
to make sure we keep them safe
umm so without will just see him
for questions.
Thank you let's go to the
audience
those wishing to speak an
opposition to senate bill one
ninety please raise an excuse me
we're not one
to forty one please raise your
hand.
Get those online wishing to
speak in opposition to senate
bell two forty one please raise
your hand
don't see any
those in the audience wishing to
speak in support of senate bill
to forty one please raise your
hand.
Those online wishing to speak
and support of senate bill two
forty one raise your hand.
Yeah yes
mister
would you
unmute yourself.
Yes my insurer members of the
committee thank you my name is
me advocacy director for
new mexico we stand in strong
supporters
to forty one as it protects a
lot of our older population over
often vulnerable to financial
exploitation or other forms of
abuse and collection you think
this is a strong measure to be
able to protect consumers in
their families thank you thank
you anyone else online wishing
to speak and support the bill.
Tommy hernandez.
Yeah.
Coming into
thank you bad and chair members
of the committee tommy hernandez
public policy director for the
alzhemis associations to mexico
chapter here i'm here to offer
the full support of the all
timers association on the bill
health and express our gratitude
to the coast bonds or for
bringing this legislation
forward as well to the aging
department our support for this
legislation is quite simple the
aging population of the whole
are generally vulnerable
although perhaps none more so
than seniors who are
experiencing cognitive declined
or worse all times disease a
legislation would help produce
the potential for harm and bring
improve sensible protections to
the vulnerable population
the alternatives association
respectfully asked the committee
to move this bill forward thank
you better sure.
Thank you anyone else and line
wishing to speak and support the
bill police raise your hand.
I don't see anyone.
Go back.
So we have a due pass motion on
senate judiciary committee
substitute for senate bill one
ninety is that not right now to
forty one of two forty one i'm
sorry i'm fixated on that
because we're going to be
getting to that bill soon so we
have a dupa motion on
senate bill two forty one
made by representative ream and
second dead by read and
representative second high
representative was it remarried
yet.
Will you call the role
representative of
representative.
Yes.
Yes.
The.
Have a dupa on senate bill to
forty one we're not quite there
yet center one more relatively
quick one
senate bill one forty nine I was
seventy one senate bill one
seventy five is there someone
here to speak to that bill.
It's law enforcement fund
distribution
no
no
that's how to meal and I thought
perhaps he had set someone look
up a.
Short I do think you could put
it on senator
okay
i'm sure we do missing.
I understand it was a pretty
straight for a road
bill.
Senator appreciates it.
No I don't think they do either
thank you madame chair this bill
that I know very very well
create a fund that is primarily
around for a recruitment
purposes for long law
enforcement and has a thirty
five million dollars
appropriation
and that's about it limited okay
we'll quickly go to the audience
anyone wishing to speak an
opposition to the bill please
raise your hand.
Okay.
Anyone wishing to speak online
in opposition please raise your
hand.
Just declare fire I was just
reminded that the there was an
amendment that removed the
appropriate so just to be clear
so basically this creates the
fund and the appropriation is in
house bill to probably
okay those in the audience
wishing to speak and support the
bill please raise your hand yes
sir.
Thank you anyone else in the
audience wishing to speak and
support of senate bill one
seventy five please raise your
hand
those online wishing to speak
and support I see a hand sarah
fitzgerald.
Good afternoon madame chairmen
of the committee i'm service
gerald senior vice president of
the greater albuquerque chamber
of commerce or in strong support
of this bill swift and certain
consequences to crime are keen
to determine a criminal element
in new mexico that goes can't be
accomplished without experienced
and well trained people on the
job this bill will help us
recruit and retain law
enforcement officers and we urge
you to support it thank you.
Thank you anyone else online
wishing to speak and support I
don't see anyone I imagine we
can go to the committee are
there questions.
Second
we have a we have I we have a
dupassed motion made by
representative of conseconded by
representative sapansky
representative queen question
thank you mancher memchair
center i'm sorry I
maybe if you know the answer
this question and maybe I missed
it they took out a thirty five
million dollars preprecious
their money in the budget
manager was on it I have no
idea.
Just
dick
your pointing at someone to go
ahead
with the text and fund is
already got this money in there
all this is a better of how to
distribute that you get together
money's already put aside.
Thank you matter thank you
anyone else with a question
alright so we have a due pass
motion on senate bill one
seventy five as amended which
are called are all there
presentative points
representative chasing.
Representative him yes.
The.
The.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes
yes I wrote of nine to zero we
have a due pass on senate bill
when seventy five as a minute
thank you for helping without
your senator now senator ivy
sodo unless we have the
amendment we don't know okay.
Thank you madam chairman of the
committee that a build one
ninety
is for little bill on detail
the bill has actually two
primary purposes for
the first is to rick upon all
the details
into a new article chapter six
six article fourteen which will
now have a dwi act followed by
voting while tax by boating that
voting
followed by the imply consent
act followed by the addition
interlocked licensing act the
the second is a purpose of the
bill which is what got the the
give the exact message on the
bill is
a bush build fix currently there
are five reasons to be able to
do a blood draw under the if I
could set act what is if you do
a voluntarily a second of the
person's capacity other they're
considered not withdrawn then
you can get a warrant currently
if it's great body harm they go
home aside or a felony this
allows if someone is drugged
driving for you to be able to
get a warrant once you've
eliminated alcohol as the cause
of the impairment so first you
have to do a breath test
the breathtust has to be in the
area of non intoxication which
under this bill is point of four
or below.
Then you asked the person if
they want to
voluntarily get the blood if
they say no then the officer can
do a written request for a
warrant.
Are the requests for warrant
requires that the officer
established probably cause that
the level of impairment is
inconsistent with someone who
was legally not intaxicated
once they get the warrant either
the person then agrees to get
the blood or they don't want to
get the blood they're not
required to strap the person
down and stick the middle and
they can simply aggravate them
just like they would agree with
somebody for
with that matter should be happ.
Okay those in the audience
wishing to speak in opposition
to the bill police raise your
hand
yes sir
with the administrative office
of the courts and we're only
really in opposition or one
provision of this bill on that's
section thirty two as amended
and that would remove
jurisdiction from the magistrate
courts to try mister cases
where those cases involve a
blood draw um we are concerned
about shipping those cases from
the magistrate courts to the
district courts as well as the
workability of that provision
because
we don't really have any other
laws where jurisdiction is based
on evidence of the case rather
than uh level of a crime so
that'll be something new for us
okay thank you anyone else in
the audience wishing to speak an
opposition to the bill.
Those online wishing to speak in
opposition to the bill please
raise your hand.
Those in the audience wishing to
speak in support of the bill
please raise your hand.
Okay they're over here and then
over here
yes mail.
Good afternoon madam chairman.
We have been working really.
And from the.
The dot stands in support
I think there was a hand way
back there yesterday.
Please we stand a support of it
that met with the sponsors
multiple times.
The.
Thank you mister d a
good afternoon thank you matt
and chair committee members
markets material conditions
attorney
trains association in person
today standing and support this
bill is get did you turn tedro
we would like to command the
sponsors of this bill for
reading with us and seemingly
all stake holders
to a lot of many hours to be
right but that we are thankful
and.
Thank you anyone else in the
audience wishing to speak in
support them bower
thank you matter members can be
mine it's been a power and cheap
public defender were standing in
neutrality to this but is that
I I think the spice of the tried
to be thoughtful about how to
address driving into the
influence of drugs and we really
don't like anything to give the
ability to potentially prosecute
more cases but I think there's
some real procedural safeguards
that sponsors have tried to put
in here which have addressed me
and so we're here to thank
sponsors and
thank you anyone else in the
audience which you can speak and
support the bill.
Those online wishing to speak in
support of the bill
sarah fitz gerald
thank you madame chair members
of the committee service sterled
with the greater albuquerque
chamber of commerce we are in
strong support at this bill as
well this legislation will make
some really important updates to
order wireless in wallet
addresses those core issues of
penalties repeat violations
blood screening it also wisely
provides for treatment if
approved by the court and
counseling and treatment to
those in custody and i'm dot
says last year thirty seven
percent of our deadly crashes
were alcohol related and there's
no telling how many weren't drug
related but we don't know what's
a problem and this bilk and help
address it we're support thank
you.
Thank you miss it gerald anyone
else online wishing to speak and
support.
I don't see anyone else sponsor
any other comments before we go
to committee out manager simply
that are in video was here they
unfortunately miss gonzalez had
to leave she would have stood up
the same as trd as as do they
did simply to indicate that with
regard to the definitional and
other tactical aspects regarding
tax and routine that that I work
with them and they appreciate my
working with them.
Okay thank you senator
questions from members
of questions representative
remarrie thank you madame chair
so you had given a brief intro
and i'm just trying to wrap my
head around some of the
provision with which um blood
could be drawn and on what
aggravation can you point out to
me first where it is in the bill
where those changes are made and
then walk me through that uh how
what you're recommending the
change to be certainly
madam share members of the
committee so first of all if you
look at in
page seventy two seventy one and
seventy two
page seventy one subsection a
is is the current section that
has
the provisions where you can get
a warrant.
Or for someone.
And that is if somebody you will
see their beginning on seventy
one line thirteen there by
causing the death or great
partly injury of another person
or there's probable constably
the prices committed a felony so
those are the three reasons
right now where you can get a
warrant.
Then we have the new language in
subsection b which actually if
you turn to page seventy two I
would give you a nice little one
to and three number one the
chemical breast test was the
person submitted so they have to
send it
you have to have a result of the
chemical breath test and the
chemical breathtest has to
result in an account alcohol
concentration in which the
person's presumed nap to be
under the influence of
intoxicating licker which if you
look two pages above you'll see
that as point oh four or block
second the person subscribed
refused the chemical blood test
at the request of the law
enforcement officer and then
third the long person officers
written after david.
Establishes problem costably
that the impairment of their by
long first officer is
inconsistent with the result of
the breath test indicates the
presence of intoxicating drugs
and remember the officers also
wearing a body warned camera so
will be able to verify that what
they write in the written after
david is consistent with what
actually happened so they're
there will be a kind ability in
terms of that now in terms of of
if the person still does not
want to give their their
their blood and some people may
still not want to give their
flood then if you turn to.
Page.
Forty.
Two and forty three of the bill
you have sixty six fourteen
three
six six fourteen two is driving
under the employers of
alcohol six six fourteen three
as driving under the influence
of drugs and you'll see under
six six fourteen three
on page forty three aggravated
driving under the influence of
an intascating drug consist of a
person number two begin online
eight refusing to submit to
withdrawing the person's but for
chemical test when a warrant is
first issue for the blood drop
as provided for in the implied
consent act and in the judgment
of the course based on the
evidence of taxation for them
the court the driver was under
the influence of a tax skin and
drug corner of the influence of
accommodation of a drug enough
right so that that sold in other
words we're not talking about
strapping someone down to gurney
and stick in.
The.
Um.
So many chair senator is this
process now that we're talking
about when it comes to that
evidence of intoxication and the
refusal.
First of just two two questions
first what is the impetus for
clarifying I think section fifty
through this process versus the
current process that we're
subscribed to will just start
with that.
Certainly so that the absolute
matter chair matter must share
the current process we have
person to pirch field which is a
spring court case that says you
cannot enhance somebody
unless you have a warrant for
their blood we don't have a
process to get a one for
somebody's blood in the mexico
unless it is for great body harm
beside or falling.
So consequently if you have
somebody who has very impaired
driving.
The officer then takes them to
get to do a breath test they
test not intoxicated.
But they're clearly impaired.
They say well can I get a sample
of your blood please.
The process now the officer has
no remotely at that point now
and do that no remedy or when
they got a court they have all
the observation evidence of the
person's impairment.
But the defense now has the
chemical evidence of non
intoxication.
And in this cannot see aside a
day and age.
Or factor
they want to see the chemical
evidence on the other side of
someone's impairment and it
does.
So madam chair senator so what
this process recommends is
essentially saying.
We're going to go by non
chemical evidence and simply
situational evidence that allows
us to then go to um.
But is it not not district court
but now we're going into.
Magistrate court and then
prosecute that evidence is that
correct manager matter buster if
it involves blood this will
force the case up into disrecord
acceptable connect where we have
much bottom so if it's just
situational however many chair
senator then it goes to matter
of madam chair might invest by
that is correct which is where
it would go today but but also
you don't have a battle of the
experts going on with
toxicologists.
The.
Amount here senator so the way
it works today is that.
We're we're saying those
situations where we don't have
any concrete evidence of whether
or not this person is
intoxicated because they didn't
submit to a blood test are now
being proud today being cropped
prosecuted in a magistrate court
madame shared by investor that
is.
And so this recommends
essentially
making sure that we have all of
these sort of
fail safest to try to get a
blood test as that when i'm
hearing madam chair might have
made investor that is correct or
to be able to enhance it the
person continues to refuse
because of the consciousness
ago.
Okay and what is the impetus for
enhancing
manager matter by share so right
now for example if somebody
refuses their breath the
breathtust we enhance great
right so it just simply does the
same thing if they refuse to the
blood we would also enhance.
But we only enhanced in the kids
of the blood as opposed to
breath you don't need to warn
for the breath but because blood
is born invasive we only enhance
in the case of a blood.
When we have a warrant first.
Okay i'm trying to write my head
around this having seen this
name be page bill for the first
time
i'm trying to understand can you
could just help me understand
the
again processing through the
magistrate court and remind me
what page those are on the the
worry that or I think it's fifty
six fifty seven
on the the jurisdictional
question as to why we're now
moving evidence into this
quarter I from the audience
members.
Manter senator sounded like this
is going to be a new process but
you're telling me it's current
process manager manifest your no
it's so so the new process is if
we have blood evidence.
We want that to go to district
work.
Because we're gonna have a
battle of the experts we're
gonna have tox colleges
testifying as to what the
significance of certain elements
and someone's blood means
because we have no presentative
loves.
Without how we are presented
levels madam chairman of
but we have no presentative
levels with regard to drug speed
we had prescription drugs in our
prescription drugs listed drugs
illegal drugs were no
presumptive certain of those
drugs are water soluble.
And if the more water soluble
the drug is the more that that
the presence of the drug in your
blood
is is
it indicates the presence of a
breaking the bloodbrain barrier
and an indicative of intaction
okay which is what happens with
apple which is extremely warsaw.
The similar sort of thing
happens with okay
note is a fairly water soluble
drug as well.
T f c is not a water solid
and sold the mere presence of
teeth senior system does not
necessarily indicate that you
impaired at that particular
moment.
And so and so and and then
there's a whole variety of drugs
that have different levels of
solidability so consequently
because we're gonna have a
battle of the experts because
we're going to have to have tax
call just probably on both sides
testifying as to what the
presence of these drugs mean we
want insurer we're not dealing
with an offset prosecutor case
we wanted sure that we're not
dealing with the court where
there's not a public defender we
want unsure that if there is a
dream trolley to twelve member
jury trial now
we wanted sure that that that
we're not talking about
that that we have the the full
set of due process for that
person.
In in these cases.
And so that's why we're moving
those cases up to the district.
If it's a drug case that doesn't
involve.
Blood evidence.
It should go to bed strictly.
If it's a first security.
I think you madam chair thank
you senator so.
Some of the sounds like a longer
process and I and i'm my concern
I think already out the gate is
the elevated sort of um
charges for refusal I think
that's my concern with that is
that if you're having a bad day
now you're being accused of
being on drugs I say no I don't
need to take a blood test.
Yes you do you know you look
impaired now i'm elevating like.
I'm having
you know so when we're talking
about how we're sort of making
those accusations without that
chemical evidence I going into
magistrate court to defend
myself a zero evidence
necessarily against the other
than having potential your body
came hope hoping that it would
work and then my word against an
officer that you know these are
the impairments that were
escalating.
I'm just as we're looking at
this overall this is just one
area that
you know i'm i'm trying to read
my head around what the value is
and sending us through this new
process
you know outside of the fact
that again on water solubility
and all those other concerns
rate where we know to with
counterbest that it can be in
your system for weeks if not
months
and now we're saying i'm having
a bad day okay i'll finally
submit to the drug test and i'm
going to district court for with
a twelve member jury because I
had a substance from weeks or
months ago that i'm now being
accused of being impaired for it
today and so
i'm just i'm trying to wrap my
process and what value we get
out of those who are you know
innocent to
what their accusation would be
at that time.
I I will continue to listen to
the to the debate and the
dialogue but I just wanted to
walk through some of those
changes for now thank you
speaker martinez thank you
madame chair should the time and
senator could see you.
Uhm I i've got a community on
the title of the bill I i've
seen much shorter bills with
about a peach and a half of
title jordan years has the
reliance
very very efficient
for sure but that let me I I
we've talked a lot about DWI I
want to go
the committee's attention to
pitch thirty eight section
thirteen.
Now we're talking about core
insurance
can you can you walk us through
that section please
certainly manage her mister
speaker
so the there's language on pages
thirty seven and thirty eight
that are struck from the mentor
finance responsibility act that
is struck from section sixty six
dash five dash two o five point
one that's language if you look
on pages thirty nine and forty
you'll see that language
inserted in the very next
section work for work
in six six five two o six that
is language that in conversation
with the tax revenue department
with the motor vehicle division
they just simply felt that that
language actually sat better and
section twelve six as opposed to
section to a five point one and
so we just employed since we're
doing kind of a clean up bill
anyway we just simply moved that
language for them they come in
insurance in center and I and I
can appreciate that but I I do
have an issue.
I mean i'm i'm literally sitting
here paging through this bill
and I see this section on
insurance which is not been
mostly what we've talked about
this afternoon so i'm wondering
what else
I should be looking for up madam
chair and senator is there an
appropriation attached to this
bill manager and
mister speaker there's no
professional test this bill
there are two studies asked for
at the end of the spelled both
of the studies of paid for
through growth and case madam
chair and senator.
You are just with the previous.
Debate
you were explaining the need for
expert testimony on both sides
right and so i'm thinking of the
days for example and the periods
who's going to pay for the cost
of those experts madame chair
and and senator assuming this
passes marriage share and mister
speaker that is that is the job
of the days office that that is
the job of the peace office when
prosecuting independent cases.
But aren't we possibly
increasing their cost.
Should this pass we're not sure
matter chair and mister speaker
actually we're we're through
this bill ratio a number of the
costs and and the reason the
number of us is that one of
things that were doing in the
spell is that we are ensuring
that any time that there is a
blood drop.
If it is a five existing time
with the existing reasons under
the pipe of set or the six that
were creating that there will be
a split sample made available to
the defense a hundred percent of
the time.
Because of that were actually
gonna be alleviating a lot of
the draft costs that would
otherwise take place because the
defense will have
a female up the blood.
Exactly as it is that the
prosecution has of it whereas
madam chair mr speaker the way
that is just right now is that
when my blood is taken at one
thirty the morning i'm given an
opportunity to get someone and
the dependent person become take
my blood if i'm lucky enough to
find somebody that person takes
by blood around three o'clock in
the morning which means madam
chair mr speaker they take a
different sample of blood than
what the prosecution house and
so consequently then when we end
up in a debate over what's in my
blood and what the significance
of it is if we're talking about
a substance that is relatively
water soluble we're talking
about different levels of blood.
And whereas under this bill
because we have a guarantee that
there will always be a a
sufficient sample i've taken for
the for the.
For the defence to be able to
use them what happens is that is
that that actually will reduce
the number of of trials that
will have to have ant ill make
the trials that do take place
that much more efficient members
entered don't did the as already
are they supposed to preserve
the blood samples i'm a matter
share must figure what are they
supposed to preserve the bliff
samples already madam chair and
mister speaker preserving by
samples and and having a
sufficient amount of blood
sample for the
for the defense to be able to
use our two different things.
And so a lot of times there is
not a sufficient blood sample to
be able to do a split sample for
the defense this guarantees and
this makes it available to the
defense at no additional cost to
the defense
the the additional thing is that
I that I do want to make clear
that the
by my that that is on page
and paid sixty six point six six
to fifty seven
beginner went to a two when was
trying blood for the performance
of a complete test the person
shop withdraw.
I sufficient ample to permit an
independent chemical analysis to
be conducted the additional
sample sent to the fact of
laboratory of the proper health
channel customer storage then it
goes on and subsection b that
take that it can be requested
either by the driver or
operating motorboard but about
or through the price of legal
council
and that and that no fish i'll
be charged for storage or
delivery of the sample
and so that so that that's a
guarantee that that is that is a
new guarantee that does not
exist in current la that's the
reason what of the reasons why
the pds office I had shown up at
every single hearing to say that
they're neutral on this bill is
because they recognize that
there are things in the spell
that actually are helpful to the
defense I also want to make very
clear.
That we don't go to the to the
brass test until somebody is
under arrest so so so even in
the case that the by share was
saying of having about day is is
is yet to first be.
The the officer has to have to
see signs of impairment as to
them pull the person out of the
car has to do the standard I
still to brightey tests has to
the the president has to fell
with the standard I still
surprised us there has to be an
additional ambition of
impairment the person such that
the process placed under a rest
first for empire driving then
the person is taken to the
breath brat machine only then
when the person
when the bread scores is is
under the level of impairment is
is is there any.
Consideration made at that point
whether or not it's appropriate
to get a warrant for someone's
blood.
Thank you and insurance center
thanks for that and i'm still
concerned about cost I think
these things are expensive and I
think.
You know we've heard over and
over again the last few years
how how much we underfund the
days and and the pds for that
matter
which is probably something we
have to fix spread and we have
to come up with a good a good
formula to ensure that both
very important agencies can do
their jobs so that's one concern
the other concern I don't
remember seeing this in the
interest courts corrections and
justice committee was is taken
to the committee out medical
chair and mister speaker was not
very well I met him term mister
speaker it has been burstfield
the brisfill district issue
itself has been discussed quite
a bit this committee approved a
bird one this this committee for
approved the personal fixed last
year
that was carried by
representative rib
who was one of the cosponsors of
the bill along with
representative rim
and and and a bill summer to
this one was approved and
and sea pack last year which I
believe the vice chair is a
member of uh and she voted for
that one last year as well
that's that's fine thanks for
that
I have a concerns about cars
have considered that ccj didn't
see this in the interim
looking at the title.
If I were to just read the title
I would be missing a whole lot
in this bill and i'm just not
comfortable but thank you for
your responses and thank you for
the time manager thank you
speaker representative
you're not on the list okay am
yes thank you madame chair
thank you senator
I think I want to maybe see if
you could explain a little bit
to the committee more why this
bill is so thick and why is laid
out and how you chose to lay
this bill out or we are
sponsorers did with this kind of
old ancient dwiact totally
member share and representative
we've the sold six six eight one
o two which is the currently
where I law is if you lay it out
just by its up is about eighteen
pages
that in it of itself is fifteen
sections of the dwight act
because it's broken up.
In this bill and each of those
sections is laid out as if it
were new material but it's
actually not new material.
And so and so but the thing is
it's a lot of text
and so when you lay out all of
that taxed
again and then you lay out all
the text of the boating while
tax categories which is moved
from article thirteen article
for the motorbike and then you
lay out all of the
implementations and act again
and then all of the edition
interlocked act again.
It you end up with a lot of
pages.
But most of that are simply
reorganization it's not actual
new material.
Are the the new material aspects
of it we've we've we've we've
covered the buck of it and and
so it's your you're analysis
actually does a really good job
of covering up what what actual
changes there are in the bill
and manager and senator this
isn't change or just any
penalties in the dwi statute at
all out metal chair and
represent the read there are no
changes to the penalties for dws
and madame chair and senator on
the the costs part of this bill
there's also a part in here at
referencing video testimony and
could you explain how that might
actually be a cost saver
for the manager I certainly
manage her representative read
this this allows the motion to
be made to allow video testimony
of tax colleges and a blood text
it does require the actual talks
called his actual blood tax to
be the ones to testify whereas
when they go testify in person a
lot of times you get a
supervisor you don't get the
actual person so the so so this
actually provides a greater
level of of due process in that
regard and and it does require
that the that's court make a
finding that the person rights
are not being aggregated and we
have case one of mexico that
mere distance american
convenience is not sufficient
if you have to have an actual
showing of necessity and so and
so those aspects are still gonna
have to be maintained but where
those aspects are aren't
appropriate for the debited
transport and take place regard
to tremendous cost savings
matter thirty in madame chair
center so if i'm in clovis and I
need to have the the talks of
colleges testify as an expert
instead of driving three and a
half hours to clovis waiting to
testify and then driving back
that person can actually be in
the lab testing other cases a
matter of turn and respect them
to rep if if the mushers
approved out that would be
correct alright and so a man of
chair and center just so the.
Committee is clear what happened
when birds field came down and
if we could kind of enough we've
really explained what we lost as
far as prosecution and law
enforcement and keep in our road
safe when the birth field
decision was decided currently
made a share and and
representative read what we what
we lost was the ability to have
any any way to enforce drug
driving loss alright and madam
chair and send yourself this
would encompass your first and
second and third offence is
correct i've meter chair and
represent a report for a second
and third you don't always know
when you're on the side of the
road how many death how many
parties person has alright and
so madam chair and senator or so
long for sment
at least has communicated to me
and i'm assured to you that this
has become a huge issue i'm not
only with canous being regulated
but just any of the controlled
substances that people are using
when they're getting pulled over
for repair driving up metal
chair and representative that is
that is correct and in madam
chair and senator this isn't
that all out fixed to this
problem would you agree up
madame chair and represent
reboot actually limited this
quite a bit if somebody refuses
the breath test we don't go any
further if somebody blows over
the presumptive level of alcohol
we don't care what's in their
blood if somebody blows in an
inconclusive area we leave it to
the officer's investigation we
only have it when somebody blows
and our level of presumed non
attacks
right in some manager senator
and just to be clear there is a
whole process you have to go
through when you're pulled over
for a dwi and I think he started
to explain you have to actually
reasonable suspicion to pull
somebody over first rate
and then madam chair and center
then you actually have to have
the field sobridy test done and
they have to fail those and that
is when the actual rest is made.
Representative that is correctly
for you have any chemical tests
what so in the case of like you
said the matter by your cent of
having a bad day she's actually
gonna have already been arrested
for impaired driving at that
point because she's failed to
field sobriety tests before
she's asked to take a breath has
store blood tests matter chair
representative desperate so we
don't really have to worry about
a situation where some was just
having a bad day and that they
have a video camera on and they
just think that you know it's
her word against the officer's
word matter chair representative
that is that is exactly correct
and I guess and I know this bill
is long manager and and members
of the committee and understand
long bill scare people and it's
scarce me but we have gone
through the spell I believe with
every stakeholder including
prosecutors and law enforcement
and all the different people
that public defender
and my understanding talking
with them in the hours and hours
and hours we spent going through
the spill with them that this is
going to help keep drug drivers
off the streets and it's going
to help protect new mexicans
because it's going to get
prosecutors and love forcement
more options and what they
currently have now to deal with
someone who's under the
influence would you agree with
that manager and said manager
represented report also
providing a fair matter to
process for the defendants that
is correct
and I don't think we've gone
through this mountain chair and
send it but if you could explain
briefly for the committee in
case some of these members don't
understand the
point of eight percent level and
what this bill does as far as
the the level of when you can
get a search warrant currently
madam chair representative so so
under existing law went away is
presumptively and talks good but
one sex is presumptively
aggravated we don't change that
penalty with them and under
existing while we have a level
that is that is inconclusive.
And then a level that is
presumptively not intoxicated
under this belt the presumptive
non interesting level is point
of four or below
four point three point two point
one point zero zero that is
correct and you can only get the
warrant if you are planning for
point or three one o two point
one point zero zero you can't
get though you cannot get the
warrant at one oh five or point
or six or one or seven or
finally
and so point five point six
point seven point set your per
se dwi but those three people do
still prosecute prosecutors and
law enforcement do you still
handle those cases and prosecute
those cases based on all the
other circumstances I have to
stop other evidence they may
have to show that they are
appeared even though they're
under a point away madame madame
chair representative that is
correct and that's really no
different than kind of how it is
now a days would you agree a
matter of share representative
so monitor and senate or not
really changing that in any
really in any aspect except now
giving long forcement another
tool to if if they can
articulate to a judge in a
search warn if they've a point
of four point oh three point or
two whatever down they can
articulate to a judge hey this
this doesn't make sense as
person failed to field some
bridey tests they clearly look
compared whatever they can
articulate they have a body
camera on they go to a judge
obtain a search warrant and the
judge agrees there's probable
cars for that search warrant
then at that point is when there
can be an ask for a bleja and
matter chair representative read
what they're what they're
probably gonna be looking for at
the judge which probably going
to look for is that the person's
heiser dialated or or that they
are that they're a very small
you know really either really
large really small that are the
the nice tagmas is is is is
really pronounced in the eyes
that the what the person
speeches I mean it's not simply
going to be.
That first was have it a bad day
and then ultimately if you get
the word let's say madam chair
and senator you're still going
to have experts testifying what
that actually means whatever
substances they find whether
it's you know method federal
mean or whatever it might be
your second half experience
testifying to the fact finder of
whether or not they're driving
or their actions are consistent
with someone who was under the
influence of intoxicating drugs
or alcohol whatever it might be
matter which I represent a read
that is correct and so I guess
my point to the committee is
when you see a bill like this I
know it is it freaks people out
because it is so long and it has
a lot of information in there
but I think with a problem that
we're having with dwiss in new
mexico and do you eyes a
specially especially with the
possession of allowing canada's
to be legal that this has a lot
of checks and balances in it
that law enforcement prosecutors
all the people at stake believe
will actually increase
prosecutions of these types of
dwiser duis and I think anything
we can do as a legislature to
help curve dwi is something that
we should try to do and
that's why I support the spill I
think that's why love for some
support in the spill I think
that's why the public defenders
are neutral on the spill and I
don't believe it will raise
costs to da's offices or what we
prosecute these no matter what
you know if we have to prosecute
and we have to prosecute them
it's actually going to save
money for the state with the the
lab and it was not having to
drive and spend their whole day
driving across the state and not
being in the lab moving these
cases along for speedy trial
issues and things of that nature
so
I know my sponsored this bill
but I just wanted to make this
comments and I think that we
should both hear the spell if we
want to help take care of DWI d
u I so.
I think you matter
chair representative queen
thank you mcchair mentioner
center you came.
Uh
to talk to me about the still
appreciate that
as a knowledge when you can talk
to me have not read this build
thoroughly have skin through it.
It's sort of
the fleeing the session pops
upon the agenda in it's hard to
find the time to read and ninety
eight
mentioner center.
You like long bills the pressing
your capacity for handle
handling many topics
I do recall the the election
tune that bill
which was hundred and forty
pages madam chair and
representative a claim if if
you're talking about the one
that I think you're talking
about it was four hundred
seventy three
so
cementer I I personally part of
it and I am but
I personally have more interest
and perhaps aptitude for
election law and then read that
one either
and
there are missing that right I
mean there is a constitutional
flow wasn't there
many share and representative
between out of four hundred
seventy three pages four hundred
seventy one and a half for good
luck so that's a good average
I really like to repeat bills
because I can you know make sure
all the comments are in the
right place and what that so III
appreciate your
handling of the topic
i'm.
Yeah
read I got right for some reason
on bills three people out and I
think for good reason so I just
count me as little freaked out
thank you very muc.
Anyone else.
Yeah madam chair thank you and
madame chair and senator
i'm gonna talk about prior to
could an officer obtain
take a blood tells in a dwi case
madam chair and represent a brim
and the often day yes again
madam chair and senator they
didn't have to have a search one
is that correct ma'am chair
representative ring they can
they they could ask before they
can ask now and and the issue
was what happened afterwards and
and whether or not there was any
there was a way to compel and
and that's part of what birth
build up with.
And and whether not should get a
warrant and in new mexico that
are worked sometimes when they
did get warrants for the message
interview w y despite the
language in our status with that
clarified with
that man chair and senator what
i'm really highlighting was when
you obtained your driver's
license you agreed to a chemical
test including a blood test if
you were injured near in the
hospital and
let's say you're unconscious the
officer could require you to
give a blood test without any
more and that was prior to
birchfield a sacred a metal
share and representative that is
that is still currently actually
if you're in capacity and you're
correct when somebody gets a
driver's license one of things
that they sign one things that
every single person on the
assuming everybody in the panel
has a driver's license sign was
that they agreed they implied
like consented to a sample of
their breath or blood or both at
the discretion of the office
thank you madame chair and
senator um
you've been on cc have we
discussed over the end trum over
the slash several years
berchfield and DWI matter share
and representative really we
have discussed both of the
british field and w
and madam chair senator can you
kind of give the committee and
overview of the work this summer
I just this bill and who is
involved and how we've gotten to
this point where quite frankly
you look we've got the public
defender
at the best i've ever heard him
say that he supported something
and law enforcement days you
know everybody is after table
we've only had one op and that
is a procedural and i'll get it.
Can you connect described what
happened to get to this point
charlie madam chair and and
representative we've had
meetings with without numerous
meetings going over this belt
several times one of his why can
find things so quickly and as
well as because of the number
times we've been through this
belt that includes going over it
with the d a is going over with
the police going over it with
multiple people have long first
including people from birthday
of county sheriff's department
from rerental
pb from
the ps from the police are from
other jurisdictions from going
over it with up with the public
defender's office taking input
actually from the public
defender's office and
incorporating a lot of the input
that they had into this bill are
going over it with the pub with
the
department transportation going
over with the tax and revenue
department taking their input
including the tactical fixes
that they needed in order to
have the federal funding that
they that they require in
different parts of the motor
vehicle code even if wasn't
directly related to certain
parts of the bill to build
incorporate that so that they
wouldn't lose their federal
funding for different parts of
the off of of things that are in
the more vehicle where we could
help
and manage her and senator which
talk about what zero four zero
five means and as a compromise
was that but let's say not
favorable to the prosecution.
Madame sharon and and
representative actually you know
zero zero five
zero four zero four essentially
some people particularly someone
is partied
have I have a couple drinks they
could they could approximate an
o three or four
it junk takes a little more than
that to get up to twenty five
more than a couple drinks to get
to know if I and and that's
where law enforcement felt
we talked to them that that it
was inappropriate to be
prosecuting someone for apple
only at an old for
depending part of someone's
impairment they didn't feel that
way about all five and and and
as a former dw prosecutor myself
like that that we're out
and banner chair and and senator
so
you know we map I mean we spent
an entire day a
representative reband so you had
a prosecutor you had a deed up
the eye off served me and we're
in an agreement that would be
better interest in public to
move from zero four zero five
I think that it's important to
highlight how much work is gone
into this with all the different
players are one thing that I
want to make everyone very
comfortable but we've been
through this multiple times
there is absolutely no penalty
increase where sobbing some of
the problems that are the
birchfield came up with and you
know cleaning up language over
multiple years of working on the
sixty six eight one o two
sections.
Anyway I don't know if you have
a comment on that or not just
simply that that one things that
we discovered as we're doing
that we're unpacking one or two
was we found some conflicts of
lot that we're able to resolve
within six
by unpacking it am going into
different sections and making
some of the subsections in the
paragraphs and madame chairman
senator I would point that had
the public defender
who is obviously read this and
understand it understood it
found something that they didn't
like they would have been an
opposition so
madame chair thank you
thank you
so what I hear from this
conversation is that there are
two members who very comfortable
the two members are the ones
that were on a committee that
was working on the bill
what I hear from just about
every other member and I don't
presume to speak for every
member but almost every other
member is they have concerns
about
a combination the combination of
many different sections many
different topics
a new process that none of us
have been briefed on berry
thoroughly
it's an item that could have
been brought forward during the
interim and that did not happen
so I am suggesti.
So we're rolling the bill.
Madame chair i'm wondering if if
we could
you know perhaps a few people
who have the greatest concerns
meet with
the senator
and representing we could bring
in the public defender and stuff
and have a discussion to make a
more comfortable bout where
their concerns are
certainly we can do that and i'm
sure there will be members
willing to talk with the sponsor
and something can be resolved
than that we can bring it back
but you're getting very very
close to the end of the session
and truthfully I makes me very
uncomfortable only get bills
like this that are three days
before the end of the session
and there's a lot of pressure on
us to try to to pass it through
under the real brick of this is
for public safety and all those
kinds of things which of course
is a very important thing but
also getting things right on
public safety is a very
important thing and truthfully
i'm not comfortable with an
eighty page bill that changes
numerous things we don't even
talk about the boating stuff
that's in the back of the bill
and not reference to anywhere in
the title and I think the
speaker's point is very well
taken it's a very short title
for every long bill with a lot
of different subject matters
including the insurance
information that the the speaker
mentioned in his conversation no
mention of that and
think one member mentioned to me
that they thought there might be
a log rolling issue here so I
think there this is something
that needs much greater thought
and consideration and certainly
up we can roll it and if
but I tomorrow evening we have a
sense that there's some there's
a resolution and we can try to
reschedule up but I just
wondering people we are on the
precipice of closing down the
session in the ability to get a
bill like this through is
problematic at this point so
madame chair of.
The members who are concerned
about it would either contact
representative reeb or myself or
the senator so we can get
together do that thank you thank
you thank you center thank you
manager okay i'm just trying to
understand where we're out do we
have the amendment we've been
waiting for for help senate bill
six will keep looking at me
every time i'm sorry i'm sorry
but you're
it is on its way we're okay I I
heard I heard that he was on
this way it does okay would so
you would prefer to wait for the
written amendment mr speaker
other bills to get through we
have another bill in the queue
so if that's a minimal to you
alright senator padia.
And we're on senate bill one
twenty nine
if you take a really long time
and this will not get ready okay
we will will grill him thank you
very much
expecting that thank you madame
chair and members of the
committee I continue to come to
you with a
bills of this nature cyber
security and then of course the
broadband stuff that we're
working on they were modernizing
you know a lot of
if you expect to state
government
I have the acting secretary of
the department of information
technology madam chair with me
as an experience also the cheap
information secured the officer
get all that out onto a business
card looks pretty nice
manager this is a presentation
on the senate finance committee
substitute for the senate health
and public affairs committee
substitute percentage or one two
nine and the reason for the two
substitutes along the way this
is a very
I would say a very new thing
that we're doing trying to
organize the state government
this way
from a security standpoint
it's very messy there's a lot of
of folks that have an opinion on
this folks are finally after
twelve years of me pushing this
thing so hard folks are now
paying attention which is really
good and so we've got a lot of
really good feedback in your
plague to hear some of that
today the legislation did pass
out of the senate thirty seven
to zero and it met made it
through us back in finance in
the senate with no votes those
no no votes but i'd only mention
that because again we're trying
to build argent then strengthen
the legislature on this topic I
know you're waiting for
something and i'm gonna want to
go as soon as I I finish here
but essentially.
You know what we're trying to
accomplish here is as a standard
procedure for state government
if you want to conduct a
transaction with state
government money in money out
sharing documents pulling
documents whatever it is that
you're trying to accomplish with
the state government and so
we've received a lot of feedback
and and and we did have a pretty
lengthy discussion earlier today
on the information that you're
probably going to hear from the
administrative office of the
courts
now all other bodies as we
understand it have come forward
in our now supporting what we're
up to here but you might hear
from a few today because again
this reaches every single aspect
of government in new mexico if
you want to do a transaction
with the state government here
so essentially what the
legislation as it creates a
requirement that a public body
that receives a general find
appropriation which is within
our perview within our right to
ask for things that
a general fund appropriation for
it resources must report cyber
security standards to the cyber
security office it allows the
security officer to adopt him
implement rules applicable to
all state executive agencies
develop cyber security awareness
policies and training standards
makes total sense established a
central life cyprus and data
breach reporting process so that
we know and we can learn from
agencies that are breached and
then it reviews provide it
reviews and approves agency
cyber security procurements the
reason that that's important
member so that matter vice chair
members of the committee is
because we want to make sure
that what the agencies are
purchasing lines up with being
their ability to meet the the
standard set by the cyber
security office it reviews and
makes recommendations to the
legislature on executive agency
public school higher education
institutions are county
municipality appropriation
request on this topic and no
others it allows the security
officer to conduct it security
assessments and we did change
the word audits to assessments
to meet the requirement of the
state auditors office that was
one amendment that is now rolled
into the latest substitute for
this bill it allows the security
officer to issue compliance
orders.
To executive agencies and issue
orders necessary to protect the
state's digital assets from
imminent threat as we know that
we've seen recently
have brought the cyber security
strategy forward about three
sessions in a row and as we all
know we operate by something
called mbe here I call it
management by emergency so we
had the
regulation in licensing
department which affects
approximately sixty eighty
percent of all businesses in new
mexico compromised right before
the two thousand twenty three
session so as a result I was
able to get this thing to fly
right through there after three
straight years and then of
course we've seen just break
office of super tentative
insurance our multiple school
districts large medium and small
the city of albuquerque
bernaldio county donyana county
lost crucial schools you name it
so we're simply trying to bring
minimum standards to bear so
that you know we we know exactly
what everyone's up to who's on
first the standard that that the
office is going to implement is
something called missed and this
stands for the national
information security national
institutions what he said
we got that approved by the
eighty g the economy development
group has actually approved that
so we're going to be we're good
there but that that is the
standard with which when we hear
references to the rules being
made by this office it is going
to be the nest standard that the
state will operate on so
therefore all agencies in
another state government or
whatever will have to adhere to
that as well and then it changes
the composition of the cyprus
security advisory committee to a
line with federal standards so
that when we're linking up with
federal agencies were in good
shape there so that that's
essentially what the legislation
does we had some great analysis
from your your team and i'm
gonna ask the chief information
security officer and acting
department of information
technology supervisor rogers
since in bunden to say a few
words and I will take your
questions.
Thank you senator.
He covered a doll
so everything of not I have he
touched on it this is very
important to the state as the as
it's security practitioner and
who someone who understands the
basic functions of day to day
idea operations without some of
these changes it will be hard.
Do report to the legislature and
to the governor's office on what
our true spend of those hardly
and taxpayer dollars.
They told understanding the
spruce spend other taxpayer
dollars we cannot build it to
how much we should set aside for
cyber security so it includes
hygiene it includes an
understanding of that we are
spending what we have spending
and the interoperability of that
complex environment it is so
complex I think I
relate the scenario once before
then there was the incident in
the us mountain
and
malicious group the cost to that
impact at apd
that through it impacted the
court system and they've got
through and it came and not done
our doors in the
there is nobody that can provide
assurance that it won't happen
so
excellent thank you so much I
just wanted to give that brief
this is such a complicated topic
that we just feel like we should
give you more information than
less okay
all right
any other brief comments before
we go to the audience as I can
the previous speaker more brief
than he was the previous there
is some consensus there I think
now
those in the audience wishing to
speak in opposition to the bill
please raise your hand in favor
first I have my own way of doing
things and that's how I do on
selena
good evening.
And the ability.
Rep.
Thank you anyone else in the
audience wishing to speak in
opposition to the bill.
The.
Anyone online wishing to speak
an opposition to the bill
I don't see anyone raising their
hand those in the audience
wishing to speak in support of
the bill please raise your hand.
Okay yes certain things so.
I am chairmen's committee my
name is dan garcia i'm with the
officer cyber security work with
roger so today we walk through a
email detector I hope everybody
wants to military but do we know
that they actually did do we
know the middle tackers actually
working you know do we know what
standards it means is the
minimum standard is not catching
appropriate things saying with
our fire detectors are video
cameras our sensors on the
windows are they meeting minimum
standards we don't know that.
This eight hundred two or seven
says basically goes been concept
of zero trust what is your trust
it says never trust always
verify
and that's really what the
office every security does it's
verifying it's very fine you're
safe did you trust the safety
that you have
right
or should we verify that and
make sure that it is see.
Thank you thank you
yes and then you okay.
Out of chair worked around I
represent several clients that
are interested in this piece of
legislation I have also served
as the state's information
technology commission chairman
in the past and I think what is
important to understand that the
about the beyond thanks to the
senator for being so diligent in
regard to it is what it does
along with the way is it doesn't
assessment inventory all the
systems that are out there and
when you do that one of the
things you're able to do is
understand all the firewalls
that are out in state government
and I think some of the
opposition to the bill is
actually in regard to not
breaking down those firewalls I
think the department of
information technology will know
what firewalls to break down
what fire was not to break down
cause if we don't do this
eventually we're never going to
get to those incidents that are
going to take down all our
entire systems so for that
reason I support the bill that
mark before you go could you
please tell me what clients your
representing yes and in this
case
a and m
and advance network management.
Specifically.
Okay thank you that's the only
one there are others but that
one is asked me to stand
okay thank you.
Yes sir
yeah
um members of the committee i'm
brought something on the cheap
sort of the technology after for
the officers
after cover in march with this
very small IT shop however the
business processes I don't that
the opposite to
elaborate
but we did have the resources we
got active september
and we partnered with risk
and prevented some major issues
like that of occur
in four months I feel like with
the health and partnering with
the office of sovereign security
well now one of the most
security season states and the
partnership that's there and I
think some of the rules and
tools that are in this bill
would prevent it that that
particular hack if it was in
place before so I just want to
say that the opposite of the
thoughts are
this budget
very good thank you sir online
those wishing to speak and
support please raise your hand
robert doyle.
Okay
thank you.
Yes can hear me
yes but you're very garbled
okay see here that's a little
better
better yes
okay my name is robert doyle and
i'm with new mexico for
university i'm their cheap
privacy officer right to comply
to officer and I and I am the
acting cheap information
security officer can I support
this particular bill because it
helps you to fight an embecticle
as a state in protecting all of
our critical infrastructure soon
data and all the type of things
about having the same tool six
and happening on pain a grant to
see all the threats that are
happening.
Thank you.
Thank you cannot beater.
The.
Cannot the beater
yes yes now I can
thank you madame chair
representatives my name is kind
of the beat the item the
director of it for send me a
county as a voice to the small
two media or medium to small
communities within northeast
remember school a lot of my
court arted very much in
an agreement with the bill that
is
a bit before you today our issue
is that they're so many small
counties are so many small
municipalities in school
districts that they really do
not have an idea of where to
begin with setting up the
property for structure in
hygiene this bill helps give
them a guideline in a roadmap to
be able to protect themselves or
to understand what it would need
to protect themselves as most of
our small counties do not have
in house I tea and have to go
out to a r third party so
released they would have some
type of roadmap they would have
some type of reporting a no out
would they would have to do in
the case of a civil security
incident and at least give some
structure that's why I am
supported this bill and.
Thank you.
Thank you no one else online
wishing to speak in sport back
to the sponsor thank you I madam
chair and members and and I want
you to know we did have a very
good healthy discussion with the
office of the administrative
office of the courts and in in a
week we made a decision as a
legislature to add here to these
minimum standards and to bring
the stayed into complaints with
federal standards and
you know it's basically it's
going to be a decision of this
legislature on whether we hold
all of these other offices you
know when they want to do
transactions with the state
government if they're going to
meet these minimum standards or
not this nist standard I do have
with us today and I mean i'm
trying to apologize the attorney
or the legal council for the
officer saver security is
actually online I would like for
him to just have a few moments
mountain chair to address the
separation of power's question
that the aoc
okay mrperiod brock is that
right
yes manager.
Thank you
I apologize sincerely for not
being there today but I want to
touch just briefly on the
separation of power's issue that
was raised I think it's
important that the
that the body understand that
the the constitution prohibits
any branch of government from
you serving the power of other
branches and and as the supreme
court stated in state excel
clark such an infringement
occurs when the action by one
branch prevents another branch
from accomplishing it
constitutionally assigned
functions and that's just simply
not the case here.
And neither of the actions of
the legislature and creating
this law nor the resulting
requirements of expenditure
reporting were adoption of
minimum security requirements
prevented judicial branch from
accomplishing its
constitutionally assigned
functions passage of the bill
will not impower the legislature
or the executive to rule on
questions of law or determine
appropriate sentencing no
the requirements in this bill
are administrative and they're
necessary for good government to
be administered in an organized
way think of it as them
contingency
the sort of contingency that the
legislature commonly requires if
you receive a general fund
appropriation for it resources
you must report your it security
expenditure and he must
implement in certify your
compliance with minimum security
standard the legislature saying
if you accept public money for
IT you must demonstrate how
you're protecting your part of
the state's item for structure.
We all know cyber attacks are
hugely consequential with
devastating impacts on time
money data integrity and and
data loss but cyber security is
a statewide issue all public
bodies that use the state it
infrastructure bear some
responsibility for its security
thank you
thanks mister brok can I ask you
a question.
Um.
So are you well i'll wait
because I you're going to be
online I don't want to jump the
line in terms of questions so
you'll be continuing to be with
us i'm assuming mrperiod brok.
Yes matter okay thank you
anything else center before I
was just gonna add one more
thing so so thank you and I
thank you mister brought for
your comments there
want to make it clear as you
heard from the chief council
over at the administrative
office of the courts by the way
that the only folks that have
come forward at least to me that
you know an opposition here and
I respect that and we heard from
from them in the meetings that
we've had with their cheap
information security arbs are
their chief yet information
officer
you know if they have the
standards that are meeting the
state standards that meet the
sinist standards everything's
great that they're that they
shouldn't experience any
anything one where the other and
so I think if they had here to
those those practices then them
they've met their requirement
and we move on to the next you
know a potential challenge to
the next agency
thank you thank you senator
representative remarrial
thank you madame chair thank you
senator for bringing this
forward
as we had spoken through the
inter this was such a major
issue I know with them astounded
to see the number of features
then threats that you have with
such a small team working so I
appreciate all the work that you
do
on folks here to speak up
I do share the concerns with
office of the courts in the
sense that
on the distinct branches of
government not only do we hang
over their heads with the amount
of money that we even allow them
to operate upon but now we're
asking to now be subject to this
form of legislation which in my
you know what i'm understanding
is that they're saying allow us
this independent.
Oversight with with the type of
cyber security that there
already subscribed to
I guess and you're saying let's
just have a statewide approach
which I you know appreciate and
understand but if we're talking
about the distinctive powers of
government and we're at and
they're asking allow us to opt
in to this when we we want to
but allow us also to opt out
understanding that they want
their own system what is the
value of needing them to be part
of this outside of that like it
uniformity but understanding
that there is a distinction
there on their decision to
operate as their own branch of
government.
So.
Manager and made a vice
essentially we don't want this
to be sort of
something that causes them you
know any additional you know
cost or anything like that
but if they want to do it and it
a transaction with with the
state government you're dfa
monies coming in leaving
reporting things they simply
have to meet these standards so
that that's why we want everyone
included I mean I ask russia to
to respond I do have a potent
like i've never had a a bill of
mind amended in the house and
had to go back but I do happen
to have something if we happen
to need it that i'll share w.
In exception dusting.
Section to participate.
Can you describe that then madam
chair white why would they be
opposed to that if they were
exempted from this act.
I don't know.
The.
The public body that does not.
So you're.
That that's a circular argument
I i'm understanding so all i'm
understanding is that if they
don't want to function as the
office administrative office of
the courts currently receiving
funding then then they just
simply wouldn't be part of this
act and.
Out of that bad they spend their
money toward cyprus security and
the other one is completely
wallen very for them to follow.
And mister national.
All the state agencies that work
with the including
administrative office of the
court in their own effort that
they are falling.
So madam care
senator uhm an expert would they
be able to I mean
I understand the best practice
aspect of why we want this but
if we're able to establish that
there essentially saying we want
to do that to the best of our
abilities as our own branch of
government
what is the value in I guess
compromising that that those
distinct branches of governments
just to be subject to this act
if what i'm hearing and what
they testified to is that
they're able to meet that same
standard
chair senator so chair and
management then then as I
mentioned a little while ago.
They're they're good they're
great there that there's nothing
that they'll you know are the
requirements of them
so madam chair i'd like to hear
what you're recommendation was
to exempt them from this act
that I want to talk about just
yet I mean you need to answer a
question that a committee member
state would be very yes i'm
always very.
You know we we amendment number
one that we were discussing
would be paid seven line twenty
five or we add the words stepped
as provided by subsection d a
public body that is not under
the jurisdiction of the security
officer may voluntarily comply
with the rule standards orders
and other requirements of the
cyber security act and
participate in the sebarate
security and information
security programs offered by the
cyber security office so the
additional language would be
except as provided by
subsection.
In subsection dears in this bill
is that cracked or is it as it
would it be new material added
to the spell no it's already in
the pit i'm sorry page seven
line twenty five
subsection
subsection ears where this would
said.
Trying to follow the arm
proposal so in the exception
that I was asking about this
would essentially allow the
administrative office of the
courts to
be exempt from the act and come
up with their own cyber security
plan is that what i'm hearing it
would because we believe that
the greater impact of the
legislation in the office itself
would continue yet this office
did monty I trying to make
everybody happy here but
obviously trying to take it in
steps rather than
that they would still manage her
man byster they would still be
c.
Unfortunately they would.
Would be required about they've
said that they meet all of these
standards I think that's
terrific actually and so i'm not
quite sure on the other side of
the coin why they're so
concerned mountainer center I
think when we delivery on taking
power away from the legislature
any time that's compromised
that's this you know that's the
sort of
challenge rate they are in and I
I mean even the fact that we
control the purse of our courts
I think is is already a bit of a
of a challenge that we brussel
with ourselves
so
hanging this over their head is
for something that you know when
we're talking about data and
we're talking about
you know very sensitive area of
government coming to the ports I
would almost defer in a lot of
ways to their
you know how it is that they're
handling that already and
certainly with improvements so I
just want to take seriously what
they're saying and I will just
ask and I don't know if this is
okay madam chair but it would
that compromise make sense for
the administrative office of the
courts i'm looking at that
exemption is that
well I think it's fair to ask
but it's also fair for them to
say they need to look at and
think about it because
you know I these kinds of things
on the fly when they could have
been offered to the individuals
earlier on our heart so miss
jones if you want to respond.
Yeah.
What we are.
This.
Yep sorry I mean in chairman of
my so I think the challenge and
I really appreciate what was
just sad we just would know what
they're doing we we wouldn't we
wouldn't have a view to that and
we're not asking for any
specific data or names dates
titles colors temperatures were
none of that's what's going on
here simply that the standards
the minimum standard set by the
officer met but we just really
wouldn't know that because they
would not be required to tell us
what though what they're doing.
At managed her senator if there
was an opportunity to I mean we
do this allow that rate when
we're looking at blanket
provisions that affect a lot of
I mean all of government under
this provision would it be worth
at least having that exemption
in place
working that how and then you
know if there are problems with
breaches of data if there are
problems with standards of you
know how sibert security is
being managed overall we can
revisit that but I would be
remissed think that this was you
know when we're already hearing
that this catch all approaches
are going to work with for an
entire branch of government that
we wouldn't want to just at
least try to work with that I I
think i'm more than happy to do
that um
gives me a little bit angst
because we wanted to keep
thought everyone on the boat
together but we choose to move
forward with that the other two
branches and I think that we're
in the shape there.
So I would be fine with that
again I don't know that you I
don't know if you adopt
amendments on the fly I were
running at a time and a light
and all that so I thought they
would bring a potential solution
in.
Madam chair senator what i'm
hearing though is that the
definition of public body is
real and certainly from our
analysis is that it's the broad
broadening of that definition is
where the rob is right now
without a clear exemption of
specifically the judiciary
I would prefer to have it
probably drafted by lcs to just
make that clear but if you'd be
willing to do that be happy to
work on that with you I would I
I guess you know again you know
when I created the early child
that education and care
department it took us three
sessions to get it where it is
today officer broadband same
thing we had a ninet.
The last two years are so i'm
more than happy to to make help
find a way to make this work for
everyone I guess I would ask
madame chair if you.
What is your meeting schedule
look like for the next couple of
days
and if you don't want to tell me
that now that's perfectly fine
but i'm just trying to get my
work done for the folks who ask
you to do this
we were we have we are having a
special meeting tomorrow morning
but we.
It could be a lengthy
conversation we could meet on
wednesday but you know that
we're bumping into
the session and alternatively
with your permission madame
chairman of my share they know
that senator do highest here and
I don't have another action
after that one yeah but we would
race right now to go get
something done.
I'm in a run over the lot of
burger if anybody needs pretty
i'm kidding i'll have some heavy
run
triple backer thank you well if
what you're saying usual talk to
the courts and see if you can
come up with acceptable language
that's what I hear you and if if
we have time to get to it we
will try to do that tonight but
I can't guarantee that cause
we're already beyond that we are
supposed to go to the floor at
five thirty oh you're going to
the florida yes we are yeah let
me let me see what I get that
thank you thank you
speaker martinez I think you're
next bills up
okay you'd prefer the senator go
ahead okay
wait a second everyone ready we
are on
senate bill one forty two center
monias thank you madam chair all
this does it is in the behaviour
of house system and anybody is
taken for treatment and use for
medicaid in any purpose that
they notify a family member
currently what happens all all
long gallop people are taken in
the arizona no notification of
family members they use their
medicaid money in new mexico for
a treatment and details and
they're kicked out on the street
and have no way to turn they
call the police the police
usually context her family this
is one of those missing persons
it's actually kidnapping
but it's happening throughout
western new mexico and this is
an attempt to resolve that
issue.
Oh thank you senator
let's go to the audience those
in the audience wishing to speak
an opposition to the bill please
raise your hand
those online wishing to speak an
opposition to the bill please
raise your hand.
Those in the audience wishing to
speak and support the bill
please raise your hand
those online wishing to speak in
support of the bill please raise
your hand
rate will go to the committee I
we have represented chassis and
then represented mcqueen think
about him turn thing to senator
would this prevent what I read
the story in the new york times
about behavioral health
acilities in arizona going on to
the reservation and taking
people to treatment centers and
then the family doesn't know
where they are and that is
exactly what's happening arizona
fixed and resolved the issue
rate and when it comes to tribal
lanes if they go to round rock
arizona which is between my
member valley and gently and
they take somebody from there
and tribal lines there's no
notification arizona is now said
if you bring someone in for
medicaid you need to you need to
allow them or attempt to contact
their family members so they
know where they're at
the
insurance center I mean I don't
know if this is going to help an
arizona and it would seem like
the federal medication require
it but i'm happy to support this
here I will tell you my wife
caught
these people in the dmb and
gallop actually in tin johnson
was estately she she followed
them and got their license plate
to see where they're up to where
they were trying to get new
mexico drivers license and there
was a facebook story about a
white man driving around cannot
be people so we did him my wife
did I force me to call while she
can force me I called tim
johnson said he something's
happening with this set people
in this van because it's on
facebook in it and it kind of
learned either license we can
get anything just the other day
there's another story out of
areas on that they were showing
them and all run down hotel
and just pretty much locking the
gates and not giving them any
contact with any.
Thank you represent mcqueen they
came out here venture center I
was looking forward to seeing
you tonight but with the rules
reversed
anyway this this is a good bill
thank you very thank you for
bringing i'm glad you got see me
as speaker martin moved to pass
we have to pay us on senate
finance committee substitute for
senate health and public affairs
committee substitute for senate
bill one no no no no no senate
bill one let's start again we
have a due balance on senate
bill one forty two
made by.
Speaker martinez seconded by
representative safants.
Very good would you call the
role please representative
outcome
every senate
representative case
yes
representative lane speaker
market yes
representing the queen yes
yes.
Representative yes
I
don't care yes.
Yeah.
Thank you representative embry
could job at the game and I wish
you would have been with me a
matt.
Thank you
all right
senator
you're back
we are back on
bill six I believe there's a
amendment floating around
them chair
yes speaker
we have the american minutes
being passed out
and i'd like to move that
amendment
point two to eight three nine
zero point one
and as discussed previously all
it does is it
it removes the brackets in mind
through on page twenty two
starting line twenty four twenty
five and then page twenty three
lines one through three
which effectively will allow the
prohibition on members of the
house or senate
to apply or be granted a license
to engage in any commercial
candidates activity prior to
july one twenty twenty six or
this amendment will simply make
sure that that part of the
candidates regulation act to the
statute stays in place
in admiral option
it motion has been made to
adopt.
An amendment to this bill two to
eight three nine zero point one
by speaker martin and seconded
by representative hembry and I
see that representative a queen
wants to discuss the amendment
ma'am chair this is the second
question I had that you asked me
though although yeah yeah
them chair senator
representative
i'm curious that the scope of
this like
what
commercial canvas activity
requires a license
almost
madam chair
representative
I have gonna adjust your your
question but I want to say first
taking this language out was
never part of this bill
originally this was an amendment
that was made and sent a
judiciary it is not an intended
as part of the scope of this
bill and I have no problem
whatsoever with with you
removing it but licensed I
activity is producing
manufacturing retail courier
testing
research labs here representing
page thirty two all of the
different license activity
through page thirty three.
And the requireme.
You can do any of that
so many chair situation
representatives
lawyers accountants builders
plumbers greenhouse sales and
none of that is that man chair
represent those aren't licensed
candidates activities okay thank
you venture.
Representative.
Understood that it does say who
is a member so if you live
tomorrow you can go start
planned in your money
out of the chair representative
you can legally plan that stay
in her home grow program
yes
so i'm sorry if i'm beating a
dead horse but what this does is
maintain the prohibition on
legislators participating in the
canada's industry as a as any
license canada okay very good
thank you speaker
any other questions or comments
on the amendment
any opposition to adopting the
amendment
I see no opposition to adopting
amendments so we have another
amendment to the bill so just
remind me as it's the fourth
amendment I just want to make
sure we get right make the
emotion on that
okay all right okay.
For
four
we adopted the amendment I asked
if any.
I get it's getting late I know a
lot of us are tired in me so
we have a motion to up for a due
pass and send a judiciary
committee substitute for senate
bill six four times amendment a
meant amended made by
representative outcome and I
think it was seconded by you was
that right representative ream
okay I thought I saw you waving
your hand sorry okay so would
you call the role please
representative of one
representative of chasing
representative and yes
representative lane speaker
martinez yes representative
mcqueen yes representative me
yes.
Representative raining yesterday
representatives sapansky yes
madam by share yes madam chair
yes.
I have been out of 10
members thank you all right we
have concluded business I just
want to say we are meeting
tomorrow eight thirty in this
room we have yes we have one
fairly controversy well
interesting bill and if senator
padia has his arrangement you
know worked out some arrangement
on the bill with the judiciary
we may discuss that as well I
just want to put everybody on
