Representative Townsend.
Thank.
Madam chair.
The
and but can you tell me who is
available on our agenda do we
have any of the sponsors of
house bill one sixteen
available.
Who shall.
Are you asking for.
Representative has some they're
therefore suppose this down.
He's not answering his phone and
he's not on here okay
Representative Brown is here.
Let's go in just which the order
and to house bill one twenty for
since Representative Brown is
here and we've got people
waiting long enough.
Thank you very.
From thank you madam chair I am
running for house bill one
twenty four
it is of Bill endorsed by the
courts corrections and justice
committee and what it proposes
to do is add to judgeships are
one and the fifty additional and
one of the thirteen.
so madam chair it's a pretty
simple bill this would carry an
appropriation to fund posed to
judicial seats I do have an
amendment which I want you to
know that at this time.
We're to introduce.
Yes please okay madam chair
members of the committee
we submitted yesterday an
amendment to this bill the two
oh two number is point two two
two two five nine point one and
what this does is
modify the bill title to reflect
the material that we're adding
so we're adding a section three
which is a temporary provision
regarding appointments and
basically says the
the seats would be filled by
appointment of the governor and
then we remember some sections
and then the other major pieces
that we had no effective date to
the bill setting the effective
date for the provisions of this
act be July first of twenty
twenty two.
So more madam chair it's
I think we need we need to have
these moments in their if the
committee so willing to do to do
that yes I'm.
Did you say.
Because I was prepared for the
other bills.
In the get this would you say
about a committee sub
Representative.
What madam chair it's not a
committee so that's an amendment
okay I thought I heard you say
those words.
These people.
Chair Chasey.
Then it for discussion purposes
and other questions on your.
Is there any objection
Representative do you want to
move the amendment with that
option.
Our Representative are you your
hand is up.
Representative listed option of
the movie.
Are there any questions on the
amendment.
Any objections.
Okay same amendment is adopted
so go ahead Representative
Brown.
Two oh two number yes.
Point two two two two five nine
point one.
Yes so madam chair for if I may
um house bill one twenty four is
as I said earlier endorsed by
the courts corrections and
justice committee based on the
number of factors incur
including a workload study it
was determined that we do need
to add another judicial seat in
the fifth judicial which covers
Eddie Lee and Chavis counties
and another seat in the
thirteenth judicial district
which covers of all of Santa and
once the.
In the fifth judicial the number
of seats would go from eleven to
twelve in the thirteenth two
nine.
Because of population increases
and and increasing caseloads we
think it's very important to
have these two new judgeships
there were for judgeships added
are rather recently but these
are the the two that have been
waiting in line for for funding
so I'm our state statute madam
chair says that the County Board
of commissioners is responsible
for providing adequate space for
the district courts and I do
know that in the Eddy county
courthouse there I believe that
renovations are already underway
to add additional space.
And we'll get into a little more
discussion on that but I'd like
to bring in my two witnesses
expert witnesses if I may madam
chair
chief judge James Hudson.
And chief judge George Michael
and I hope there is somewhere.
In our participant list.
attendees list I guess if they
could be in to see if there
there is the judge Bryant.
Madam madam chair members of the
committee chief judge James.
Very good.
And
madam chair members I judge I as
well I see you now thank okay
great go ahead Representative
yes so if I could have judge
husband speak first and explain
the need for these positions and
the judge from the thirteenth
after him I would appreciate it
don't go ahead.
Madam chair members of the
committee I am James sits on the
chief judge for the fifth
judicial district it's my honor
to present our request a this
afternoon for an additional
judge ship and Eddy County
let me begin if I can't by
telling you a little bit about
the the fifth judicial district
it doesn't cooperate the Chavis
steady and Lee counties
it's about fourteen thousand six
hundred seventy two square miles
of the major communities that we
serve our Roswell Artesia
Carlsbad and Hobbs and and
loving times and obviously the
smaller communities to within
the accounts of our counties is
is very similar in terms of the
size and population and and
caseloads
we currently have a total of
twenty judges that's eleven
district judges and nine
magistrate judges.
And the district of a Chavis and
Lea County chat for District
Court judges and Eddy County has
three District Court judges we
have ten point between the
district a magistrates and we're
spread out over a nine
courthouses
our focus in the fifth is really
on providing the.
Or essential to judicial
services and we have a very but
of structure organizational
structure basically judges staff
and and and clerks in the fifty
Daschle district we don't have
hearing officers or
commissioners staff attorneys or
our lockers to support the
judicial activities and in short
the judges pretty much do it all
in and in the fifth.
A judgeship incorporates that we
believe the three positions the
judge trial court administrative
assistant or TCA and a certified
court monitor.
This bill as I appreciated what
address the judge in TCA and we
requested a certified court
monitors part of our general
fund request for FY twenty
three.
We spend just a little bit to
minute talking about each of the
positions in the judgeship the
role of the judges and the fifty
additional district maybe a
little different than what some
of you and larger
population centers are
familiar with our judges here
are what we call general
jurisdiction judges we're not
divisional lines the so we each
of us has a docket that
includes.
Criminal civil family law on
other types of cases.
Now the trial court
administrative assistant is
really the sort of the nerve
center of the judge's office the
best description I've heard of a
TCA is that they're part of air
traffic controller in part way.
and the TCA really is the point
of contact the communication
with the conduit for
communication with the the judge
of the court might coordinate
the docket set the hearings
you know communicate with all
the attorneys and parties of the
help the judge with the.
Drafting orders and
correspondence and and and
decisions.
And that brings us to the
certified court monitor.
The rules the court monitors to
make sure that every hearing or
proceeding there's a proper
record may the hearings are
properly recorded that court
proceedings are.
A summarizing those are prepared
and without a court monitor a
judge can't have here
in in all of our counties of
it's very common for all of the
judges to be having hearings at
the same time.
and so each judge really has to
have of course monitor to
maximize their ability to have
hearings and to avoid also to
the scheduling issues trying to.
Among the judges now as as part
of this bill there is no request
for additional Bela
of positions.
So when I turn into white is the
fifth made up a new judgeship
and and Representative Brown
touched on the.
The Judiciary Commission day
workload study.
A few years ago and that study
concluded that the fifth
judicial district dated two
point one
additional judges and so we're
asking for one to meet that
need and part if you look at the
the.
K. loads and our numbers of
cases and members of docketed
advancing by document I mean
every time something that is.
Entered into our file system
whether it be you know a
pleading order or anything like
that if you look at it from
between FY thirteen and FY
nineteen caseloads and Eddy
County increased by one thousand
four hundred eighty three cases
that translates to over that
time period forty point seven
percent to increase our average
of the US six point seven
percent.
Per year.
The.
Docket events during that time
period went from roughly sixty
thousand to over eighty five
thousand
events per year and so those are
indications of
a significant increase in case
load and work.
During that time period.
and then finally you look at the
a population increase the.
Twenty twenty U. S. census data
indicates that to any counties
population increased at a rate
of fifteen point eight percent
over the over the decade baking
and I think the highest rate of
that increase of any county
in New Mexico so for those
reasons there's clearly a great
need in the fifth
for an additional judgeships.
In eighty County and that brings
us finally to well is there
space to put that in again.
Representative Brown touched on
on that the.
A county has a.
Approved to remodel the second
floor of the courthouse to great
judges offices and a court room
in discussions with the with the
county I.
A company by the time the judge
would be seated there would at
least be the offices of space
necessary in other space
necessary for the judge to
conduct hearings is here where
we're we're doing a lot of
parents remote at this time and
so that to add some flexibility
in doing that and so madam chair
members of the committee I would
respectfully ask that the.
In requests HBO one twenty four
of the favorably considered and
recommended for passage and and
with that I will stand up after
a judge I called a present so
for any questions anyone might
have.
Madam chair if she judge I both
would like to speak now sure.
Well.
Judge I called you need yourself
on your end.
Can you hear me judge I called.
To route.
To where to go.
Restraint to help judge I quote.
Get.
I just for is now do you see
him.
No I don't see him anymore I
think we may have lost from now
he's back let me promote okay.
He probably fell asleep like
judge for all you still.
Judge.
If you hear me now we could hear
you okay I'm gonna follow up on
I judge Hudson and I want to
thank us madam chair and all
other committee members for for
for listening to us is just a no
doubt.
Sen and I have classmates from
the same class in law school he
was all real good explaining
things so I'm not going to
to to safety that we already
stated in the state a little bit
about about our judicial
district where the thirteenth
judicial district and that once
again is Cibola Valencia and
Santa Fe County some of the
municipalities are we sure are
in Cibola county the the main
ones are grants to Milan is San
Juan County we have Rio Rancho
Bernalillo paralysis he does
Cuba hamstrings and I'm sure
I've forgotten some of the
smaller communities alleged can
we have farms but also the
students and the left up we
cover a vast area actually our
districts starts in the border
Arizona on the west side and it
extends to the side of the
Sandia mountains.
Aside from the municipality to
also have to Pueblo the part of
the Navajo Nation part of the
history of reservation.
We have a a district judge's
eight magistrate judges and we
have a in eight different
locations one magistrate could
well a magistrate District Court
judge in Bernalillo a magistrate
District Court judge in Los
Lunas a magistrate judge of
court actually implant in a
magistrate and District Court in
In in in requests well I think
the the the couple reasons that
we're requesting this judgeship
is.
The the population in our
judicial district is the one
that has grown the the number
why is the most in of any that
percentage wise of any district
in in the state up.
We in the Senator night is since
two thousand ten our district
grew by almost seventeen
thousand people that is two and
a half times faster than New
Mexico as a as a whole
actually are popular a just the
growth alone in the last ten
years is greater than the
population of of I believe
twelve different counties in the
state of New Mexico so the
growth is is great in the
continues to grow up twenty
eight point eight percent of the
state's population assistance
this up twenty ten occurred in
the thirteen judicial district
and is not going to stop with
with the investments made by
companies such as
Intel in Rio Rancho Facebook and
assume the.
Population what will what will
continue.
Also the the same occasional
study that was mentioned by
judge function shows in our
district actually needed three
and a half more judges.
it which is the forty four
percent increase in the number
of judges that we have right
now.
Our last jobs with added back in
two thousand fourteen and our
caseload continues to grow.
The emphasis on this judgeship
is going to be a job that will
sit in our in Santa Fe County we
have the the space fortunately
my predecessor judge McDonald
was wise enough to to have.
New courthouses built in off in
all three counties hello trying
to outgrow the Santa Fe county
courthouse we have we have space
for the the additional judge.
Just as in the fifth we are a
court of general jurisdiction
although not all judges should
handle all cases all case types
we do on occasion handle other
cases other than those being
assigned to a particular judge.
While also
all the judgeship that we're
seeking over here will primarily
be doing civil cases and the
reason for that is our civil
caseload is the caseload as as
well as grown more than any
other type here in in the
district although this judge
will be primarily in Santa Fe
County your sheet will also
assist in the other counted as
as needed with that said if I
stand for questions and I I'm
not going to get into the of the
the other issue that is with
expect this to what up the judge
of PCA and the all.
Or monitors do or or or the fact
financial situation good I think
judge how to cover that
extremely well.
Okay thank you very much.
And madam chair if I I just
might point out that the the
bill does ask for an
appropriation three hundred six
thousand eight hundred dollars
would be appropriated for the
fifth and the same amount three
hundred six thousand eight
hundred for the thirteenth and
up on the house judiciary
approves this bill will go up
next to the Appropriations
Committee and the explained that
the need for that level funding
at that point madam chair I
think we're expanding the
questions now.
All righty I I don't think we
need to take a call on this I
don't think this is a
controversial bill and I think
we'll skip that and go to
members of the committee and let
me just say
I can second judge I'd wells
opinion of for the need in the
thirteen having practiced law in
all three of those counties
regularly for more than eight
years I.
I know for sure they really need
to judge and I certainly believe
judge Johnson is similarly
compelled to ask for more help
so first on my list I have
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair
Madam chair representative high
course the practice in the fifth
judicial district and and see
the needs and I guess and and
full disclosure I probably need
to rebuild it chief judge Hudson
was a former partner of mine for
many many years and I think a
law firm we try to
grew up together in the firm
but that said R. J. Johnson
leads the judicial district and
season made for Hey I'm
there are four point district
courts.
Or four divisions in Travis
county four divisions and we
County.
Here with the state and all over
the city I think
actually what I'm.
So.
I could go to any shows.
We believe the solution.
Thank you madam chair.
As I was saying there's there's
for a district courts in Travis
county four or four divisions in
Chavis four divisions and we
have this legislation would
provide for a eighty fourth
Division and Eddy County which
is seeing tremendous population
growth at and also
we've saying a a growth
generally and the number of
cases filed and the number of
Crimes particularly surrounding
the the oil patch that they have
arisen with the Berman and we
really need that help so I'm
pleased to see that come forward
I don't know the situation in
the other judicial district but
it sounds like the same needs
are present there and so I would
encourage my colleagues to
support this legislation create
these additional divisions
within the two judicial
districts and allow our courts
to our continue to be efficient
and the maybe Mr justice and
merry.
Or prakashan thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Representative Nibert
Representative Cook.
Do passes Monday.
I second that.
Madam chair your muted.
Other for the questions.
Okay will the court please call
the roll.
We have a motion before us on
house bill one twenty four as
amended Representative up on
yes.
Representative Chandler yes.
Representative Cook.
Yes.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Lewis.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert yes.
Representative Rehm yes.
Representative Townsend.
Thank.
Yes Sir.
Madam chair.
Yes.
By a vote of nine two zero we
haven't do passes amended on
house bill one twenty four.
The due process nine go to
appropriations and I'm sure
you'll do well there has to nice
to have you Mr to surface.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee thank you bye the
judiciary now and and I think
Representative I asked on this
with us for one sixteen.
Thank you very much lot of
charitable members this is house
bill one hundred sixteen of this
the revisor of statutes.
The
And I think the a house
committee analysis says it best
excuse me systematic and
continuous examination of New
Mexico statutes regarding
lifting obsolete or inoperable
statutes by the revisor of
statutes would allow legislators
to proactively revise statutory
inconsistencies as well as avoid
creating new inconsistencies are
you on an ongoing basis and so
what this bill does madam chair
is it
It creates one full time
employee with the Legislative
Council Service and that person
will be charged with
with consistently and and
methodically of reviewing our
statutes similar to the massive
recompilation efforts that took
place in the I. in years past as
you recall the ours been tired
Mexico statutes will re compiled
in nineteen fifty three they
were then recall compiled again
twenty five years later in
nineteen seventy five.
I'm and then it and then having
to recompile since partly
because the the need for
recompilation isn't as great
because of word search because a
computer sort of different age
than we were in nineteen seventy
eight but
but the question is how do we do
it we spend seven million nine
million dollars industry
compiled the entire code that
was kind of frowned upon from
the many conversations I've had
in the past couple years so I
had let's Council route research
what other states are doing and
we think we come up with the
most cost effective and
efficient solution is creating
this revisor of statutes that
person will be a member of the
compilation commission and we'll
have the duty to of to ensure
that
That are that are statutes are
ongoing we re compiled in terms
of chapter and verse as well as
spot contradictions conflicts
and and ambiguities.
Thank you madam chair what
that'll stand for questions.
Representative is just to have
any witnesses for this.
I know Madam not not officially
now thank you I think there's an
amendment to just add the
appropriation to the title is
that correct thank you madam
chair if the there was a a typo
in the in that it is an
appropriations bill appropriates
one hundred thousand dollars for
a FTE for eight council the at
almost got sent to rules the
the the the title should reflect
that the tiles reflect that it's
an appropriation bill so if you
can amend the title that be
great and I believe there's a.
An amendment on your desk
the share file do you have the
two oh two number.
Not handy I do not.
Representative Chasey this is
deb Kendall Gallagher and I have
the two oh two number on it if
you would like it I just brought
up you go ahead and tell us
thanks to help it's point two
two two one eight eight point
one.
Members all it does is on page
one.
Line sixteen after requirements
in search making appropriation.
So I'll move that amendment.
To adopt that amendment.
Second that okay thank you very
much Representative Alcon is
there any objection to that
amendment.
Okay seeing that amendment is
adopted.
So let me go to the audience
right now Representative and see
if we have anybody here
attending who would like to
weigh in on this.
Which would getting a call up.
Madam chair.
I'll come to you.
Sure just a quick I see the
speaker in the audience with his
hand up okay.
Okay.
We please.
I'm trying to move in now
sometimes it doesn't want to do
it thank you thank you
Representative going.
I know I provided to the
panelists Mister speaker and I
think listed too so your.
Doubly present.
Welcome.
Okay can we do the call now on
house bill one sixteen.
If you are in favor of the bill
please raise your hand.
At our excuse me don't raise
your hand that's for speaking
please.
Indicate by indicate your
favorite of the frontier and
then if you are in opposition
you may do so by.
Filling in that button
Representative Chasey I don't
have a pool in their and I guess
I can create it hold on let me
try and create an.
All.
Well we're waiting for that let
me go ahead and go to
Representative McQueen who has a
question Representative.
Madam chair I I I do a comment
on the bill which is a very for
that.
Yes.
So.
Here Representative Maestas on
the bill at the likability it's
like you know.
Routine maintenance tightening
up I mean like it's good right
so I have no problem with bills
on page two however a section II
it's got this this provision
which I which I personally find
to be out of place.
The speaker of the house may
refer the legislation.
We'll go out to committees and
same for the Senator the leader
in what what what is this like
well two things one is kind of
skips ahead.
Because the revisor of statutes.
This position does not
introduced legislation right
prior to the prior paragraph
refers to craft legislation so
somehow we're starting to deal
with legislation and then
secondly we're stating the
obvious you know so it doesn't
become legislation until a
legislator introduces it and I
wanted a legislator introduces
it of course the the speaker
first to commence so my
recommendation madam chair
Representative Maestas would be
that we strike paragraph the.
Madam chair representative we
know that's a great catch that
that struck me as somewhat as
well.
And I haven't spoken of the bill
Dr with regards to the necessity
that paragraph I think it's
maybe a may as opposed to a
shall I don't know but I I I
will consider that a friendly
amendment.
I would I would move we strike
her recipe.
I don't Madam I don't know what
that does is we have another
amendment.
You want to handle that well
we've already adopted the first
amendment.
Okay in terms of the committee
report they did but they were
just all show up as amendments
yes okay what chair I make that
motion.
I'll second the motion for
discussion purposes
Representative range of a
question on the amendment.
No ma'am questions on the bill.
On the amendment and members.
Representative yes yes you have
no problem with striking that.
Thank you.
Correct and madam chair
Representative McQueen the
amendment.
So.
In section one you would be
striking the entire subsection
you.
Lines sixteen through twenty
one.
Madam chair needs to is that
correct that's correct madam
chair is there discussion
further discussion on the
amendment.
Thirty objection to that
amendment.
K. state then we will adopt and
that it's been adopted.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Maestas.
Is that all Representative ring
Representative recording.
Yes that's all I have okay did
you were you able to do the call
Lisa.
Okay you need okay here we go.
Please indicate if you are for
or against this piece of
legislation and we'll have this
call up for twenty seconds.
Apparently we have nobody here
for this piece of legislation
and so there's no votes.
The public is agnostic
Representative Maestas.
The bill at next I have
Representative Rehm for
questions.
Madam chair.
One of the things that I have a
problem with on this is I
believe that.
We already have the power to
tell Legislative Council to do
that now I understand the
hundred thousand minutes to hire
a specific person for that but I
think we already were already
have that ability and I don't
know that we need to codified in
law and I don't know what
Representative Maestas has a
comment on that or not.
Madam chair representative room
I believe we do have to codify
it I think theoretically yes
let's council could do this but
we need to figure out how to
institutionalize it and I think
we need is to slice it in in
statute when you look at.
Two dash three dash eight.
This is an duties of Legislative
Council Service there is no.
Ongoing.
Statutory duty to to do what the
competition commission did in
nineteen fifty three in nineteen
seventy eight
you know they're busy drafting
our bill ideas and things of
this nature but it be great to
have somebody come to us and say
Hey this section is to be
remembered.
This section pry needs to be
You know these contradictions
need to be fixed or this archaic
or unconstitutional language
needs to be removed so I I I
think it's necessary.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative Maestas when we
go to page three we don't line
eight through eleven.
So the duties of this revised
What I see here is.
Almost as a legislator he's to
go through the statutes look at
whatever you think Saddam be
changed
you know
decide Hey I think we need to to
make a new on it should be this
and I I and I I don't know.
Thank you I understand why we're
trying to go but I'm kind of
wondering if we are giving him a
little too much power if you
will that
you know Legislative Council
shall direct him to do.
X. Y. and Z. not
For him to go off on its own
little search as we know each
individual has their own set of
values and we have a draft the
the on the go ahead and draft
legislation that he feels is
proper may not be what we feel
what's proper.
That's kind of my comments I
don't know how that.
Thank you madam chair
representative dream no that's a
that's a legitimate concern and
this this takes particular up.
Attention not to do that that
that would be contrary to the
Legislative Councils function as
as bill drafters and so to call
attention to conflicting
obsolete or inoperable statutes
I think it's great to do that
ongoing land systematically but
I'll ask you look on page two.
Alliance five and six there is
no new laws that are going to be
proposed there is no new policy
initiatives are going to be
proposed it's very re numbering
and catching contradictions and
then we fix them and so on page
two lines five and six to the
states.
Legislative Council Service out
not alter the sense meaning or
effect of the statute.
The statutory revision program
shall be performed in
consultation with the New Mexico
compilation commission in other
words
it would just make the
compilation commission more
efficient in terms of.
Remembering stuff that has been
re numbered in over forty years
and so I do as you know madam
chair reserving the.
You know when up when we amended
bill the compilation commission
puts it in in in the section and
sometimes it's B. point one
point two I think our tax code I
read a tax statute that was
point sixty five.
and obviously new material has
to go somewhere and right now
the compilation commission.
Six is the objects of the
statues when we amend the laws
or puts the new material into
and given that new numbers but
there is no way to re number
that there is no ongoing
mechanism to re number them from
time to time as was done
thoroughly in nineteen seventy
eight so I think this is more of
a re numbering thing gonna it's
certainly not a policy
initiative thing.
Thank you madam chair
representative ring.
Madam chair and representative
by us is so H. two Y. twelve any
clients what store matter
requiring policy decision are
substantiated revision shall be
made clear with alternative
provisions to illustrate.
Very very and options available.
You know I I understand what
you're trying to do I just
I just have a concern that we
get an individual and there are
two.
Well decides to be a legislator
and starts up.
Legislative.
you're going through the statute
well I think we ought to have X.
Y. Z..
But that's that's my concern I'm
not sure our address.
Thank you madam chair
representative dream I think
that's I I I I I agree with you
I I I it bugs me when people say
like industry bill agency bill
governor's bill constituent bill
but that's what we refer to as
as to how they derive.
The the compiler this person and
let's Council kind introduced
legislation cannot vote on
legislation cannot amend
legislation this person will
simply bring things to our
attention that there are
constituents agencies councils
take no we do this adhoc from
time to time periodically many
of these bills.
You know lose momentum and you
kind of lose interest this would
be a systematic institutional
ongoing way of making our
statutes better and more
efficient easier to read easier
to interpret and just have a
more efficient modern government
rather than the whole nine
million dollar recompilation
every twenty five years.
That's my question.
Representative Rehm.
You're you're on mute.
Thank you madam chair that's my
question to now
nine.
Representative Nibert.
Representative Cook may have
been before may madam chair.
Whatever you want us to do.
Sorry
I knew him because there was
other noise there are and so.
I think he was ahead of you but.
Are you with us Representative
Cook.
Madam chair I was just going to
pass as amended okay we'll take
that motion is there a second.
All second that motion and it
will go to Representative nine
point for discussion thank you
Representative code.
Thank you madam chair
What.
I am particularly pleased with
the during my tenure is.
The Legislative Council Service
has acted both professionally
and I think very discreetly and
and everything that I have
dealings with Legislative
Council Service and I really
appreciate that because I I feel
like you know we've been crazy
ideas for me R. yes
yeah.
Their best effort and I'm a
little concerned with.
Some of the things that
Representative Rehm or album a
moment ago because it does say.
but it will draft legislation.
Consistent with the purposes of
this section and and so they
will be initiating their own
drafting of legislation.
And.
I'm a little little concern
without all right I I support
the concept that the
position could go through our
statutes and look at conflict
situations go through our
statutes and provide statutes
that are obsolete and maybe find
a list to us of things of that
that Bennett finds but it seems
to me that it ought to be with
them are
Our to forty two then.
That stuff up and request a
specific bill be written to deal
with those things up right
behind them and this legislation
the language in paragraph the
basically a self acts executing
as I read it Madam chair
representative would that be.
After the observation on my
part.
Madam chair representative
Robert I believe so yes.
And so so madam chair and
representative that.
I I kinda like the concept of
this the.
Position of revisor of statutes
to look for the inconsistencies
and to look for obsolete
statutes and you know doing that
aspect of it but when we take
the second step of
drafting legislation consistent
with the purposes of this
section.
Legislative Council services now
in the business are coming up
with ideas for legislation.
That
Full service
Yes ma'am.
Until
In
Kind of I'd like to I would like
to restrict the text because
that goes to obsolete an
inoperable statutes.
This is my question.
I think I we I think we would
madam chair I think we still
want to be I think it I get for
future legislative amendment and
I I mean I don't think the hurt
the point here is to let
account services we go into the
law and change in archaic were
two different work right that
that the change in the statute
would still have to come.
To the legislature.
Madam chair representative
that's correct.
Okay so it looks to want to do
it I'm happy to proposed
amendment I.
But we don't think we need that
that I need.
It's a friendly amendment okay
madam chair I would I would
propose.
On page two one five strike the
word sense.
And insert in lieu of.
Substance.
Comma text.
At the moment.
Would come after text.
Well you know because you just
struck in the wrist sensor that
comments in the sense yeah.
All through the tent yes.
Thank you so it right let's
check out the session shall not
alter the substance comma next
comma meaning or effect of the
statute.
Are you adding in the word
substance though and to text.
Getting rid of the word
substance inserting in lieu
thereof two words.
Substance.
In a word text.
That's a friendly.
Are you clear on that.
I'm not sure.
Who did this who and analyze
this R. L. and you have that.
This is that come the Gallagher
I analyze.
The.
Yeah.
Yes yes I do just repeated that
we're striking the on that page
two line I are striking the word
sense and in lieu there we are
putting substance comment taxed.
Yes.
Thank you.
All right everybody clear let's
go ahead and call the roll on
the amended bill.
Sure we are we voting on the
amendment or the amended bill.
You.
I didn't actually take a vote on
the and then the is there any
objection to that amendment
thank you thank you you object.
R. I would.
I think you are correct there
does need to be a comma after
tax because the next word is
meaning so.
I I I I would objective there's
no comment there.
Madam we take the we don't need
to come up
because I mean let's walk this
through again okay look at page
two one five.
There is a word they're at the
very end we're dissents.
Deleted that word.
Okay.
Now add two words in one comment
at the word substance comment
text.
And the original com is still
there because you did not the
comma when you deleted the word
sets.
Press one so the Senate bill
would now reach out alter the
substance comment text.
meaning or effect of the
statute.
And madam chair I respect that
common sense of this committee
that is it from.
Okay.
Your hands up our.
This is a mentor and I I I need
to quibble but.
U. S.
state per hundred years there's
a lot of stuff are statutes we
often used offensive terms terms
are now considered offensive to
describe.
Racial groups to describe.
People with impairments whether
fiscal are met you know and
that's the kind of thing I would
look to clean up because I think
it is really.
Hard for people to see those
turns in our statutes and those
are that is text.
So I I think we should be able
to flag text I appreciate
changing the word sense to
substance I think that's
definitely an improvement but
this substance meaning and
effect.
We additional.
It.
You can still flag it what I'm
saying what the point here is
that we don't have an unelected
employee council service going
in and changing.
Statutes.
Yeah I did this to to
Representative chair
representative means point you
can still flag archaic language
I don't think we want to let and
unelected staff person.
Go into the New Mexico statutes
annotated and start leading
words and putting in other
words.
I don't think our anyway thank
you Mr speaker and no point with
that they do not have the power
now or under this bill.
So madam chair I guess I'm I'm
confused beyond description
because this is when providing a
draft revision a statute the
Legislative Council Service shop
off your.
The text of the statute.
Isn't that.
Let me let me ask you Mr speaker
what you're saying is they're
going to say here's the tax I'm
not altering it but you should
alter it.
I guess well you know I'll just
and I just I I would try to give
it it's it's I just which is
good.
It it this is a catastrophic so
I I would drop even.
Representative Ezzell.
Madam chair R. I was going to
comment on the amendment that
the.
Just got withdrawn but that to
me.
The speaker was correct that is
the essence of this bill.
And that this is just when we
have a draft.
That we've asked Legislative
Council to to consider.
That they will not alter what we
wanted that's why I took it.
Okay so right now Representative
Maestas you can do with it what
you want from this discussion
for the future let's vote on the
bill as we have twice amended
that.
And we're ready to call the
roll.
Representative Alcon yes.
Representative Chandler yes.
Representative Cook yes.
Mr speaker yes.
Representative Eli.
Yes.
Representative Lewis.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative Snyder.
Representative green.
Representative Townsend yes
ma'am.
Thank.
Madam chair.
Yes.
Yes yes I'm here Sir.
Yes you're voting yes thank you.
By a vote of nine two zero we
have a two passed as amended
twice on house bill one one six.
Okay folks thank you very much
let's hope our next bills next
week because we've got a lot of
them go smoothly we now have
representatives from first of
all the district attorney's
office and Bernalillo county and
then the law office of the
public defender to give us
feedback on the issue of pre
trial detention and I think both
groups are aware of the fact
that we have heard the LFC on
their report so we'll do that
wonder if I should call can
Chavis cookie teller.
Miss more I'm here I don't know
if that was directed at me.
I I needed her sorry I haven't
been able to promote you and for
seven already.
She's on our screen okay.
So okay.
Yeah we're going to start though
with the district attorney's
office and let me see who I'm my
classmate is on and I'm gonna
let him tell me what's going on
with his run of show is.
Yes.
Thank you madam chair the local
mandis with the district
attorney's office and with me
today is Mr James Grayson so
will be giving a presentation.
Together we're sharing a
microphone so hopefully the
technology cooperates with us
and and that if that's okay show
you would you like us to proceed
I would like you to begin that
would be great thank you madam
chair so I'd like to start by
saying thank you for giving us
the opportunity to to present
jobs at today
we often go into spaces where of
the the the voices of police and
prosecutors don't don't always
get get her so we appreciate
that up that opportunity.
and I'm going to if we have the
ability to share our screens.
I'm going to ask learning
technical experts because I
don't have a back.
Just a moment.
Please can you make screen
sharing available.
This moment there we go.
We don't share your screen you
want Mr Mendez the screen to be
shared.
Elaine can you do the share
screen.
Yes.
I'm sorry how can I help.
We need a screen share Elaine
for Mr Adolfo Mendez.
Okay thank I'm sorry madam chair
as a co host I can't do that but
let me bring to your office and
I will gladly help we say if you
guys can give me at least one
minute to run over there okay
thank you.
Okay.
Sorry folks but we are still.
Still working technical
difficulties.
Yes.
We appreciate your patience.
Once we get the technical issues
were hello.
Reporter present.
With this being in person.
Agreed madam chair.
There you is my screen visible
it is son thank you.
All right as I was saying well
we really do appreciate
Having the the product the
perspective of folks who are
working on the front lines in
the coming justice system will
share share our thoughts about
pre trial detention and then
general.
are you response to to speak to
some of the information that we
have that's been presented to to
our legislature.
what I wanted to start at a
place where we have lots of
agreements.
We certainly agree that
swiftness and certainty are the
best ways to.
Deter criminal activity.
We agree with the importance of
supporting children and families
to try to find the kind of
support around them to prevent
that the the kinds of
root causes of crime that we see
occur every day.
We agree with supporting
diversion and treatment for low
risk individuals will share some
examples of of our many efforts
to to try to make that happen.
We also agree that crime has to
be addressed now
the our community is expecting
that of us and
Believe that the the time is now
I appreciate your attention to
to the Department shoes.
I want to start with again one
of the places of agreement and
it's an area that we have
advocated a lot for mitigating
adverse childhood experiences
that are that are children
experience
in Bernalillo county we see that
if it is an individual child has
four or more aces they're very
likely to end up in and coming
into contact with the criminal
justice system this is an
example of one of those areas of
agreement where we believe that
addressing aces will go a long
way to prevent crimes by going
way upstream and supporting
children and families.
We've discussed publicly the
importance of supporting these
early childhood interventions
not just braces but making sure
that we're providing services
around children and families and
we've noted in the past and LFC
is noted in the past that New
Mexico has been behind in really
providing that kind of support
around families so again these
are areas where we have
agreement.
and.
In terms of diversion we also
strongly believe in diversion
over the last two years County
or twenty twenty to twenty
twenty one we've increased the
number of our pre prosecution
diversion offers but we're
hundred sixty two percent I'm
anticipating that and we're
going to be offering diversion
as often as we try to move to
the team they're very close
numbers today the vast majority
of our these offers go to our
individuals who are represented
by our public defender
counterparts but we are actively
making changes to our diversion
program to try to make sure that
we are getting individuals that
kind of treatment and support
that will hopefully prevent
future crime.
I'm we don't see that kind of
acceptance that we're hoping for
and will will come back to this
point a little later because we
think there are some structural
issues in criminal procedure and
and and Bernalillo county
specifically that it contributes
to the acceptance rate not being
as high is as we see in other
districts on but certainly it's
an area of focus and emphasis
for us we want to get these
individuals treated for that we
believe that it's the right
intervention for low risk
individuals to get them drug
treatment for example or
stabilizing education and other
services which is supported
housing services to make sure
that that those folks don't.
Have the support to prevent them
from coming back on and so again
these are all places where we
have agreements.
Where we had we want to make
sure that we set the record
straight on on more on some of
the the numbers that we saw on
the report we just want to make
sure that it is clear that the
that are our districts our DA's
office here has been
increasingly successful
conviction for adult Alaniz.
both in general and when we look
at the at the final population
these were detailed in our
response the report but we want
to make sure that that we're
we're setting that record
straight here we've been in
conversation will with the LFC
staff or understanding why their
numbers were different and some
things that they included in the
numbers that
not to have been included which
result in some of the
differences in that we're seeing
but what we're seeing is that
when we're case is initiated and
is moving through the system our
our outcomes our success.
And these are some of examples
and for this part of I'll turn
it over to my colleague Mr
Grayson to top to show talk
about what we include when we
when we call something a
conviction.
And this is just a different
I did a difference in sort of
counting the data essentially
When LFC council convictions
done so through Odyssey it's
stands up to a document that
they will be tagged as part of
their data collection.
And that document is is either
guilty plea or or a jury of jury
verdict but often times these
defendants have multiple cases
that our court that are pending
at the same time and so we're
certainly aware of that in our
office and we gauged
legalization under the reality
that there are multiple cases
that exist same time and a plea
agreement reflects that so we
have a dependent such as Drake
big committed residential
burglary in two thousand
eighteen.
We picked up a second case with
second degree murder conspiracy
to commit second degree murder
yup which is evidence
the state resolve cases through
consolidated we agree.
In that consolidated plea
agreement the residential
burglary case was dismissed the
defendant ultimately Sir ended
up serving a prison sentence for
twenty four to thirty years as
part of that the group and in
our office that's a depends
who's one hundred percent
compared he's one hundred
percent in present as a result
of the crimes he committed and
that plea agreements or
reflection of all of his
criminal act.
But in terms of the data
collected by LFC that defendant
would be fifty percent
convicted.
and and fifty percent dismissed
because it was dismissed as part
of that.
Similar example here defended
his use Cabral was charged with
aggravated assault with a deadly
weapon session control substance
two thousand nineteen later
indicted for aggravated stalking
and arson prevents in a two
thousand eight two thousand
nineteen there are three felony
cases
the guilty plea included some of
the counts from some of the
cases and then dismissed one of
the cases in its entirety which
was the session with Joel
substance under this please Mr
all will serve ten years in
prison so again for our office
that consolidated the request
the entirety of his criminal
activity that was pending at
that time and he serving ten
years in prison for that
activity so our office considers
that that individuals be one
hundred percent.
And finally dependent journal
being.
Four separate cases or four
months spans receiving or
transferring a stolen vehicle
armed robbery Act results and
and an open account of our
he pled no contest to second
degree murder as well as other
charges one of his trip for
cases dismissed as part of a
plea agreement and so from
Odyssey perspective from the
documents that you tagged in
Odyssey as a data collection.
Perspective he's only seventy
five percent compared but he is
actually one hundred percent
convicted for the entirety of
his criminal conduct and the at
the time.
So those those are some of the
examples on the conviction side
we also want to set the record
straight on declination
dismissal they were similar
differences in methodology with
as to as to conviction but we we
will what we're finding is that
were the declinations about
thirty seven percent and it's
almost always due to all two
thirds of times due to victim
cooperation issues so we'll work
will share with you some of
those real world examples as
well.
So this defendant Stephen R. CS
was charged with the real life
seven services you know you are
it's.
the law enforcement officer on
the case when a military leave.
state attempted to set up
several projects with your
officer able to appear.
As a result we could not be the
PPRF deadline which is pre trial
interview deadline under the
case management order.
I should emphasize here that
this is this is a situation that
arises only in Bernalillo county
and not in any other county in
New Mexico.
All counties the rules of
criminal procedure find for pre
trial interviews to be conducted
those interviews are conducted
in other counties but there are
strict deadlines of windows must
occur and just as a matter of
practicality and as a matter of
people's schedules and as a
matter of the reality of of of
practice.
Practicing law people don't set
up those pre trial interviews
frequently until the case is
moving to trial.
sometimes defense attorneys will
want pre trial interviews and
other districts in order to know
what kind of the agreement they
can enter into often though and
I I trust you basis in the
fourth judicial district report
coming Johnny often we would
plead basis before pre trial
interviews and pre trial
interviews were conducted
approximately a month before
trial conducted only with the
key witnesses case number
earlier County it's completely
different and I can tell you I I
was aware of the CMO
because I wasn't how the
training before becoming trial
prosecutors I was certainly
aware of the text of the CMO but
I can tell madam chair members
of this committee I had to live
it table.
prosecuting cases Bernalillo
county is completely different
than prosecuting cases in any
other county Mexico.
This is another case involving
case management order affect
dependent Lujan sorrow he was
charged with aggravated battery
on a burglary.
Conspiracy to commit are
overboard larceny and unlawful
during our.
The victim had concerns about
continuing with the prosecution
because he feared retaliation
against his family and he was
away from state Montoya.
He chose not to participate in
the pre trial interview because
he was away and couldn't protect
staff.
As a result of that we could not
meet the pre trial interview
deadline the case management
order and we were forced to
dismiss.
Finally I believe this last
example here.
And then L. generous was charged
with two counts trafficking.
Is a scheduling order that was
issued by the court on September
second two thousand twenty one.
The scientific evidence
deadlines and set for September
fifth two thousand twenty one
only three days after the
schedule issue.
So let me explain that a little
bit so we when we file charges
Network defended is you're bound
over for trial from metro port
or isn't here she's indicted.
in the case is initiated
District Court the defendant is
that a range within a week or
two.
the scheduling order is entered
shortly after that usually
within thirty to forty five and
the scheduling order sets out a
series of guidelines that are
required under the case or one
of those pre trial interviews
one of those scientific evidence
and what that means is if we get
drug results after that
scientific evidence deadline we
can't use they can be suppressed
it could be excluded by the
court because we have we haven't
complied with that science
deadline and we often based
alliance that are simply not
realistic and not even
physically costs.
This is an important point to
tie back to the beginning we
thinking about why do we not see
the kind of expectant to some of
the version offers that we're
emphasizing there's so many
procedural issues that can cause
and result in the case being
dismissed but they're dead that
they of there are there
depending maybe be interested in
just waiting and seeing rather
than than taking on the the the
the treatment that we think
would prevent future future
crime and we lay this out as
game those noting relay this out
to give the context of a very
different criminal justice
system and Bernalillo county
than any other part of the state
and the kinds of expectations
and and burdens that are placed
on cops prosecutors victims and
witnesses here in Burleigh
county that are experienced.
In in other parts of the state
and these are things that as I
noted we haven't and we we don't
get listen to very often we
often see ourselves up make
alerts and
issue warnings please don't
implement this type of procedure
please don't do you take that
kind of rule I often we're just
a outvoted and we stand we see
the the changes in procedure
implemented and the results are
situations like this which are
very challenging to move forward
on that and so for us it the the
system here really County it is
it is a broken system that we're
seeing and the one example of
the type of thing that we've
caution please do not do this
but has happened regardless is
reduction of grand jury
reduction of the opportunity to
initiate cases during the COVID
period we've experience what
it's like to have a criminal
justice system that does not
have a grand jury we seem to
kind of drop off in case
initiation that that results in
but at and many periods in the
past we've seen reduction of
grand jury and with each time we
see that happen we see case
initiation reduction.
Because the crow justice system
is like a like a system that is
all connected if you
constricted the beginning you'll
necessarily constricts the
output of it at the other end
and so Alex he noted that the
prison admissions are down and
we believe it's largely due to
the these changes in and
reduction due seem grand jury
and really in and making it more
more difficult to do our jobs
begin getting cases initiated so
we want to take some time to set
that record straight and with
that turn to the idea of a pre
trial release and start by
talking about who moved to
detain.
But I want to just again we
remind everybody that we are
making almost as many offers to.
To do pre prosecution diversion
and then the last year as the
number of folks that we're
seeking to detain.
So the we are office over the
last five years has had
approximately forty thousand
adult County new adult felony
referrals.
We have only order the tension
in five thousand cases and that
has and that is only affected
four forty two hundred
defendants so forty thousand
cases where we have only such
detained four thousand
defendants.
The the population that we moved
to detain and there's no dispute
about what the make up of the
population we we moved to
detain.
Seventy percent of the time
they're coming to us on a
violent charge when it's not in
a violent charge it we're often
seeing that their criminal
history demonstrates the the
violence and the dangerous
agency that they represent in
the community so.
We get forty thousand over this
time period forty thousand cases
we have been very measured and
directed at who we are
attempting to detain.
Our our issue with pre trial
detention isn't all of the other
individuals who are released our
concern is the population that
we see to the team.
Everybody else does not get a
detention hearing the tension
hearings only occur if we have
sought to detain an individual.
Now.
They're granted about half the
time then again there's no real
dispute about the grant right of
detention hearings so the forty
two hundred individuals that we
sought to the team half of them
have been released and is that
population that half of the
individuals that we sent to the
bank that we we are advocating
for changes to make sure that we
get the we strike the right
balance as to who among those
have get detained if if the
courts were to detain slightly
more in that set of people
maybe would mean another hundred
detent defendants a year
something of that of that order
but it's about getting to the
right individuals what some of
you were able to hear our police
officers share this morning
about how they see the same
defendants committing violent
crimes repeatedly well national
research supports what they were
calculating based on their
frontline experience.
What the John Jay school of
criminology and their research
has found is point five percent
so again a very small proportion
of the population point five
percent of the population is
responsible for sixty to seventy
percent of violent crime.
So we're trying to do is align
our pre trial detentions to that
to get precise as to that small
population and so it's about
getting it right on on on that
small population of those folks
that are let out.
one of the measures that we that
we have home we were considering
moving to detail is whether or
not a fireman's present
so in about forty three percent
of the motion that we filed
firearm is present we believe
that that inherently increases
the the the dangerousness of
those felony situations.
Fortunately the grant right when
a fireman's present goes down
right so for those for the folks
who have been advocating common
sense gun safety we would expect
that the grant rate would go up
when individuals behaving in
current activities are felonies
and the requirements present we
would expect the grant right to
go up but we see it go down we
should go down across all crime
types will drug trafficking it
seems is flat but for violent
crimes when the we move to the
chain and there is a no a gun
present it's granted less often
than when a gun is present
and so this I think what we're
advocating is precision
making where we we're moving to
get that to identify and detain
the right people we need
precision and we need the
signals for and and the guidance
for our judges as to how to
evaluate the presence of the
firearm the rebuttable
presumptions bill helps provide
that kind of guidance.
We have.
That we're identifying the right
individuals and we're and we're
evaluating dangerous miss in the
in the effective and in a valid
way because we have an
experience of.
Moving to detain the same same
individuals on the same criminal
in in incidents in two different
courthouses so at this point we
have at least two hundred and
fifty defendants where we've had
the opportunity to move to the
temple systems and have gotten
outcomes of those detention
hearings in both systems.
What we see in the federal court
is an alignment with our
determination and evaluation of
dangerous and because the grant
right there is but above ninety
percent same population in our
state court the grant right is
only sixty percent.
Same proof the same burden of
proof clear convincing evidence
but wildly different outcomes so
that signals to us that there
needs to that there's some
guidance that's happening at our
in our state court that is not
aligned with.
How would different quarter is
with reserves but reductions is
evaluating the same conduct and
we think that the Arnold tool is
in part the the challenge and
the and the issue here
what I'm showing here the R.
Arnold reporter for Daniel
Espinosa.
He's charged with possession of
a controlled substance no
history of violent history but
he has a lot of criminal
activity so he maxed out the
Arnold school you got a six six
which placed him in the lower
right hand corner of the matrix
it says
That that individual should be
detained.
This is the type of individual
that we would likely make it an
offer of diversion.
So we have a public safety
assessment tool that is.
Making it the giving signals to
our judges that this person is
dangers we what we would not
have moved we would not move to
detained this individual we
would like to make an offer for
of diversion for this
individual.
On the other side of it.
Here's Anthony guy it goes.
Activated battery on a household
member so violent domestic
violence situation.
Agpiece all of the deadly weapon
abandonment of a child in this
case he punches go for more than
a hundred times and slender head
on the on a concrete floor and
gender with the gun.
His history wasn't such that his
Arnold score was very high he
scored a three to.
Which meant that the Arnold
recommendation was really
someone as own reconnaissance.
The the the creators of the
Arnold pool the the Arnold
foundation they recognize that
there is a gap in the scoring of
the Arnold to.
They recognize that someone with
low criminal history coming in
on very serious crimes may score
very low.
And we see it and we've been in
practice here.
What other jurisdictions do.
Is create a secondary layer of
of asking questions that they go
through a step wise process and
I'll show that I'm sure the
example of of New Jersey.
And this this is an important
conversation here because it
aligns with what we're
describing with remarkable
presumptions providing guidance
about.
Well what to do when the
Arnold's courses one one because
the individual maybe as a first
time coming into contact with
the criminal justice system but
they came in on something
extremely serious like murder.
What do you do your nose or
would say one one so New Jersey
does New Jersey asks
the person come in on murder
felony murder for example are
aggravated sexual assault.
Then they're scoring would say
that no release would be
recommended I think they're
scoring would result in a
recommendation of detention.
When we talk about the only the
me just so that they do we can
see the stepwise process.
They have other enumerated
statutes that would also result
in the recommendation being to
detain the individual if you
look at their September fine
right activated manslaughter or
manslaughter sexual assault.
First degree robbery.
Again if the answer is that is
the current charge any of those
in New Jersey that the
recommendation would be not to
release this person this person.
Rebuttal presumptions are like
that we've they they identify
and fill this gap a dentist I
how to evaluate the the crimes
that are legislature has
indicated are the most serious
crimes in our community murder
rate is activated domestic
violence child abuse human
trafficking sexual exploitation
and sexual content contact with
the child kidnapping robbery
shootings.
Violent assaults on our costs
activated arson.
Alaniz when a gun is brandish
your discharge and families that
create great bodily harm.
So those would be that the
crimes were presumption would
exist which would guide the
judge saying where how do I
evaluate dangerous equipment and
like New Jersey the those crimes
being the current crime would
presume that the individual
should be detained like you see
in New Jersey.
and I think with your
and pass it to to James to talk
about when an individual is not
the team and because we have
experience of individuals not
pertain who would have been.
Zoom detained under the the
rebuttable presumption statute
and will come back and commit
homicides and without just two
to James.
We heard a lot about recidivism
rates and I think those rates
are being viewed in isolation so
are worth our recidivism rate in
New Mexico when you compare it
to rates in other bail reform
jurisdictions are recidivism
rate is higher than other
jurisdictions.
So we know we can do better and
that's what we're really talking
about which rebuttable
presumptions that's what New
Jersey is really talking about
with this with this risk
management tool that they have
as a decision making framework
it's about managing risk it's
about violent offenders being a
higher risk because when they re
offend they commit crimes of
violence.
And those crimes of violence
when they're released have real
world consequences so it's
really important that we get it
right and of course you can have
a system where we're always
right we're not asking for
protection what we can do better
and recidivism rates in other
states show that we can do
better and the the recidivism
rates in other states it's no
coincidence that those other
states or jurisdictions use that
type of framework that we're
talking about Jersey or they use
revival productions but in some
way the flag the seriousness of
the offense.
So let's talk about real world
examples.
Yes.
So J. Montoya he was charged on
June nineteenth two thousand
twenty one with multiple felony
offenses including felony
possession are are receiving
transferring a stolen vehicle
possession of meth and.
We filed a motion to detain Mr
Montoya district court denied
the motion motion in place too
much yes.
He was a GPS for ninety three
days but he failed to appear for
his preliminary hearing.
the battery in this GPS with
that on August twenty this two
thousand twenty one.
Now most from multiple reports
law enforcement agencies this
individual one on a crime spree
when our crime spree state and
across the state three different
counties.
in the month of November there
was an armed robbery Sandoval
County an armed robbery Santa Fe
County.
And then according to criminal
complaints he fled from police
at a high rate of speed.
after armed robbery prostitutes
County and fired multiple shots
at law enforcement for to be
taken yes.
Two firearms and other items
that we do November fourteenth
proper so let's look at the
dates in the top are you
nineteen.
When he was charged June twenty
twenty was released he was
placed on June on GPS monitor.
He was out in the community from
June twenty fifth till November
fourteenth.
And we have no idea what he was
doing in that time.
It was on GPS monitoring during
that time law enforcement does
not have access to the GPS
monger so the question is how
many unsolved crimes you commit
while he was out on release I
think all of us can can suspect
that he was not the most law
abiding citizen for that period
of time given his crime spree in
November he didn't just commit a
bunch of crimes in June and then
decide to be on good behavior
and November committed crimes.
We also have other real world
examples that I want to talk
about but I want to talk about
it in the context of the data
that's been present to
Madam chair members of the
committee Mr Grayson the service
and I just want to ask I think
we asked you to go with thirty
or forty five minutes and I
think we may have been
there so if you could try to
close it up I know I've heard
some of these examples because
I've been in other hearings and
so but if you could try to draw
to a close I think it would be a
good idea.
We.
I was not aware of the time I'm
sorry and the other thing is
that members have asked if we
aren't on a copy of your power
point in I would be very glad if
we could do that if you wouldn't
mind letting us sure so that the
committee members could have it
for later thanks and also.
Thank you madam chair and I'll
try to speed this along current
members of the committee but I
do want to highlight one thing
in particular because in in the
LFC report inventions seven
homicides committed by people
who who were released and also
mentions that only two of those
involved revival presumptions.
In the FIR report for H. B. I it
again says that two of the
Senate and
were charged with rebuttal
presumption is and also says
that the other five were not.
Now that's important because
that's that's simply not the
case.
Our own research shows that at
least five of those on the side
dependents were charged with
rebuttable presumption of
princes when we moved to detain.
one
Relation to
Where is
