Representative McQueen here.
Representative Nibert.
Representative Rehm there are.
Representative Thompson.
Thank.
Madam chair.
Present.
We have a quorum.
Thank you very much members for
being here today.
Let me just read.
Repeat what I mentioned at our
last meeting and that is that I
had invited the legislative
finance committee today.
Sent to us and then we will have
the district attorneys and the
public defenders and possibly a
couple of other folks sure
exactly on Friday and I do want
to
I think there'll be a chance for
committee members to ask
questions let's see how it goes
and I do want to assure you that
if some group says what we're
missing data we want we just
what all of those data to be
shared and we we want to have as
much information as we can about
community safety and how we
could best addresses
legislative body so I will let
Dr John Courtney who is one of
the deputy director of the LFC
it reduces panel and I think he
invited some folks from the
institute for Social Research as
well which I appreciate it thank
you so much and I will let you
go ahead then drive forty.
Thank you very much madam chair
and and thanks to you in the
committee for for inviting us
here today
I I'm John Courtney and Dick
deputy director over the
legislative finance committee
I receive program evaluation
unit there with me today is our
our to staff from that unit
Kelly cars well and Dr Ryan
Tolman they were the authors of
the the report that they'll be
taking you through today we also
have some new information from
data that came and subsequent to
that report that's are relevant
to House Bill five that they'll
be covering
just as an insurer about three
and a half years ago the
legislative finance committee
released a pretty comprehensive
report and evaluation on the the
criminal justice system and
Bernalillo county many of you
might remember this at it so a
long document it still gives me
give me nightmares it's but we
were we were able to meet a a
lot of great people working
really hard to to keep the
public safe in in our jails are
our first responders are police
officers and our courts and
Kalyan Ryan have been continuing
that work today will be sharing
a status update on the progress
report that we're conducting
right now to look at progress
that we've made since the two
thousand eighteen report
along with information again
relevant to some Representative
rebuttable presumption bills
that you may have before you
soon you know I I would know
before I handed off to Callie we
looked we work with a lot of
criminal justice partners
both in the eighteen report and
in this report and and David
many thanks including APD the
City of Albuquerque the public
defender's office District Court
metro court UNM's I just are the
second DA many of you likely
know.
that
I'd like to acknowledge the
second DA took some issue with
some of the findings related
specifically to his office from
our report after it a bit of
communication issues I spoke
with the a tour as Monday and
we're meeting with his office
tomorrow to dig further into
those concerns we we probably
won't be touching on on those
today because they have to do
with mostly conviction rates and
are we'll be talking about rob
run numbers for the most part
today as opposed to rates
so with that is an overview if
you wouldn't mind I'd like to
hand handed off to Callie and
she can take us through where
we're at what we found so far
thank you.
Members let me also say that
you can be operating from the
Navajo or the
for House Bill five or is there
anything we should be looking at
we have those documents in the
file Mr speaker I'm madam chair
we are going to take you for a
power point presentation so I'll
screening that's going.
All right.
it's telling me the host
disabled participants screen
sharing at.
I think I still need permission
to share my screen.
while we're waiting on that I
will just give you a couple more
points of introduction so as
John mentioned this is a
preliminary version of a larger
report we're working on updating
the twenty eighteen evaluation
we're expecting that
long larger report to come out
sometime in the spring so today
will briefly cover recent crime
trends and the system's response
and will also take you through
some analysis out the trial
release is currently working in
Bernalillo county as well as
content potential impacts of
reforms you may consider this
session as John kind of nodded
to I do want to make you aware
at the outset that the analysis
will shared today with you.
I differs in some of it
specifics from the pre trial
analysis that's included in the
crime anymore and that's because
we did not have data specific to
the population that would be
affected by each you I and we
put and I'm not we also didn't
actually have a final version of
that bill so we've updated the
analysis now that updated
analysis is also what's mac are
I and that's what will share
with you today.
So let me try again I still am
not able to share my screen.
Looks like.
So on my end that screen sharing
is on.
Madam chair if I may it actually
says Lisa that you're sharing
your screen.
Is that better not.
Would anyone screen but the
floor it said you're you're
doing the similar as scary what
we need to share it with them.
For LFC Madam chair Koenig have
message that says close Ag at it
that the panelists okay.
You have to Ryan now and I will
be back when he's.
Hello everyone can everyone hear
me okay.
Very well thank you so much for
having me here today winnings
rental number program evaluator
with the LFC
So let me first start by just
providing a quick overview of
the criminal justice process
which can be quite complex
involved multiple agencies the
figure here on the screen
displays a simplified version of
how typical felony case might
flow through the justice system
from arrest to conviction.
I want to highlight here the
release conditions for pre trial
detention since this is the
stage in which the legislation
which you might potentially be
considering focuses on.
So here in the next slide first
I want to highly trends in crime
across all of New Mexico since
the last LFC report first
reported on it back in twenty
eighteen so first I have things
gotten better or worse well we
find it's a bit of a mixed bag
actually.
Property crime rates have
dropped and is approaching the
national average as you can see
by the orange lines there in the
middle.
I'm finally crime rates in New
Mexico rose starting around
twenty fourteen and continues to
exceed national average despite
improvements in full twenty
nineteen and twenty twenty as
you can see in that top blue
line.
Our next in some communities the
violent crime rates appear to be
rising.
In the least twenty communities
violent crime rates in twenty
twenty we're up relatives twenty
sixteen.
When the LFC last reported on
its and on statewide crime
trends many of those communities
violent crime rates exceeded the
national average.
So in Albuquerque violent crime
plateaued at its highest level
in twenty years and twenty
seventeen even as property crime
fell in reached one of its
lowest levels over the same time
period.
Violent crime rates remain well
above national averages.
This city did see notable
improvements in some areas such
as auto theft which declined by
twenty five percent from twenty
eighteen to twenty twenty.
Albuquerque over in Jordan shoe
Bryson homicides and twenty
twenty one during a national
trend that began during the
COVID nineteen pandemic
Albuquerque recorded a hundred
and seventeen homicides the
structure forty six percent
increase over twenty twenty.
I was we'll see analysis of
twenty twenty one a P. data
found that guns were involved in
seventy nine percent of those
homicides slightly higher than
the national average and an
increase from historic numbers.
Some of the factors in the
increases in homicides includes
the fact that more guns were
involved of robbery playing a
significant role and also
worsening drug problems.
So how does the system been
responding to all of this well
the LFC previously reported in
twenty eighteen that Albuquerque
experienced an increase in crime
starting in twenty eleven around
the same time when we order
things like poverty homelessness
income inequality truck used in
gun use all worst and social
conditions deteriorated the
criminal justice system help
fewer and fewer people
accountable what trends continue
to increase of insurance within
certain accountability for
criminals along with the
dressing room causes of crime or
to public safety.
Research shows that certainty
being taught some more powerful
deterrent to crime than severity
of punishment.
The criminal justice system this
means it is important to
prioritize solving crimes in
securing convictions.
Willie for serious offenses.
However the LFC found that
arrests indictments and
convictions Bernalillo county
all declined what currency
recidivism increased.
So how are we doing today well
the accountability gap continues
to process neither rest nor
conditions have tracked
fluctuations in felony crime in
twenty twenty one felonies begin
surprised accountability for
those crimes fall.
Twenty twenty there were about
twenty thousand reported
felonies.
Only about fifty six hundred
arrests and then only about
eighteen hundred convictions.
Present emissions of also not
track with prime in FY twenty
there were only three hundred
and seventy seven present
emissions from the second
judicial district sixty one
percent decrease from FY
fifteen.
No it should be noted that some
gap between arresting conditions
might actually be desirable
especially if it's through the
use of affected diversion
programs.
However diversion does not
appear to be what's driving
these particular trends.
So if you want to bring justice
to victims of crime one place
that we need to focus on is
closing this accountability gap
by prioritizing solving crimes
and securitizations.
So what about violent crime well
we find that arrests and
convictions for violent offenses
have remained relatively flat
through at least seven years of
rising violent crime.
Finally private appears to be
stuck at a high level in recent
rises in home sites is of of
course important public concern.
Similar to the trend that we saw
on the previous slide there is a
widening accountability gap from
the most serious offenses.
Thank you so much and I will now
turn the presentation back over
to my colleague County.
Madam chair members of the
committee.
I am going to shift now to a
discussion about the are
important and I wanted to start
out by pointing out that this is
just one out of state one of the
few significant reforms
Bernalillo county credible
mental justice system has gone
through in recent years
and that these reforms are
likely at least factors and the
arrest and conviction trends
that ran just described to you
there are some other things also
that could be at play and
analysis staffing staffing
within the police department did
not clearly correlate with
arrest trans
At least not so as to fully
explain those trends but
understaffing particularly from
two thousand ten to two thousand
eighteen was an important factor
according to APD and City of
Albuquerque.
Also as I'm sure most of your
where are where the destruction
of the behavioral health system
in New Mexico occurred during
the same period we're looking at
and LFC is previous work on
crime has identified behavioral
health issues as an underlying
factor.
So why bills are important most
restrictions that have pursued
it have done it for two primary
reasons the first is that cash
bail has been recognized to be
and currently I because it makes
punishment prior to inspection
hi to wealth and bonds also did
not find act public safety
protection the second reason is
that scientific research has
shown us that dealing criminal
defendants prior to trial is
often unnecessary to protect
public health and that's because
most defendants do not commit
new crimes while on pre trial
release in two thousand sixteen
in New Mexico became part of a
growing national movement to
reform cash bail when voters
approved a constitutional
amendment that largely
eliminated it and also change
the conditions under which
defendants could be detained
trial.
Can be detained prior to
conviction in New Mexico now and
why this I site is basically
describing how it works after
the changes so anyone charged
with a felony can be detained if
a prosecutor moose for their
detention and then a judge
grants that motion the
prosecutor must prove by clear
and convincing evidence that
defendant is dangerous and also
that no conditions of release
ensure the safety of the
community or any individual.
There is convincing evidence for
all the non lawyers in the room
is a very high level standard so
prosecutors have a difficult job
the high burden to need to get a
motion granted to detain someone
prior to conviction.
I also wanted to point out here
that just kind of contacts for
the rest of this discussion that
pre trial systems ultimately our
risk management systems they
have the difficult job of
balancing protection of public
safety with civil liberties and
the presumption of innocence one
of the fundamental principles of
our legal system the tension is
supposed to be more the
exception than the rule and that
kind of system you can never
expect to totally eliminate
rest.
Instead both the legal system
and society at large except
except some level of risk as the
cost of liberty and the
presumption of innocence in a
sense.
And the tricky thing of course
is that not everyone agrees on
where that level of acceptable
LESC lies.
New Mexico has been in the
process of increasing the use of
best practices in pre trial
services and that process
started and Bernalillo county
one of the important
developments here was the
implementation of the public
safety assessment or the PSA
this is an empirical risk
assessment tool that judges use
in their decisions about whether
to release defendants pending
trial and also with what
conditions to apply to their
release
couple important things about
the PSA.
First it is a tool and it's a
good one but it's not a crystal
ball also the PSA is not a
replacement for G. yes just a
judicial discretion excuse me
it's simply a tool that judges
use scores Defense risk in three
categories those are failure to
appear for court risk of new
criminal activity while on pre
trial release and then the risk
of new violence new violent
criminal activity on pre trial
release.
What we know about how it the
new pre trial system is working
so there are three high level
important outcomes that we're
interested in tracking and those
are essentially the same things
that the PSA scores so the rate
of arrest for new violent
charges among the population of
felony defendants that is really
speech the trial at the rate of
re arrest on the charges of any
type and that the rate of court
appearance.
So research by the into
institute for Social Research at
UNM about fifteen thousand cases
over a four year period found at
the outcomes you can see on the
slide those are the ninety five
percent of defendants on
pretrial release over the four
years were not rearrested on a
pilot charge eighty two percent
were not rearrested on on any
new charge and nearly eighty
percent made all court
appearances
I also just wanted to say real
quickly as I'm getting into some
of the state of that I'll
guarantee from I. S. R. is on
the meeting and he's not going
to present but he will be
available for questions if you
have them on the research that
his staff is done.
I also note here that EDD has
told LESC that is focused on
this five percent of the
population that do commit new
violent offenses father back in
the community and we plan to
work with the department to
include additional detail on
their strategy for doing that
and all in our full report that
will publish later this spring.
It also says that in its view
this level of re arrest is too
high and notes that the
statistics don't account for
defendant to commit new crimes
but are not rearrested it's
certainly true that more crimes
the arrest would be occurring
and if they are I think it goes
back to some of what Ryan was
going over with you that an
important area of focus is
narrowing this gap between
reported crime and arrest a
particularly for the most
serious offenses.
The slide is providing you with
a little more detail on the
kinds of new charges pre trial
defendants were arrested on so
the most common at work for
property crimes and then drug
crimes and then assault and
battery charges serious violent
charges like robbery sex
offenses and homicide and
homicide we're much more rare
and these of course are
generally more rare crimes
overall each representative one
percent or less of the new
criminal activity in this
population release defendants
were charged with seven
homicides that occurred during
pre trial release over the four
year period and defendants in
the population that each the
five other available presumption
bill that you all may consider
the session.
So the population that bill
would target
I'm two defendants were arrested
of out of the seven homicides.
Now the question you all are
being asked to consider and it
is certainly a difficult one is
is this level of risk acceptable
the data on its own can't answer
this question and I want to be
clear that we the LFC staff are
also not here to answer that
question for you but just to
write provide you with data on
outcomes and the potential
impact of reforms you can then
decide how to weigh what we've
tried to look at is if the goal
of proposed reform is to better
protect public safety what we
know about how well that might
work.
So as we get into that
discussion and talk about some
of the potential impacts
specific to each I
I wanted to start by framing it
was some topline takeaways the
big one is that increased
attention and avidly involves
trade offs they're both costs
and benefits.
I'll take you through some of
those right here the first is
that more to more detention
likely will yield some crime
reduction benefits at to realize
that benefit you likely need to
detain a significant number of
people who would not have been
rearrested while I'm pre trial
release and you also likely
between some people who won't
ultimately be convicted of the
charges they're being detained
for.
Increased attention likely won't
lead to large projects large
reductions in overall crime
rates and long term the benefit
may become more marginal due to
increased recidivism and this
last point has to do essentially
what that manage act act of
incarceration.
So H. B. I would establish a
rebuttable presumptions for
defendants accused of certain
violent offenses certain
firearms offenses and defendants
previously convicted of certain
violent crimes for pick and who
are pick up new felony charges
of any kind presumably the at
intent of this bill is to make
it easier to detain these
defendants by shifting at least
some of the burden from the
prosecution to prove that they
should be detained to the
defense to prove that they
should not be detained this
chart is giving you an overview
of the preacher the trial
population the bill would and
one hi to you and their public
safety outcomes to date.
So the new arrests in each group
are represented by the red and
peach colored bars on top the
blue represents defendants to
didn't pick any up got any new
charge while in pre trial
release and the smaller bar on
the right here is representing
the population of pre trial
defendants that would be
impacted by HB five.
So we came up with an estimate
for the number of potential
additional detainees I did HB
five statewide we project up to
twelve hundred sixty new
detainees per year I also comes
included some other important
metrics to consider here the
first is that eighty five
percent of those detained in the
specific population would likely
not be re arrested if released
the trial this is based on real
world outcome data that we have
on this population are from I.
S. R..
We also came up with some cost
estimates for those for the
annual new cost of detention as
well as cost savings due to the
crime prevention of facts of
Bill.
this slide is giving you some
estimates on that crime
prevention piece the benefit of
the bill your I. provided
estimates because for Bernalillo
county and statewide you can see
that total crime we're expecting
to be prevented at the bottom
for the state as a whole we
expect about a hundred and
ninety in crimes we were
prevented if H. B. five four
implemented.
If you do the math putting the
last slide together with this
fun statewide we estimate that
detaining roughly six defendants
prevents one crime.
This is just giving you some
detail about our methodology for
making these estimates
so you can kind of understand
what they represent so they're
based on arrests among the total
population impacted specifically
by subsection a of the bill over
a four year period that's
because the section of the bill
is the only one that we had data
at this specific on yes it is
assumed that the desk district
attorney will file a motion to
get against this population and
its current rate and that also
promotions will be granted we
made this assumption essentially
so that we could get high and
estimates both for the costs and
the benefits of the bill in
reality it's likely that judges
would potentially grant all of
these questions I'm sorry I just
made a crime prevention is based
on the number of each time these
defendants were arrested for
over four years and the
proportion different proportion
of defendants in the impact
impacted population we expect
you to teens.
Finally I wanted to conclude
just by calling knowledge and
that intangible costs and
benefits matter a lot to and
these exist on both sides of the
debate over these potential
reforms so there are additional
costs to defendants their
families and the economy from
detaining those who do not
respond well on the track or the
trial release or those were
never convicted.
These costs are difficult to
quantify but they could include
the lost employment loss of
housing disruption of families
and increase recidivism.
Cancel an intangible costs borne
by victims of crimes are the
value of life lost are not
included in our fiscal estimates
but we want to be clear that
these are of course significant
and these are some of the costs
that could potentially be
avoided through the crime
prevention benefit of this kind
of bill the magnitude of of what
it costs to just try and
increase with the amount of the
most serious crimes that are.
All right and that's all we've
got for you so let me start
sharing my screen.
Okay I thank you madam chair
members of the committee will be
here for questions along with
the folks for master.
Dr Courtney did you want to say
anything further.
Madam chair I I just wanted to
knowledge Dr Paul Keren and Lisa
Ferguson from the U. M.
institute for Social Research
stated they've been a great
resource to the state to us
through a through about a decade
of research on on criminal
justice
and that
and other than that we're we're
here to provide as much
information as as you all might
need to to help make
seems like a pretty difficult
decision thank you Sir let me
see it members if you have
questions Representative Eli.
Are you madam chair and so I do
have a question from the annals
couple of what the cost of
detention the thirteen point
eight million does eight does
that include we just got a study
either of the other members you
seen it from the ABA about the
public defender's only have
about a third of the people that
are required in New Mexico
to be able to adequately
represent people
does include those kind of
institutional costs that we
might need more public defenders
for dust for judges is any of
that analysis been done it House
Bill five passes or is it simply
this is what it's going to cost
to detain I I'm trying to figure
break down the thirteen point
eight million.
Yeah madam chair representative
Ely it is not we only utilize we
only calculated in the cost of
actual detention so it is not
account for additional costs the
public defender's office.
Okay no we're not talking about
operational costs like.
Correctional officers behavioral
health those kind of things
services that might have to find
people rather be detained.
Correct.
Madam chair representative Ely
yet only accounts for the
marginal cost of each additional
detainee okay madam chair and
thank you very much I I one
other question so I know I've
seen this but I didn't see in
report today not that it's
related but I was curious is
there any way to quantify if
you're locking people up because
I guess Center house so I could
be talking a lot of people.
Does that fact that you're
walking more people up.
Pose a danger to the community
that is additional other dangers
in other words I again at how
can I order the last slide the
impact it's gonna have on that
people and their families being
locked out the very people that
you know otherwise would be
convicted and so we're sitting
in jail and then released for
whatever reason.
Is there are other studies about
does that mean people locked up
on Turner teacher let's question
many people were dangerous in
other words the fact that
they're sitting in jail for that
period of time and they come out
are they more likely to commit
crimes are they more dangers to
the community that's what I'm
trying to find out I I I don't
know I articulated that well
but.
Sure Madam chair representative
Ely that's that's a really good
question you know to some extent
it depends on on who's being
locked up
Researchers suggest that if if
you have a of.
Low risk offender you can
potentially affect stability
providing structures to people
while they're locked up hi
employment housing family
community relationships when
when we were doing this report
back in twenty eighteen before
the research resource reentry
center was
was functioning MDC would would
drop of Anna folks into downtown
Albuquerque we would stand down
there and and interview those
folks and and quite often you
hear stories of well first you
would hear can I use your phone
and then you would hear stories
of I I lost my car I I had lost
potentially custody custody of
my kids so there there are
potentially destabilizing forces
from that we actually did an
analysis in that twenty eighteen
report looking at
a new felony arrests within
sixty days of release from up
from a prior felony arrest as a
function of of the number of
days that you stay in jail and
as with each day you stay in
jail your likelihood of re
arrest goes up that's you know
that's not to say that they are
going to be those circumstances
where somebody is is is very
dangerous and and probably
should be capped should be kept
locked up.
Madam chair and John if I could
not remember as soon as you said
that I remember seeing that
study if you still have it handy
if you could email it to me at
some point I'd like to see it
and that was that settlement so
that's the question Madam chair
representative Ely I just want
to add some stats from some
research studies that we had
found when we were asked to look
into this as well in like Dr
Courtney had mentioned it kind
of depends on the population of
study but in one study in Harris
County Texas consisting of late
forty six over twenty thousand
people of the state.
These are misdemeanor trials but
we they found that descendants
were twenty five percent more
likely than similarly situated
releases to plead guilty when
they were detained forty three
percent more likely to be
sentenced to jail receive jail
sentences that are more than
twice as long on average another
study of juvenile cases across
thirty two jurisdictions this is
forty six thousand cases down
the pre trial detention was
associated with a thirty three
percent increase in felony
recidivism.
And eleven percent increase
investigator recidivism.
In there's other studies as well
but it's like they provide
similar things that people are
more likely to plead guilty stay
in jail longer and that can have
that criminal genetic effect of
potentially increasing
recidivism on the backend.
Madam chair a at it I I really
appreciate those answers I mean
because what it tells me this is
and I remember now in the back
of my mind from this morning
remember thinking she states
that there is a cost that's
difficult to quantify.
Locking people up in a prison
setting I have a lawyer I have
to tell you I had a lawyer
described to us talking about
the issue he said yes I'm
gladiators academy I mean you're
teaching people are really have
become professional criminals
this is a problem and you're
destabilizing them from the
things that might keep them away
from crime like their family
their jobs you know
transportation whatever will be
so any of that material that you
have including the other studies
you've referenced if there's a
way that I can get those that
would be very helpful to me and
I and I and I'm glad to share
with the members I don't want to
distilling it but if you can get
them to me I would reach out
from which I appreciated madam
chair thank you this is been
very helpful.
Thank you
just a second here let me see
if.
I know your hands up
Representative Chandler but why
is it not showing up.
Here.
We go Representative Chandler
thank you madam chair and thank
you presenters for your
information and I just wanna
take you back to maybe ten or
even longer years ago LFC has
been studying this issue
periodically as I recall madam
chair really for for some number
of years and periodically Madam
chair LESC prepares a report
that talks about these very
issues and am I not correct Mr
Courtney.
Madam chair
Representative Chandler that
that's correct we've we've been
working on public safety issues
for a number of years I'd say
the Bernalillo county effort was
was relatively new twenty
eighteen but we've been doing
reports on the partner public
safety the corrections
department going back probably
since the inception of the unit
and in nineteen ninety one.
And madam chair and and Mr
Courtney am I not correct in
saying that the conclusions that
you offered here today that is.
The best way to actually make a
dent on crime and crime rates is
to have a robust system of
justice that includes
prompts apprehension of.
The of the alleged criminal.
And prompt resolution of that
alleged criminals K..
And then you know obviously
**** punishment and so on and so
forth.
My not correct that you Mr
courting have been you're
obligating LESC excuse me LFC
and similar agencies have been
publishing reports that
essentially say that for some
time now.
Madam chair representative
Chandler it it's.
I I would I would probably take
a step back from that and say
there there and number of a
number of system elements that
likely need to be in place and
and and be functioning for for
the system to be to be working
at its peak I I I don't know
that we've we've recommended
fixes to each and everyone but
you know what among those we've
talked a lot about
I.
Addressing
root causes are before.
Right even starts you know going
going back to early childhood
programs such as nurse family
partnership is and then proven
to to reduce
our reliance on the criminal
justice system you know we need
effective programs on the back
into the system what within the
prisons to to rehabilitate folks
and and lower recidivism and
then for for kind of that that
middle part of the system or
more front end of the system
itself that we've been talking
about today there there are a
number of of the potential
Potential elements that that
lead to potentially lead to
better outcomes and that
includes you know that the use
of of evidence based diversion
or pre trial programs substance
use courts etcetera when it
comes to
when it comes to actual you know
capture and and detention of of
those that are accused of crime
research seems to suggest that
the swiftness and certainty make
a bit more
of an impact than than severity
but but I'll also say you know
and I'm sure Dr Garen would
would back me up on this you
know the the causes of crime are
are quite complex and and for us
to to set up here and and and
say that that we know all the
causes are that we can we can
predict what's going to happen I
would I would I would be remiss
if I if I didn't say that's
that's.
We're not comfortable doing
going that far so to speak okay
Mister Corey that's and madam
chair that's an excellent answer
and and I really appreciate your
supplementing my focus to all
the things that I would agree
with you on in terms of
dealing with the root causes
help support families and even
some going as far back as infant
care where we have a newborn
programs so on and so forth that
no doubt helps us in the whole
chain of trying to break any
spending family system of
you know we're Senate recidivism
and so on and so forth so your
answer was excellent in terms
that it will and and and and
that address topics that I agree
with you on mine was narrower
but I completely agree with a
number of the things that you
mentioned I think you for
supplementing what I had asked
you about that's honest madam
chair thank you.
Thank you Representative Rehm.
Thank you madam chair I had a
few questions that are on the
study like to go through it
first of all thank you for the
power point I and I was
wondering if you could send it
to the committee so they could
share it with us
also you mentioned an updated
report that would be good
because my questions will come
out of the January seventeenth
report.
I'm glad that you're going to
meet with the DA's office and go
over some of this
R. madam chair one of my.
First questions was a discussion
of.
consequences of our of our rest
and there tried to place a
dollar amount on society or
family of loss either by a
person that was killed or
seriously injured and I think
that that can be found and I'm
trying to remember I want to say
that
Center for decent disease
control or our national health
because I know that the
Issue values of.
Estimated life values and losses
for such as car collisions and
things such as that and I think
that would be a good data point
for your updated report.
Thank you Representative Rehm at
and I would I would just at if
you look at your FIR for
for House Bill five we do
include some of that information
in there you know it's always
controversial and in fact some
researchers will will shy away
from
from trying to assign a value of
a life but for conversation like
this I think it's we think it's
important to have all the data
points so in in your FIR for us
House Bill five you'll find an
estimate that we took from the
Washington state institute for
public policy that puts that
estimate of a range of four to
ten million dollars.
And and that's often differ
referred to as the the value of
the statistical life.
Thank you for that the another
one that I'm kind of interested
in New.
So here we have a certain number
of individuals that were
released that were then arrested
later and let's assume that it
was for a violent crime do you
have any specific examples so
you can say this guy was
released on murder and then shot
someone else or murdered someone
else you have any specific
examples on that.
Madam chair representative read
we did not do that kind of
details anecdotal case review
for this report I think the DA
the DA's response to LFC is
report provided some of those
anecdotal examples as far as a
reanalysis of HB five we did
work with I. S. R. to
Come up with a count of specific
of crimes that the specific
population in so far as we could
define it based on the
provisions of order subsection
anna of the bill specific crimes
that that population was re
arrested on and we found that
two of the top seven homicides
that pre trial defendants and I
just our sample were arrested on
during the pre trial period over
four years two of those
defendants were in the
population that HB I would apply
to.
Madam chair I think they meeting
with the DA's office is going to
be a formative I remember it so
I'm I want to say one or two
weeks ago there was an
individual who is out on release
and basically what a dinosaur
allow his ankle monitor battery
to die and then one on his crime
spree Sen I'm I can't remember
all that but it was up quite
late so we
Hey I know that there was it was
she ended in a shooting or
murder but I can't remember all
the details of it.
I think some of the examples of
the individuals that have been
released are very troublesome.
But what for the for the
additional offenses we know that
the
The individual that kids are
baseball recruit for University
of New Mexico was out on a
murder charge and shot an
individual was released again
and then murdered the baseball
of recruit for U. N. M. and and
that's very troubling when you
have that kind of.
Examples but I don't know if you
have a comment or or just move
on.
I am going Representative
remained no commented other than
to say there's.
You know there's there's likely
no perfect fix
You know your right to two of
those Kelly's right two of those
could have potentially been
included in the provisions of of
the bill I warrant you know I
and I I think I think you all
are taking an excellent approach
and and hearing from the the
number crunchers you know it and
LESC the university and then
hearing from the folks working
on the front lines dealing with
this day today and and
incorporating all that
information into your decision
that that would be my only
comment on that Sir.
Madam chair and Jarrell are
moving on on the front page of
the first paragraph found that
crime rose arrests and
convictions remain flat or even
declining.
Are creating an accountability
gap you go on to say that a FINS
swept in certain justice
was very effective and and I do
agree with that statement did
you look at.
The effect of and and one of
them you look that was the
results of COVID but I want to
go let's go to our house bill
four we're qualified immunity
well as a remote.
Did you look at that.
Madam chair representative Reem
we didn't look at that
specifically we did it and look
at a number of different factors
and some of these trends I some
of them include things we
mentioned in the presentation
briefly COVID you're right I
think at a and a fax to go early
and twenty twenty and twenty
twenty one although some of
these trends were under way
before that so it's not the only
factor
some of the other is you know we
did mention some of the reforms
that are actors in these times
you can also see some detail on
that and then I'm out
as well as potentially staffing
issues within the police
department to at least on expats
for some period of time.
And also there could be there
could be other things too it's a
pretty complicated picture and
it's difficult to it's difficult
to draw really direct cause and
effect relationships but we do
plan to date more deeply into
the wise as trans for our full
for our full report.
It is yes cars will I agree with
you I think that
The removing of qualified
immunity the the fund police
movie the cost center Greenmount
all have a chilling effect on
the arrest of the individual of
I think when we get to the next
your graph we start looking at
the swift and certain justice
and what we see is the case
management order.
And basically if correct me if I
have this wrong the DA's office
is given a by the court a
certain date to turn over all
evidence it will use in the
future.
For the prosecution of the case
and should learn something after
that date they can't use.
And this makes it very
difficult.
To have every piece of evidence
and ready for trial quickly.
I think one of the areas you
could look at is streamlining
the court system that case
management order only applies to
Bernalillo county and not across
the state.
And it was to address a problem
back in the nineties and clearly
we've gone past that.
But
When you look at the.
Average.
I'm from a restaurant trial I
think you're gonna find that
that's twelve to eighteen
months.
Which with COVID is probably
even longer now but
I think that goes to your second
paragraph about swift justice I
think that that would be a good
data for look at I I don't know
if you have a comment on that or
not.
Then just interrupt and ask your
clarification Representative
reading when you say second
paragraph are you referring to
the January seventeenth memo.
Yes ma'am yes madam chair okay
I'll be referring to that
throughout my questions come
from this.
Madam chair representative reams
thanks for the questions a
couple of quick quick points so
it is true that within the New
Mexico the case management order
is unique Bernalillo county
I believe it's also true that
all districts you have deadlines
they're just different most
restrictions everywhere in the
United States to have that they
have to follow I'm going to
trial as your other point about
the efficiency of the court
system our twenty eighteen
report found that after the CMO
the time at the average time to
K. disposition and the second
district improved significant
significantly and had reached
about five months COVID has
definitely slowed that way down
the most recent data we got from
the second district or but that
average time to K. disposition
currently at around twelve
months
and that is probably slightly
understating at
due to the delay and jury trial
so there's a lot of cases that
basically aren't disposed at
that aren't factored into that
so COVID has definitely had a
basic facts.
He.
Madam chair and help thank you
for that is when we go to the
bottom of the second page that
was the when you're slides we're
spoke about twenty communities
In New Mexico have seen a rise
in violent crimes and up I think
that that's
I think that that's very
troubling because a lot of the
comments.
have been that it should
Albuquerque problem and I think
it's a statewide problem and I
think that highlights that we go
to talk to the top of page
three.
You talk about how the five four
crime plant towed about twenty
seventeen well property crime
fell.
Now.
And I agree with you that auto
theft is down.
But I want to share some.
information I received from
constituents
Basically if you want to report
a burglary or even if you want
to report an auto.
APD is requesting that you do it
in a phone report.
And as an example I had one
constituent who is opening a new
office building.
Yes please stay on a lot of
computer equipment totaling a
hundred eighty thousand dollars.
Someone broke into the building
over the weekend and stole all
of that computer where.
So seventy he called the.
Our city police and requested an
officer.
to come and take a report.
As we know that also means that
they would be there to
collecting your requests and.
You know more evidence.
They try to make you do a phone
report.
He demanded to speak with an
officer.
The following Thursday at eleven
PM an officer showed up at his
home to take that report.
And I think that's part of the
problem that we don't have
enough officers.
Not only with APD but most other
agencies I think and say that as
well but particularly with APD
we'll get into some of that
detail later on.
One of the things I remember in
your reporter she detail
shoplifting staff.
Are you aware that there are
about twenty categories were APD
officers are instructed by the
McLernon part of the lawsuit to
not arrest individuals.
There are Madam chair
of Representative Rehm you know
I I I've heard we've heard those
anecdotal accounts ourselves
there could very well be lots of
crimes going unreported you know
we going back to twenty eighteen
we raised a concern that
although the the department of
justice intervention coming in
you know perhaps perhaps
necessary potentially re
directed a number of resources
and and and basically change the
way that that the police had to
do business procedurally
you know I I went on ride alongs
that same year where we had to
ride along with BCSO because APD
wasn't allowed to
to participate in high speed
chases at the time so I I I
think I think you're you're I
agree with you I think you're
you're on the right track there
that that there are there are
likely likely procedural issues
there are no fault of of you
know the the the good folks that
we have protecting us on the on
the streets in Albuquerque that
are are impacting their job and
potentially impacting the the
reporting of crime.
Thank you we some of these I'm
just going to highlight some of
them because I think not not
only some are.
You know affect the welfare of
our society but I think the
other ones we're going to affect
your data points on of of theft
and larceny and yeah and
property loss but here's just
some of our Spokane ceiling are
delivered to you criminal damage
under a thousand dollars
criminal trespass indecent
exposure larceny under five
hundred dollars.
Minors in possession of alcohol.
Prostitution paced organizing a
prostitute.
Receiving and concealing stolen
property shoplifting under five
hundred dollars I think all of
those go exactly
and that the officers are not
responding to requests for
reports for our property theft
in the individuals are just
turning it over to their
insurance.
So are I think that's that's
something you could look at in
your analysis for the future.
Representative Madam chair
representative retail thanks for
that and and absolutely and I I
can think of a few resources we
can lean on for that
you know it with and I I think
it might even drive during the
first time in this years and
years ago you know homicides and
and auto thefts tend to be
pretty pretty most mostly
reported it's it's hard to hide
homicide and auto theft for
insurance purposes there are
other crimes that have that have
different proportions of of
reporting and I I can remember I
I left my truck on locked a few
years ago and somebody took a
tool back from the back of it
and I I didn't bother to report
to the police I kind of figured
that that was my problem for for
being a bit about had but I I I
absolutely we will take that
feedback and and it's good
feedback and and and formative
to to the our process moving
forward thank you.
Thank you madam chair and panel
when we get to the bottom of
that page
in and also for the wrong and
hear you speak about gun sales
and you contribute this to gun
sales are part of the rising
crime begun sales
I want to.
Tell you what why discussion
with police in my community and.
R. I have I remember the data
point from twenty nineteen there
were over two hundred and two
thousand.
Gun purchases in New Mexico a
state with just over two million
and population.
last year and twenty twenty.
Bernalillo county alone saw tomb
justifiable home starts.
Three of those were employees of
the store being robbed shooting
the robbery killing Robert.
Now I think if you look back in
history we probably didn't have
to justifiable in five years
seven years maybe even ten
years.
And what my constituents are
telling me as they don't feel
safe since the bail them.
And so to me these data points
show.
A community who is arming itself
and taking care of their
personal safety.
And not relying on the police
and and that's trouble some for
me.
R. I mean part of our job is to
adequate the.
Fund and supply save.
Neighborhood safe work
environment I save state
I don't know if you have any
comment on that.
Representative Rehm Madam chair
representative Rehm I I if I
remember correctly that that was
identified as as a you know a
possible contributor I I think
there's of a lot of stolen guns
as well the the CDC has been
recommending more and more to
look at have gun violence and
gun safety as a public health
issue.
Colorado recently studied
started their own Office of gun
violence prevention and the
department of health to to
basically have have more study
on that and and really get to
the bottom of those reasons I I
believe that's included as a of
a current recommendation and in
the the budget as well so
so that that would be my my
comment there Representative.
Madam chair and Mr courting I I
think you bring up a good point
there are I think that one data
point that would be very
interesting is those who are
committing violent crimes were
they allowed to possess that
firearm and by that we start
seeing juveniles under the age
of twenty one under federal law
they can not cause us to hand.
So we find many of them are in
possession of a gun which is not
correct and then we hear a lot
of.
Convicted felons obtaining or
using a firearm in the
commission of a crime and I
think that would be another good
data point in here
to show our highlight the
criminal activity that we're
tracking.
Thank moving on to.
Dr Courtney you are muted.
The manager we're just gonna say
that that's a that's a.
Madam chair representative ring
a great observation and and we
think we I was just having a
side part conversation with
Callie we think we can we can
find those data.
Great thank you when we went to
the top of the next page you're
talking about of.
Nationwide protests do affect
police activity
I agree with you of what we've
seen is.
More confrontation open
confrontation with police not
only through gun violence but.
Disobedience and I and I think
that this is
in the the fund the police
movement is made a chilling
effect on officers desire to
have contact with our citizens.
and I think that is that is a
real problem here I'll move on.
Where you are.
You just tell me where you are.
unfortunately I don't have a
future memories.
It's a process.
Pop top of page for.
House number these pages ago.
About the middle of page for
your noting that
you know the drug research you
know we're we're seeing more of
these armed robberies being set
up over Facebook I totally agree
that's what friends in law
enforcement our state of.
One of the things such troubling
you know so we're second
paragraph from the bottom we're
talking about some of these
individuals in here and the
percentage of them but you know
one of the things that I see
that.
Is whacking in our bill
amendment is to look at
misdemeanor crimes that are
indicative.
Of future danger to either raise
specific victim or the public
can only give you a few examples
of those sent by our bill
amendment we don't it does not
address misdemeanors
misdemeanors are we're gonna
going to release you but the
plastic violence there's
situations that again domestic
violence where I think the
individual should be detained
for a period of time to it
nothing else school up for the
release of.
There is violation of a court.
And particularly if a person has
a court order for stalking or
domestic violence and they make
a for rent to the individual
well but next time I'm gonna
come back I'll go ahead and kill
you she called options as an
officer I would take that is the
extremely serious
Representative.
And of.
What's the.
Criminal sexual contact of an
adult that's grabbing someone
oryx indecent exposure you know
those kinds of things I think
that that's kind of outside of
your review of the US but I I
think it's something we as of
legislators need to be
Are aware of that we missed and
that bail is some of the.
Madam chair representative three
just a quick response to that
so it is true that
the bill amendment restricts
detention without bail to
defendants charged with new
felonies
the public safety assessment
Houston Bernalillo county prior
misdemeanor conviction is one of
the risk factors it assesses for
new criminal activity some
misdemeanor charges can be taken
into account in those decisions
the risk at risk assessment and
then I the judge as well.
I asked the question on this
topic.
About the distant domestic
violence.
I'm sorry your request.
How job in on your question just
on the domestic violence as.
Does the state have any special
treatment for domestic violence.
In the.
Madam chair I don't believe it
has specific treatment for
domestic violence in just
looking.
yeah it doesn't have special
treatment for domestic violence
but it does actor and prior
violent convictions as well as
current violent offense.
Into the assessment of risk for
New violent criminal activity so
that could be a domestic
violence could be included there
I guess what I'm thinking and I
agree with Representative read I
think
In the future if there's any
possibility to
altered that assessment.
I think that officers either now
or they should be specially
trained on domestic violence so
that they can alert the court to
the danger for the victim and
So I think you know if it
doesn't specifically.
The mystic violence we might be
missing something that New York
times had a really long K. a few
weeks ago I was in December
about the woman of the bridge
and it was about a woman who
ended up jumping off the bridge
and the police finally after her
death got justice for her but it
was too late and it was the
police who knew what she was
suffering and at the hands of
her husband and.
And I I do think that would be
one where we would want to be
able to provide that information
to the court for.
Pre trial detention so.
Just a quick response to that so
I'm I just wanted to come back
again and just emphasized that
the public safety assessment is
just one tool that judges years
so it's not the only thing they
don't follow at without
exercising other discretion
I'm so the kind of information
you're talking about it's
certainly the legislative
by either prosecutors police
witnesses
or effect on this or other
witnesses Act those detention
hearings one of the things we've
heard from multiple stakeholders
about these detention hearings
which as I'm sure you all know
Chrissy and I'm very quick
timeline again and that efforts
to balance public safety with
I'm protection of civil
liberties and the presumption of
innocence and one of the things
we've heard from a lot of
different people is that judges
need more information
at these hearings and I think
what you're talking about is one
example of where it might be an
opportunity to develop
strategies to provide that
information at this hearings in
a better and more complete way
so the judges have what they
need to make those decisions
which you know should be
acknowledged for the judges
those are very big and
consequential decision that's a
good point thanks for the
reminder I I'm just hopeful that
law enforcement whether it's on
a sheriff's or a or a police
officer throughout the state
would be able to make that kind
of a case at the hearings thank
you thanks Representative
remember let me jump and.
Yeah no no problem Adam so we're
now at the top of page six and
in the middle paragraph we're
talking about data Yafai down
and
the arrests and all that.
You know I think a lot of this
goes to COVID which looted in
your report but I want to
highlight a couple of data
points so I know I have a friend
of mine who is a that'll liquor
salesman always life.
I don't want to identify the
city for the store that he has
but one of the stores that he
had in twenty nineteen when the
pandemic started he was
delivering forty semi loads her
date of that store about call.
And it was everybody going home
and party I think that that also
occurred what I saw early in
twenty nineteen as people began
to arrive.
Very cautiously
I felt it was so they would be a
collision and have contact you
know there by not exposing to
comment that quickly changed I.
I read literature where it was
talking about speeding over a
hundred miles an hour and those
citations being insured and I I
forget it was a hundred and like
eighty percent increase but when
we look at the.
Twenty nineteen twenty twenty
period I think another data
point would be what was the
reduction in DWI roadblocks and
I think the you know the again
the perception of.
Justice being arrested for
driving the roadblocks were very
effective in that
you know and again I think that
you know like we discussed early
the costs order the
case management order and the
the fund the police movement
have really stopped self
initiated patrols what we call
it.
The that I don't know if you
have anything you want to speak
on that.
Hi madam chair Senator cream if
you turn to the next stage of
the memo that I am that the and
set the COVID nineteen pandemic
likely exacerbated
accountability gap really sorry
we didn't put page from numbers
on this by the way.
I didn't realize we didn't
so you can see and there that we
have some information about
state police reducing proactive
at appropriations
during the COVID we cite the
number of data driven
trafficking forced our projects
to give you ice saturation
patrols and DWI arrests awful
online before low performance
targets that a report LFC in FY
twenty one.
So I just kind of point that out
as an example of the type of
thing you're siding in New
Mexico and also to say that I
these issues during the COVID
are certainly not unique to law
enforcement in Albuquerque.
And when we go to the second
paragraph on page six we have a
raft to the side of it but it
talks about the rise in violent
crime.
And if you look nationally at
any city where there's the DOJ
of supervision of the police
department you find the crime in
that city.
Escalated.
Exponential what.
Do you of federal DOJ this year
and knowledge that and made a
statement that we need to start
reviewing these.
Orders so that of.
We can lower crime in those
communities and it might be an
interesting conversation with
the O. J. about what they
actually plan on doing or what
they're going to direct of
current cities under DOJ
supervision to complete and get
it except way on up a clear exit
plan and they were talking and
there news release that you know
it needs to be solved within
five years and many of these
that you see in this other
cities grow in that ten fifteen
year time period I don't know if
that's or something you want to
comment on or not.
Representative Rehm chair
representative remain on our in
our twenty eighteen report on
page sixteen we we actually
found the same thing we looked
at Seattle Portland Cleveland
New Orleans Albuquerque in
Newark where
The OJ had had come in with a
descent to consent decree and
found that
crime increased year after
signing that DOJ consent decree
and and each jurisdiction that
the reasons for that not not
entirely clear
Some of the some of the things
that people of have gases
resource reallocation changes in
police tactics our procedures
which I I think I mentioned
earlier
rather intervening factors that
maybe the cities have in common
that that I have nothing to do
with the DOJ consent decree
maybe it's some sort of weird
spiritus correlation but but
it's so I we found that I I know
that others have found that and
I I think that's a fair point to
to ask us to to reach out to DOJ
on that and and so with the
planets.
Thank you I'm gonna move forward
page six now at the bottom and I
want to talk about a rest times
for APD
But I he reached out and she
spoke with Sean will be he's the
head of their police association
he would be willing to talk with
you provide data or whatever and
if you don't have a contact I
can find that you know whichever
but anyway I had a conversation
with him and his the the center
of the average time to book a
person from the time the card is
picked a mop you place them in
the car and you you're going to
the jail is about two hours as
you know the jail in
Albuquerque's out of the west
mesa it's a you know it's not
close to downtown like it used
to pay.
But what I want to highlight on
our conversation is he was
talking about.
Due to the cost should remain if
there's any use of force you
grab the person's hand to
put him in handcuffs or the
person complains to hand cuffs
for them then it's far it forces
a use of force investigation and
that investigation begins at
that moment.
One of the examples he gave me
was an armed robber.
Rather than gathering the
evidence including speaking to
the armed robbery and getting
out of a confession they now
stay on four to six hours.
Investigating the use of force
and the president's or or or the
priority is.
On the use of force and not on.
Trying to gain the evidence are
prosecuted crime.
Mr will be explain last week's
that in the south we east part
of town.
Of there was an incident
involving use of force that
lasted from base shift into
swing shipped and over a seven
hour period there were no
officers to respond any calls in
the southeast part of town
because all the officers whether
they witnessed or were involved
in that were involved in the use
of force investigation.
And you know that goes back to
the cost of their you know their
needs to this we be some
modifications but I'm kind of
trying to highlight some of the
areas why policing.
or police contacts have gone
down.
Representative Madam chair
representative during the we
have found the same thing again
and that twenty eighteen report
we went on a number of ride
alongs with APD also I can
remember one specific case where
an officer was off the street
for three hours due to use of
force
sometimes you'll see the same
thing for for both use of force
and and the rest so we we we
have found that same thing and
that's contained in our twenty
eighteen report.
Yeah.
We had a P. madam chair and at
all currently at APD there are
sixty.
short officers
whose duty is to review all of
the hello video from the week
before to ensure that.
Not only was the standard
operating procedure followed by
county officers have
done this situation in a in a
different manner when you start
talking about sixty officers
you're talking about a shift.
Of officers who could be on the
street.
I want to go to a few more data
points that of Mr Welby again
may
so we you know in that last
paragraph you're talking about
FY twenty they had a thousand
four police officers
Mr will be told me that.
What occurred at that time was.
there was a fifteen thousand
dollar.
bonus retention bonus given by
the city to officers who would
come back to work and and
basically that brought a hundred
twenty officers out of
retirement.
But using the attrition rates
that we see over law enforcement
And it generally it runs about
sixty per year but R. twenty
twenty one.
There was
two hundred officers that left
the forced and that forces now
at about nine hundred officers.
And yeah you know the two
hundred leaving your the sixty
per year or the two hundred levy
is a function of not only
retirement but individual saying
that I'm not going to be a
police officer anymore.
for whatever reason.
So if you go to page seven.
And another comment that I have
from
Mr will be as a state of now.
Due to the low man power of
moves to twelve hour shifts and.
My comment is is that that is so
I don't feel that's a wise move
if the officer makes an arrest
late in the shift is now they're
pretty on twelve hours I think
all of us say when you're
working twelve hours a day
that's a not a healthy work
environment and prone to making
mistakes let's see if we have.
You see what page are let's.
And are you I noted on page at
the bottom of page eight your
noted that defendants who were.
In jail tend to make plea
bargains more often now I know
the defense would go ahead and
say that that was because they
just want to get it over with
and get it down the road but I
think that part of that is the
swift justice that you're
talking about a perceived
that apprehension appreciate I
don't see that should that's
coming along I don't know if you
have a comment on that or not.
People say.
Madam chair representative brand
not beyond what we know it in
the memo which is basically that
research shows that the finance
were held and terra's jail are
more likely to accept these.
Our list of the strength of the
underlying case so.
and panel if we go to page nine
the second paragraph we talked
about the twenty eighteen
valuation found the of many
cases were dismissed and the
most common reason was evidence
problems and I would note that
it's in that time period when
the Ole backlog of rape cases
rape kit basis we're finally
analyzed and many of those were
beyond the statute of
limitations and that's why the
cases could be moved forward.
I am you may want to.
Check with the DA's office on
that I think that data right.
needs a little more
clarification.
Representative Freeman Madam
chair representative re we we
have requested those data from
the second DA.
After career needed again.
Going.
I think you just answered the
question and then I'm not sure
if okay go ahead Representative.
I'm trying to move to the next
page I got highlighted which
page it is for everyone so it's
up page of what.
And we go down to number four.
And
I just have a question we're
defendants were released on
bail.
Did the failure to appear.
Increase or decrease during that
system you know if we were to
compare the current system with
the old system.
Madam chair representative
remained.
Dr Karen do you have any insight
on that question.
Madam chair representative green
I I don't know right now I mean
it is something that we could
check to see if that is and if
what the rates were pre and
post.
So the question is whether the
FDA rate is different under this
system than it was prior to the
builder for.
Yes madam chair representative
we might I understood the
question I don't know right now
we could check I was clarifying
for myself it that's one
thousand so just want to be sure
that's what you're going to be
trying to look at okay.
Madam chair and
when we go to page twelve the.
The second paragraph you know
with a comment that you have for
the third one freedom prior to
conviction should be the norm
and
and certainly don't take this
that I think we need to hold
People didn't commit crimes or
they're not should be released
for burial but when I look at
the federal court there are much
stricter on bail.
And
when I was an officer and I
spoke to individuals are we were
arrested they wanted nothing to
do with federal court and part
of that was because the justices
in federal court was very
strapped there were there were
not trials that were here out.
The.
The I think swift and certain
exam that I don't know how you
compare apples to apples that
you know Representative data but
it's interesting when you when
you look at the federal system
and then you look at the state
system.
Thank you madam chair and
council on page twelve and now
we're the third paragraph down
and I'm truly part of follow the
data points here.
What I'm concerned about so of
the fifteen thousand one hundred
thirty four K..
That you looked at and then you
narrative down
Did we look at.
All homicides including unsolved
homicides or just cases of
arrests.
I Madam chair representative
Rehm this data can only account
for the known primes among this
population so arrests that were
made.
Thank you for that.
Page thirteen of the top we're
talking about
Of the pre trial release people
are only committed a small
fraction of the overall crime.
And just to.
Beyond we don't know.
Who committed the unsolved
crimes and you know some of
those individuals could be in
that.
And madam chair I think I'd be
that our one.
Thank you.
Thank you Representative reading
let me see if I have other
questions from committee
members.
Let me
My questions were.
I did the exact opposite of what
I meant to do.
Okay.
I wanted to.
In the report.
They're so very troubling trends
in the state that very likely
have little to do with pre
talked pre trial release.
In.
It is twenty two.
Guns were involved in fifty
percent of homicides.
But in twenty twenty one it was
seventy nine percent.
You know I think that.
When we are looking for ways to
solve the crime problem we could
not ignore the proliferation of
guns on the street.
Thank you want to.
The questions I would like to
say something about.
Approaches to public safety that
don't really have anything to do
with the
Pre trial.
It is.
Hello it's on the other
Representative really has gotten
is to all number of pages.
I have a hard copy of not doing
this ensure file
page nine of the report there's.
The last paragraph says a
promising violence intervention
program may provide a model for
the rest of the state.
And it talks about the violence
intervention program in
Albuquerque a coalition of law
enforcement partners conduct
weekly shooting regents to
identify individuals have been
recent victims of violence and
individuals were engaged in
criminal activity.
Who have.
Who are also known to law
enforcement so then APEJ
conducts background
investigations do licensed
software that allows officers to
make connections between cases
identify networks of high risk
individuals every week a list of
the I. G. Kernan this is
generated from this work and the
officer assigned into care
support workers make contact
with these people and they
deliver a message about the
consequences of engaging and and
violence and offering support
and services.
And it's about income housing
support education wise systems
treatment counseling and it's
this strategy this programs
based on a successful program
and
In Oakland California I know
Baltimore Maryland there may be
others as well but.
The court focused deterrence.
As of October twenty twenty one
ninety two percent of a hundred
and sixty eight individuals in
the program had not again
committed this is a bad one.
So I have the bill house bill
that is.
We asked for ten million dollars
so this program could go
statewide.
And the LESC put a giant one
million dollars into the budget
so complaining about that and
when we extolled the virtues of
this program.
Talking about the potential for
the state.
It for some of the savings to
society by
trying to reduce crime.
We're gonna is twenty two
million a year.
Yes and only one million I'm
trying to make committees right.
So in that in that other way in
in a different approach so
That maybe has a little bit
better outcome data so far then
what we're getting is for all
relates.
I
wanted to.
Also we.
That the.
does discuss the lower rate of
solving and clearing cases and
it sounds like maybe the
district attorney and the LESC
the two Michigan to see if those
are.
Correct rates but if you're not
solving your clearing then you
don't have swift and sure.
And we are with regard to social
conditions and this is in that
memo is that extreme poverty is
increasing in the state and the
number of students are are
escalating so those are things
that we really need to address.
One of the things I
Enough said about since it
happens because I have a lot of
clients in the legal system was
that we have the collapse of the
behavioral health system in
twenty thirteen.
How close to rebuilding that
system.
Then we have the effects of the
pandemic which is certainly.
I don't want to say that our
crime.
Problem and solution.
Could be explained away by the
pandemic but I will say that we
are not alone in New Mexico is
suffering the effects of this
The situation.
I guess the question because
Representative really brought up
the issue of how.
The having adopted qualified
immunity might somehow be at
fault here but the effect of
qualified immunity be measured
in this kind of a report
adjusted to possible committee.
That madam chair that's a good
question it if I could just back
up and and and comment on on
your on your first few points
the I I believe it's the the
clearance rates I believe are
are correct the those the second
DA when we're meeting with them
tomorrow that's on a conviction
rates
on
dismissals and
some of some of his specific
outcomes and and we'll we'll get
to the bottom of that
I I think madam chair that
we've.
As with criminal justice we'd
probably do almost as much
research on on behavioral health
I know that there's
Trucks and and the budget
recommendation that's moving its
way through to to
dedicate millions of dollars to
increasing the behavior health
workforce to building capacity
in training for evidence based
behavioral health care
and and child welfare to
establish to crisis response
system so I I know those are
priorities of the of the of the
committee
as far as
as far as that last question
it's I think it's something we
can we can take back and and dig
into a bit more and and see if
if we in fact might be able to
to get to that and you know it's
it's something I'd probably like
to talk to our criminal justice
partners in and Dr Garen about
and I don't know if you have any
any comment on that as well.
I don't have from.
I just want to taken opposite
view my colleague Representative
right you know we did hear about
the do fund the police at the
national level I heard no real
comment serious conversations
here what I have heard is that
we do need to try to help the
police have.
The list for.
Intervening in
a call when there's obviously a
psychiatric problem or
psychological problems and you
know my neighbor one of my
neighborhood meetings this
weekend we had a whole bunch of
police officers there and they
were saying in fact this is let
this be known APS hiring public
safety officers who do a lot of
things that contact with
so that you there they are
actually going out taking on
reports and so forth I think we
need more resources and.
Police who are so well treated
that there's never any question
about trusting them with with
our lives which is basically
what we do so.
I I do wonder though about the
fact that you do a lot of
research on data do do you do
any qualitative follow up on
some of those data for example
The.
Let me let me try to think of an
example here for those who.
Did reoffend or those who did we
offend about.
What factors may have been
involved
because it with ATG in the
violence intervention program
really getting to know all the
offenders in trying to help
steer them away.
I think we're trying to learn
more about what people need and
I I guess I'm
I'm interested to know.
What is qualitative follow up
you're doing it maybe so early
in the system that you haven't
begun that.
I'm madam chair yes we do quite
a lot of qualitative work in
addition to the content of
repeated specific to the
violence intervention program
Ryan and I spent a day in
Albuquerque with
officer and peer support worker
we do that work right along with
that I'm going to visit people
I'm interestingly we didn't
actually find any of the people
that they were looking for that
day I think that's a pretty
common experience for them they
often go out on multiple trips
to try to find people.
I'm just kind of an interesting
bit of information for you all
despite that essentially whoever
we ran into.
During that day they offered
services to so they're doing
quite a lot of outreach beyond
yes.
That
they're actually trying to find.
you know we also one of the
things we have on our list going
forward is to
is that the resource reentry
center in doing in making these
kind of visits with people those
are opportunities to both gather
that qualitative information and
they're actually to some extent
is information that's on a
viable on some of the issues
that you're talking about
when I places like the resource
create reentry center traffic
kind of services that
your clients are most requesting
your most referred to and so we
look for that kind of
information as well.
Great thank you very much I'm
just I I just think the more we
can learn the smarter will be
about the
The providing the proper
services in trying to change the
divert people from the future
our continued life of current.
Stop for just a moment because
the vice chair would like to ask
a question or two and then I'll
come back and finish with my
questions.
Thank you madam chair I just
wanted to offer a quick couple
of comments
you all and this LFC report have
certainly become the focus of so
much of our attention as
legislators and in the media and
I just want to highlight and
name my appreciation for that
and how important it is that we
have such research to make
responsible responsive smart
policy decisions as someone
that's done a lot of research
professionally.
I know that the questions we ask
matter and that we could
potentially use data to tell a
lot of different stories but the
integrity that you all have
demonstrated I got to see you
Senate Judiciary early this week
and now here just the
thoughtfulness exudes out of
this report just a couple of
points specifically I wanted to
make
The debate we've heard in
multiple committee so far this
he did session has been around
some of the tools that we use is
the foundation of the second.
The second district in New
Mexico system including Arnold
school and one of the things
that you all heard me talk about
over many years is how important
it is that our data is validated
to New Mexico's population that
we don't just take the supposed
benefits of models that may have
worked elsewhere in urban
environments or in populations
as much different demographics
but that we actually test them
here at home in the realities
and experiences and and
movements of New Mexicans do our
criminal legal system so I just
wanted to just appreciate that
making sure that our committee
members in our audience today
understands like this data
actually shaped like the
effectiveness of the Aries that
maybe practice in many other
places and sometimes we may have
outcomes that are similar and
sometimes we may have outcomes
that are vastly different but
just this is my shout out to the
institute for Social Research
today our incredible team LFC to
The New Mexico's sentencing
commission you all as a resource
certainly have state my opinions
on couple of these big bills
moving forward and I think it's
really important to me not
lastly I just wanted to offer a
chair Chasey reminded new and
when she asked a question about
qualitative data that on the
other side I she named and
others have it's incredibly
important that we're making the
right kind of investments to
interrupt cycles of trauma and
substance use incarceration
poverty and I've really relied
on LFC evaluations like those
you've done of crossroads for
women and other programs that
really help these New Mexico
service providers that may not
have the resources to provide
the contract outside evaluators
to become evidence based or
promising practices that we have
LFC annual in house to help
document and capture some of
those outcomes so that we can
continue to put dollars where
they're most needed insert thank
you madam chair for letting me
make those comments.
Madam chair of I just checked it
and is it thank you very much so
it's a very sincerely we we
really appreciate it we got a
really strong team of public
servants who are are very
dedicated to improving outcomes
for for New Mexicans and and
providing independent and an
objective information for you
all to to help make those
decisions so thank you thank you
our our thank you.
Thank you very much minimized
chair.
I guess what I it I.
Some of the other comments that
I have is.
I'm very much for my neighbors
who.
are tired of this just as
Representative Rience neighbors
are tired of this I want for
people to feel safe in their
neighborhoods.
Quite frankly we have been
working a number of us
bipartisan group since twenty
twelve but criminal justice
report so that we are not
spending all of our money on
presents.
It's terribly expensive to
incarcerate people.
The level at which we would have
to incarcerate with the
rebuttable presumption bill as
drawn up according to the
numbers that are
in this report and in the
analysis of house bill I.
Is just staggering to me that we
would potentially be considering
taking on that kind of a burden
instead of going to prevention
programs and.
At the same time.
I.
I don't want any more
heartbreaking tragedies
tragedies.
I don't think we can predict
every single one as as as you
know.
With all that we're trying to do
here.
Of the seven homicides.
There were five that had nothing
to do with pre trial release.
Two of them had we're we're
people who are on this
particular type of pre trial
release and you know I I heard
and I have thought myself
sometimes if you could just stop
one it's all worth it but is it
worth twenty two million dollars
annually.
To
Actually take all of that money
away from.
Early childhood home visiting
from behavioral health programs
from preschool and early
childhood from education funding
from juvenile intervention for
juveniles who are having
difficulty I I don't think it
pays off it it doesn't.
Get us where we want to go as a
society it it.
It.
It's it's not a good policy
decision on our part.
You know a number of red states
made the decision and before
twenty twelve because we have
the former president pro tem of
the Texas Senate program speak
to our crew Justice Reform
subcommittee in twenty thirteen.
He said Texas made a decision
not to build more prisons and
they have not done that it
appears they have not bills were
presents.
Because they don't want to spend
their money that way.
No a lot of people look to Texas
and say the weather's armada
lock them up throw away the key
and I'm not advocating for
dangerous people to be out on on
our streets I'm advocating for
people who are real threat and
need serious intervention to get
it in and if its separation from
society then fine but.
What I.
We have not yet heard from the
district attorney.
Representative we made a really
good case.
One position is somebody tell us
what resources what greater
resources you need.
Who are law enforcement has
Representative remake it really
could K. for they don't have
enough people they don't have
enough support to do all the
things that are needed what else
does the GA needs more
paralegals to prepare the
motions does the DA need more
staff.
The public defender is dancing
if this were to pass they're
going to need four hundred more
I actually have to go back to
that in our system it's just
astonishing we've got to deal
with the point to we can't just
say okay folks we're gonna start
putting always people wait but
you can't do that without the
all the legs of the stool and
you need intervention in the
courts so I'm interested we'll
be hearing from the district
attorney on Friday will be
hearing from the public defender
on we want to give everyone a
chance and want to share the
data.
I would like so much to know
what it is you need I think it's
a good time to try to build the
system
even if we.
Don't get it all figured out
right now what can we do
immediately to assist.
I wonder how many of the
Problems occurred before there
was twenty four hour twenty four
by seven.
Supervision supervised
supervision because it is me
forty hours a week that wasn't
working obviously the courts
needed more resources to get
that done
probably suggest that is the
question do you have any any
distinction between where we
were before the twenty four hour
and at twenty four seven and
it's going to be the forty hour
on the twenty four seven.
Madam chair we don't have that
information currently but that's
something we could certainly
follow up on
and try to get that to you I
just respond to a couple of your
other points about having
questions about where specific
resources are needed to address
some of these problems I'm going
back to the point about and
commonly identified issue with
detention hearings being that
judges don't have you know they
don't have enough information
presented at those hearings to
really make those decisions or
possibly to
perhaps they have enough
information to find that someone
is dangerous but not to me
second wrong that's required
one of the specific follow ups
that we have for the DA's office
that will hopefully be able to
discuss with them tomorrow I've
got this question are there
specific resources that if they
had them available would make it
possible to gather more
information to present to judges
that this detention hearings
that might affect the rate at
which those motions are granted
yes it should be a little higher
than it is
I'm going to the police you know
I just had a conversation with
someone APP this morning.
About additional follow ups that
will plan to do with to complete
our report and
this was one of the things that
I've brought up in our
conversation that first and
we're discussing and in any of
these things we also want to
note from that what specific
resources they need and the
state's role
in supporting that so that we
can bring that information to
you all so we're we're working
on exactly those things you're
asking for and hope to deliver
to you.
Thank you I just want to also.
I appreciate all of the research
that's been done.
About safe communities and
people want to be able to call
the police when they're afraid
they want the police to come
they want to feel safe in their
neighborhoods the
There is another interesting
case The New York Times about
there's lower rates of gun
violence.
With the war green space in the
in the neighborhood.
So those are the kinds of things
we can really we can look to
those with our capital outlay
dollars we could have a more
concerted effort to just make
all of the improvements.
That show people we care about
them in their neighborhoods
So with that I will.
Wait make any other comments
after we have our our meeting on
Friday and I I just want to let
all of you know I think everyone
on this committee wants to try
to make things better.
I so appreciate the work.
Of the institute for Social
Research of the LFC I I have
The phone over the years that.
We are so fortunate to have this
kind of expertise and I also
feel really happy about the fact
that we are listen to what we
say I don't think you ask the
right questions but I do want to
get this back to the higher
authorities that I released the.
One million for the violence
intervention program given all
this information.
Very smart.
Despite your brilliance so.
Are there any other questions
from committee members.
Okay thank you again for your
time I can't thank you enough
and we'll look forward to
hearing from you again in the
future.
With that I think we're
adjourned for the day thanks
everybody.
