Representative
graduate.
Here
here
thank you
so our first item of business is
to correct an amendment for
which we received some poorer
language and it wasn't from the
person proposing the language it
was some advice that we received
through ledge council so
we have a process that we're
going to use out recognize them
chair cheap I mean leader chase
her move to a car house but one
twenty seven
so we have emotion to recall
second
any objection
no objection we are recalling
house bill one twenty seven.
So I moved to strike the
amendment we adopted on on
january thirty first.
Is there a tracking second month
here
leader chasing did you want to
explain a little bit about what
it is or I can do that if you
like
no chair that we use the wrong
word we we put I think license
generally should have put
registered
correct so and so that's why
we're striking animated yes
there's no is there any
objection to striking that
amendment from less wednesday.
I see no objection so that
amendment is stricken so many
I move that way I don't
amendment
you have in front of you they
are too number is nine five
seven point one okay and the
word
is now correctly registered
guide so what we're doing on
page two line nineteen before
the semicole inserting or is a
registered guide pursuant to
section seventeen dash two a
dash three and a mse nineteen
seventy eight and this is
corrected language that we've
received from my from account.
So it's been moved by leader
chassis second by representative
mcqueen to insert the amendment
that she cited it is two two
seven nine five seven point one
any objection to adopting that
amendment I don't see any
objections so the amendment is
adopted so we
do we need to do pass on the
building
yes we do so
second
so there's an emotion to
for due pass and house bill one
twenty seven as as now amended
made by leader chasing and
second by representative mcqueen
let's let's call the role on
that one so clear if you have
our con
representati.
Representative.
Representative martinez
mcqueen yes representative.
Representatives sapansky yes
matter which chair yes not in
chair yes.
Thank you so i'm just review of
the agenda everyone's
attification what i'm proposing
we have the order i'm proposing
for our bills are
house joint resolution eleven
than house bill one eighty four
and then will finish with house
bill one sixteen so
representative sarinana would
you like to join us at the
table.
We're doing a house joint
resolution eleven first.
Pick him out of chair and
members of the committee I am
here to present how strict
resolution eleven
I have an expert criminal jason
akamura commander of three
seventy seven mission support
group from curl and air for
space he'll be here to answer
questions and give given
background
alright madam chair house joint
resolution eleven is for the
legislature to accept the
federal governments but retro
session of dristics and to
concurrent state and federal
jurisdiction curling has been
working on this this project for
a few years now curtain would
like the partnership between the
base and the communities so that
they can open up a seventy or
parcel of land for commercial
development or to bring more
industry into the area with the
concurrence of the state and
federal jurisdiction the federal
government has coordinated with
burning a county sheriffs to
respond to all enforcement
related events in this area the
federal government has entered
into agreement with albert
kirkin berlie a county for fire
suppression emergency medical
services utilities and
maintenance so this process has
gone from curtailing asking for
a concurrence to federal and
state jurisdiction then number
two the governor who agreed to
support the request went to the
tourney general who looked at
the specs and gave his support
and now it's here for the
legislature to give supporter
opposition
this request will support
currently in their current and
upcoming missions particularly
the curtain research lab and the
space rapid capabilities office
and albert ricky annumexco will
also benefit with additional
jobs that will be created as a
member of the legislature I
believe the legislature should
approve this resolution as
curtain air force spaces
extremely important to not only
albertic in new mexico but to
the nation with that amount
passed on to expert.
Thank you ma'am thank you thank
you committee for her hearing us
and for allowing me to be here
today it's it's an absolute
honor to represent the uh
curling air force base
particularly and it's at three
thousand military folks that
work on they've been working
based on the community along
with the twenty three thousand
occupants total that that
colleague call itself
home on a day to day basis so I
am here to answer any questions
that you may have but overall
this is the first step or this
is the step of a normal step of
the process as the air force
allocates finds a way to
allocate and use used land that
is otherwise not being used so
in this case it is we've
identified the seventy acres as
as a representative serving
mentioned and we have
over to the private developer
who is looking to make it a
mixed business use or mixed use
kind of arrangement there with a
combination of offices research
space coordination of including
retail and
businesses so with that
you know we find this as a
really good use and and a way to
modernize the base it's
community and the and make it a
vibrant area for for businesses
to wanna be.
Thank you
anything else you'd like to
before we go to the you know
that that's it manager thank you
thank you anyone in the audience
wishing to speak an opposition
to a house joint resolution
eleven.
I don't see anyone in the
audience is there anyone on
line.
Resolution hands up please okay
those in the audience wishing to
speak in support of this
resolution okay we'll start over
here and you can just stand
supposed we have mikes in the
ceiling I we think.
Thank you next month.
Thank you yes yes sir
my name is richard moody and
then john
thank you for this opportunity
we stand in support this
bill
then mexico veterans and
military family's carcasses is
as when when us for new mexico
and for the military thank you.
Thank you anyone else in the
audience wishing to speak and
support
not see anyone okay thank you
I think we're ready
members represent our con.
Yeah.
Is there a second we're gonna
have time to question them we're
not stopping questioning so is
there a second who second that
representative chase
do pass motion from represent a
consecond and by representative
chasing now we'll go to comments
I think representative mcqueen
they can enter the manteres and
search any other you're talking
about commercial development we
got.
The survey don't know where the
property is to jason the curtain
will the commercial development
be subject to local zoning.
My exper.
The.
They've representative mcqueen
thank you the answer is yes it
is a part of the the county so
we will we will submit to the
the zoning right requirements
there.
Thank you
I just had one question madame
chair on on whether or not we
talked about commercial
buildings we're in a housing
crisis and our c and he said
mixed use
does that include housing.
Ma'am I I would have to differ
to the to the actual planners of
the of the arrangement I did not
see any housing on that
particularly but I I don't
specifically know what other
tenants they have in that in
that configuration madame chair
representative yeah I i've guess
just certain housing codes
owning codes require housing now
I don't know what bernalios
codes look like um and I don't
necessarily know where this
parcel is a weather or not would
be conducive mixed use generally
would mean housing in the
terminology the madam chair
representative while I this is
totally outside of my sticks in
our understanding of
how it would impact just on the
premise that any any additional
housing we could uhm
produce we would be more in
favor of how that would work out
but that said madam chair
representative just the
encouraging factor for that I am
supportive we may insure we may
have an answer and my living
earlier for space legal office
daniel will
I I think that this has been
planned for commercial you sold
me however we are.
That's create to hear think you
madam chair representative of
sapansky income chair
this is just a question I just
want to make sure it's asked
when we're dealing with
concurrent jurisdiction or a
real estate transactions that we
occasionally deal with the
legislature
so not night and i'm not asking
this question because I have any
specific knowledge of this
transaction but
I just want to make sure that I
want to ask are you aware of any
conflicts of interest related to
the private developer with with
this body or is there is there
anything else we should be
concerned with in terms of this
the development of this
property.
We are not aware of any
conflicts in the of interest in
this
thank you madame chair
thank you I ever follow up
question representative of an
expert on from represent my
queens what I heard the answer I
heard was yes we will submit.
To the to the counties zoning
that's the answer I heard that's
different from being subject to
the counting though and that's
not the same thing that saying
we'll agree to be and what I
what I understood representative
mcqueens question to be as are
you subject cos it's different
because you can submit to things
you want to agree to and you
could not submit to things you
don't want to agree to so i'd
like a better understanding of
that
yes and chair that was my error
in interpretation i'm sorry okay
I would like to correct it we
are subject to
zoning okay okay and was a bit
thank you
other I think everybody here is
asked a question so we're we're
done so we have emotion before
us I do pass motion made by
representative seconded by
representative chasing which you
call the role please send it off
our coin
we have refunded their chassis
representative handbury
representative lane
repres.
Yes
representative read
representative re.
Yes
yes
yes
we have.
Very good so we will then move
now move to house bill one
eighty four
as amended in a previous
committee use of artificial
intelligence
transparency.
Yeah.
Floors yours representative
thinking meditarian members of
the committee I represent
saranian i'm here to present
house bill one eighty four
I haven't my expert
lisa
and if we need to we have
so let's talk a little bit we
have a couple virtual experts
and are they in okay okay so
there's.
Okay chris more in rasin okay
correct all right very good if
you want to introduce them just
so everybody knows and we have
russia semi down the acting
cabinet secretarian state chief
information officer from do it
and we have doctor because more
who is author at santa fe
institute and a member of the
interdisciplinary working group
of algrement rhythmic justice he
has an expert on building
transparency in el programs were
decisions regarding public
resources great and new
introduced mislower rate at
least
very good okay
and just just in case whatever I
can't answer i'm sure majority
leader can
okay thank you i'm sure of that
alright house bill winning
before next the government use
of artificial intelligence
transparency act it requires
inventory assessment of
artificial intelligence system
use and it requires bender
transparency
this interim session in our in
our first meeting of science
technology and
telecommunications we had two
days and all we talked about was
artificial intelligence and with
the help of our leader chasey
and at least a wee listened as
an amazing speakers almost every
present are doing those two days
spoke on the importance of
transparency accountability and
bias except our martin who
talked about jobs but otherwise
everybody else really focused on
a transparency accountability
and buyers courts corrections
and just for leader chases
committee also looked at a an
elc but the ai in education so
it's been again transparency
bias remain topics and I believe
the legislature really feels
like we need to do something in
this area.
I've been a part of the multi
state a I working group along
with um for leader chac and this
through ncsl cyber security
committee through ncl and
several conferences where again
transparency and bias or major
topics so what is transparency
in artificial intelligence
artificial intelligence
transparency as the practice and
principle of making a ice
systems understandable and
interpretable to humans where
the decision making processes
are clear and understandable
what does that mean well imagine
you have a thousand applicants
for a job
and you only have twenty five
positions you could use a I to
near that down that thousand
down to fifty and get the best
who you think would be the best
but you could use an area system
but to narrow it down and you
could end up with something like
depending on your system you
know males blond hair and
experts and environmental
justice so really depends on
your ais systems we have to know
what the data said is and this
is part of what we need to know
about these systems what the
data said is where they getting
it from is it from the northeast
part of the country the midwest
california or a possibly new
exico and.
Those are big decisions those
are what we're looking at
without transparency were
driving through a dense fog like
this morning with no clear
understanding of how algorithms
are out a I agree interact with
the data to drive decisions this
bill works towards creating an
inventory of what state agencies
are using when it pertains to ei
the goal is to ensure that we
are not blindly following a I
outputs but truly understanding
the why and how behind them we
know artificial intelligence
technologies being incorporated
into tools used by government
entities but the extent of which
are state and agencies are using
tools that rely on artificial
intelligence is what we don't
know that's why we need this
bill to really find out what
they're doing what they're using
these types of bills are going
on all over the country
we barred components of
legislation from other states
primarily connecticut
but while the states are taking
action to regulate use of aai
including the private sector
this bill does not again this
bill is only attempting to
regulate is not attempting to
regular eight merely looks at
mechanisms to gather information
and prove transparency with the
use of a tools by state
governments.
That makes sense hopefully that
makes sense.
Madam chair members the bill
also adds a transparency
component to the procurement
process so that when the state
contracts for tools that there
is some disclosure by the
contracting vendor to the state
and their mechanisms in place to
protect other inte- intellectual
property and
other proprietary ownership
very good thank you for that
we'll now go to the audience to
see those wishing to speak an
opposition please raise your
hand.
I don't see anyone anyone online
wishing to.
Those wishing to speak and
support of the bill please raise
your hand.
Good morning members of the
committee my name is daniel
policy advocate of mexico they
still use traveling supports
this bell we were very excited
to see an introduced.
This technology
is and fancy rapidly I was also
cc the summer didn't sleep great
after hearing all the things
that were said about the way
that I can be used in particular
what concerns that the at the
is the real opportunities for
this introduced bias and and
justice into the system
particularly as this bill
addresses when used by
government so we're very happy
to see some transparency
accountability and we hope that
as that transparency grows we'll
be able to look you will be able
to look at policy makers and we
as advocates our ways that we
can continue to strengthen the
way that we engage with this
technology so that it not only
does not negatively impact
justice but could potentially
positively impact our
communities thank you thank you
I don't anyone else in the
audience wishing to speak in
support of this bill.
Not see anyone.
I'd appear to be anyone online
wishing to.
Okay doctor more.
Oh thank you very much madam
chair representatives I don't
have my video on and I do not in
fact have a mustache that is
ironic image from the movie
nineteen eighty four
but I really appreciate you
taking us this bill I think that
as a I advances had offers posts
are great promise for a society
and dangerous and by maintaining
transparency as a number of of
the state legislatures are doing
we'll be able to make sure that
whatever ai systems were used
here will serve the needs of new
mexicans thank you very much.
Thank you anyone else online
speaking support.
Not see anyone back to the
sponsor any comments before we
go to the committee.
Okay very good.
Questions from a members.
Represent mobile corn and then
chasing
thank you manager
who build there is the parts
there for
following the procurement code
how are we going to score or
kind of
because of the store new
what gave me material but what
are we going to use to score
somebody that is applied to do
this.
From the senate side that is
doing just that they're setting
up a task force senator pity is
till look to get a group who can
look exactly what this.
Manager representative this
wouldn't affect the other
components of the procurement
process or what's included in
art the other then it will
outline and what needs to be
disclosed in and the contracting
process
I understand that matt mentioned
I do understand that
representative I understand that
the only thing is that I just
can't in my mind put together a
scoring sheet in order to figure
out how to award a contract on
this job because there is so
much so new we've been have to
have the desk was just a figure
out I would be hiring somebody
madame share representative
alcohol
it would not affect the scoring
it would just require
disclosures so it doesn't
it doesn't involve an assessment
of the suitability of the toward
it requires disclosures so that
the state's agency knows
how it works thank you very much
thank you represent
representative chasey
mountain charges wanted to say
first about thank you for
carrying this primary response
or represents only on it but we
were really pleased there was a
best who responsible in the
spill that the do it secretary
was so eager to join and and
felt that it was a good move for
the state so
obviously I support the bill
thank you.
Just to way in a little bit c c
j had a really
great day of talking about a I
as well and I carpied some of
the stuff you all did inside
technology but we had kind of a
more legal bent to some of the
conversation it was really
really interesting and and we
have conversations about
you know police using a i'd
profile people in independence
and target areas and so and so
it was it was very interesting
and we had a conversation about
trying to acquire this kind of
information so we can make
better decisions as to whether
or not it's being used
appropriately and state agencies
and our citizens know how it's
being used so all of that is
that I think we'll lead us to
uhm some
creative ability for us to maybe
create other regulatory issue
frameworks as we learn more
about how things are and also
test the quality of the programs
that they're using you know that
all saying garbage in garbage
out well it certainly
appropriate in this context as
well so very glad to be sign on
to this bill I think it's it's.
Any other comments now all right
we have.
Oh
okay my vice chair
I don't know
we will find out where.
Chair move I would move a due
pass on house bill one eighty
four recemented
or second second we have a
motion.
Yes representative.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative
you yes
yes madame chair yes.
Thank you I thank you represent
have a nice evening
thank you chair members of the
committee thank you
and thank you doctor moore.
Thank you very much.
Representative matthews.
The.
Wait before you sit down because
we need your mike on and okay.
I was just madam chair just
going to offer the committee the
opportunity to
roll this bill
yet
yeah
I
slight and i'm not with all head
whips we've all had very long
day but I believe that to the
committee
represented this is early for us
we were here till eleven thirty
this is like piece of cake okay
so we're happy to hear it if we
keep rolling bills we're not
going to be hearing I I that is
the other factor in all of this
yeah
and chair members of the
committee
really are here on
hb one sixteen and represent
thompson is the prime sponsor on
this bill and she was not
feeling well so she sent her
regrets nascast to continue
she has been sponsoring a a
version of this bill for I think
three or four years and.
And and it
and it has become a well that
i'm sorry
I couldn't read my way
I got marked in
terms of always get this right I
got involved in it when I was
working with
the governors recent organized
crime commission
that she created and learned
from the members of that
commission that
cartel income.
Um.
Based on human trafficking is
higher than cartel income on the
sale of fed now and other drugs
and that sort of said to me that
while this is
something that we need to be
looking at and I reach out to
represent thompson and
tell her I would work with her
on bill and with me today is rob
heart who is the director of the
governors organized crime
commission and then also
here today is.
Heather bedow who runs a
heartline we have one of the few
hotlines in the country that
deal with human trafficking and
land satches who is on the new
mexico traveling task force and
director of an organization
called after care at lifelink
and
they're here as they'll tell you
in support but also they have a
lot of expertise in case the
committee has questions that
would relate to them and.
With that what i'd like to do is
ask
mister heart to
give brief overview of the bill
and what to changes are on the
law and then we'll stand for
questions if that's okay
that and share members of the
committee thank you so much for
this opportunity i'll be brief
some of the main things we're
trying to do with this bill and
that we've drafted this in
conjunction also with the
department of justice their
attorneys have waited and and
approved of all of these changes
as well they're also in support
of this we're looking at
expanding the language used as
particularly the verbage and the
point of that is currently the
way our state laws work with
human trafficking it's almost
impossible to prosecute these
cases without basing without
victim based testimony and so we
have these victims that are
constantly made to testify
repeatedly they often have no
incentive to cooperate with
prosecution
especially the particular ones
if they're not from new mexico
and they're only facing some
type of deportation at the end
of the prosecution anyway what
we want to do is spare them from
having to constantly retestify
over and over again we want to
be able to investigate these
crimes based on officer
observations and use different
types of evidence in order to
prosecute the human trafficking
and just to reiterate you know
the organized crime commission
has made this a huge priority.
Um we've as we've done our
assessment throughout the state
we've seen that one this is the
most profitable endeavour for
the cartels right now and we're
also seeing that because it's
not.
As easy and some of the
surrounding states it's all
starting to get pushed into into
new mexico so there is there's a
point where the feds will
prosecute these cases
and then there's pretty much
everything else that's just
falling off the table our
officers aren't able to do
anything they'll pull over vans
filled with people who are being
transported were finding people
who were basically happening to
do indentured servitude and
trapped in these labor camps and
not not allowed to be free and
there's no way that we can
prosecute them the way the laws
currently written so that's what
we hope to address with these
ch.
The.
Rooms the only the only edition
I would make is that the bill
addresses both sex trafficking
and
well call worker trafficking and
but they often overlap and
it's
in the end there the statute
does need some strengthening in
both ways.
And what that was standard
question okay thank you
those wishing to speak an
opposition to house bill one
sixteen
please raise your hand
those anyone online wish.
The.
Anyone's wishing to speak in
opposition online please r.
Those wishing to speak and
support please raise your hand
okay and the as is the practice
of the committee you may speak
for ninety seconds so go ahead
and miss
my name is heather videl and I
am actually a native of new
mexico I have a business I have
several businesses that have
focused on bringing medical
technology to rural communities
and I found out about sex
trafficking about five years ago
and it just devastated me I was
horrified and I learned in that
time that new mexico has the
weakest in the country for
prosecuting sex traffickers so
party I got involved is I helped
produce a film cut surviving sex
trafficking it's a documentary
and we followed survivors and I
want to tell you a little bit
about what survivors goes
through because yes it is a
hundred and fifty billion
dollars industry and the cartel
is in it but here's the thing
the people who do the grimming
they don't look like what you
would think they look like me
they hang out at support they
hang out on the bus they look
for really vulnerable they
almost are like I don't know
that these priorities that they
can see somebody who is lacking
confidence and they approach
them and they
and so what is happening because
my first career was actually
working with local businesses
here for entire spend about a
decade working for intolerant
building local businesses
to work with themselves but we
have become this
magnets for
sex trafficking development
essentially if you want to call
it that people come here and
they recruit why do they recruit
because our laws are we are
penalties are weak if you were
travel
appreciate it can I just say a
couple other things no because I
have to treat everybody the same
so I appreciate okay we'll just
and conclusion of what i'd like
to to finalize is.
We have been here for five years
and we never to the committee
thank you
go ahead.
Care.
We've been working since for
seventeen years now.
We come here a year after.
You all care you all feel out
the emotion of it and yet this
bill still hasn't passed my
hope.
And the victims will know that
new mexico does care about the
we had it nine year old boy here
last year and he still asked me
has that bill passed.
I would love to.
Thank you.
Sir
members of the communi.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Prosecuted.
And enough to work with these
vehicles.
Crime.
Thank you i'm ashley.
Are you are you not actually
going i'm sorry madam chair
members of the committee thank
you very much for your time this
evening my name is victoria.
And I would like to think
representative matthews
representative.
That we see far too often in
britain we have county and
throughout the entire state it
has the full support from our
office and.
Anyone else chief
cheaper definitely deal with
earth in mexico state please
in the mexico steeply strong.
Anyone else in the audience
wishing to speak and support.
Anyone online okay.
I see two hands raised online
richard mason.
Yeah.
Mason.
The.
There could you unmeet yourself.
Okay let's go to southwest
woman's loss.
Yeah.
Southwest women's lawson so is
there are we having trouble on
our end no okay southwest
women's law center you wish to
speak in support.
The.
Hello.
Okay all right madam chair and
message for himself west yes.
Okay
southwest women's law center.
Yes sorry madam cherry just
popped up for me i'm thinking
out of chicken and members of
the committee my name is he
result and i'm the staff
attorney at southwest women's
law center before in this
position I was a public defender
in albuquerque and one day while
I was in court I overheard
someone speaking to the judge
about their case this person had
found out that she had a warrant
in new mexico when she had
applied for her nurses for
nursing license in another state
the charge she had a worn on was
prostitution from about a decade
earlier third here she told the
judge that she had been traffic
and that she was so traumatizing
embarrassed that when she
escaped she tried to force them
all out of her mind and she
couldn't even remember being
arrested on the charge that day
I saw someone must drop the
courage just to face the reality
that they had in dirt
trafficking so that she could be
able to help others as a nurse
knowing that a debt knowing that
a decade likely wouldn't have
been enough for her to face our
traffickers and that even if it
were the clock had run was so
crushing this is why it's so
strongly support this bill today
because trouble it is not know
when the statute of limitation
ends thank you thank you
let's try dick mason again
mason.
Oh there you go.
Go ahead.
Yes
could he be married to your
members the committee my name is
sick mason and i'm a board
member in the registered
lobbyist for the leak of women
voters of a new mexico in a
league stands and strong support
at HB one sixteen the league of
women voters he united states of
public offorms of domestic and
international human trafficking
of adults and children including
sex trafficking and library
trafficking based upon their
position leads around a country
has have supported legislation
that will reduce human
trafficking.
HB one sixteen is sexual
legislation so the league of
women bars are no mexico stands
in strong support energies you
to give it a due pass and send
it to the house floor thank you
anyone else online wishing to
speak and support.
Okay I don't see any others i'm
back to the sponsor any
concluding comment or any
additional comments before we go
to the committee
madame shared just one thing one
of the things that the build
does because of the story about
the woman who is
subject to prostitution is
it specifically provides that
the victim are often someone who
has been forced to engage in
prostitution will not be
prosecuted for that crime and I
just since we were on that topic
I wanted to point that out thank
you more prepared for questions
thank you.
Thank god thank you
representative matthew so I
appreciate your hanging in here
with us
we
had I actually had
a bill that was signed into and
it wasn't just on this but it
was a while ago where from the
sixteen to eighteen they were
still charging young women
though that age with
prostitution when they were
under the age of consent.
So anyway we stopped doing that
so it looks like you have made
some good changes here and I
know that we've had testimony in
the past and it's it's been
frustrating I think for everyone
that
a lot of the crimes that are the
elements of human trafficking or
already against the locked and
it just
somehow we were
making those either less serious
by the way we were putting them
together so it it looks like you
you've been working from that
angle and without having the
criminal lawyer here to
in tell us otherwise i'm going
to take your word
we may have made some progress I
have i'm not a big fan of
increase of creating new crime
sir our new penalties but what
we do know about
chrome and penalties is that if
it's a white color crime
penalties actually dude her
the conduct and I look at human
trafficking as a white color
because
it's so planned out it is not
someone in a drug industry of.
Anger or
a lack of control it is very
very dvs and as you stay really
devastating so i'm I am
certainly willing to try to give
this her.
I try again and see if we can't
get this right this time and III
have heard the advocates over
the years saying one of the.
One of the things we really need
to do is make it very clear to
those who are engaging in such
conduct who are looking at.
Potential venues for their
activities that we will go after
you hear
I don't know if this
accomplishes that but I am
certainly going to support it
today.
Thank you representative
representative outcome.
Thank you madame chair I pretty
much really scan support this
bill I do want to tell you the
story that I think only
represent the leader chases
still around it is her story
before but then time I go
magistrate judge
this young lady escaped from
the britain who was holding her.
And that to round enforcement
and there reported that she had
been held therefore but this
band for months.
And
really nice day wristed
throwing jail
supposed to do it I mean that's
the officer's dob.
And
if pretty cool I believe even
with newspapers.
Next morning i'm certain there
was distributed dirty and the
sheriff had been coffee
we're talking about this case
and I asked them to where is the
victim
are they said we turned her over
to
okay I think that here's a dudge
looking at a kays.
Any thank you
I can I say anything said by the
that is the newspaper that
reports dodge alcohol or ours
this sexual predator.
I choice to do that on here but
anyway we need to have the
streaming of available to both
the prosecution and the police
so they know that if this is
available
these people do I less they keep
the with them around that that
victim is there to testify so we
can prosecute these people who I
do in this kind of stuff we we
don't want to have a case like
this anywhere understanding new
mexico like the one I would I
still have nightmares over that
thing to better chair.
Think you madam chair I just
want to think the sponsors i've
heard the spell in a previous
committee and I just want to
think that the folks for
sticking with us i'm having
passed this bill I think we had
talked about
four times through um committees
and twice through our house
already
right so madam chair
representative thank you and
thank you to the folks who
continue their advocacy I hope
this year is there.
Anyone else wishing to come all
right happy to entertain emotion
madame chairman of a due pass on
house bill one sixteen
thank you.
We have a motion for a do pass
made by representative ramaro
second by representative
sapansky would you call the role
please representative of home.
Representative chasing.
Representative hambury
representative lane.
Representative martinis
representative yes
representative
representative range
representatives of ski yes
matter vice chair yes
yes.
You have a dupass representative
prosecutor thank you very much
i'm glad we didn't roll it yeah
be one more thing for monday so
thank you have a nice evening
take care
I don't see anything other
business we need to just address
before we adjourn I don't have
any we are starting tomorrow at
eight thirty in this room
eight thirty
I might bring donuts or
something
dunkin okay all right not the
craft one who's done who's done
that okay i'll do my best all
right so we are a journal
