All right started right away
folks yeah we're going back on
the floor at eight o'clock I
would like to have a hard and to
this committee at seven PM if
possible so folks and have an
opportunity we.
R. eighteen hour day so we're
gonna start with hospital would
be six on Representative
Pettigrew and now.
Do you see.
I'm looking.
See them quickly let's see
we've.
Representative Pettigrew.
He's with us now.
Representative Pettigrew.
You have the floor.
You need to get off of you need
to turn the microphone on Sir
there you go.
Thank you madam chair I just got
upgraded I should have one or
two witnesses in the.
In the participants I did this
sure Linda Hamilton from Sierra
County.
Sure what Corey help them from
Lee County.
Impossibly share Shane Ferrari
from San Juan County.
Madam chair I I is requested at
that I don't know how you guys
do it over here the panelists
link but we didn't receive that
so they're all in the in the
participants somehow.
We're moving about now.
Thank you.
I'm trying to find the emails
for your witnesses because you
didn't send me the emails you.
You see them and I'm sure or
now.
Madam chair the email addresses
were in my work they were carbon
copied on the email when I
responded to your.
We have serviceable to who was
the other whatsoever they were
looking for.
Potentially Corey Helton from
Lee County and shameful ari but
if we have
if we have shared panels and we
can move forward.
We'll go right ahead.
Madam chair committee members
are this bill is pretty
straightforward as you know the
law enforcement protection fund
takes ten percent of the money
in receive from fees licenses
penalties and taxes for life in
general casualty of title
insurance.
Into a fund for our
Law enforcement this is
specifically madam chair for.
According equitable distribution
of money to municipal place
university please trouble please
in the state and the county
sheriff's departments this money
is used for maintenance and
improvement of departments
enhance efficiencies and
effectiveness.
For more fortunate madam chair
and and now members of the
committee this money and shoes
very specifically well for a
multitude the multitude of
unfunded mandates that may come
down from time to time.
And so in addition to everything
else is this money sustains a
reasonable level of payments
available to surviving L. both
family members of the police
officer killed in action or in
the line of duty as and and so
with that madam chair if you.
Your views of the bill.
Thank you from twenty nine dash
thirteen dash three what it does
is it removes starting on page
one lines twenty four and twenty
five and then on page two lines
one and two and three.
It's a eight those.
Allows the money to revert and
then adds section which is lines
for inform page two that the
money from not reverse.
Madam chair and and committee
members purpose of this is.
This actually I with the intent
of the original
fund which was to be able to put
money aside for our law
enforcement agencies around the
state with that madam chair I
would like to introduce my.
professional witness to be sure
flat Hamilton from Sierra
County.
And I offer him the opportunity
to talk about this as well.
Welcome I'm sure Hamilton go
right ahead.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Glen Hamilton the magician to
being elected sheriff here in
Sierra County of the twenty
eight year veteran of the
department I also chair the
public safety and courts policy
committee with the New Mexico
counties I sit on the board of
directors us here counties
Representative and also the
legislative liaison for the New
Mexico sheriff's Association.
and again thank you for the
opportunity to our to address
this issue and and thank you
Representative down Pettigrew
for willingness to bring this up
bring this issue forward
inconsistencies in this in this
measure as you know
in in the special in the
provisions of the FIR.
The finance and accounting put
together for a.
Pretty good deadline is to what
what this with this particular
fund does work with the monies
derived from and and and how
much on average at this this
fund collects that's probably
fifteen point six million
dollars annually the deuce deuce
Fund brings in unfortunately
prior to the H. B. one eighty
for the twenty twenty session
there's only approximately five
point three million that was
actually distributed to to law
enforcement's one average about
ten point four million was was
reverted to the general fund and
during the intro member for the
this thirty day session.
The New Mexico sheriff's got
together and and had many
discussions with department
public safety we've had some
discussions with the
representable Estes in reference
to the possibility of that
Senate bill three seventy five
from the twenty twenty one
regular session being revived.
Which three seventy five was
essentially a bill that provided
many law enforcement reforms
from training to the reform of
the law enforcement academy
board can even have provisions
in that particular bill that
that that could potentially
taking little over six point
eight million dollars from this
fund in order to add to
implement some of those
provisions
and I can tell you that the many
of the sheriffs and chiefs of
police of miscible league in New
Mexico counties well we're
definitely on board with that
with some of these changes and
that we're located at three
seventy five during the prior to
the session we met the New
Mexico sure so the opportunity
to get together with the law
enforcement academy person and
the New Mexico chiefs of police
association and find out there
may have been a better use for
these funds as many of you may
remember HB wanted for the
twenty twenty session
essentially double the the
amounts that law enforcement
agencies or were distributed
we're looking up approximate six
point nine million in twenty
twenty two the beginning budget
cycle twenty twenty two
These distributions will be
increased to law enforcement
that still leaves about three
point three million dollar
projected surplus in this fund
and.
Last year.
During the twenty twenty one
session
on it the law the firefighters
had actually.
Into the bill I believe it was
a.
Senate bill two fifty six that
essentially to stop the
reversion of the fire funds and
reverted any of the leftover
funds into a grant program.
In our discussions with the
chiefs of police.
We decided you know this might
be a really good idea and and
something really good to work on
during the intro between the end
of this session in the beginning
of the next session in which to
create a similar type grant
program in the law enforcement
protection fund and rather than
them just this projected three
point three million this year
alone going back into the
general fund that would give us
an opportunity to actually work
on possibly putting language
into the law enforcement
protection act that would create
a grant opportunities for those
agencies that are specifically
in need of large purchases no
portion of the fire funds in
their grant program
does agencies which are under
served in their communities
basically get the preferential
status when they apply for for
some of those funds.
As you know many of you
lawmakers have have been
approached by your law
enforcement leaders either that
we have large purchases of of
police vehicles that we need to
replace there are due to.
Due to the high mileage or or
maintenance costs these can be
especially to small departments
which is does mine here in
Sierra County in rural New
Mexico these can be out
substantially high cost so to
create a provision within the
law enforced protection fund act
that would allow these monies to
revert into a grant program that
would be made available to work
law enforcement agency heads um
den we would like to work on
this in the intro before we can
work on that we felt it was
necessary to attempt to get the
reversion language removed from
the current the current law.
Madam chairman members of the
board of I will stand for
questions.
Let's go quickly to the audience
and see if there's anyone here
in
Washington way in the one ninety
six would you put up a quick
cool.
Leases so we can see it there
are folks out there.
You have twenty seconds to
register for or against.
We'll hear from you.
Okay.
We have.
Million people six are in favor
and three are in opposition so
let's give them an opportunity
to speak if they wish.
Raise your hand if you wish to
speak either for or against.
And will have one minute
Anybody wish to speak on what
state your hands up.
Looks like the folks who are
listening in don't wish to weigh
in so let's go to the committee
now.
We do have some members with
questions.
First.
Representative McQueen.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair representative
Pettigrew I looked at the F. I.
R..
Things were yes this bill.
It says it doesn't and I think
this is consistent with the
chair statement.
The bill doesn't.
Find any increased
distributions.
We're simply just set aside
millions of dollars and figure
out how to spend it later.
Is that.
My is F. I. R. M. I. N. correct
about that.
Chair and representative I
appreciate the question the way
I look at this is is.
our our law enforcement aren't
able to get to get through the
process and I don't know if
you've gone to the law
enforcement protection fund
website with respect to the
forms that have to be able to
about but in my opinion and and
Madam chair representative of
Ask for our for sure of Hamilton
to to weigh in on this I don't
think it's the issue of whether
or not there's a need for.
I think this is an issue of
getting to it before the time is
left on it.
Sure if you have any additional
comments on that.
Thank you madam chair
Representative McQueen.
I mean essentially yes it does
we are asked for these funds to
to remain in the fund the or the
in any of the excess funds to
remain there up what.
We are planning on on the
empaneling a committee.
With DFA representatives of
municipal league sheriff's chief
of police in which to determine
how the language of the or or
how we should go about creating
a grant program
so when the FIR yes it does
indicate that if we did nothing
we just allow these funds to to
continue to revert into the fund
or stay in the fund a potential
yes there are millions of of
unspent dollars that will remain
in the in the fund
it would it would be up to our
legislators to make a
determination as to whether
we're in the increased
distributions to law enforcement
as a result of the surpluses or
whether again what will you
would be amenable to considering
a grant program similar to that
contained within the a
firefighter funds.
Then the group channel ten that
we've had some discussions
about.
The process of the legislature
and it.
It's often frustrating from my
point of view that we want to
adopt a policy that they cost
money and we're told you can't
pass a policy until the money's
in the budget of course the
money's not in the budget
because we don't have the policy
so we definitely have a chicken
or the egg kind of problem with
that you know ideally I suppose
we would be adopting policy and
funding it in the same session.
That's proven to be difficult
but with this with this appears
to be is we're gonna fund
something and everything about
the policy later and I don't I'm
not hearing or reading about the
shortage in the fund and I mean
it's.
What we're reverting is the
surplus of the unused.
Portion of the funds that were
not using for its current
purposes and it's not a small
amount.
It's millions of dollars I think
the fire said it would grow to
eighty million dollars over the
next few years.
In the fund.
And I just you know I'm not
there Madam chair representative
chair of like to know what the
purpose of the of the funds
before we set them aside.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative for that and
I I see the Representative had
agreed that we call on the next
person please
Albert.
Madam chair when we talked about
this fund for a moment the
purpose of the fund is to
purchase equipment and training
for our lawn for Smith we and
then the other purposes there
are some white concerns policy
for officers who were killed in
the line of duty so when we
heard correctly the forfeiture
Act for law enforcement the
money and the forfeiture that
the agency would receive they
would use for training and
equipment.
This is something we've tried to
address for a long time you know
I'd like to work with the
committee on figuring out how to
spend this money.
We talk about the New Mexico Law
Enforcement Academy but when you
look around the state I can't
remember we've got nine or ten
satellite academies and the
money could be used by each
agency I think they need an
increase per officers
distributed on a on the basis of
certified officers but then we
could
also look at the you know
increasing there is a lot then
to the agency by the size of the
agency and then look at the
training academies as to how we
could do that but I wanted to
explain that to.
To the committee and thank you
madam chair.
Thank you the suit.
Committee members I don't see
any other hands up.
So a few questions here.
This is one of those things
where I know was appropriations
act late at reverting.
I
I'm wondering of course it was
assigned to us and then goes to
House Appropriations but
what is your sense
representative of your reception
there.
Madam chair I'm I live in a
glass house we give you the the
very pointed
conversation I had with chair
Lundstrom and that was by that
she doesn't see that if it made
it that when it makes it Taos
appropriations the it will be a
discussion in the will be
something that puts it on the on
the agenda for for enrollment as
we continue forward but she does
not see the house bill to come
back over to to the house for
concurrence that with enough to
be able to make that offset with
with some of the other things
that may be coming from taxed
rather than some other areas
like that.
But she was not opposed to
seeing it come to House
Appropriations so that they can
have that out discussion and
have that on the right are going
forward.
I guess I would submit it might
be smart just to give her your
bill and put it there and and
not have to.
Have her schedule that and so
forth at this time but.
We Appropriations Committee that
students a little irresponsible
for us to pass it along to
appropriations that comes that a
two million dollar hit.
We know it's not in the budget I
think one of my members as a
racist and I will let him ask a
question Representative Akan.
I can find my but.
I.
Chair I guess Representative
Pettigrew out brought up the
this question in my mind is that
is that that the money that is.
Basically you reverted already
you're being used in the house
bill two as part of the budget
right now.
Madam chair and representative I
I I would be remiss to say
exactly where it's going but
our our appropriations Committee
is pretty good at that making
sure that any any penny that's
the fact there is properly
applied somewhere so I don't
know where it's going to right
now.
We did not get that deep in the
conversation but and and where
it's gone to in the past to be
honest with you and make it
goes but as my understanding
goes back into the general fund
so it could be applied
just putting more.
You madam chair and
representative that aggressive
what what is the amount that is
reverting back this year.
We'll go back and.
She that shares you may have
that answer quicker than me.
Madam chair representative
welcome according to the DFA
predictions twenty twenty one
reversions nine point eight
million dollars.
Thank you thank you madam chair
I.
I think it really is not just
the.
We should.
I don't know if you want to say
that but up to a back up to
appropriations so that they can
spend time looking at it but
that we need to look at this
deeper and I have the energy how
we can go about this this first
of all they were thought about
something like this it looks
like a good possibility it's a
good way to spend money.
But it so like you say I mean
it's hard to
it's hard to process the
paperwork in order to get the
money spent per the other
departments especially the
smaller departments I mean I
live in the village of Milan
I can almost guarantee you that
the we've had a need for the of
the we had about three different
chief in the last four year olds
though I do need to get into one
of the three of them had any
idea how to apply for the
funding.
You know the previous chief
would apply and he would get the
the doctor for a half a car or
something like that
For the last ten years but that
was it but the new chief that
have come in I have I I can
almost guarantee they have no
idea are you would open the door
to apply for any of the money.
I think it's something that
needs certain studies I think
you need to work I think it's a
good possibility that this is
something that could work but we
need to do with the right way
thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative
Representative Chandler.
You madam chair I move to table.
You have
table Representative Chandler
and the second Representative
Armstrong.
That does take precedence so we
will call the roll.
Representative Alcon yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Chandler just.
Representative Cook.
Mr speaker yes.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Lewis yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative night we're.
Representative rain no ma'am and
I'd like to explain my vote.
Representative Townsend no.
Thank.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Yes it's like my dad to.
By a vote of nine to three we
have.
Bill with the success that house
bill one ninety six has been
tabled thank you very much
Representative right.
I think that it was clear it's
gonna go to appropriations were
against table but at least I
could hear the presentation and
get ready for the trump to look
at this issue and I would hope
that we would have Sierra for.
That process so their appointed
with it thank you madam chair.
Thank you very much what we have
automatic very briefly and
belatedly explained my vote sure
go ahead instances.
I understand I'm sure the fiscal
piece you know this is about
making it not reverting it
leaving the money in the fund is
not make any additional benefits
available to law enforcement
because the benefits that are
payable under the in under the
policies in place do not rate is
governed by
contracts policies outside the
scope of this bill.
So all we do is leave money
accumulating and the fund but
you need to have legislation in
which if you want to have more
funds rate to
into the law enforcement
protection fund to be able to go
out
You too bye policies you need to
have a separate law.
Whether or not a reverts you're
right she Sierra you madam chair
because you're not changing the
amount of money that goes to pay
for the life general casualty
you know our European Act you're
you're changing the way goes out
you know changes distributions
just making it on reverting so I
I think I think this bill simply
miss the mark we and we also
have nearly two hundred million
dollars in house bill two
including fifty million dollars
the law enforcement retention
hiring I think that's a good one
your investment with more to
come two hundred million thank
you madam chair.
Thank you and what I want to say
first of all is Representative
Pettigrew I really appreciate
your candor and I appreciate
your having visited with the
chair of House Appropriations
and have ensure that with this
nothing precludes you from
requesting that the LFC look at
this of the interim and so I
take what the speaker just his
observations and that
information and
Go forward and good luck I've
I've tried to have the funds not
revert before in the finance
committees are are very
appreciative of that.
But thank you so much as we
appreciate having.
Madam chair and committee I I
appreciate the comments I
appreciate you taking the time
to put this on
in order to a time when we got
this introduced and
I would say that madam chair and
and committee as we continue
forward and anybody who wants to
play along with us one of the
things that came out of house
bill four and in the qualified
immunity was the best way that
we avoid lawsuits with more
training in this money to very
easily and those defined in
statute to go towards training
so we'll continue to work on
this will continue the the the
the will of our shares
Association and I do appreciate
your time today sure fair
penalty.
Thank you bye bye.
We'll go into of Bill the
program.
This bill one forty five from
Representative Fajardo.
See if we.
Representative Fajardo here yet.
Hello there she is.
Share separate.
This technology.
I think it would be able to
suddenly appear.
Sen running down the hallway and
sitting at the table in the
committee room.
So
not sure if we have the
Wait for.
Version of the Canadian side but
I know there is a committee zoom
in the Here file and the point
four just makes.
Some.
Really not substantive changes
in the committee order that's a
a point three right
Representative correct madam
chair and I'm I'm so I have
Jason Espinoza he's already and
is next right we have a
gentleman by the name of George.
Davis if you could bring him in
as an expert witness as well and
we did we talk to the drafter
and I'm gonna let as Mister
sinister explain to you what
what we have and what the
drafters sent to us based on our
conversations.
And madam madam chair this is
that Kendall Gallagher is yes
it's the same things that
Representative Fajardo sent to
the committee in the analysis I
added I added the things that
Representative Fajardo sent to
us so it's it's after the
initial analysis.
and you can see the changes
Representative Fajardo I didn't
excuse me I don't know that.
What is in the point four
version since I haven't seen it
but.
Yes go ahead Jason.
I just know to so what.
Can you.
We're going wait three version
she stayed up in service it was
down admits that it would be
rolled into a point four.
Okay.
Wait I don't I don't think we
have those but I think you could
go through them with us.
Let's move that committee
separate discussion purposes
please.
We do have a committee said the
last time so this our first
discussion of the committees.
Madam chair make that motion.
Thank you.
Representative Rehm seconded the
motion.
Okay.
Representative Fajardo adjacent.
However you want to arrangement
please go ahead with your
presentation and I know that our
vice chair worked with you US
extensively and I she is here
right now but you just have to
be in Senate committee so I want
to give her an opportunity to
participate as well.
Madam chair members the
committee so I guess all go
through the point three a
committee substitute first are
and talk about those changes and
then go through the proposed
amendments I know the council
service to get him down to
Representative Fajardo is office
so hopefully I will be available
to the committee as well but
I'll walk through those first we
just really want to thank the
committee for their fact last
week on Friday I really took
that to heart and worked with
the the vice chair katana for
about four to five hours on
Saturday to go through the
legislation and work through
many which are reflected in the
committee substitute us also
briefly inside of everything but
hit the high notes one of the
comments that was given on
Friday was to ensure that anyone
not just substitute caregivers
could give to file a complaint
notice with the investment
office that has been changed so
that anyone can make a complaint
to register a complaint with the
ombudsman office on behalf of
the child so that will include a
parent substitute caregivers an
attorney a worker with and so
wife the anyone solution so we
really worked result that we did
work through the confidentiality
issues as well because there
were questions about age of
consent that language is really
tight and so that everyone every
document that is taking access
by the doctor department is
confidential unless it is court
ordered by the court it's not be
so we really tight and that
language that as well
let's see what we did hear we
did add is definitions of the
parents and guardians fictive
kin and others to make sure that
they're captured in notified one
of the statements that by your
content I wanted us to really
make sure is that anytime
someone comes in contact with
CYFD that that individual
whether it be a child a parent's
guardian other other
some security.
It is notified about the about
spend and how to contact them so
that is been added into the
legislation but we also did add
in reporting language so that we
can get report on how CYFD is
doing related FY and that's also
fixed in some of the investments
we got language from
Representative Georgene Louis as
we know the State FY is making
its way through the legislature
so we can refer to that directly
but we included language that
upon passage they could look at
the federal echo the
exemplification as well as state
it but implementation as well
trying to see some of the other
the other highlights here we did
add other items related to some
of the reporting to expand and
capture some of the things
really tight in the language of
their as well we did straight
the appropriation as was
mentioned by the the speaker and
in the previous meeting as well
so really just work to tie in a
confidentiality make sure that
more people are able to access
use the investment process and
then lastly related to the
proposed amendments to the
committee saw that would rule
out as a point for our when we
talk about hundred care facility
we had a question whether that
included in state or out of
state we wanted to make sure we
capture both of those us we
inserted language where we're
children in custody of the
department our place so that
we're capturing any facility
regardless of its location.
and then in getting numbers we
had used originally of the child
was removed from a arrests we
wanted to make sure that we
clarified what residents was so
weird inserting residents of the
parent substitute care giver or
guardian so that we're catty
capturing the entire universe we
did add a reporting requirement
that the ombudsman report on the
number of children return to a
household from which they were
removed which would include a
parent substitute care giver or
or other again we want to make
sure to check the cover all of
those as well and then in the
reporting about the I'm standing
which we did answer families
subject to court order treatment
plans or voluntary placement
agreements with gone with the
children to make sure that that
language was tight end up and we
really got to the the issues
that that matter there.
And just it's anti clean I can
sure that the language was clear
and and and its impact
there as well so that's an
overview of the changes that
again we really just leave this
be a great tool to help
stakeholders all across that
engage with CYFD as well as the
why the CYFD itself really
before day and and reform the
system for the betterment of all
children and families for New
Mexico.
I want to clarify the committee
analysis which everyone should
have it is a losses of the
committee is the first.
A little over three pages.
Well the first.
Two and a half pages the bottom
just has the changes that would
be part of a point four version.
So it refers to the members and
you should all have that have
access to that so I just want to
let every everybody knows that
Hearted you wanna say the house
about the people with whom you
consulted or do you want
Representative content to weigh
in because I know you've been
really open to
We we both met with judge
Schneider who is presiding judge
of the twelfth today and I have
a list of heard suggestions and
she like all of us and
supportive of having ombudsman
eventually it really isn't so we
can.
Go ahead.
Thank you madam chair thank you
members yes I would I'd love to
have Representative content to
speak on this we spent about
four hours one afternoon going
line by line over of this bill
we need to we spoke to
Representative Lewis Lewis is
about to make sure we have some
language that that
that took care of it what all
those all those we've had
initial conversations with
stakeholders
more and more support I've had
several people come on board who
who asked to actually testify on
behalf of the of this man and I
think I need but
let me go ahead and
Representative condemned would
like to have explain what our
process was to get to this point
I would love to have a talk
about it.
Are you available madam vice
chair.
Thank you madam.
Your
bills you have to go yes.
I'm waiting for the call they
were calling the for the center
there was a few minutes ago.
Hello.
Madam by your we can hear you.
Now I can hear you I am a
multiple devices trying to make
my way to the the state so I
just wanted to appreciate you
all certainly madam chair I
think we had quite helpful
discussion here and happy to
sherry and we certainly
demonstrated I think are shared
and bipartisan commitment to
figuring out how to best to
upper level one and young people
in New Mexico our child welfare
system I also appreciated that
the speaker encouraged us and
give us room to work on some of
these potential concerns
together so yes I think from
members of the body we had lots
of folks not being by and high
fiving athlete that in the
basement of the building on on
Saturday for many many hours and
I really appreciated
that both sponsor Representative
Fajardo and her expert we're
going to go line by line myself
and one of the bigger the
analyst had hi of the paperwork
analysis from the AG's office
for many of the from direct TV
we also had list the list of
concerns and considerations that
came from incredible advocates
and trusted advocate thank and
M. can Blake the folks that that
that run the sexual assault
support services and child
advocacy centers in New Mexico
so certainly I wouldn't want to
imply that I had the expertise
that counted that I was grateful
to be able to fullfill Tate I'm
getting those kind of
considerations into this draft
we the I also just wanted to
give it again takes out out
Representative Candie Sweetser
who on the house that has also
been looking at the importance
of an investment program over
several years so just see happen
to not be in the committee that
that that the we have but
certainly I'm glad that you're
able to find on and given that
the review as well considering
the years of research you put
into the also I Mr
I've been on debating on the for
the last few days you can tell
but madam chair I certainly
appreciated hearing and and
centring the ways that we can
reflect the diversity of
families families that the
little and they're born into
families that have supported
that showed up as substitute
caregivers that all of those
folks will have a room in place
but certainly I'm grateful that
we're able to center and include
the bio family madam chair when
my piece that would add.
Beyond what our expert Mr thing
necessary about the notification
for families that are touch base
with the Business the intention
to also make sure we're
considering the young people
that are wrapped up in the
juvenile justice system as well
there was some ambiguity on that
point previously like whether or
not we meant to include them but
then office as a resource for
those young people and the
people who love them and care
for them us we hope to make that
more clear in this committee set
state Madeleine they pieces that
we may not have gotten to yet I
look forward to the discussion
around this but I was I was
proud to have been a lot of my
weekend in the sector and I'm
really proud of how far we we
advance the this legislation
together.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you.
Is there anyone you would wish
to hear from you Representative
Fajardo we've had a public
hearing people spoke in favor or
in opposition.
I don't think we need to do that
again but it seems like perhaps
we should hear from the major
players fight my maybe the
secretary.
Maybe judge Snyder she had a lot
of good that we haven't talked
about yet what's what's your
what's your wish.
Madam chair I have two computers
going on check your.
I do apologize for that having
the one one of my computers
madam chair I know it's we've
actually had a lot of people
come on board a the group from
Kevin asked implementation
support team has come on board
to to support it
I must be doing something wrong
because we have the ACLU has
come out to to to support this
this legislation I think this is
the only time they've ever
supported one of my bills madam
chair members of the committee
so we're very excited about that
but if the secretary I would
like to make some comments
I'm more than happy to
you I think we all know that I
probably disagree with ninety
percent of them we did get I L.
everybody was emailed early
earlier some
some findings that they had the
nice really pretty piece I sheet
and most of those things have
been addressed or relevant
especially with the committee
staff and all the work that
we've done but madam chair if
you feel like you would like to
have the secretary speaking
you're more than welcome to.
I haven't asked her so I don't
know if I'm I just think she's
here so let me let me see if I.
Yes she does have her hands up
so I'm gonna let her can we
promote secretary the help.
Let her.
React to the.
Committees.
She's been there.
Okay thank you very much madam
secretary.
Thank you madam chair.
And members of the committee my
name is Barbara Vigil and
cabinet secretary of children
youth and families department.
Let me start by saying there is
no doubt that there are numerous
numerous stakeholders who
believe that our child welfare
system must be improved and
there's probably no one on this
call or in the state of New
Mexico that believes that it
must be improved more than I.
I think the enthusiasm behind H.
B. one forty five stems from
that desire to improve our
system and to enable the
department to be accountable to
stakeholders whether it's
children or foster parents or
biological parents anyone in the
system and so let me just start
by saying first and foremost
foremost that that is a critical
aspect of our child welfare
system that we at CYFD B. be
open and transparent and
accountable to the people that
we serve.
So I appreciate all of their
input and the fact that they've
worked with the sponsor on this
bill that said I must still
strongly opposed this particular
piece of legislation for several
reasons one is it's not clear
how this commission will operate
is being tied to the department
of finance and administration
the amount of money necessary to
operate effectively it's still
not clear and so it seems
awkward if you will that this
type of importance work for
improving our child welfare
system is tied to DFA so I don't
think it's been carefully
thought out and developed in
that respect
second of all I know there's
into C. Azam by folks involved
in the cavernous settlement and
and I appreciate that we are
working diligently to comply
with the Kevin **** commitments
Kevin just settlement and that
so many specific with respect to
what the department must do to
improve our system by adding
another layer of and then sub
not clear how this agency or
this commission will work and
whether it really will be
affected in moving the
department towards improvement
it's very likely that it will be
I'm not an obstruction but a
hindrance for the department and
complying with the Kevin just a
settlement I have a voice that
to a number of stakeholders
including including those
members of the Kevin just
implementation team certain
members
And so if we want good
government and if we want good
accountability on the part of
the state of New Mexico to
account for the work in CYFD I
respectfully say that this is
not the type of bill that will
work effectively
I believe that we have begun a
process to get the appropriate
and thorough input from so many
stakeholders and that process
will be
facilitated by the Casey family
programs this spring we look
forward to make meeting with all
the stakeholders involved in the
child welfare system to hear
their biggest concerns about
CYFD and to implement a
meaningful process for enhancing
and monitoring our system this
particular bill and I recognize
that people are frustrated and
impatient with having this type
of accountability I respectfully
say this bill will not
accomplish that but add simply
another layer of bureaucracy
with no meaningful remedies if
you will to to the concerns
raised or the findings raise by
by the commission
I also think that there's been a
lack of
Really collaboration if you will
I I would open my availability
to the sponsor and other folks
to talk about how we can have a
meaningful way of CYFD to to
respond to concerns that said we
in the cavernous settlement and
and and unilaterally as well we
have developed internal
grievance procedures within CYFD
and we are continually working
on ways to strengthen that
process.
And so I just for those reasons
the administrative costs the
management how this will really
work
I I say that you do want to
meaningful accountability system
and a way to enhance and
monitor CYFD allow us the
opportunity to come to gather
and proposed to you a real
meaningful piece of legislation
one that will work work for
everyone not only for those who
have complaints against the
system but actually those who
worked the system that we can do
things better for the people of
New Mexico so with that I
appreciate the willingness to
want to improve our system
there's no one who feels more
strongly about it and I but I
respectfully urge the committee
to allow us the opportunity to
work on a bill that is actually
better and more meaningful to
accomplish that and so with that
the madam chair I can stand for
questions and and thank you for
the opportunity to speak to
those interested in this
important issue.
Yes and thank I want to thank
the sponsor to for being willing
to.
Entertain any comments from from
the stakeholders here of who you
are an important one.
Madam chair I I did forget that
one of my expert witnesses is
not in the room yet Mr George
Davis.
And he's also status.
Is it doctor George Davis yes
yes in the room.
Thank you but it would like to
hear from doctor Davis yes
a pass just hand that.
Let's see yes I see that you can
make a panelists you wanted to
share a few things like if I
could madam chair before you go
to the committee.
You're on mute.
Talking to myself
I'm just thank I think I just
Needed Dr Davis.
Who is okay.
There are yes hi doctor Davis
how you doing I'm good thank
you.
Madam I'll be brief I know a I
know there's been a lot of
discussion this already my name
thank you very much madam chair
members twenty for allowing me
to speak in favor of a house
bill one forty five my name is
George Davis of child and
adolescent psychiatrist my
specialty is the long term.
development affects of abuse
neglect on children in the
system and that's made me who I
have treated throughout my
career I'm also a clinical
consultants for Kevin just
implementation team and it
worked also with the CYFD itself
and the fulfillment of some of
those requirements of the
cavernous agreement
I think most importantly for the
for the purposes speaking here
though I'd like to say that I
have either works at one time or
another either for or with every
single CYFD administrations
since our theme creating this
while researching was governor
and there's not been one that I
have not worked with some over
some period of time when I also
served for ten years
as a director of psychiatry
for CYFD as well.
I support this the the ombudsman
bill
Because after thirty years of
watching the department attempt
to reform itself both in the
inside and the outside and
seeing a almost an endless list
of experts spokesman each Casey
involved or experts I just have
come to the conclusion I think I
share this with the Kevin just
implementation eighteen that
yes it is not possible for the
for the department to reform
itself internally without the
assistance of some external
oversight.
This has no bearing at all on
our respect and liking and
admiration for secretary the
beans
you know as a
and honored the member of the
those people who would like to
reform the this the Department
but I would say that it's not
it's not a result of us thank
you or the advocate stating that
the secretary the whole is
unable to perform department is
thinking that the Department
cannot be reformed without some
sort of external oversight.
Others make three other points
the issue is been raised and the
secretary of state
appropriations that the office
of the ombudsman duplicates or
Some how conflicts with the
Kevin just agreements I don't
think anyone from our thanks
that is true in the advocates
for the supporting this I don't
think this is true of the
cavernous agreement.
Essentially
requires the creation of new
services screening instruments
are a new share please for the
children who are in the custody
of departments
and it also because I will say
this that in my part of that
agreement because retaliation
has been such a long standing
problem I think by common
agreement there is a clause in
there that asked for
the.
Policy about retaliation and
also just for the creation of
internal grievance procedures as
well which have been done it is
true that apartment has created
a of.
Rights of the foster child
rights of the foster parents and
they have created internal
procedures for listing
grievances the problem is that
it's internal there is no
oversight from outside the
department as we've seen.
Repeatedly over the years that
is where the problem yes the the
office of the ombudsman would
have the opportunity to look at
those grievances to collate them
to actually find out what
patterns and what frequencies
they are and to make
recommendations that are
Policy why in department wide
for the proof one of those I
think that the the departments
itself does not have a
requirement to share the numbers
of those or the resolutions of
those
and and the ombudsman would have
that opportunity.
Second point is that the
cavernous agreement is was never
meant to be the sum total of all
the reform that the department
requires it's it's the beginning
of reform.
and therefore fulfilling this.
We're will develop the the
server Services therapies that
to children require but I will
not do the whole job fulfilling
it will still need things and
done and a lot of those things
can be fulfilled by the office
the ombudsman sure and last.
I'm trying to encourage you that
I'm getting closer that thirty
last I would say the reform and
the improvement of CYFD is not a
political or partisan kind of
approach it is it has gathered
people from all ends of the
spectrum and as the legislators
know from looking at their in
boxes that also has gathered
groundswell of support from from
the community at large and
specially advocates for children
and for the department as well
it's got the ACLU it's got the
children's advocacy center it's
got New Mexico foundation for
open government and it's got a
number of other and agencies
plus like I say a huge number of
advocates and community so with
that also includes thank you
very much.
Madam chair and members of the
committee for hearing my
comments.
Thank you very much Dr Davis.
So.
Representative Fajardo did you
want to
Respond to anything no madam
chair I'm sure I think we've
kind of expressed not anything
guys if there might be some
committee members that have some
questions
or anything at outstanding let's
let them answer them madam chair
okay let's go to the.
Do we have questions members I
don't see hands up.
Here we go all right
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative Ferrary okay I
don't really have a question I
just wanted to make a statement
and it's either this or explain
my vote at that at the and maybe
but I want to express
appreciation Representative for
your commitment to this in your
work and to our vice chair for
working
with you on it and I know you
have been working on this for
awhile and I I agree with our
with the previous testimony that
this is not a partisan issue and
that there's probably no one
on this that doesn't think that
CYFD needs work and has a
history of of issues that yet to
be resolved I also I am very
familiar with an ombudsman
program having been secretary of
aging it's different there than
what this is but I I think
that's an effective on saying to
have a an applicant and external
advocate.
However.
I have the utmost respect and
confidence and the secretary and
secretary Vigil and I.
I'm going to side with her and
give role more time I think in
the interim yes if there's no
different approach I will be
here next year but I would say
then you you have to go ahead
but I she's been here not long
enough I think and with a lot on
your plate and I think there's a
willingness and recognition that
it needs work
and that she believes in that on
the progression of that as well
so I just didn't want to in in
not supporting it today I didn't
want you to miss construe that I
I I don't appreciate the work
order it's not my it's not a
partisan issue I I appreciate
the work in the commitment of
everyone I just want to give the
secretary a little bit more time
an opportunity to make it an
effective program and to be
clear about how it works so
thank you madam chair that's
that's all I have.
Thank you I'm just trying to
clarify for the.
The staff we.
We don't have the committee and
now the app is been the
committee sob in the chair I.
What we have for the committees
that are the proposed amendments
to that
The committee so I've got the
committee.
I think that Representative
Fajardo if mailed it to me and
I've been sharing it with
whoever wanted but I I know the
analysts have the right one
because they've analyzed it so I
don't know why we don't have the
committee sub number is.
Two two five four six point
three Representative Chasey I'll
put it back in there okay all
right with that back into the
chair elected so.
I think they may have gotten
confused when she said that the
other document and they thought
they had a new in total
committees so forgive us for the
technical.
Your.
And madam chair was my
understanding from from talking
to the drafter we also have a
proposed amendments for the
committee and that is two two
two seven oh six point one that
if we adopt these amendments
then we would have committee
seven point four and we have Mr
okay to make sure on the same
page thank you madam chair the
we don't actually amend the
committee cell but what we would
do as we would wait until that's
prepped before we actually
approve it but this way
everybody knows what it's going
to look like.
So.
That's what's happening there.
All right now.
Resume questions from committee
Representative night part.
Thank you madam chair
MHM.
In connection with these built
previously
I will go over that but but I
hear madam secretary talking
about
maybe more time or or you know
one of.
Change things within the within
the department.
Secretaries of COVID on and yes.
We continue to experience the of
the problems and so my mind
having some.
Buddy bear the.
Yes providing some some
observations and providing or
maybe some oversight
It is a step in the right
direction and last night the
former for the house.
We talked about the your bill
madam chair of the the.
Yes a stab and.
This was represented as being
not burst of that but actually
and compliment to that for.
And so to me at the same time.
We ought to act.
It's going to be.
Another year what we before we
get together as a legislative
body.
I'm not sure I can go back to my
community and tell them that we
may have another child placed at
risk because of.
Internal policies of state why
of the that the result in the
the another tragic event so
maybe we need to get this
Office up and running them in
place so that we can start
working.
Not just prove the whole system
but I I would hope working in
concert with the secretary and
trying to accomplish the very
goals that she talked about.
And so I would encourage my
colleagues to
Support this.
but when program to support this
legislation to not the lady at
any further because I wish we'd
have it
you know.
You know maybe even ten years
ago
but having worked
With our local casa program and
and some of the volunteers I
feel very strongly.
About that.
You know we
try to talk about other national
Parker's there are things I
don't know who that broadband
Landel bow whether C. Y. of T.
as have other work groups to
maybe do some of the stuff but
it just seems to me the best put
sand statute a role.
Defines the role of that party
as I stated it's not one that
dictates anything but inspired
to
Is our and to recommend.
And to
maybe.
Hi on some of those policies of
how it will actually affect.
The.
Work in the field and impact the
protection of children in the
state and the impact of how the
process works so I'm certainly
in favor of it and I hope that
my colleagues on this committee
will advances for a debate on
the floor that.
no real questions ma'am madam
chair but the I do I do feel
strongly that we need to dance
with legislation thank you madam
chair and thank you
Representative for bringing this
forward thank you madam
secretary.
Thank you Representative
Representative McQueen.
Thank you madam chair madam
chair I had the.
Also the couple statements and
at least one question all that
my question.
might be for
So I support this idea I think
this is a good structure
I think it's something yeah.
I don't know a lot about arms
but programs or the other
positions we have that are
comparable I continue to have
concerns about putting it in DFA
age is because that's not my
conception of DFA.
I I kinda like the idea of
putting it in the state
auditor's office and other arms
but people in the state
auditor's office because.
That feels to me like the
mission of the state auditor's
office make government better
but I also.
I don't know a whole lot about
C. Harper offices that may be
off base in me I.
It is interesting to me that the
auditor's office your daughter
is a statewide elected position
with the really remarkably small
office.
in maybe this we get more
attention.
Over there that with the DFA so
I have a concern
expressed that before my concern
is your idea of the house
Judiciary Committee as.
you know the committee that
looks at everything make sure
it's structured what right
and you know this is a big bill
it's complicated bill there are
a lot of moving parts we have a
point three committee set up
with possible point four it
doesn't really feel buttoned up
to me in my.
My preference would have been.
That we would have heard this
bill second.
On to I don't know if it would
go the seatback or health and
you and affairs that's not the
right name of the committee I I
this this seems like a good bill
to come Judiciary second.
Yeah actually came to us first.
And I don't you know have a good
feel for to wait to hear any of
the stuff simple and comfortable
there and then if we're gonna
drop the ATSC referral then it
would go to the floor.
And I just.
If you.
Bill that it should have to
house committees I recognize
repository day session.
The I think it are is gonna have
a hard time came across this
line.
so you to another committee.
Probably be good for the bill
get for the program but it
probably would do then I would
think.
so I I I'm concerned about that
I'll just leave it there are I
see the speakers hands up.
Maybe he could address those
concerns a in his own comments
thank you madam chair.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you madam chair the the
thought that occurs to me is.
If we want this to proceed.
I think we might take the
committee seven I want to
commend all the members of the
committee and the staff and
everyone this work on this job.
Hi it's been good work on a
compressed timeline.
my sense is that most of the
concerns that I've been hearing
could be addressed if we had a
delayed implementation I think
that would do two things one it
would allow for the funding of
the options to be built into
house bill two for FY twenty
four.
Right I think the reality is we
need to have funds in place to
hire the staff to do the work
that is necessary and.
This bill started moving too
late in the process for the
funding to be included this year
we explored the idea of a.
Special grant a budget
adjustment authority
in that that didn't really work
either we look today could see
savings in that also didn't work
So I might suggest that we.
put effective date on the bill
that is a year out.
And in that we
That that may keep everyone's
attention focused on this
knowing that it's coming and
then the next session yes some
of the structure of the bill
needs to be tweaked before final
implementation would have a year
to think about that and the
money can be built in house bill
two.
I'm sorry.
And if we did that we could do
it is that is this Senator you
know point three or point four.
Madam chair.
Read a point three Mr speaker
point three that was just that
the technical changes it'll be
important for.
Yes I have some other ideas
along those lines to.
So it so you know what I would
suggest is that into the point
four version.
On page twenty two line
seventeen.
We say the effective date of
this act is July one twenty
twenty three so I would propose
another change to be
incorporated point four madam
chair.
Then on page.
Twenty two.
Line seventeen strike twenty
twenty two and insert.
Twenty twenty three.
I think you have talked with
Representative Fajardo but did
you want to comment
Representative Fajardo.
I'm yes madam speaker I did SO
I've actually talked to
Representative Dan who's worked
tirelessly on this with me as
well the last couple days and
the speaker and we don't have a
problem with that we really dont
I mean it's we we see the
greater need for the bell I'm
going through and so if that's
something that that the
committee would like to do and I
support that and if if there's
any major cities otherwise
please please share the reason
why.
One way and I think that's.
Going to make it possible.
To get it.
I would suggest that maybe would
take out some of the specificity
that's here that
Those like judge nice gentleman
and others have mentioned like
what are going to be the
remedies and do you really want
to DFA or just want to say it's
going to be in the executive
branch you know maybe take out
and give yourself time.
To figure that out let let me
just tell you a little bit about
where I'm coming from the bill
that we passed out last night on
the office Valley representation
we've been working on since
twenty nineteen and we we've had
meetings and meetings and
meetings and have a lot of
expert input and I really prefer
having that kind of bill on the
house floor but I I certainly
don't mind having a structure of
this we're going to do this in a
year and here's the here's the
We do and what the purposes
because Senate judiciary will
take it out but we it would be
clear that it's.
An office for independent
oversight who can beat the
complaints that you're gonna
have investigative authority
Maybe not spelling out whether
it includes a rate of how are
those kinds of things.
If you're going to make it free
of conflicts of interest and
that sort of thing
That would be perhaps.
We could.
Right talk about a little bit
about some of the answered
questions that people brought up
like well what is the remedy.
For for folks and I did worry me
when people started saying well
what happens is.
You did this and and then what
what happens next so.
I I don't know how fast we
could.
Could get that done but.
Giving yourself a year to really
structure it so that it's
helpful to everyone and
manageable and everybody can see
the path forward I think will be
great.
The state has to be changed I'm
just suggesting that we might
want to.
Look take a look at it in view
of the delayed implementation
date won't madam chair a lot of
those things that you brought
brought up we actually had a lot
of conversation about and some
of the major does actually be
done rules in in in writing this
that you have to be
You can't be so specific that
when you ask some ask for report
the responses I'm sorry it's not
in there and so there is a
little bit of a broad nest so
that you know it's not specific
and so so some of that is is.
There is very specific R. the
way we would recommend that I'm
and madam chair you know we've
even had it's it's been an
interesting conversation
because CYFD is meant to collect
data and give reports they don't
have the authority to tell CYFD
what to do.
That would take away the role a
lot of people ask those
questions like you know what
what are the consequences things
like that it's data we're trying
to get data
one of the things that that the
judge wanted to she actually
wanted a response from CYFD yeah
that's that's we haven't put
that in there because that's it
it's it's amazing how.
As a grant.
How more and more people are
going well what about this why
don't we get this information
when we get this information so
we some of that has to be dealt
with with with rules when this
budget then is is created.
Because it that it has to stay a
little bit flexible there's only
so much you can put a statute or
you actually take away their
authority.
Madam speaker at.
Mistrust and just add a few
things as well we have.
Madam chair members of the
committee I just just want to
respond to just on I I sent
others a lot of questions about
the DFA sort of positioning
there and and so I just want to
make clear to an all sort of go
through the the.
Our administratively attached
statute and what that means but
so the ombudsman would it be
placed within DFA it's not a
division with the DFA what it
would be is administratively
attached and so under the
executive reorganization Act
which is nine one seven.
Really so just the purpose of
administratively attached
agency.
An agency attached to the
Department for administrative
purposes only shall one exercise
its functions independently of
the department and without
approval or control of the
apartment so it's completely
independent to submit its
budgetary request through the
department and three submit
reports required of law by the
governor or by the governor
through the department and the
department to which the agency
of the tax on the state's DFA
shall provide only if mutually
agreed the budgeting for
recordkeeping and related
administrative and clerical
assistant so that there'd be
some if mutually agreed upon
some cost saving efficiencies so
they would have to have their
own sort of back office staff
that could be shared and then to
include the agency's budget
request so include the
embodiments budgetary request as
submitted without changes to the
departmental budget so really
this is just sort of it and
efficiency thing for back office
operations but they would
operate entirely independent and
this is exactly the sort of the
set up the administrative
administrator's office has their
administratively attached to DFA
if you remember the legislature
passed that legislation several
years ago because when you were
a tax payer in you were
protesting the decision of the
tax department you are here
heard before employee the tax
department so they said okay
we'll move that out and this is
the set up they've done it and
it's worked really well so they
operate independently so just
want to make that clear that
that relationship that exists in
another office and so we thought
it was appropriate here.
Jason what we did was the office
we representation is that we
created as an adwords agency
pursuant to section nine one six
which is the executive so I
mean.
Which is to say DFA are the
executive but that's probably
a viable option.
Madam chair members the I agree
with you I think that's the same
way the office of the
superintendent is set up to as
well as an adjective agents.
There's one other thing that I
wanted to say which I
Actually and then to talk with
secretary be held for this
hearing and I have the
opportunity to do so
but.
I actually think that for
The department is complex and C.
Y. FTE that.
This could be.
Helpful to the Department.
In changing the culture where it
needs to be changed because.
I found it so different in the
different counties.
When I was practicing law so
different in Santa stable of
Valencia Bernalillo.
And you know when we would go to
the children's law institute I
found that.
I found the same thing from my
colleagues throughout the state
all the court appointed
attorneys.
You madam secretary.
This this job but I think anyone
can change the culture it's you.
I have great faith in you and I
actually think.
As an attorney I was so
frustrated sometimes when I read
the regulations and said alright
with.
You need to respond under this
regulation to this Rick this
request it was crickets.
And that was not good.
I'll tell you that was really
not good for my client whose
children were actually abused in
foster care and notice a tort
claim against the department.
I I wish I could have gotten the
county office manager to
respond.
So you know I just felt so
powerless sometimes.
It might help a lot.
Secretary you know it sounds
you've got a big job to do but I
I that's why I think it will be
helpful to you ultimately.
So I I think we have to
Get.
The clean version as fast as
possible so that we can take a
vote on it because.
Generally what we do what time
is it.
We
we we can get a point for Mr
speaker did you have a
suggestion on that.
I'm sure I was going to make a
motion and then maybe.
Hold the vote until we get the
point four version down okay so
that so that when it comes down
we can just bring the seven you
know to everybody and if they
can days changes we want we
could just do a quick vote so I
I would.
Madam chair move a.
Do not passed on house bill.
One forty five.
They do pass on House Judiciary
Committee substitute for house
bill one forty five point four
version okay and then we can
have that pending I will vote as
soon as we get the sub.
This is good.
Sounds good so for now we're
going to suspend this discussion
and we will move on to the
our next item on the agenda.
Thank everybody for your
contributions and
Your input in those who are in
favor of those in opposition and
data will will come back for a
vote and since we can't.
But we do have some more items
and we're going to go for at
least another.
Almost two hours.
Okay thanks everybody.
Yes we have Senator Sedillo
Lopez Representative Ferrary.
Joint resolution to.
Thank you madam chair.
I'm could you please
elevated panel if they're not
already
also Eric chance.
And Karen necks.
And
Representative chair Lujan she
was presenting another bill I'm
not sure she's here yet.
Yes this is a look up here.
Turn if you raise your hand that
would help.
There we go.
Would you raise.
Already in there okay he's
already with us okay thank you
oh wait Representative Lujan I
don't see her okay she might
join us a little bit later.
Okay.
Thank you madam chair
This is house joint resolution
two of the environmental of
a constitutional amendment and
madam chair we have the an
amendment would you like us to
do that for after we get
started.
Explain how straight resolution
to and then explain your
amendment because it might
affect public testimony.
Okay.
Okay thank you madam chair well
the green amendment will add to
to the bill of rights section of
our constitution a
constitutional right to a clean
and healthy environment and it
will establish a clear trustee
obligation on New Mexico
government officials to protect
the state's natural resources
for the benefit of both present
and future generations this
ammendment is more than a policy
statement it is ensuring that
government here in New Mexico
continues to first and foremost
serve the people and carry out
their vision and mandate for our
state and the constitution is
the mechanism by which the
people both empower us as
government officials but also
ensure that our governments
properly serves them and with
this ammendment the people will
be given the opportunity when
they vote in November to make
clear that they expect their
government to include amongst
our highest priorities their
need for clean healthy and safe
environment and and to ensure
that as with all the bill of
rights entitlements such as
speech property and gun rights
that all government action will
ensure these rights are
protected.
And included in all good
government decision making and
balancing this amendment simply
guarantees the minimum
necessities to live a life of
dignity clean air water and land
and while it's been suggested
that the repeal of article
twenty section twenty one we'll
have we'll somehow undermine our
legislative authority when it
comes to environmental
protection that is simply not
true article four of the
constitution creates our
legislative body and gives to us
the power to legislate including
for the public health and safety
which is exactly what we do when
we legislate regarding the
environment the legislature have
the power to enact environmental
legislation and in fact enacted
of our mental legislation before
article twenty section twenty
one was ratified and the repeal
of article section to article
twenty section twenty one does
nothing to change that authority
and two X.
To
suggest that otherwise is to
misconstrue our constitution and
repeal of article twenty section
twenty one is important in order
to ensure clarity so that this
provision of the past cannot be
used to conflict unintended
consequences that would result
in undermining the environmental
rights and the obligations that
people will be passing with this
newly proposed building
amendment.
This new provision will not
result in lawsuits between
private interest it speaks to
good government action that
creates environmental benefits
and prevents environmental harms
that rise to the constitutional
level and the suggestion by some
that this amendment should be
reworded studies entirely
defined by the legislature
misses the point the legislature
will still be able to legislate
after the green amendment is
adopted this amendment is
instead about ensuring that
environmental protections the
basic fundamentals essential to
our health delights such as
clean water and air a stable
climate and healthy ecosystems
are given the same
constitutional standing as other
fundamental entitlements found
in the bill of rights other
fundamental rights are not
entrusted entirely to our
legislature and all of the
vagaries of our political system
nor should the environment and
given that we all need a clean
healthy and safe environment to
both survive and thrive it is
just and right that these
fundamentals of life be given
the same constitutional standing
as the rights to free speech
freedom of religion the right to
be free from unreasonable
searches and seizures as well as
our right to bear arms and
having property rights.
So with that madam chair I'd
like to turn it over to Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you thank you madam chair.
Senator.
I also just want to thanks a
chair Matthew McQueen for the
excellent changes that he
suggested when we were before
his committee I believe that it
made a stronger bill the only
thing that I want to add to what
Representative joined Ferrari
said is this is also an
opportunity to protect all of
the good work that has been done
by this administration the
produced water regulations the
methane regulations because.
A consideration of the
environment of the impact on the
environment would have to be
done is any.
Future administration wanted to
reverse them.
And that is very important for
the future for our future New
Mexicans future with regard to
keeping our environment as clean
as possible so thank you madam
chair and I am available for
questions.
Thank you very much
Senator.
are you ready for us to go to
the audience.
At madam chair interrogates a
few words okay sure go ahead
turn.
The evening Here sorry and
dealing with dogs I apologize at
thank you for having me on
evening we stand and support and
I will keep it short and sweet
and just say that commissioner
Stephanie Garcia Richard has
made policy changes the role to
make decisions that are unheard
of and that a lot of people said
it would take industry and take
and we did the opposite so I
just want to encourage you to
know that taking the necessary
steps to protect our environment
it's something that is necessary
and that doesn't have negative
impacts my bottom line
perspective so thank you for
letting us be here today and I
hope you passes the.
Thank you very much turned.
I think we're we're having.
Analysts my committee assistance
excuse me receive the amendment
but apparently the analyst
didn't have it but I'm gonna
bring file.
Copy I think perhaps you should
mention what it is.
Representative Ferrary and then
we'll go to public comment.
Thank you madam chair the
amendment is point two two two
five five six point one.
You.
We.
I'm sorry we just have point
one.
Meant about changing political
subdivisions to cat two states
counties and municipalities yes.
Okay it's the same one I don't
know why it would be different
And less when she had to send it
again or something it it just
went to a different number.
But what we I'm we're doing was
striking directs the state to
and inserting provides that the
state counties and
municipalities shall.
And that goes with
Shell service trustee of these
resources and
after working with
Representative chair of
House Energy Environment natural
resources chairman queen to re
work for the substitute we then
we're working
with the estate yes and it was
important to them not to include
and they're subdivisions and so
that's what this is just doing
its just directing it including
its political subdivisions was
being struck on page two line
one and insert in lieu there for
counties and municipalities.
And this was proposed amendment
makes it clear that we are
including all the state and
local government officials that
we had intended.
Thank you for the land grants.
Right okay yes I think that's
probably good for the public to
know we could
What about the technicalities of
the the new and
the and try to get what we have
to our analysts at this time.
Let's go ahead National for
public.
Chairman been forwarded to the
sharing the section the the
sentence that is change I think
it begins on the one twenty five
of page one.
She received the the seven as it
is amended so I can write it
down.
Yes I'd be glad to
A lot of page one line twenty
five
It's in the very last of it says
the state.
And
Takes out including its
political subdivisions is the
state counties and
municipalities.
Goes to page two line one.
Yes.
So what punctuation doesn't save
the state comma.
Count please calm and
municipalities shelves server
trustee of these resources
sector.
Excuse me madam chair I have the
going to.
Representative.
Representative Ferrary so are
you working up the point two or
the point one because it's the
point to that is the that was
what was sent to the committee.
Thank you at yes and it does
have under section one B. this
section is enforceable against
the state counties and
municipalities we added that in
again and I apologize
so that makes it perfectly clear
not just the one change we talk
about but then again
in section of.
Do it might be perfectly clear
to you but I'm not sure that it
is to our committee so.
Let me
I was I could hear your your
lack of clarity Representative.
So let's let's read it
Senator.
Since you have the points to.
Course.
I'll read the entire thing.
On page one somebody needs to
mute themselves because I hear
social
worker I hear background noise
and it's different there we go.
so on that so this is two two
five five six point two and it
says on page one winds fourteen
is fifteen strike importation
directs the state to end of
quotation and insert in lieu
thereof provides that the state
comma counties and
municipalities shall.
And then on page two line one
strike including its political
subdivisions and insert Lujan
include their of counties in the
disabilities.
And then on page two line seven
after the period insert this
section may be enforced against
the state counties in the
estimates of allergies.
And has Representative as
Representative Ferrary stated
the the purpose of doing this
was to ensure that it turns out
that there are a lot of
political subdivisions within
the state so we didn't or I
didn't realize that using that
term might possibly bring in a
sec as another potential
political subdivisions and we
didn't intend for the amendment
to be binding on them they would
not have the budget would not
and they they don't make these
kinds of decisions that would be
covered by the amendment so it
was just confusing to have that
and so we wanted to bring some
clarity to it.
Are you ready for us to go to
the participants.
Yes madam chair okay right.
Want to I'm.
Check on our time here.
I'll allow for fifteen minutes
on each side.
For this
one minute H. and if you've got
more than fifteen people please
try to get your spokespeople.
And we will first which will
call then I will start with the.
Those in the opposition and
those in favor so the calls
going now for twelve of twenty
second.
We have seventy four percent in
favor and twenty six percent in
opposition they're considerably
more than fifteen people in each
of these groups I'm only going
to be able to take fifteen
unless people are willing to go
to thirty seconds and ninety
five that to be very very
difficult so let's go ahead now
and.
Krycek the opposition first and
JD Bullington please watch your
time please don't anybody repeat
what's been set thank you go
ahead JD.
This.
Thank you madam chair to go out
for the undo button to pop up JD
Bullington speaking on behalf of
the greater Albuquerque chamber
of commerce with still
respectively with the amendments
still opposes this proposed
constitutional amendment they
believe it is unnecessary and
that existing laws and
environmental stewardship
agencies including environmental
organizations are doing a good
job to protect our and our air
land and water.
If this resolution were to pass
the greater Albuquerque chamber
of commerce believes attorneys
will be the big winners and
state agencies funded with
public money will be the big
losers fostering a climate for
more litigation without
guaranteed environmental
outcomes is not the best
strategy for New Mexico the
purser pursue the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
as we opposition to this bill
thank you.
Thank you
Deborah Condit.
Deborah Condit here with an
arrest Energy Alliance I'm
interested in need alliances are
clean energy trade association
representing over thirty of the
largest renewable energy
developers and manufacturing
companies in the nation we're
headquartered right here in New
Mexico and also work across the
surrounding region inner west
stands today and respectful ops
opposition how straight
resolution to Interwest members
are committed to helping the
state need it's clean energy
commitments through the
responsible development of wind
solar and storage projects and
respect the Sanchez intent of
this piece of legislation and
the goals and help the
environment however with that is
stable predictable business
environment companies will go
elsewhere legal answer to do
will prevent clean energy
development in our state for
these reasons we respectfully
oppose HDR to.
**** Madam.
Evening madam chair members of
the committee Kerry Romero
registered lobbyists for the New
Mexico council of outsiders and
guides we stand in opposition to
this joint resolution for the
reasons that have already been
stated and simply because
without a clear understanding of
what it means to have a
protected environment we feel
that this would do nothing but
just encourage and less
litigation and we respectfully
oppose thank you.
Tom Shelley.
Thank you madam chair.
Respectfully oppose the
legislation even with the
amendments made and I ask
everyone to please consider the
fiscal impact report
indicates.
Contrary to some of the things
that have been sent to this does
create uncertainty for those of
us that rely on permits for
agriculture and.
The in other industries.
To operate.
Thank you.
Thank you.
When someone's.
Good afternoon madam chair and
committee members by name is
Marco Gonzales summer answered
this for pattern energy pattern
energy stands in opposition to
this house joint resolution we
appreciate the intent of the
sponsors for bringing four but
we have that direct experience
with this type law and
understand the potential
outcomes Patty was developing a
large global project in Montana
but a large Texas billionaire
that over rents my tad out Costa
project and to the participating
landowners and the we project
and was granted an injunction by
the court this created enough
uncertainty that we decide not
to continue pursuing the
development this is not only a
nuisance lawsuits which already
allowed her to Mexico law but
they also went after a county
road use permit the exact same
structure that could be used
here we're concerned that this
will weaponize opponents of
infrastructure development
including renewable energy and
stop our transition to
renewables we're also concerned
additional put at risk in SB six
billion dollars of additional
investment renewable investment
a pattern has plan for New
Mexico because of this we would
ask the committee for do not
pass our table thank you madam
chair members of the committee
for your time.
Join this person.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Charles
person on the deputy executive
director for New Mexico counties
while we sincerely respect the
fact that environmental rights
should be important for every
citizen in the state we don't
think that this is the right
approach to resolve this we
already have existing rules and
regulations that have been
vetted in great detail there are
many different stakeholders in
the state in addition counties
especially the eighty percent of
rural and frontier counties in
the state did not have the
resources to make these
decisions any more than a steak
yes what even though you removed
the monetary damages that will
not negate the amount of time
and resources that it would take
for local governments to
litigate these issues and for
that reason we stand in firm
opposition to this bill.
We're having trouble with our
clock.
It is starting over and it's not
working.
Can you get some help with that
Lee sung I I want people to know
where they are on time with
their.
So go ahead Jason.
This week sorry you madam chair
members of the committee Jason
Weaks on behalf of the
Albuquerque Hispanic chamber of
commerce the the Spanish chamber
represents a lot of small
businesses throughout the state
and quite frankly this will lead
to a stunt this funding of
economic development in the
state of New Mexico and as a lot
of larger businesses when they
locate here the small businesses
are the beneficiaries because a
lot of side businesses inside
economic activity occurs as a
result of those large businesses
locating in the state if large
businesses are pushed out of the
state and this and that this
incentivized to locate here it
will have a trickle down impact
but we'll see that will in
significantly affects small
businesses in New Mexico and for
those reasons we stand in
opposition thank you.
Thank you.
Next we have Mike Bonin.
Thank you thank you madam chair
members committee my name is
part and on the executive
director of the New Mexico
mining association our our
association opposes HA are to
first because we believe it is
unnecessary environmental
protection already is required
on the numbers federal and state
laws rules which specify strict
standards and procedures for
money permitting including
public participation are members
already must minimize are
actually complying to public
engage second this
constitutional member would
create regulatory uncertainty by
allowing the course overturn
policies standards set by the
legislature's state agencies
protecting our regulatory
uncertainty discourages capital
investment needed for New Mexico
businesses thrive finally we
believe our current constitution
balances the interests
Department actually and economic
development but this resolution
would eliminate that balanced by
repealing article twenty section
twenty one thank you very much.
Thank you patients down.
Can you hear me yes okay thank
you madam chair and committee
members
this is basically our current
time are with the wild force
wild life protection of New
Mexico.
I do appreciate the two
amendments so far thank you
again for dearly needed however
at this point since I can't see
them clearly I have to propose
and I just say that we already
have agreed amendment of
nineteen seventy one which will
be deleted which is actually
quite right yes who should
control this what we're talking
about
and
also I heard that word some
action.
Once the leaders from this.
Amendment and I don't think that
we should have counties across
the state vying for control of
various natural resources I
think that's wrong so no it's
better with getting out the
secretary subdivisions of the
state the land grants.
Are not good enough yes and so I
have to propose
and.
Well.
Next I have
I don't have anyone who hasn't
already spoken.
There's.
People and their reputation I
stand now there.
Did you bring it.
You can drop in.
Their hands up of people who've
already spoken and so.
It's very confusing I'm.
Sure okay.
Thank you I apologize for the
delay I should you all male and
I hope you take time to read it
in my opinion it's there are two
is nothing less than him to
establish regulatory capture
regulatory capture occurs when
an agency or political
subdivision in New Mexico
created by an industry that the
agency or political subdivision
is supposed to regulate that the
agency or political subdivision
is quote captured by the
industry would result in all
meaningful regulation being
tossed out the window in favor
of the will of the industry
regulatory capture is staggering
well established in our country
we must not with this outcome
regarding New Mexico's natural
resources and environmental
laws.
we can them please do not be
fooled by the three Talkington
by middle groups that have
likely already Dan or could
easily be New Mexico created by
industry is difficult enough to
monitor payout by industry to in
an effort to capture our
provided our we must not make
our state environmental well
being more vulnerable by
entrusting your.
Your time is up.
Charlie work as.
All.
Thank you madam chair.
chair and members of the
committee on Charlie mark is
registered this for New Mexico
business coalition New Mexico
business coalition has a goal to
make to Mexico a better place to
live and work.
With all due respect to the
sponsor and then be she
respectfully opposes HA are to
all members of the followers of
New B. and and B. C. support a
clean vibrant environment but
they want to see that
accomplished in a way that
provides balance allows business
to provide for needs while
creating jobs for New Mexicans
if approved by the voters this
piece of legislation would alter
the state constitution is not a
desirable way for us to address
the environment and issues
regarding this protection New
Mexico often experiences
unintended consequence of
religion is altered from Russia.
Legislation in this case the
constitution is amended there's
no quick way and natural way of
medical records therefore we
believe it's not a good way to
address the issue issues such as
the US thank you madam chair.
Thank you.
Hi.
We should.
Okay very.
Good evening.
Good afternoon chair Chasey
members of the committee Amy
Barrett be the registered
lobbyist New Mexico oil and gas
association our members are
committed to the responsible
development of natural resources
in accordance with the numerous
statutes protecting the
environment passed by the
legislature and the pollution
control section of the New
Mexico constitution memo that is
deeply concerned that the
proposed legislation strips the
legislature of its authority to
protect New Mexicans and the
environment as explained in the
F. I. R. she is the
responsibilities currently
interested to the legislature's
to the courts and burdens
regulators with defending their
professional decisions I
potentially great cost to the
state it would be a mistake to
undo and call into question the
carefully and thoughtfully
developed laws enacted by the
legislature throughout our
state's history in favor of
turning authority over to the
judicial system so that our
state can be party to furthering
and national agenda with very
little.
When we have time for to more
people Jennifer Weber and Andrew
small.
Good evening madam chair
committee members my name is
Jennifer Weber and I am here on
behalf of the New Mexico chamber
of commerce.
Amber has supported efforts to
address the climate crisis from
the passage of the Energy
transitioned Act the efforts to
develop an effective methane
rule and even more for tax
credits for renewable energy but
it is with this history and
commitment of money that we
oppose H. share to what New
Mexico should be doing instead
is focusing on implementing the
laws we already have like the
energy transition act which will
move us aggressively toward
carbon and energy reductions and
a cleaner environment New Mexico
faces many challenges in getting
its residents opportunities to
stay and work and raise their
families in the state and to
diversify its economy and make
it equitable the uncertainty
that this resolution creates
would wreak havoc across the
board and we ask that you not
pass each year to out of the
committee thank you.
Roosevelt.
You madam chair members of the
committee I am at Roose one
register lobbyist with the New
Mexico rural electric
cooperative association we stand
in opposition this G. R. two
with amendments our cooperation
twenty two percent of the
population and eighty percent of
the land mass in the state of
New Mexico.
A record members farmers and
ranchers and being good
caretakers of the in land and
water for generations language
in any G. R. du was changed to
an entitlement to have clean and
healthy air water and soil we
think that being a good steward
of the air land and water is a
responsibility of each and every
New Mexican not entitlement
thank you madam chair committee
members we respectfully ask you
to oppose this resolution thank
you.
Thank you very much we are now
going to those in favor so I
would like to ask those of you
who aren't opposition to put
your hands down and I'm going to
invite those in favor to put
their hands up.
This for something something.
Manage turn right.
Somebody is on not mute and I
would like to ask that you go on
to mute Nicole are you in favor.
Yes yes madam chair members of
the madam chair members of the
members of the committee my
name's Nicole line of it I'm a
disabled veteran exposed to
environmental toxins leader of
the PNM Adelante progressive
caucus leader of the PNM
environmental justice caucus and
a core team member of the green
amendments for the generations
New Mexico teen we stand in
support of the committee
substitute of HA HA R. two we've
been working with leadership
Sanchez are supporting
communities to make sure the
language within the substitute
still oppose the primary goal
and that's the people's right to
a clean and healthy environment
voted on by the people in our
bill of rights there's an
overwhelming need yes our state
from bad actors even the federal
government's ever changing EPA
for far too long they have taken
advantage of the pollute now
create policy leader standard
this resolution allows us an
extra layer of security from
these very bad actors for all
these reasons we ask that you
support the committee substitute
for H. J. R. two thank you.
Major brick eagle.
I'm gonna skip over because not
getting a response indicating.
Yes thank you madam chair my
name is any pain and I strongly
support this bill in these
trying subpixel reading climate
change we need to focus more
attention for protecting and
respecting our environment and
natural resources than we have
ever done before H. J. R. two
does this just exactly that by
giving individual New Mexicans
standing to sue protect our
environment such legislation is
working well in other states.
New Mexicans should be given the
opportunity to vote on how we
want our environment and natural
resources protected.
Please give us a chance to vote
on this amendment to our
constitution by voting yes on H.
J. R. two environmental rights
thank you very much.
Thank you.
Paul Gibson.
Good evening madam chair
committee member's name is Paul
Gibson co founder retake Our
Democracy a statewide nonprofit
advocacy organization with
twenty five hundred members
including members in every state
house and Senate district in the
state if your Democracy strongly
supports to remember the
interest of time off or just one
reason there tens of thousands
of wells in the state of New
Mexico in the oil and gas
industry equipment five hundred
seventy thousand tons of nothing
new here in New Mexico you will
at our climate impact of twelve
coal fired power plants methane
pollution a known carcinogen is
more than doubled in the Permian
basin since two thousand eleven
the state has already I
inspectors to identify each and
issue fines our state is not
going to protect us from these
kinds of environmental
violations is important that
residents have a legal mechanism
to just force the state to do so
whether it's methane leaks
produced water leaks for
radiation seeping in the aquifer
impacted residents to
communities deserve a mechanism
to require the state to protect
them these reasons we take our
democracy strongly supports this
resolution and encouraging it to
pass my message to the voters to
decide thank you very much for
your.
Adelante progressive caucus go
ahead.
Hi this is sure can you hear me.
This is Cheryl Harris I am the
former chair of the Adelante
progressive caucus and a
resident of Albuquerque
it was surprising to hear Mr
Billington say we didn't need
this that everything was fine
when I had a vision of the
methane cloud over the four
corners and the flaring that I
see from gas production and the
golden San Juan river flowing
through Farmington with uranium
tailings Senator a couple of
years ago.
The constitutional amendment
will add strength to support
environmental.
Conditions in New Mexico it will
be a preventive action rather
than remedial action being
enforced voters have the right
to vote on this we've
Representative.
Huge number of people in these
hearings and we want the
opportunity to vote thank you.
To.
Hello my name is K. shaped by my
community organizer was a
distant character for the future
and a young woman living in
Carlsbad I will never forget the
first time I attended a public
meeting held by NMED discussing
implementation of HB five forty
six the produced water at my
mother just been diagnosed with
ovarian cancer fifty and many
other young people in my life
been affected by cancer and I
began to get concerned about why
do so many people that were
falling L. at the end of the two
young children were there that
night and they said to speak
about trucks to be produced
water on their land long story
short they were essentially told
that there is no action they
could take from in this
dangerous practice it was pretty
adhoc it was clear that there
was nothing nearby community to
do to protect ourselves from the
dangers of produced water with
the dangers of what some of the
Benchley selling act apple was
already set in motion without
our consent and the leaders that
they did seem to share the same
concern are for the help of my
community I let that many
terrified if the green with the
pin in place and perhaps I am
that family would have left that
meeting feeling empowered
instead of in danger to
completely out of control we all
deserve a right to a clean
environment and we all deserve
to have a shot at enjoying good
health for old age right now the
everyone in the state gets to
enjoy that right and the great
amendment has the power to
change that thank you.
Thank you.
Terry Sloan.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members thank you for
all you do for the people my
name is Terry Sloan and I'm been
a New Hope a native American a
board member with agreements for
the generations and board member
for the Mexican faith power
lines I fully support HDR to
environmental rights to green
amendment I believe agreement
amendment will help better
manage and protect our pristine
novel lance and it need to New
Mexico landscape and help manage
our current extractive
industries as long as people
business owners and industry
follow and meet regulatory rules
and regulations the green
amendment will not prohibit or
inhibit current and new
businesses I love are met
majestic New Mexico mountains
and chanting desert's sparkling
rivers and lakes and spoiling
fresh air we breathe remember
New Mexico is a sacred site on
Mother Earth keep New Mexico the
land of enchantment please pass
H. G. R. to environmental rights
amendment let the people vote I
thank you.
Thank you Joan brown.
Good evening chair and committee
and Sanchez thank you so much
right.
This is consistent and the
executive director of New Mexico
interfaith power and light we
work with faith communities and
people of faith all over the
state which is thousands and
thousands of of people
I'm currently in our state we
have too many legacy pollution
are concerns that affect the
health of our people and also
our editors to our sacred
creation and these looting
legacy and sites continues to
happen.
The book of Deuteronomy says
choose life that you and your
future children may live this
bill is for choosing life we
affirm it please let the people
vote thank you.
Thank you madam.
Yes.
Good evening madam chair members
of the committee at least got a
with the Sierra Club Yogananda
chapter representing over thirty
five thousand members all across
New Mexico we stand a very
strong support of of the green
amendment this amendment will
make real the right into clean
and healthy environment for all
people in all parts of
governments jurisdiction of the
minutes important for current
and future generations of New
Mexicans and our environment in
a previous hearing people spoke
about the use and their grand on
behalf of their grandchildren
and children the climate crisis
is true and it's here now and we
are asking the will please vote
yes this amendment and an
opportunity for voters to see it
in about thank you very much for
your time.
Go ahead.
We go to Pat Thomas.
Please send you.
Sorry I'm so sorry.
Madam chair committee members of
my name is Pat Thomas and I live
in Espanola over toxic chemicals
have polluted the aquifer from
which both Espanola and Santa
Clara Public draw their drinking
water the underground chemicals
also released toxic gases that
end up inside homes the
pollution was discovered over
thirty years ago and the federal
EPA essentially designated the
fifty eight acres as a Superfund
site and carried out reading
meet remediation efforts that
were only moderately successful
in to stop two thousand nineteen
our state environment department
became responsible for the site
state remediation efforts are
ongoing and we hope the state
will get this site cleared up
however if the state feels in
that effort for reasons that
were within his control a
constitutional amendment such as
the one before you today would
simply allow the people of
Espanola and Santa Clara to
exercise their fundamental human
right to clean air and water by
asking a state court judge to
order the state to carry on a
stress responsibilities and to
marshal the resources to get the
job done thank you for letting
me speak.
Steffi wise bird.
Madam chair and committee
members I am speaking on behalf
of three fifteen New Mexico and
it's approximately eighty
thousand members we've all seen
photos of the horrible air
pollution in Beijing and other
climate disasters and communist
countries locally our democracy
gives us a pathway to protect
basic values like the right to
breathe clean air and drink
clean water we have seen how
laws and regulations like the
clean air act to be eroded and
this is why we need a
constitutional amendment please
vote yes on H. J. R. to to let
the people who voted for you
decide on this fundamental right
thank you very much.
Thank you.
Marlowe pager.
Thank you madam chair of the
committee I'm Marla Diener I
live in about new neighborhood
of the south Delhi Bernalillo
county and I'm president of not
you community action Mountain
View is an old working class
lowincome neighborhood in the
Rio next to the Rio Grande that
was primarily agricultural at
one time we as many as other
places in the state suffer from
inequitable impacts of industry
in our community and we we
cannot calculate the the effects
of the impacts because there is
insufficient health and
pollution monitoring and
industry is supposed to be
monitored by a combination of
city county and state agencies
but these agencies do not
coordinate no one agency has the
directive or the capacity to
adequately protect our health
and well being and
and cumulative impacts are never
considered so for us this is the
catastrophe we need a
constitutional amendment to
protect the health and safety of
our vulnerable residents and
right now we have no way to do
that thank you very much we
support HA are to.
David Grunfeld.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee.
Climate change will put
increasing pressure on our
environment and we cannot afford
not to have constitutional
protections to guarantee that
safe water air and soil are
recognized as fundamental
rights.
Thank you.
Thank you want to start.
Go ahead.
Let me just say if you're on the
phone it's not working so I
apologize
that may be an issue great
pagers.
Good evening madam chair members
of the committee on cricketers
senior advocate for conservation
voters New Mexico here in
support of the H. G. R. twos a
committee substitute for reasons
already well articulated by the
sponsors in previous commenters
well we respectfully urge it to
passcode thank you madam chair
and the other member Sanchez for
bringing the support bill
forward thank you for the
opportunity to provide comments
you.
Thank you we'll we'll have time
for two more Robert accordingly.
Go ahead Robert.
Okay well it Ortiz.
Thank you care can you hear me
yes thank you chair and
committee and thank you very
much Sanchez for this wonderful
H. J. R. two and substitute my
name is Janet wallet Ortiz and
I'm elected Democrat democratic
delegate to the SEC of voter and
a forty year resident of New
Mexico I stand in full support.
Of the substitute H. J. R. two
in the green amendment
specifically agreement would
enable bad permits to be voided.
Problems are fixed so it would
be an option to fix the problem
and then the permit will be
allowed to go forward it would
allow no sacrifice zones for
marginalized populations in
urban and rural areas it would
allow no misappropriation of
environmental funds it would
recognize our obligation to
future generations of clean air
water and land let the people
decide please vote yes if you
believe in democracy and allow
us to have a voice for the green
amendment thank you so much.
The last one will be June
Parsons.
Still trying to get.
I'm gonna take you last because
you're a panelist.
Honorable chairman
representatives my name is June
Parsons from Rio Rancho I'm
speaking in strong support of H.
J. R. to the green amendment New
Mexicans should without question
be given the democratic
opportunity to vote on
legislation so critical to our
health and well being of every
New Mexicans living today and
future generations your vote on
H. J. R. two will demonstrate
your confidence in our people to
make the best decisions for
themselves their families their
communities and their right to
do so please give New Mexicans
the opportunity to vote for a
healthier future for themselves
and our children by voting yes
on H. J. R. two thank you.
Thank you okay in room three oh
nine.
Good evening chair and committee
members might the names of the
increase to do low and I am the
on environmental justice caucus
as well as the veterans and
military affairs office and we
all are in support of this I'm
retired navy engineer and this
is a matter of the people taking
back the right to life on earth.
I've noticed that since EPA Kate
formed we seem to have lost that
right I grew up in North
Carolina remember the outrage of
the PCB's bills and in Florida
at the government taking care of
the sinkholes forming but I was
amazed and frankly just just
maybe assuming this regard to
the environment here in New
Mexico and it I found out is not
the people's choice but resigned
expectation resulting in poor
health and extreme concern for
our future all of our futures
please show all the people that
are government holds are right
and they act as trustees.
And it give us a government by
with and for the people again
vote for I do past of H. J. R.
two thank you.
Thank you is there anyone else
in three oh nine.
There is not thank you very much
okay with that let's go to back
to the committee thank you.
My pleasure.
So much is standing up in front
of everybody.
Sorry folks.
Okay.
I want to the proposed amendment
for discussion purposes and make
sure that everybody has that.
Very clear before we begin with
committee questions.
So
Do we yet in this your file.
Let me just ask the analyst.
Yes we do it is in the share
file okay
Members of the committee are you
clear on.
What the proposed amendment is
actually that's a terrible
question I use to try school
what I you need to say is is
there anyone who is not clear.
Representative average would you
live if clarified further.
Are down okay your anybody else
have questions.
What.
Madam madam chair what it what
is the amendment I don't it's
definitely not.
On email or in the shared drive.
Just got placed in the share
drive.
Because we didn't have it
earlier.
With the
Ellen commute by name please yes
you did your yes in the share
file and it's listed as H. J. R.
C. S. amendment I believe.
Mr speaker if.
The number is
triple two five five six point
two.
Madam chair I had to exit the
shared file and they go back in
for it to appear point where.
Okay I've got it thank you madam
chair.
As we Mr speaker my
understand you know.
My understanding for the Sanchez
is that it serves to remove the
executive and the
This is and beyond.
Land grants.
So what's the pleasure of the
committee with the amendment.
Right we have a motion for
Representative Quinn to adopt
the amendment I'll second that
is there discussion of the
amendment.
Representative when you're not
on them and then are you.
That's correct and on the bill
okay and Representative
Chandler.
And madam chairman the bill
okay.
The light.
Yeah I just put my hand down
because I'm on the bill okay
great all right let's call the
roll it out to the amendment.
Representative Alcon yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Chandler yes.
Representative could.
Mr speaker yes.
Representative Eli.
Yes.
Representative Lewis yes.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative nightmare yes.
Representative rain.
Yes.
Representative Townsend yes
ma'am.
I.
Madam chair yes.
Eleven zero we have been adopted
and we have with the drive down
and all right let's go to the
committee members on the bill
and in order I have the first
Representative McQueen.
Thank you madam chair
Madam chair members of the
committee we heard this bill
of nearly twice in House Energy
I.
Did not answer the first time
and I think the Sanchez for
coming back with a changes that
address my concerns in god that
the specially with the new
management
to a place where I feel I can.
I really supported.
The just just so you know that
the history
there were a number of changes
made one was dealing with the
use of the word fana.
And I I don't think it was the
intent but I read the bill to
give people a right to fund the
and not provide any protection
of that fund so it was sort of
in unintended right to hunt
rates trap which I can't
support.
There were cultural in also the
word scenic in you know I I
think cultural protection is
extremely important especially
in a place like New Mexico that
has such great cultural
resources but I didn't view it
as.
Alright then viral protection
that this amendment with was
aiming for so that was just it
was too much and it was
there there are considerations
of cultural protections.
Some things are cultural some
encouraging cultural traditions
maybe I think that should
continue I mean it changes over
time so
so passionate about that
and then also the the way it
it's been restructured.
It now relies heavily on the
trusty relationship.
Of
the state that seems like
creating yelp like that.
Sorry.
The trustee relationship of the
state per season out and so
we've limited it to
those political subdivisions
taking out of state yes land
grants so water conservation
districts all sorts of a little
political subdivisions.
The trustee relationship.
it brings a prize a process to
the consideration and it brings
us sort of policy that you know
a trustee
The.
Has some some leeway in how they
make decisions for the benefit
of all the beneficiaries and I
think all New Mexicans would be
beneficial.
So it's not just
it's the supplement in that way
but it does also provide to
remit cheery all the standard
of the regional bill in my
opinion you could have
challenged any governmental
decision including
administrative decisions like
issuing a building permit.
Think because the trustee
language that's challenging
something like that is really
off the table will really
talking about our big decisions
L. eight large and.
And so I just to serve one to
update the committee about why.
I changed my mind on the bill it
became supporter and I hope it I
hope this is through this
committee.
Thank you Madam.
Representative Chandler.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Sanchez had many conversations
with you about this bill
And I've raised many issues
relating to it so first of all
madam speaker and
Sanchez could you tell me how
you envision our citizens
utilizing this constitutional
amendment and force their rights
the exact mechanisms please
madam speaker and Sanchez.
Thank you well first of all it's
it's a directive to all of us in
state county city governments to
consider the environment in
decision making
and so that is that is very
important and then with regard
with with regard to specific
enforceability has you know our
rules of civil procedure allow
citizens to enforce the
constitution and in some
circumstances and this makes it
clear that
this is the that these rights
are enforceable part by our
citizens and so I have read the
appellate cases in that have
used this indent and normally
what happens is that up for
example a permit is granted and
the permit is granted without
any consideration of the impact
on the environment so that it
but sometimes they raise it in
the context of granting the
permit and then department is
considered because they realize
they have to consider it but
sometimes they don't and its
appeal what I like about this
amendment is when it's raised
with the subdivision granting
the permit and when the
environment is taken into
account we could avoid problems
and that's what I think is
particularly important is
avoiding problems not paying
damages for the harm that might
occur but avoiding problems and
preventing them
and I'll just give you an
example of one basis I thought
was pretty interesting in
Montana which was the case
involving the the drilling of
the of the exploratory of that
the of you Goldman mining
company wanting to drill some
exploratory wells.
And they had failed the the
agency that granted permits for
the Exploratorium's had taken
and fail to take into account
the impact on the water and what
that would mean for downstream
farmers and for a creek in the
Yellowstone.
And the this was raised on
appeal and the court said simply
the environment needs to be
taken into account the impact on
the stream and the impact on the
on the water needs to be taken
into account and it was sent
back to the agency to take it
into account that's the client
that's very very typical
normally what the court does in
these kinds of cases is of the
cases filed and the court looks
to see what are the state
standards and did the state
comply with them what is the
environment taking into account
so I see that happening.
The other thing that I see
happening is madam chair I think
privative would help a quite a
bit apologize but there are four
hands up madam chair and I have
a number of questions so I don't
mean to be disrespectful sponsor
but I think what I asked was
what are the mechanisms so maybe
I could help you I understand my
question better and I apologize
for interrupting but.
As I said I seems for hands up
and then we have many of us have
direct questions and we have a
floor session for tonight so
madam chair at the Eric chance
would be able to answer I think
more directly to if you can.
Next question right now okay go
ahead Representative Chandler.
Let's talk about the Civil
Rights Act I've had a
conversation with you maybe that
will help us actually focus on
what I'm talking about madam
chair on I have had
conversations with both of the
Sanchez about my concerns
regarding the intersection of
this constitutional amendment
amends the bill of rights and
how it will be implemented
through Civil Rights Act so
let's talk a little bit about
what that act as
at at allow those individuals to
see to
Governmental and entities and
individuals is that not right.
It doesn't allow individual
space suit.
No that's not.
And so that is one mechanism are
there other mechanisms you have
to have a cause of action
etcetera I know that you're a
former law professor so let's
talk about the cause of actions
that we have here we have the
Civil Rights Act that's an
that's a vehicle what other
causes of action are essentially
available to a US citizen and
the state well I really
appreciate the opportunity to
talk with the Civil Rights Act
because while
While the other states don't
have the Civil Rights Act
Pennsylvania does does have
discretionary authority to award
attorneys fees to a prevailing
party and so that gives us some
insight into whether the
provision allows for an award of
attorneys fees and I know from
my discussions that was the that
was the concern and so we did
additional research and then
awarded the for attorney fees
available in Pennsylvania is in
in none of these particular
cases was a cost of litigation
actually awarded
and it really suggests that New
Mexico's be shifting opportunity
under the Civil Rights Act is
likely not to be a spark for
massive litigation because that
didn't happen in Pennsylvania
and it is also to be very
unlikely that it would be
awarded with regularity that
would encourage that spark and
litigation because the courts
under the Civil Rights Act the
courts have discretion to award
it to a prevailing party.
Chance of excuse me could I just
continue with my questions madam
chair.
I do want to correct something I
have the copy of the civil
rights act fund me section five.
It thank the court may at its
discretion allow a prevailing
plaintiff or plaintiffs
reasonable attorney's fees so
plaintive the those are the
citizens that may choose to
utilize this loss a let's
correct that that we would lose
prevailing parties in federal
law I think you're right
prevailing plaintiff is in the
in in the Civil Rights Act so
municipality or sub Garcia are
County who was sued they would
be sustaining their own
attorney's fees and should they
prevail against an individual
who brought an action they would
not be able to recover anything
attorney's fees they might be
able to recover costs under our
usual procedures is that not
right Sanchez that that's
correct madam chair.
Are there any other avenues that
citizens in the state might
choose any other causes of
action that citizens in the
state and I'm talking causes of
actions what what would they be.
Okay I can imagine because this
has already happened in New
Mexico so during the Richardson
administration they
painstakingly that that
administration painstakingly
pass regulations over the course
of eight years and within ten
months the Martinez
administration who revert
seminary summarily reversed
them.
And so it because of the action
would be against those agencies
that summarily reverse them to
require at least the same
processes that it were required
to enact them has has to reverse
them and that's why I started
out by saying legislative probe
and preserving the legacy and
the important work that our
governor has has done with
regard to the environment
because it would be a disaster
if four years from now we
elected some of the governor
that wanted to reverse all of
the advances with regard to the
environment and this would
require a consideration of the
environment before they were
reversed and the impact on the
environment for they were
reversed and that's very
important that's the kind of
cause of action that is very
important to me one of Michael's
one of my big concerns in
choosing to sponsor this
ammendment.
One of my concerns in
Supporting this amendment and
and is the fact that we're
abdicating the legislators
prerogatives and how we define a
violation of arm that
fundamental flaws so for example
senator you noted some
regulations that were overturned
we have the ability to enact
legislation such as the methane
rule that I'm very proud that
our current governor has and
enacted in if we did that
although not a perfect solution
it's a solution that is done
through the democratic process
what's your reaction to that why
hasn't we instead chosen to
pursue aggressive violent
environmental laws instead of
going this route we're we're
relying on the courts to define
what is protection of our
environment.
Thank you madam chair and that
is an excellent question but in
New Mexico the court prohibited
from substituting their of forty
for that of the legislative
branch of government and for
agencies each has its role and
when you suggest of the Courts
New Mexico would overstep
federal that's that's on founded
there is a lot of New Mexico
case law that confirms that
position for example in privacy
Homestake mining under the
separation of powers doctrine
courts may not inquire into
statutory policy and may not
substitute their views in the
formulation of legislative
provisions or classifications
and there is that same deference
to agency
in fact in our team has B. the
the Sanford Stanford.
Sanders read the Martinez case
in fact that's what the court
did is they had that deference
to the Martinez administration
agency decisions which summarily
reversed them with no
consideration of what that meant
for our environment.
Madam chair and senator what you
just described was the fact that
the courts
Should not.
To to place their views in the
place of the legislature's okay
I accept that but that's not
what we're talking about here
madam chair and senator what
we're talking about is asking
the courts to determine what
Protecting a clean and healthy
environment including water air
solar slopes I'm reading I think
probably the wrong one because I
just saw the word flora which
seem to be a determining point
and Representative McQueen is
determination as to whether or
not to support this amendment
or.
This particular constitutional
amendment so I'm I'm looking at
the wrong one but let's see
here.
A clean healthy air water soil
and the environment
so normally madam chair that's
it would be within the
responsibility of the
legislature to create laws that
that protected those items those
particular important values but
in this case we're creating a
constitutional right that could
be enforced to the search Civil
Rights Act for the courts to
determine whether a municipality
or the state is engaging in
activities that are are
protecting or not protecting
clean air water soil and the
environment thereby creating
their own body of law through
which our citizens will have to
I guess.
So tell me about that.
That's what I'm talking about
isn't in I'm not a non
democratic process thank you
madam chair with the courts if
you read all of the opinions
dealing with these issues if you
read the written appellate
opinions with the courts direct
is four is first and they look
to what are the state standards
what has the legislature done
what are the regulations in
order to define these terms so
they look to what we have done
has legislators and what the
agencies have done first before
and and that's where they look
to for the definitions.
And so it doesn't they don't
substitute their judgment so
clean water would be what is
defined by state law or even
perhaps federal law it or if
there was a local regulation
that's what that the courts
would always look to first is
what have we done and did the
agency comply with those
standards.
They don't create new standards
and that's generally true in in
this kind of litigation.
Okay fair enough madam chair and
senator then why aren't you
pursuing legislation that simply
creates a private cause of
action will citizens will be
able to look to the laws that
the legislature of enacted and
then those citizens would have
have the ability to enforce
those laws if they're not
satisfied with either the
administration or this or under
forcing agencies so help me
understand why that's not the
solution to the issue that
you're presenting here because
we're not interested in opening
the door wide what we're
focusing on the environment with
this with this
With this ammendment we're not
interested and I and I'm not
sure what you're talking about
we talk about private cause of
action private cause of action
against individual polluters is
available under nuisance law
which I should want I should
mention that that case that was
described in in the comments
that I think it's Diana's crazy
idea LLC versus crazy mountain
wind that was a nuisance case
the case against the wind farms
and it was not it didn't have
anything to do with Montana's
freemen.
Yes and we need Eric to weigh in
on this too please Mr dance well
I'm not sure that we have a law
professor with whom I'm speaking
Representative I and I'm
satisfied that she's capable of
answering these questions madam
chair so.
Our.
It is true that the Erik Jantz
has much more litigation
experience than I do and if you
have something to add I think
that that would be important so
I certainly defer to you.
I'm sorry madam chair you're on
mute.
Thank you talking myself.
Yes Mr chance to make a quick
response thank you madam chair
and Representative Chandler I
just want to add to Senator city
location.
that one of the benefits of
having agreed amendment is that
it will plug the gaps and
current legislative frameworks
right so right now for example
there are all kinds of issues
with P. by contamination
and from Air Force bases and
those are regulated under state
law or for that matter federal
you have the the Halliburton
loophole in the safe drinking
water act
which would which creates a gap
for protecting on groundwater
officers so plugging those gaps
in existing frameworks is
something that the green
amendment would do that citizen
suit provisions to existing
statutes with.
So I appreciate the opportunity
thank you.
madam chair thank you for that
answer Mr Janse so we could rely
on the courts to fill those gaps
or we could potentially rely on
ourselves to fill those gaps.
Is that not right madam chair
and Senator and Representative
I'm that would be terrific if we
did but we are very very part
time legislature has you know
and as you know many good
environmental bills don't make
it through because of simply the
lack of time and so I I mean are
legislature was was founded our
our our our process was founded
when we had but what is ranchers
from all over the state coming
to Santa Fe literally in their
covered wagons working on a few
bills and then going home and
now what's happening is we have
many many problems such as such
as you describe and we can't get
those bills sufficiently vetted
and we can't get them through
the process.
So unfortunately our legislature
honestly is not equipped to do
as you suggest.
Madam chair.
And gentle lady or shall I say
Senator we could work on fixing
our legislative process so we
actually have the tools at least
in your money to do what we need
to do or we could pass a
constitutional amendment that
advocates those
responsibilities and forces our
citizens to seek litigation to
fill gaps that we are unwilling
or unable to do and I I must
confess madam chair that the
answer really fall short for me
as as as a sound basis for
pursuing this activity I would
love to work with Representative
Senator Lopez a city a Lopez and
my dear Kali Representative
Ferrary to actually overhaul the
let our legislature which a
number of us madam chair and
Sanchez are actually working on
but if we did that then we would
have the ability to be more
effective and so many topical
areas not just the area of
environment so I'm looking
forward to that dialogue but to
me pursuing this because we do
not have the tools in our tool
box to legislate really it
strikes me as
Falling short of our
responsibilities so with that I
see a number of hands up and I
have a suspicion that they'll be
pursuing some this line of
questioning as well madam chair
and senators and Sanchez thank
you.
Mr speaker.
Thank you madam chair.
I.
I had a few points that I want
to cover up but I have I really
have to take issue with the
notion that the legislature is
not equipped.
To tackle big issues
I ate it remain incredibly proud
of the Energy transitioned Act
which said New Mexico on the
most aggressive time line in the
country to carbon free
electricity we have house bill
six that is pursuing as which is
my bill within days and small
that we are working to try to
decarbonize our economy.
it is you know I think it looks
like Senate is gonna have to be
brought back that just yet in in
a future session but just
because a bill doesn't pass on
his first attempt.
Is not meeting that the
legislature isn't equipped to
take serious action on climate.
We last session passed the
Senate bill nine or ten senator
Wirth to allow the state to
adopt regulations more stringent
than their federal counterparts
we are seeing all sorts of
positive benefits flow from that
and I have to yeah I I have to
mention the Civil Rights Act.
Madam chair and and I think it's
relevant to this conversation
because I'm.
This is trying this would insert
a a new injury.
Into a civil rights click.
That bill was as heavy left as I
have seen in my.
Thirteen years in the
legislature.
And.
It took.
Six months of work I believe by
the New Mexico Civil Rights
Commission.
Coming up with answers to
address all of the questions
that are being presented here in
the energy committee and Senate
committees as well.
To get the specifics of how this
would work.
Thank you know we had Madam
chair representative Chandler
ask very specific questions you
know what is the cause of action
what is the standard of proof
how do you demonstrate standing
I in I am I'm not a civil rights
lawyer as it said that over and
over again in the last session
I will say that I did one I've
been one so rights case in my
entire life it was the first
amendment case the do not seek
damages and
That's it so I don't know about
you know thank you so rights
claims.
From personal experience.
But I do know that.
In order to get the Civil Rights
Act to give it to you anything
like a fighting chance to get
past.
We created the Civil Rights
Commission and they did work in
the commission studies state
issued a hundred page report
that really dug deep and
surveyed every state to see how
they handle the issues of police
violence and qualified immunity
madam chair and.
And and we did that so that when
we got very directs specific
pointed questions which we knew
we were going to get we had
answers they were just for me as
the co sponsor of that bill
along with chairman Lewis I'm we
had retired Chief Justice of the
Supreme Court we had experienced
federal prosecutors we had
professional civil rights
litigators to participate in and
be part of this I watched almost
the entirety of both hearings in
the energy committee.
And.
We saw a debate where we
questions about you know who's
the plaintiff and who's the
defendant.
Not really answered with much
specificity and madam chair we
start questions about you know
what could be the impact.
on economic development projects
that might be percent
Albuquerque and
yeah I got answers that we're
sort of to me unfortunately
unsatisfactory because if we're
gonna embark on something this
significant we have to know what
all of the consequences are or
are likely to be and we have to
spend a lot of time thinking
through unintended consequences.
And I don't think we're there
yet madam chair
I.
Like for example we had justice
hearing mention of P. foster
contamination from an air base
and of it can Air Force base in
eastern New Mexico.
So madam chair maybe Mr chance
would you help me explain how
how the New Mexico Civil Rights
Act.
Could be used against the Air
Force.
To me how how how could this
constitutional amendment lead to
any relief to any person
relating to be fast
contamination.
We that's a that's a very
specific claim it would have to
be brought with this amendment
under New Mexico Civil Rights
Act hi how do you make a claim.
Mr speaker I'd like to have
elevated cliff yes we might be
able to answer that more
appropriately Representative
Ferrary the speaker asked Eric
and he's here and so I I think
that the last two doesn't feel
able to answer that question
let's go with that.
Okay we also elevate clip.
Our future.
Thank you madam chair Mr speaker
so in in in the case of P. fonts
against the federal government
there would have.
The the plaintiff would be
obviously somebody was damage I
I understand that there is at
least one dairy farm who's lost
their business because of the P.
by contamination
are those people those farmers
would be able to assert their
constitutional right against
under the state constitution.
Either reserve the the Civil
Rights Act or because the
constitutional member of the so
that's executing on its own
the defendant would have to be
the with the certainly the
federal government there might
be claims of sovereign immunity
raise but you know at least that
that that farmers would have.
Recourse where is now they have
not they're broke and there
their herds are decimated.
Maintenance so let me just let
me jump in because this
illustrates my deep concern
perfectly okay the amendment
that we are considering creates
a cause of action against the
state of New Mexico and against
counties and cities so by the
text of the amendment madam
chair.
You can sue the state of New
Mexico counties and cities and
we just heard an answer we could
use this to sue the federal
government but that is clearly
not possible under the text of
the amendment the tenth eleven
amendments also prohibit that
you cannot see the federal
government and state court.
So that's a second problem with
the answer madam chair there are
probably the answer madam chair
is the statement of the that
that that that dairy farm has no
recourse which is absolutely not
correct federal tort claims act.
Lames they are allowable you're
under any number of
environmental claims the federal
tort claims act is right there
in that case has been filed is
being pursued.
And so madam chair it it makes
me very nervous because we have
this.
Concept that has been.
Presented to people as though
this.
Is going to fix everything.
It is wrong with environmental
regulations in the state.
And I picked it just the one
example that was given in this
committee meeting madam chair.
And the example is given.
Has no recourse through this
ammendment.
Being held out madam chair is
like this is how we're going to
give recourse to those dairy
farmers if it's not available
for them because there's no
claim that the state of New
Mexico or city or county created
that contamination madam chair
that leads me to my next my next
concert.
Is.
For the entirety of all federal
litigation and soon to be I
imagine civil rights claims
filed here so rights claims are
about injury individual rights
under the constitution.
Some way in which government
action causes specific
definable injury to an
individual person.
Speech property gun rights
religion right to be free in my
papers and effects free from
unreasonable search and seizure
sectors such unusual by creating
our usual punishing.
In order for there to be a
claim.
And and I I disagree that the
that language madam chair that
this ammendment self executing
creates a new cause of action.
I don't think that's the case I
don't think that you can have
something in the in the
constitution that says itself
executing and then.
All of a sudden there's a new
lawsuit that exists
but if there's if there's common
law from another state that that
says I'm wrong on that I think
that's that's fine but.
In order for this to be used
we've got to find some way in
which an individual person
suffers ECECD nice little injury
to one of the
elements contained in here so we
have in the text.
Now with the Energy Environment
natural resource committee
substitute we're no longer
talking about rights.
So I think that's something that
all literally all of the emails
that I received madam chair
every tweet that went out every
statement that was made says
please protect my rights to
clean air clean water etcetera.
That's not here anymore madam
chair when you read the text it
says the people of the state
shall be entitled to clean and
healthy air water soil and
environment a stable climate
self sustaining ecosystem for
the benefit of the public health
safety and general welfare.
So madam chair maybe it's the
you know.
You know why do we keep hearing
around talk about their rights
when they come when the tax
before just deleted a reference
to rights and now we have
entitlement so I one question is
what is the difference under the
law between a right and
entitlement to how does the
difference between right and
title meant specifically.
Act litigation that would be
brought what claims can I make
if it's right versus what claims
can I make is an injured person
if it's an entitlement.
You want to.
Click Mr yes answer that.
Madam whomever the I think the
Sanchez.
I I am happy to talk about that
and also I I I did want to say
in all fairness every time you
bring the claim you do research
on the claim so it's so
basically what would happen with
which she described against the
against the the claim against
the federal government under the
federal tort claims act is there
would have to be research before
you do it and you find out what
kind of claim you have and so I
I didn't think it was fair to to
just kind of throw that without
any opportunity for research but
with regard to your question
about the difference between
entitlement and and right we
change the language of of right
to entitlement because
And and I probably should defer
to to Representative McQueen to
chairman queen because of his
concern that people conceive of
Rights has unfettered that there
would be no balancing and has
much as I tried to say over and
over again to people that this
would always be a balance every
constitutional claim is a
balance and just in the civil
rights cases you described the
courts would be
determining whether there was
appropriate balance between the
environment the state's interest
in protecting the environment
and the ended individual harm
and and and look at that and
what I understood chair McQueen
to stay is people would bring
lawsuits because they would
think that they had an absolute
unfettered right and so we
changed the language to
accommodate that and so the
signal here is this like all
constitutional claims and all
civil rights claim is a
balancing test the balancing act
we to college and law school.
Okay I.
There's a lot there madam chair
that.
We're we're getting into what I
think would be pretty.
Deep in the weeds conversations
about constitutional law that
lays out.
Distinctions between
entitlements rights how they're
enforced.
I.
I just don't know if it if it.
I don't that makes a difference
the fact that I don't know if it
makes a difference.
Tells me that we should wait and
do some more work on this so
that we can answer this question
specifically with citations to
cases that have been brought out
so even even outside of the
United States.
To to say you know here's a case
where someone you know is able
to get something I write in this
is how someone got some by title
it I think madam chair might
actually be the opposite of what
we just heard because if you
have an entitlement such as you
know the context which are
familiar with entitlements is in
the area of like social security
or other government benefits
that is an absolute bill yeah if
you have earned an entitlement
you have an absolute ability to
obtain it thank you which you
are entitled.
Rights are not unfettered right
to the freedom of speech the
freedom of yeah under this new
devices amendment are not
unlimited right we do place
limitations on those rights when
we have any number of kinds
regulations and.
As long as they are.
You know we had a whole panoply
of ways we should do that I.
I think I have also.
Some real concerns in how
individuals would.
Be able to assert a claim that
they are individually if
particularly injured by actions
of the state relating to.
Not being able not receiving
their title to stable climate.
I can't really conceded how one
person stated there specifically
and indirectly injured by action
of the state for failure to have
a a stable climate.
I don't know how a person kids
could even show that they have a
particularized specific injury
arising from lack of receipt of
a self sustaining ecosystem.
I think the because this is
brought and the disturbing
actual under the Civil Rights
Act you could have class actions
that finding commonality of
claims sufficient to have a
class certified I think would be
a huge challenge
and.
And I and I think the the repeal
that's the other thing that no
one is talked about in in this
meeting and in none of the
emails in other social media.
This article this amendment
would
repeal section twenty one of the
constitution.
And there's extensive analysis
from the attorney general's
office expressing grave concern
that repeal would undermine all
of the environmental
conservation laws that the
legislature has enacted.
Yes we would not have specific
constitutional authority to do
that we would then be relying
back on our general police power
and I have no idea what that
would mean for our state's
conservation environmental laws.
And that.
Because I have no idea I feel
like that should be at least you
know answerable for research no
what it means when you repeal
section like that when we have
environmental laws enacted
pursuant to the grant of those
powers I'm there's a lot of
other stuff that I have that is
become.
This and so I'm in there I'm
gonna stop there madam chair I
just think I as I said from the
beginning the idea of securing
the environment and.
Responding aggressively to
climate change making sure we do
everything in our legislative
power to put New Mexico on the
direction of being a carbon free
economy is among my highest
priorities and has been since I
was first elected here I I'm
just concerned that this is not
going to meet the mark could
have.
Significant unintended
consequences and from my from my
point needs to be.
better fleshed out from a
constitutional law perspective
thank you madam chair.
Mr speaker thank you I'm going
to give the Sanchez
Three minutes to close before I
take a motion.
From Representative Alcon.
Thank you madam chair and I'd
like Mr click the add to save
you words and a rebuttal of you
know some of the things that
were sent.
Thank you percent.
Thank you.
I appreciate all the comments
that I've I've heard appreciate
all the effort going into this
just a couple of notes I I teach
constitutional rights at UNM and
I've taught and practiced
environmental law office thirty
years I know how these cases
work most cases you must
understand never going to trial
I never get this is my judge
they never end up in any kind of
award of damages much less
treaties what basis do though is
allow parties who experience
actual injury to address
problems cases can be filed the
almost always result in
negotiations and during those
negotiations you bring in other
fact it's P. foss is a new
emerging contamination in some
ways but you may be surprised to
know that something like this
process which is been no killer
for two thousand years is still
unregulated in commerce you can
still find wrongly batteries
with the stress test and
remembered would actually find
thanks to address concerns a
real injuries people die from
asbestosis mesothelioma and yes
there are tort actions for that
but if it happens that there is
some state actor there's also
engaging and as fast as activity
which could be buildings or
something like that there should
be in some kind of redress for
people who are injured
constitutional rights can also
be self executing the Fourth
Amendment search and seizure in
self executing if you go on to
someone's private property
without a warrant as a state
actor that I can be of a libel
consequence under the
constitution the Fourth
Amendment today and so there's
there's the legislature's very
powerful but the legislature
will never be able to fill all
the gaps in our environment
regulations and that's with the
green amendment is about some
means it's identifying real
issues in providing a forum to
address those issues and to
solve problems for people I'm
people in the community people
environment also small companies
small businesses might be
injured as well.
The house was closed.
I just want to say that this
parade of portables that were
were raised in these creative
professionals are answerable and
answered if if you look at the
history of what is been
happening in Montana and in
Pennsylvania this parade of
horrible's didn't happen this
parade of
this is all these questions have
been answered there's they're
standing there is a cause of
action plan and has has a
professor via pointed out often
these Kayser said cases are
settled there's there's between
four and twelve cases a year in
in the states that have a green
amendments so it hasn't resulted
in a parade of litigation and
each case that has and I think
what professors like me rely too
long too much on appellate
decision that read the appellate
decisions but what it reveals is
very few cases end up in the
court of appeals and when they
did the results were excellent.
Korabl laws were voided and
permits that were in Providence
Lee granted were were reversed
for reconsideration those were
great results and that's what we
needed the state at this time
more than ever and I don't think
we have time to waste risk
researching these questions
climate change is upon us and we
should do this now thank you
madam chair.
I want to thank everybody and as
a co sponsor of this
legislation I intend to I want
to express my favor for it I
think honestly.
Everyone is so very very
concerned about climate change
and I hear you Mr speaker with
what you have on dedicated your
your efforts to and I commend
you for those but I found myself
I I know that with regard to a
private right of action speaker
Ben Lujan could look at that
bill passed
Representative Georgene Louis
couldn't get that bill passed we
used to joke that if you're not
getting losing a bill on the
floor of the house you're not
trying hard enough and so I
commend both of them for having
done this and I've certainly had
my share of listing on the floor
of the house but
I I and I also know that I
haven't been able to get a state
environmental protection act
passed so I I felt challenged
and I do hear that people would
like the opportunity to go to
the polls and weigh in on this
perhaps there's a more elegant
way to do it but right now I
just wanted to support the
concept.
Representative Oakland.
Thank you madam chair at this
band regretfully I move to table
of.
The rest of.
The location for you
Representative all clone that he
regretfully tech moves to table
and I don't know who said
second.
Barber Representative Nibert is
seconded that motion so the
clerk to call the roll.
Representative well current.
Representative Armstrong.
Has.
Representative Chandler.
Yes.
Representative Cook yes.
Mr speaker yes.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Lewis.
Representative McQueen no.
Representative Nibert yes ma'am.
Representative rain yes ma'am.
Representative Townsend yes
ma'am.
Thank.
Yes.
Madam chair.
You okay.
You need to go back to
representative Armstrong.
Representative Armstrong.
She Torren but also I know
No.
Okay.
I have
tend to agree we have a.
to table the bill.
Ninety three oh someone's.
Sorry nine three were missing
Representative Cook was not.
I'm here I did.
Who did you vote in it was
Representative Lewis is Lewis is
not present okay all right voted
ninety three the house straight
resolution to has been table.
Thank you madam chair we
appreciate that this is.
Sorry.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee thank you very
much.
Thanks.
Because of the.
We.
Point four version of house bill
one forty five members we
already have a motion on the
table.
Or in the air I guess I should
say.
I would like to take the boat at
this time unless there's any
objection.
Madam chair madam chair this is
Doug Kendall Gallagher and I'm
sorry to interrupt but in
looking at the point four
version on page three is that
there is a reference to twenty
twenty two as it relates to the
first term of the but some and.
We we need to change that we can
I think we can vote on this and
get the point I just to is that
the only technical issue that.
that's as far as I have seen
yes.
We we are meeting tomorrow
morning at nine but
I would not mind taking the vote
on this because if we have to
change page three line eight.
Change twenty twenty to twenty
twenty three.
And I'm sure I'm happy to amend
my motion to the point five
version okay.
Hello all.
Jackson that.
I have
call the roll please madam chair
at that I think this is a I
heard someone say to clarify
what we're voting on this would
be the that the ombudsman Bill
number here.
Working
with the delayed implementation
correct yes.
And madam chair this is that
kind of Gallagher again is there
a second I didn't.
I will say.
I think it was hello
Representative neighbors who
seconded the motion.
If I was and I will call now
okay.
The speaker made the motion.
And we decided that all we had
to do is come back to it and
vote thank you very much for
calling that.
And we're only for attention.
Okay we're ready to go ahead
Senator with the rules
Representative Alcon.
Yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Chandler yes.
Representative Cook yes.
Mr speaker yes.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Lewis.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert yes.
Representative rain yes ma'am.
Representative Townsend yes
ma'am.
Thank.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Well two zero we have a do not
pass on house bill one forty
five but they do pass on HTC's
substitute for one forty five.
Okay thank you very much
everybody should find work on
this.
We have Senate bill four.
Our first Senate bill this.
It may be.
Representative Chandler you
press presenting Senate bill
four I am madam chair my
apologies
multi tasking here.
But I will
I.
Definitely increase estrace
remedy and I will do my very
best to keep this direct and to
the point M.
S. and madam chair I do have an
expert Shane you and I
understand he is amongst the
attendees.
While he's being elevated I'll
give the introduction so I don't
want I don't want to keep keep
the committee longer than I need
to
if you raise your hand like a
master.
Change raise your hand.
Is there.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair this bill
amends a provision and
the prevailing wage law that
requires construction
contractors who work on public
works to pay something called
the prevailing wage the
prevailing wage is determined
every year and is made effective
January one of every year and
there's a process for
determining that prevailing wage
which I won't go into unless the
committee needs more detail but
what we but a problem has arisen
in implementing the prevailing
wage and that problem derives
from the fact that there is a
regulatory provision that
provides that if there is an
appeal of a prevailing wage
determination.
That yield stays the
implementation of the prevailing
wage that it has been determined
to be enough to become effective
for all employees who work on
public contracts.
This is cause problems because
it is yes the ability to state
the prevailing wage in our
opinion has been abused and
because what happens is it's
appealed and then it goes to
court so we could be stayed for
months on end denying workers
the ability to receive the wage
that they are too so this bill
and it was amended and prior
committees changes that it does
not state the provision but
instead
requires that someone if they
wish to stay
the prevailing wage
determination in Moscow
to court and provided showing
that it should be state and with
that madam chair all stop and
ask my expert who supplement my
comments if he feels it's
appropriate.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Chandler very
briefly do affect of the current
situation with the statute is
that for example in twenty
twenty one.
Federally tens of thousands of
employees working on public
works projects did not receive
the minimum wage because of an
appeal that was filed claiming
that notice was given twenty
nine days instead of thirty days
and that the department of
workforce solutions website was
down for six states it was a
frivolous appeal but it's still
pending in District Court and as
a consequence literally
thousands of people did not get
the minimum wage person
prescribed by the department of
workforce solutions and this
simply fixes that problem and
allows for an outlet where is
state is appropriate and and
requires judicial approval of
that state it's it did that is
proposed legislation is that
simple.
Thank you.
Thank you let me see if there is
no the reddit fresco the
audience.
Is there any eight participants
here who would like to
indicate their favor for our
disfavor for Senate bill four
we'll do a quick Paul twenty
seconds.
We're ready to start so please
wait in.
Okay we have twelve people in
favor one against I think what
I'll do is let one person speak
against and maybe how about
three people in favor and we'll
try to we're trying to get out
of here.
We wanted to leave fifteen
minutes ago so please keep your
comments brief.
All right
So I got people at the top.
Who would the person who is in
opposition like to speak.
Well let me just go ahead and
are from the top Ricky Serna.
Go ahead.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee thank
you for your time any mystery
concern the acting cabinet
secretary department of
workforce solutions the agency
responsible for.
The thirty minister in the
building wage rate laws we are
in support of this bill we thank
the sponsors for bringing it
forward and we stand ready for
implementation that.
Right.
Thank you madam chair I I will I
will defer to the eloquent
presentation of our bill sponsor
on behalf of the fifteen ability
construction units of the New
Mexico building trades we stand
firmly and completely in support
of this legislation thank you.
Daryl together
They're all.
Baker.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is John
Baker on the political affairs
director for you a local for
twelve that's a plumber and
pipefitters union this is a
loophole that must be must be
closed and we stand in strong
support of this legislation ask
you to vote yes on Senate bill
four thank you.
Thank you.
You know local.
Sixteen.
Hi my name is Joey Atencio on
the business manager secretary
treasurer of laborers local
union number sixteen we stand as
strong support of this bill
thank you.
John which is.
Go ahead John.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee John that you it's
with the New Mexico federation
of labor AFL-CIO representing
over twenty five different labor
union affiliates across the
street state and over thirty
thousand union members we stand
in strong support of this
measure and thank the sponsor
for caring that thank you.
Josh Anderson.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Josh Anderson with
us Council eighteen want to
thank both of our sponsors for
bringing this forward and urged
support of the committee thank
you madam chair.
Thank you.
Looks like we have everyone who
wanted to speak let's go now to
committee members.
I'm pretty sure Representative
reed has his handout.
Sure we think about.
okay let me go.
To that.
Mr Espinoza I don't really know
why you're still a panelists but
I don't think we can take you
down to be at intended get.
Committee member and I'm ready
to go to the committee okay Sir
at public comment just on behalf
of the industry because I know
labor spoke and I just a comment
on behalf of industry on the
stock okay I think it quick
because I couldn't find anyone
from industry so go ahead okay
then yeah yeah madam chair
members the committee chase
that's been as a registered
lobbyist for the national
electrical contractors
association associated general
contractors of New Mexico and
the mechanical and sheet metal
contractors associations of New
Mexico we stand in support of
the legislation the current
appeals process does because in
equities between contractors
would betting for drugs for
projects and we do believe that
this legislation will create a
more equitable playing field for
comfort contractors will be for
public projects so we stand in
support of legislation thank you
well that's good thank you I.
It be in opposition this is that
the industry all right let's go
back to the
Let's go to the committee now we
don't need to at the time are
out there.
First I have Representative
Alcon.
Thank you madam chair I would do
pass on Senate bill was amended.
Second madam chair that's all I
wanted to do okay so we have a
motion and a second for a do
pass on Senate bill four is
there discussion from committee
members.
Seeing no hands raised of
committee members let's go to
the clerk to call the roll.
Representative Alcon.
Yes.
Representative Armstrong.
Yes.
Representative Chandler yes.
Representative Cook yes.
Mr speaker.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Lewis yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert.
Program.
Representative rain no ma'am.
Representative Townsend.
Yes.
Madam chair yes.
By a vote of ninety three we
have a two passed on Senate bill
four is amended.
Thank you very much thank you
for the rapid presentation.
Let me see if we can get our
last item here tonight in some
street resolution.
Did you check to see if you
could get a mock house joint
resolution twelve.
Representative Eli wants to
present this if we can't find
the Sanchez.
Chair hi I'm happy to present
the sponsor so.
But I think you're the rest of
the spells and.
All right madam chair.
Representative.
Do we have Representative Lord
or Pettigrew.
We are making that call right
now.
Madam chair.
Yes Representative.
You're you're me you did that.
So I'm not now
Hello I think what we're gonna
do folks we.
Forty minutes before we have to
be back on the floor we're going
to go ahead and roll this over
to the morning we're gonna be
starting at nine and we can take
care of it that let's adjourn
now and I will see you on the
floor and see you tomorrow
morning.
And if if I get up early enough
depending on how late we stay
all bring some donuts you have
to come by the office to
promote.
So we're turned.
