Read.
Representative Rehm.
Representative Penske.
Madam vice chair madam chair
here madam chair you have a
quorum.
Okay so just kind of for merry
issues we're gonna be rolling
house bill three thirty seven I
will be starting with house bill
I
just in terms of process we will
be allowing of course for public
comment we will be limiting each
side to a total of fifteen
minutes each and the supplies to
all of the items that we here
today and each speaker will be
asked to limit there's comments
to ninety seconds or a minute
and a half so I just want to all
know that's that's the process
also for photographs and videos
are not permitted unless they've
been coordinated with the chair
in advance
I think that pretty much covers
the concerned about the posters
signs in yes No holding we I
agree with you we don't yeah
thank you very much to.
Appreciate you.
All right.
Representative Kate's.
You very much madam chair and
committee I'm here to present
House Bill five I have two
expert witnesses once my rate is
James Grayson who is the deputy
AG and then I have Daymon Ely on
zoom he's my seconds
expert witness of the bill in
front of you it's just to make
improvements to the government
contact act we need to.
Updated so that it reflects the
hatch act from the federal
government there was also
several cases that it's
was were presented I'm so sorry
madam chair we have an
amendment.
let's start with that.
Maybe you licenses.
Thank.
Thank you madam chair and
committee so the changes were
based on a couple of
Requests by New Mexico Supreme
Court on the the we have cases
state versus good terrace and
other cases that they needed
clarification in the anti
corruption of section of the
government contact act they
needed some clarification on the
quid pro quo
there it panel to use for on
violations of this act had not
been adjusted since I think
nineteen ninety five and so
there is financial adjustment
for that as well.
Okay and now somebody in for
discussion the amendment that I
think you have on your desk.
Thank you motion by
Representative Rehm would you
read the two to five number
force please certainly.
Point two two five six two three
point one okay thank you so tell
us about the amendment so of
when drafting bills presenting
the built in the last committee
we a couple things have happened
since then the legislature has
already passed a bill that
regarding our letter head and
the uses of it so we could roll
that out of this bill and so we
did as well as on page two line
seven we strike the period in
the closing quotations mark and
insert in lieu of the I'm so
sorry and right the wrong part
paragraph madam chair please
forgive me this is provide
however it gives exemption for
the AG's office and the
governor.
we want them to have their
security and that's government
and and in in their position so
we.
Exempted them from the.
In a no use of.
Government assets while
campaigning we exemption from
that so that the state safe.
I would like to yield to
expert witnesses and we'll start
off with James Grayson from the
AG's office.
Mr Grayson.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you thank you
Representative I I want to talk
today about section three.
And this section
discusses quid pro quo
provisions
and sets out penalties for quid
pro quo.
And this section is very
important to the attorney
general's office of the attorney
general's office supports House
Bill five this section in
particular is important because
of
Our state versus creatures and
that case involved for
consolidated K..
Officials that were charged in
the into the government conduct
act including one official who
was charged with attempting to
exchange official acts for
sexual favors in that case the
New Mexico Supreme Court look to
the government of conduct act
and determined that section ten
sixteen three subsections a
through C. are essentially
aspirational.
And aspirational provisions are
fine for directing government
officials in terms of how to act
they're not so good at deterring
or punishing corruption and so
this bill takes a state versus
to genesis and changes those a
through C. subsections into
provisions that
direct government officials how
to act and how not to use quid
pro quo using their official
acts as as as government
officials and when they do so
that could can be a crime and it
can be charged because right now
under the state restrictions K.
as I mentioned those are only
aspirational and in this chart.
Thank you madam chair thank you
members of the committee.
Matt I'm sorry madam chair and
committee can I have my other
expert witness make a statement
as well as Daymon Ely on June.
Yes thank you for.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee it's
nice to be back
I guess I do want to point out
just a couple of things one
because when I first looked at
this when I was looking at
section two and specifically
that section see that
Representative K. just talked
about engaging in political
activities kind of a mini
hatchback I thought gosh the
legislature that would really be
a problem for the legislature
well it turns out the public
officer or employee and this
came up in the last committee
just so you know
I think that it does include
legislators by definition of the
government conduct act public
officer or employee specifically
excludes legislators so when
you're looking at section two in
its entirety that doesn't have
anything to do with the
legislature when we're looking
at section three then that's why
talks about Legislature
legislator or public officer or
employee
the only other change that I
really you want to say something
about.
Is in the amendment is section
five on that we discussed that
in the house government affairs
committee that was really a
vicarious liability theory on
the revolving door public
employees that the employer a
private employer would be
vicariously liable and strictly
liable that has now been changed
to where the
employer has to do some kind of
act so it's no longer strict
liability the employer
independently has to act so
there's no vicarious component
and some employer gets caught up
in the simply they've got to
actually do something so I just
want to point those out and
thank you madam chair members
the committee.
Well I would call you
representative Ely.
Thank you Mr E. lie
so we have in front of us and
amendment that we have proposed
for discussion purposes is there
are a motion to amend.
Yes madam chair I think the
amendment.
To have a second.
Okay.
Is the amendment friendly.
Yes well you offered it so.
Unless you were feeling bad
yesterday so why don't we call
the roll on the amendment thank
you madam chair calling role
Representative up on.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen yes
Representative Nibert.
Representative three.
Representative read.
Representative Rehm yes.
Representative Penske.
Madam vice chair of.
Madam chair yes.
With a test is madam chair you
have been approved amendments.
To build it
the audience we are and House
Bill five those wishing to speak
in opposition please raise your
hand.
Those online wishing to speak in
opposition please raise your
hand.
Those in the audience wishing to
speak in support please raise
your hand.
Those online wishing to speak in
support raise your hand.
Okay.
C. A..
Hannah Burling Hannah.
Actually it's Judy Williams hi
Judy.
League of women voters of New
Mexico.
Sounds to me of we are we urge
you to pass fifty five bill
strengthens the government
conduct act makes clear when
public officials may or may not
use the trappings of their
office to and influence
government activities or seek
various kinds of favors in
return for some benefit it would
also increase the money
penalties for doing so and is
the Sanchez said these are not
been increased for quite some
time we believe strong ethics
rules increase the public's
trust in government thank you
very much thank you.
I don't see any other hands up
so we're back to the sponsor
would you like to say anything
before we go to the committee
thank you I stand for questions
right thank you.
Questions.
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair.
Looking over on page three.
Section see that's online three.
Hell's political activity to
provide.
It is not defined what this
political activity mean to you.
I thank you madam chair and and
Representative Nibert I will
defer to my expert witness
Daymon Ely but I believe the
secretary of state to finance
public activity but let me defer
to my experts witness.
All good I'm gonna commit expert
malpractice now hi it is not
defined in the government
conduct act maybe to find
elsewhere but Representative
Nibert I don't have any answers
your question.
Someone else might but I do not.
I have I have failed my
Representative who's my
successors next.
Madam chair and and the.
I'll still call you
Representative why if I may of.
Would it be a stretch for me to
defined political activity as
of activities that occur in this
very room.
yeah I mean it would remember
that section is not applaud
legislators so we're talking
about you know I mean I think
the political activity of
soliciting contributions you
know being in your you know when
accounting commission office and
saying although for that if
you'll send me a campaign
contribution I'm hoping I get a
text from someone that points me
to our a section of the statute
but I don't have an answer for
that other than just keep
remembering it doesn't apply to
legislators because of when I
went to that I thought wait a
minute every legislators can be
violating that.
Madam chair representative if
you look on page two lines
eleven and twelve before it
starts the section it identifies
that these are items for public
officers or employees this does
not apply to legislators only
state employees.
Madam chair representative
that's the point.
We're engaged in political
activities.
Previous I think we are.
Hi I get to vote.
And I'm wondering if Mr Grayson
should be sitting at that table.
If this were to be law.
I'm so sorry madam chair
representative I'm not clear
about your point.
Well Madam chair representative.
This prohibits.
A public officer or employee
from engaging in political
activity.
Well the public officers
employees on duty so let me ask
this man madam chairman
Representative is Mr Grayson on
duty at the present time.
Correct Madam chair
representative and madam chair
and representative if this were
law.
Would Mr Grayson be engaging in
political activity with his
presence right beside you at
that table.
Madam chair representative I
would also differ with my expert
witnesses that we could
right we could consults
the commission on this but it is
my understanding that political
activity is not
Is not what the AG's office is
doing right now I I you madam
chair I could and Representative
hiver so I do have a little bit
of any answers I'm thinking
about it is this is kind of the
state hatch act is the way you
want to think about this so I am
certain that the federal
government and we can get you
the definition from that
political activity from the
hatch act I just want to be
clear about it I don't think
what Mr rations doing is
political activity but I
certainly understand the point
and I think that's going to be
defined by we're gonna be
looking to no federal
legislation just as a guide
would be binding or precedent
but it certainly is developed
log federal government census
tracks a lot of what happens at
the federal level on the hatch.
So Mr Grayson was running for
office using this as a platform
right now the campaign you might
be violating the many had check
but since he's lobbying for a
piece of legislation and
offering Policy work I would
think of that as political act.
Chair representative for to my
other expert witness on this
matter as well service Madam
chair representative Nibert I
would agree with mystery lie
about that I think political
activity in this context is a
synonym for camping activity.
and so official state action
would not be considered
political activity this is meant
to target the type of campaign
activity that can occur when
when people running for office
for urging someone else to to be
elected for office it's not
targeting official actions on
behalf of the state.
Madam chair and representative
seems to me that if that's what
we're doing.
This legislation lacking in that
it needs a definition because
when I see political activity I
think everything that goes on in
this building.
From from.
Speaking in favor or against
legislation to provide opinions
about the validity of of the
legislation to be political
activity because everything we
do up here.
Is of a political nature this
very body is political we're
here because we've been elected
to make decisions political
decisions as to seven public
policy for the state so in my
mind if if.
If this is what we're doing.
Mr Grayson is engaged in
political activity and it says
were law.
Think I could argue.
That he is violating the the act
and I think that if that's not
your intention you better
defined political activity in
such a way to get around that.
So it's not defined it's open to
decision by a court if if this
were to pass and I think people
could make it free strong case
of political activity includes
appearing before us and not
you're arguing for arguing
against legislation so I have a
problem with the thank you madam
chair and representative I would
agree with you if this was
pertaining to legislature but as
stated before it is pertaining
to public employees and then in
sections a B. and C. underneath
that it does defined political
activity as in directly or
indirectly covert coercing or
attempting to coerce another
public officer threatening to
deny a promotion or pay in any
room or building reserve for an
exclusion use a state agency or
local government agency
so if of this Mr Grayson was
involved in those specific
activities he would be in
violation of this bill.
If it became law.
Well you madam chair and
representative of I would I
would argue that his mere
presence today supporting your
legislation would be engaged in
political activity.
has now The New Mexico we're
seeing or anything he's trying
to influence me to vote for your
bills.
Trying to influence the majority
of us to vote for your bill.
That's engaged in political
activity.
Just like probably most people
in this room are engaged in
political activity they want us
to vote a certain way to advance
whatever they feel is is just
and right.
Fort to vote against something
that they feel is not Justin
right and that's a political
process.
And if we are going to to make
this law.
I thought maybe I might even
before it that means no public.
Officer Boise is going to be
sitting with us as we present
bills.
And.
What if that's what you want
finite.
I can see some great benefits
from that but but the it's also
probably a problem.
Thank you madam interpreter is
meant then I defer to Mr Grayson
place.
Madam chair representative
Nibert I do have the definition
of political activity from the
hatch act.
But activities actively directed
toward the success or failure of
a political party candidate for
partisan political office for
partisan political.
So again it is it is very much
like campaign activity and not
about official actions taken on
behalf of the state.
And so madam chairman Mr Grayson
the hatch act is a federal
statute correct.
Madam chair representative
Nibert that's correct and so
Congress all wisdom in defining
what political activity was the
do they not.
Madam chair representative
Nibert that's correct Madam
chair representative and your
bill.
Which she called the many had
checked with somebody to.
That word for those words are
not defined on.
Chair representative I'm.
Then have a moment percent.
Is.
Madam chair representative on
page three
throughout the the underlying a
section to pay in and through
page three and the top of the
page for that those are the
direct it would strictly poll
from the hatch act the federal
tax so that are.
The public employee conduct act
will be reflected of federal
requirements.
Madam chair representative
Nibert of course when they do
statutory interpretation process
for construction and statute in
New Mexico is based on a federal
act
New Mexico courts will look to
the federal act in the
interpretation of the federal
act purposes of interpreting New
Mexico statutes.
Madam chair racing do they do
that in every instance.
Madam chair representative
Nibert that is one of the rules
sector construction so they have
many rules at their disposal and
they do not look at every rule
every time but that is a rule of
statutory construction so madam
chair Mister very soon to be
your opinion that that you'd
feel comfortable in passing this
legislation without defining
political activity and rely upon
that.
Would be a doctrine I'm not sure
I've heard of that document
that.
The parent.
That story construction
doctrine.
Madam chair representative for
to Mr Grayson.
Madam chair representative
divert I
I would defer to the Sanchez
about whether to define that
term but
I do believe New Mexico courts
would have the tools at their
disposal to interpret this term
in a manner consistent with the
hatch act.
And madam chair Mr Grayson the
courts don't even look at what
we say in our conversation today
about interpreting our statutes
to the.
Madam chair representative
Nibert that's correct so our
courts generally look at the
specific language in the statute
to determine the interpretation.
Madam chair representative
Nibert that is correct and and
as part of looking at that plain
language of the statute the
court would recognize that it's
language used in the hatch act.
Madam chair representative what
I would suggest to you.
Strong.
That I wouldn't rely on the
courts doing that if if this
were my bill I would make
certain that that is your intent
to with the fly a definition
much want Congress to.
Let's move on.
Representative I mean this to be
is just to weigh in on this I
got into.
Jim was here.
Yeah I had to say Representative
I'm glad my wife is here.
All the at I it it would be easy
enough the government conduct
act has a definitional section
ten F. sixteen dash to do just
take a language out of the hatch
act and defined political
activity and I think that would
address Madam chair
representative nine point
concerns I hope so I think it's
difficult for me to read his
mind over soon but I think that
might solve the problem Madam
chair representative if the
representative would like a
friendly amendment to include
that a definition I am not
opposed to that.
Well madam chair and
representative you probably
don't want my amendments because
they never passed so.
They do.
Yes.
Let's go through this and
they're madam chair and
representative of you might you
might want to do there's
something there I'm happy to
happy the to
Maybe come up with some of.
Overall rate seven.
Paragraph the at the bottom of
the page.
I think this is what the
representative Ely was talking
about a little bit but
I guess I'm having a hard time.
Understanding what it is we're
trying to get out with respect
to paragraph the and maybe if
you could maybe a like me a
little that I can.
Maybe understand the a little
better our madam chair
representative if you look at
the amendments on it says on
page three line twenty four
before the comma insert who
because the violation to occur
and then after additionally and
then insert and so there is an
amendment on that clarification.
So if I understand it if.
A public officer or employee.
As violative of the act and
somebody hires a person.
That the person who hires them
could be liable for a civil
penalty.
Madam chair.
And I don't interrupt is a ready
Madam chair representative and
that's was one of the amendments
and and inspired by Mr Eli that
it is only if the employer has
intent of influence so it is not
the.
An automatic violation.
So madam chair representative
where is that requirement of
intent expressed some of
language.
Madam chair representative if
you go back to the amendments on
of a item three of the
amendments this is on page seven
line twenty four before the
COVID insert who because the
violation to occur.
In that line there.
But isn't the
in that amendment referring to
the public employee for officer.
Madam chair representative it is
my understanding is the importer
it's not the employee so the the
employer.
Because of violations so.
How does.
The employer because of
violation.
Madam chair representative I may
be so I know we don't like
hypotheticals but I I like.
The samples
if is I was of the.
If I was a builder and I wanted
to hire a tax assessor so that
they can give me insight
information on owners that would
and I specifically go for
someone higher in the tax and
then I would be in violation.
So.
If we.
If we do that then we are.
Substantially limiting.
State employees and officers.
Ability to secure.
A job after after they leave
state employment.
Madam chair representative that
that is not my interpretation.
Madam chair representative what
would be your interpretation.
Then Madam chair representative
as state employees is will being
free to be employed
We the statute is saying that
they could not use their undue
influence or relationships the
first year after employment from
their position with the state so
that so such as my example this
tax assessor cannot work with
the developer two weeks after
leaving the tax assessor office.
So but there are many other jobs
I'm sure the tax assessor would
be qualified for and
appreciated.
Is this provision limited to the
hiring of people who would then
go back to their former.
HSD and.
Representative that employer at
that former agency or are we
just trying to prohibit them
from being employed in dealing
with state government general.
Madam chair representative it's
my understanding that this is
only for a short period of time
after leaving state employment
for municipal employment.
A short time being a year one
year yes.
But.
What my question is are we are
we trying to.
Prohibit that person from going
back only to the agency from
which they came in and doing
that for we generally
prohibiting the hiring of that
person that they can't deal
with.
Any other agency of state
government because there seems
to be a big difference.
And madam chair representative
it is my understanding it's
specific to the.
The job in which they were
working for the state and and
specific to the influences
obviously we'll go back to our
our example the tax assessor
will have many different skills
and skills in which they
developed in the state agency
it's not that we're propose that
they use those skills is it
within the first year the main
no information about
developments and ownership that
would be.
Almost in inside trading up
issue and so that's why this
this portion of this bill isn't
there.
Want me ask it this way
Let's say my law firm wanted to
hire Mr Grayson and I don't know
what Mr Grayson's our area of
expertise is or what agencies he
may oversee.
But with my law firm be able to
hire Mr Grayson and have him
Representative clients who are
appearing before the State Land
Office something that he does
not do currently in its position
as a need.
And would he be able to do that
for the service prohibit are
hiring Mr Grayson.
And him engaging with an agency
with which he is not currently
and hasn't been dealing with
during his tenure with the AG's
office.
Madam chair if I could I think
there's just if I could talk for
just a moment.
Yes Representative I mean yes Mr
you I.
Madam chair representative
Nibert the reason I can read
waving my hand just because
you're talking about existing
law.
All of these questions go to
what's already in statute we're
not changing that the only thing
is changing now is if an
employer commits a separate act.
That violates the revolving door
problem.
Then they have the same
prohibitions on them that the
employee to us but in talking
about the scenarios we're not
changing existing longer
revolving door that already
exist this is literally just
talking about the employer
that's what section you to us so
I just want to make that clear
we're not changing existing long
revolving door we're just
expanding it to the employer.
Well Madam chair representative
Ely.
The we do make a change
We strike the government we had
a state agency or local
government agency on a matter
which I personally per
participated so I'm trying to
make sure my law firm doesn't
give assessed a civil penalty
when we hire Mr Grayson.
And if I read this correctly.
We could hire him and not be
liable.
He would be liable either as
long as that engagement that she
is now pursuing is outside.
The area that he is currently
serving the state of New Mexico
so assuming Mr Grayson to do
anything with the State Land
Office I think I could hiring.
He could then Representative
clients before the state land
commissioner without violating
government conduct act I don't
think program the.
RAF C. two or paragraph the
would make him for
be liable and I just wanna make
sure that's the case in the
language that was changed
doesn't change that I I don't in
in my opinion it does not what
what it does to has it makes if
if the government in the
facility that violates the
revolving door at.
If he's violated this statute
that currently exists.
Then if the employer commits a
separate act by doing knowing
what they're doing committing a
separate act for that that's why
the cost language that I did
want to have strictly live you
don't want to capture the
innocent employer that in that
situation they could both be
there would be a remedy under
the
but it doesn't change existing
notwithstanding the change that
does not.
So madam chair and
representative.
Seems to me that the getting at.
Intent of the employer you might
need to beef up that language as
well
With that those are those are
the two areas that that I
flagged after you struck out
some other stuff that was really
at the heart of my concerns but
that's been taken out thank you
madam chair thank you
representative Representative
McQueen.
Madam chair
Representative disagrees and
pretty much
said what I want to say and and
that is I certainly read the
bill to with the collective the
minute campaign act the partisan
activity
you know maybe think about
adding an amendment that
definition but that's certainly
that was my read of the bill and
I don't.
In any stretch of the
imagination consider this a
political activity that they
would be protest prohibited from
participating in so I I think Mr
Chris and answer that well thank
you mentor.
Thank you Representative.
Representative Romero future
visits Austin on that point
madam chair there is a really
great definition madam chair and
hijacked about political
activity and I did share to the
left but it's it's political
activity or activity that's
directed toward the success or
failure of a political party
candidate for partisan political
office or partisan political
group if that helps clarify your
process that's a great
definition I think to it often
just makes it really clear what
what you're just trying to
ensure in that and that act and
madam chair support this
legislation thank you thank you
anyone else at the moment
question.
Happy to entertain a motion.
I move it to pass on house bill
five as amended pending the
addition of a.
No that's not how we do it well
I met a young.
Bill I and it's a graphic of it
what did you just say I move out
of to pass on house bill five as
amended we have a second.
The second we have a due pass on
house bill five made by
Representative Romero seconded
by Representative McQueen.
Would you call the roll.
Thank you madam chair calling
role Representative Akan.
Representative Chasey yes.
Representative Lane.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen.
Representative Nibert.
On would like to explain.
Representative read.
Representative Rehm.
No ma'am and all school.
Representative Sapan ski yes.
Madam vice chair yes.
Madam chair yes Representative
Rehm and I mean I.
Ring.
Thanks for your vote Matt madam
chair
I do believe that the some of
this languages is helpful but I
can't support.
I can't vote yes until I see the
language dealing with the
definition and the intentional a
language in the other section.
With that the that's why I voted
no.
Madam chair just basically the
same thing I don't think it's
ready for prime time I think we
need to fix it before it goes
out thank you thank you.
Right thank you very much
Representative.
Hello vice chair Romero
brand house bill six.
Whenever you
may proceed thank you thank you
madam chair in front of this
committee and something very
familiar to this house it's the.
Use of legislation we've been
trying to pass for multiple
years and modernizing our on
housing policy in regards to
landlord tenant law in our
uniform resident relations act
With me is the director of the
center for long poverty Maria
Griego as well as Tom pretty men
and I don't know we official
title these days so please feel
free to introduce yourself New
Mexico legal and turn on the co
chair of the house across the
street.
And let me correct the record to
she.
Maria is the director of
economic equity equity.
Right.
And with that madam chair we
stand for questions.
Okay that's your presentation on
your bill okay I don't want to
waste any time it's a very
familiar piece of legislation we
happy to to entertain questions
I just don't in the interest of
time madam chair very well
So let's go to the audience
those wishing to speak in
opposition to the bill please
raise your hand all right
We have a Mike available in.
When I handed Health.
The fortunately so we can do
for.
Do we have another one.
You could stand closer to you
know.
This
I know we're just trying to help
you here we use what we could
use this money that's a great
idea thank you guys perfect.
Is it on Representative okay.
Much.
Well I.
Madam chair representative my
name is mark Rhodes for swan
Attorney secondly I live the
majority of the year in New
Mexico and I own dozens of
rental properties thirdly I am
the attorney that the Bar
Association has asked a numerous
occasions to give seminars on
the owner resident relations
act.
By saying aye opposed to it one
of the biggest problems in terms
of extending the times is that
if in a perfect world this might
just be what I perceive to be a
sixty day process rural wanted
big someone realistically with a
sixty days but the truth of the
matter is delays in terms of
getting into court and getting a
share if you actually need a
physical reaction can add weeks
to that so realistically it's
moving what is currently a
conviction process for forty
five days to about a hundred
twenty days if things don't go
well
there are numerous elements of
the bill that concern me and I
will go through the specifically
and I I'll talk faster if it'll
will we get yeah I and a half no
I understand the limitation and
I'm not trying to avoid it or
well me I'm stopping this well
you're asking me questions about
it so I mean I'm happy to give
you a few more seconds I mean
thirty more seconds but you know
it's we look at.
The paragraph to H..
That provision should not
include providing receipts to
people up checks and money
orders I would limit it to cash
paragraph three C. I would say
the alternative notice must be
in writing because this is just
a plethora of affirmative
defenses every time a landlord
tries to take action.
the success to broaden.
Thank you sorry I understood the
rules
thank you very much for the
opportunity.
And I will stand I if anyone.
I've been.
Thank you next Sir great we got
a that's wonderful.
Hello Sir madam chair.
Okay one attack.
Madam chair.
The honorable members my name is
Chuck Sheldon I'm an independent
rental owner Representative
hundred fifty five clients.
This is the issue that it was
just being might mention here is
just poorly written.
There's a lot of things that are
going to cause a lot of
constraint and people don't
understand how to operate first
the timing you know can we can
this be extended yes I'm not
arguing with that but I am
arguing that is so confusing
people don't know how to apply
it you know I'm looking at this
and I've added up the days get
anywhere from fifty three to
seventy five to ninety an
attorney to set a hundred twenty
so we're it's too confusing for
any mom and pop to even deal
with this gonna cost constraint.
section eleven one.
Creation eviction moratorium.
We just had two and a half years
of that enough you something
happens in the governor says we
have an a moratorium that means
that if you have a parent.
You have a grandparent you can't
rent to that.
You can affix somebody to put
your grandparent and and be in
the property so that you would
restricting ownership.
Section six do.
Retaliation.
It's on verbal so somebody's
going to be in court and we're
going to increase impact to the
court impact to the cost impact
to ownership so we're really
looking at these this language
and this isn't ready for prime
time to be able to go there and
do this above my recommendation
is this is tabled until we can
get amendment to clarify these
things and to clean up the
language thank you Sir.
Madam chair and committee
members my name is on the second
I'm the executive director of
the apartment association in New
Mexico we represent about sixty
seven thousand rental units
across the state we do stand in
opposition to this bill I will
echo a lot of what Mr Sheldon
said here you know the
retaliation clauses really
challenging it because it sets
up that a normal casual
conversation can be grounds for
retaliation doesn't have to be
written can be a verbal
conversation the end up in court
and we've got he said she said
situations now
you know I think that this is
mentioned you know your FIR even
points that the eviction
timelines are confusing
to been in the last part of it
really is that we're setting up
eviction moratorium without
really any guardrails or any
guidelines as to what the
disaster might be or what that
you know emergency order might
be and so that's challenging so
for lack of us for sake of time
here I will stop but I you know
I appreciate all of you and you
know we really want fair and
equitable laws but you know this
bill only goes in one direction
and not to doesn't to create
balance so thank you committee
members thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Randi
Valverde I'm a registered
lobbyist for the New Mexico
association of realtors we have
about seventy five hundred
members all across the state of
New Mexico we stand in
opposition to this legislation.
We think that this will create a
lot of risk for landlords that
they won't be able to afford to
occur and that they'll either
have to pass on to their tenants
or then they'll have to sell
their second homes but our
mortgage because they're afraid
that they won't be able to pay
their rent on those second homes
so we think this will be to less
affordable housing at a time
where that's critical to the
state we would echo the other
reasons cited and point to the
page seven of the FIR we agree
with all of the concerns
outlined by the administrative
office of the courts thank you.
Thank you.
Marla madam chair members of the
committee Marla shows registered
lobbyist for nap the commercial
real estate developer
Association and for all the
reasons previously stated we
also stand in opposition thank
you.
Thank you.
Anyone else us wishing to speak
in opposition in the science.
Those online wishing to speak in
opposition please raise your
hand.
Todd Clark.
Thank you madam chair can you
hear me yes.
I appreciate madam chair and I'm
real membership consideration
for this bill today I like many
apartment owners approach this
is a business and a well running
businesses happy clients if any
of my units ever having issues
were one of the first owners and
managers to offer our residences
at three state a hotel my
concern about this bill is that
it interferes with that
otherwise healthy healthy
relationships good relationships
and good communications and this
bill would require documentation
on the other side but no
documentation of conversations
on the residents side and it's
really the punitive nature and
retaliate retaliation language
that I think is the biggest
consideration and I would just
echo the comments of the the the
person who spoke before me thank
you for your time thank you.
a person named Steve.
Thank you madam chair.
The committee my name is Steve
open isn't I also stand in
opposition in opposition to this
legislation I do stand with us I
do stand with the recommendation
to table until further
amendments can be made a special
regarding retaliation as well
as.
As well as the time allotted.
We have prior to formal
objection I will tell you that
in the moratorium in the period
of the elect more to early
because moratorium there were
quite a few a large percentage
of investment properties that
were sold out because many of
these landlords I did not want
to deal with that did not want
to deal with the consequences of
the eviction moratorium
therefore we lost quite a bit of
inventory we lost quite a bit of
housing availability in this
legislation will will be an
unintended consequence it'll
cost less housing in New Mexico
thank you thank you
Josh price.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my
name's Josh price I'm a property
manager in Albuquerque
and what I can say is that you
know we're always willing to to
work with with our tenants you
know nobody wanting to make
somebody for no reason or or
even for for lack of payment
there's lots of options right
now this bill is is very one
sided it puts a lot of the onus
on on the order a lot of the
costs on the order we're happy
to talk about ways to fix the
fix you know the situation but I
don't believe that this is the
way I would urge you to vote for
this bill.
Thank you
Dan row row.
Dan.
Thank you so much for the
opportunity to speak everyone my
name is Dan Roma local property
owners and I selfmanaged when I
first reviewed this bill I
thought to myself there's going
to be less inventory because the
more constraints and more
limitations if the objective
true is to have more housing in
New Mexico this is going
literally in the opposite
direction so I stand in
opposition and thank you for the
chance to speak thank you anyone
else online wishing to speak in
opposition I don't see anyone
those in the audience wishing to
speak in support please raise
your hand.
Hey we'll start here and then
this person over here you need
to come over.
Thank you.
thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I'm of
the second guy are in strong
support of the bill addictions
are devastating anything can
prevent somebody for from being
able to pay whether they get
sick lose a job etcetera if
they're affected and they're a
family with children their
senior the people's disabilities
it's incredibly devastating to
lose not only the roof over your
head but also your community the
combination of very few rentals
available and FED on your
records makes it almost
impossible to rent another place
the impacts in society are also
serious education for affected
children as well as their
classmates are severely
compromise when kids have to
change schools mid year
businesses suffer when some of
the evicted and up on the
streets health care costs
increase when people suffer from
physical and mental health
conditions as a result of the
eviction this is an issue I
worked on when I was chair of
Human Services and housing in
Oregon I now serve on the
housing trust fund advisory
board we're we're trying to
increase affordable housing but
with such a lopsided market it's
incredible it's incredibly
important that we protect
tenants this bill is very modest
we have some of the weakest laws
in the country intent
protections this takes very very
minor steps I normally at a time
I sent you an email about all of
the different provisions and why
they're important why the
eviction timeline is important
why retaliation is important why
the court summons that says what
kind of resources they can get
is important so I really hope
you look at that if I have a few
more seconds I do want to
address retaliation because you
don't I don't
please please please look at my
testimony I'm so passionate
about this issue thank you madam
chair thank you.
Hello madam chair members of the
committee my name is winter
todas and I am the director of
the New Mexico if action
prevention and diversion program
that sits in between the courts
and the department of finance
and administration I just wanted
to let you know some important
things to consider about health
the the uniform on a resident
relations act or you are out
works on the ground so under
statute.
The hearing as the trial is
supposed to be scheduled seven
or ten days seven to ten days
from service but our courts are
so understaffed that that is not
what is happening it is being
scheduled seven to ten days from
filing and so we have one court
in particular in the northwest
where a person has to be in
court within six days of filing
so they may or may not have been
served and then.
I wanted to
let you know also that the
various judges and courts count
days differently there are rules
about this but the state still
do what they want so it's
calendar days versus business
basically that's why some of the
deadlines are weird are they
seem weird because we're not
like most court most states
where a day is a day been and
everybody follows the rules
and then I just wanted to alert
you that since we started the
program January saw our highest
month of eviction filings so the
spike that every the rest of the
nation saw when they're
moratorium were ruled that we're
seeing.
We're seeing now that rental
assistance is exhausting.
Excell thank you anyone else in
the audience wishing to speak in
support of the bill.
all right those online wishing
to speak in support of the bill.
Diane my cash.
Thank you.
Okay right I got muted hi this
is dynamic cash thank you chair
committee my husband and I were
landlords for more than twenty
years we work with tennis is
much as we could from the times
we needed to go to court we did
we considered all of the
inconvenience of the process is
part of the expected cost of
doing business we whole
heartedly support HB six I want
to highlight two things about
the bill first the three day
notice for payment three days
doesn't give time for tennis
Committee counting on their next
paycheck doesn't allow time that
someone had recently started a
new job and we're waiting for
their first paycheck eleven days
seems much more reasonable
secondly we also strongly
support better judgment New
River risky issued by the court
with three weeks to satisfy this
working advantage of landlords
as well as tenants assuming
tenants understand the advantage
to them a satisfying the
judgment to prevent the issue
with a range you could be highly
incentivizing the tenants to pay
their judgments are we've barely
had judgments that got paid but
that's the cost of it thank you
so much please support eighty
six thank you.
Right a rich want Weiner.
Rich.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is rich
winner of a long time housing
attorney for various legal
services organizations currently
giving legal advice but the
school educate basis and I I
hear many many stories about
people who are late on their
rent or have other problems up
I've heard a lot of committee in
this committee and other
committees that landlords many
landlords will work with their
tenants and the tennis I'll have
to worry about this time
deadlines and I could say that's
true that many landlords to work
with their tenants but I can
also say that many many
landlords do not and on day four
if somebody got a three day
notice the landlord to go to
court often will go to where and
there's really little time for
somebody to get an attorney or
provide any kind of of rental
assistance so I strongly support
HD six for many other reasons
but including that one I thank
you for the time thank you
Rachel Biggs.
Rachel more members the
committee my name is Rachel
budget with Albuquerque health
care for the homeless stable
housing is the linchpin for
success are thriving education
system robust tourism and
economic development we cannot
insure children thrive
educationally if they do not
have stable homes to learn and
unstable housing too often
results in the cruelty of
homelessness and we're seeing
alarming increase in the number
of families seeking our services
right now New Mexico is in the
minority of states with such
tight time frames for exaction
H. B. six once our tenants have
more time to access available
financial assistance to avoid a
devastating eviction on the
record and we'll ensure
landlords get paid and avoid the
costly addiction process
unfortunately our timelines
reduction or to short to allow
for quick access to financial
assistance Eightysix is a smart
solution to ensuring both
landlords and tenants benefit
kind of protections and
increasing our supply of
affordable housing all go hand
in hand look to New Jersey which
is good because eviction
protections sametime is
experiencing its largest housing
increases the eighties in Japan
similar protections for tenants
I'm not limited housing
production Tokyo produces more
housing in the whole state of
California we have the tools and
resources to ensure both greater
supply of affordable rental
units and better protections we
urge your support age sex thank
you so much for your time thank
you.
Andrea Serrano.
Good afternoon good afternoon
madam chair members of the
committee my name is Andreas on
all and the executive director
at a late we're a member based
organization we represent
workers early educators working
families across New Mexico and
we stand in support of H. P. six
for all of the reasons that have
been outlined this is something
that our families need and it's
a common sense approach that
benefits both renters and
landlords and so we urged
passage of HB sixty thank you
thank you.
And Kurt right here.
Good afternoon Madam chairman
members of the committee this
correct the director of leaders
advocacy ministry New Mexico and
we also are here today to
express the position of the New
mexicana dating again this year
that we believe housing is a
fundamental human right and we
support all policy that supports
the creation of affordable
housing or in this case
preservation housing we believe
that are outdated uniform
onerous relations act as an
example of poor public policy
that contributes to housing
instability potentially
homelessness for individuals and
families we further believe that
the uniform on a residence
relation Act is heavily weighted
in favor of owners and we
believe that H. B. six think
strides in Levin worth paying
the playing field like a number
of members of the legislature I
too have been landlord having
kept by home as a rental
property for the twelve years I
lived out of state I've also
been a tenant in my humble
opinion the changes proposed in
H. B. six are very reasonable
for landlords and my experience
was very similar to Mrs the
caches experience that she's
expressed and sorry I didn't get
rid quite correct madam chair
members the committee I urge
your support for H. B. six and I
thank you for the opportunity to
speak to this afternoon.
Thank you.
Maryland lever.
Maryland.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members the co chair
of the board of the New Mexico
coalition to end homelessness
and I stand in strong support of
H. two six thank you for hearing
me.
Thank you that concludes our
public comment period we we
finished our cut public comment
period
Representative Romero did you
wish to add anything yes madam
chair if I just may respond to
some of the items that were
brought up just for clarity for
this Committee madam chair one
in three people in New Mexico is
a renter so this is a
significant piece of legislation
that.
Basically does three things and
so just to congested make that
time lines clear for everybody
right now in New Mexico you only
get three days when you're
issued an eviction notice this
extends it to eleven days this
was discussed back in twenty
twenty for the first time with
the
the association of apartment
owners US Department owners
association that said we this is
a compromise we want to fifteen
days this is a compromise on
eleven.
secondly right now before
hearing to allow the parties to
participate innovation
prevention and diversion program
and a seat at just that seek
financial assistance we're
asking for twenty fourteen to
twenty one days to do that right
now when you're looking for a
lawyer looking for
representation are looking for
general support on how to
navigate the process if your
issue to an eviction notice for
us for that but for and instead
of seven days when asked to move
out of your place we're asking
for fifteen days that gives a
quick discretion to issue more
times somebody needs more time
if they have to pick up and get
a you know a U. haul van they
have to move to different places
Senator this gives them just
that buffer for the the court to
be able to issue that
finally you know with with
additional questions we'd love
to describe any questions we
have one more quick thing
housing availability and housing
stability or two completely
separate things so when we're
conflating the two together that
really muddies the water what
we're discussing today which is
about stability and so what
we're talking about is those
that are already in a home
already in place we're trying to
ensure that those laws are sound
for those to be able to cure
when they have an opportunity to
have an extra paycheck come
through etcetera so you know our
our rents are at an all time
high not just here in New Mexico
but nationally on and so we're
just calling for action here
that if we do nothing we're
going to be in the situation
exacerbated Lee as we're seeing
everything post pandemic with
what's happening but really this
is about stability and helping
that one third of New Mexicans
have that little bit more time
which is the standard for the
majority of states we're just
trying to get in line with the
majority of states here thank
you madam chair thank you
Representative Representative
McQueen.
Thank you madam chair the.
Madam chair of the we've we've
seen this before I've had
concerns about in the past
I appreciate your description of
it and of giving people more
time I think part of the concern
stems from you know we're not
just changing the three day
notice to eleven the nose it's a
bunch of other stuff too and so
the combination of the multiple
changes in the extended timeline
the the committee analysis.
House committee analysis said
the cumulative timeline for new
fiction would be sixty three
days
I don't know that that takes
court delays and into account
that might just be adding the
different time frames but that's
pretty long.
and I'm.
I guess thank you in past years
I think we try to do too much
I'm sorry in the feeling that we
still have.
We're still trying to do too
much in one bill and I I do have
some specific questions but I
wonder if you a thoughts about
that for a start on other
questions and her expert to
respond.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative McQueen for the
question and we keep hearing the
sixty three day time period and
I'm not sure where it comes from
we've done our calculations and
on the very high and assuming
tents get all the Lee way
possible to come up with fifty
two days and I can tell you what
that looks like so if attendance
rent is due on the first on the
second so let's just say first
of January
on the second they get the
eleven day notice okay under the
under the new law under this
bill they would get an eleven
day notice.
On the fourteenth that's when
the landlord could file for
eviction then assuming that they
get the most time allowed
hearing would take place on
February seventh.
And if the judge rules against
the tenant they would have to be
out on February twenty second
that's a total of fifty two days
I don't know where the sixty
three days is coming from the
venture Representative expertise
apparently was in the
administrative office of the
courts analysis I'm seeing it he
was quoted in the the committee
analysis.
You fifty two is shorter than
sixty three it's still pretty
long I mean it's almost two
months and if you're that yeah
we heard from some people that
it sounds like they have a lot
of the units if you just have
one or two units and you're
using that rent to pay the
mortgage.
Two months is a long time.
And I I I do recognize the point
that that's assuming things go
as scheduled and.
They don't always so that that
remains concerned for me the
limit let me get to some of the
specifics.
Madam chair representative page
three
we're reducing late fees if the
resident receives
public support for the rent
I guess my concern here is just
that that's another disincentive
to rent to people.
Did receive that support.
Did you think
Madam chair representative it.
Do you see that as a potential
disincentive.
But I do not madam chair
representative the idea here is
obviously to not penalize those
who are already being subsidized
and and madam chair love for
money expert to respond to that.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative claim for the
question I'm the reason we
limited it to ten percent of the
questions the resident pays is
because if rent is subsidized
often most often there is a
separate contract between the
landlord and the subsidizing
entity which dictates time over
at the time that the payment
should be made what the late
fees are payments are almost
always automated and therefore
very rarely late but that's all
handled in the contract between
the landlord and the subsidizing
entity.
And so what is likely to be late
is attendance portion and so
attendance should not be
required to pay more than ten
percent of of there were there
the person that they pay the
late fee so that was the reason
for that and again I'll just
reiterate that these were all
compromises agreed upon over the
last two years the twenty twenty
one and twenty twenty two with
the apartment association.
So madam chair representative
experts so so when the rent is
subsidized the payment goes
directly to the landlord not
through the tent Madam chair
representative that's true we're
talking about veterans support
we're talking about anything
from social security payments to
to any sort of subsidy that that
one might qualify for that help
support their.
their housing so the
specifically
non chair Representative McQueen
we're talking about mostly
section eight and related
programs that's we have a
voucher between the contract
between the landlord and housing
for directly and Housing
Authority one paid online or
directly so the tenant so let's
say the tenants of rent is a
thousand dollars and the total
runs of thousand dollars and the
tenants portion on six three
hundred which is typical
pandemic kind of questions for
some months of security the
Housing Authority cases seven
dollars seven hundred dollars
directly now the thirties got
the best for the world is gonna
pay that apply direct deposit
each and every month that is the
three hundred for the ten
thousand three if the ten
million on her rent that she's
going to pay thirty dollars late
fee not a one hundred dollar
late fee based on the whole
portion to pay the late fee
based on her portion that's what
that's meant okay.
Thank you
I will try to keep my question
short and this time it's thank
you insertional
Madam chair representative on
page four
at the top for each cash check
or money order payment made
under shop provided return
electronic receipt this in the
that doesn't a check or money
order don't they Sir come with
receipts me is it a cash check
receipt Madam chair
representative of that's true
and I think that's implied with
what we're asking of this as
well.
Twenty.
But so madam chair
representative it says the owner
shall provide.
Madam chair representative it's
based on the timing of that if
you will our expert can respond
to the necessity for having this
language Madam chair
representative we want we want
proof of the tenant paying a
certain date so if a checking
center for the money's tender we
don't know when it was given to
me only but if you only need to
receive them you know what was
going to be a force these are
complying with the ban on page
six of.
Have so the.
Madam chair the.
There's an expert I mean that
seems like.
A lot of additional unnecessary
work.
For a relatively limited
circumstance I mean I could see
if if the tents handing over
cash from yes testing it to
ensure that ask for a receipt
they might not
But if you're like mailing in a
check.
You know adding that the
landlord milieu back a receipt
is.
Yes there can I take a deposit
the check right so.
Madam chair representative so
many informal leases or rental
agreements are made today
they're not always in writing so
the importance of this is that
if I sent my rent check in in
January it was never deposited
and then now they're penalizing
me for a late rental payment or
denying it all together if I had
that receive whether via text
message and email for something
in writing that said that I paid
my rents and verified that
that's what this is covering.
Madam chair representative if
they're not going to deposit the
check they're not gonna send
your receipt.
Notice any receipt and then hold
on to the to.
Madam chair representative again
this is just seeking best
practice for clarifying that if
there is a transaction we just
want to make sure that it's a
text message and email something
that shows you paid your rent
and that if there was ever a
question that you could show
that as verification.
And madam chair representative
this is one of the biggest
disputes in these infection
hearings that we've seen again
fourteen hundred and fifty just
filed in January is whether or
not the tenant paid the rent and
can prove that.
So this so mentors as if that
the tenants bill approved that
the tenant should document that
rather than expecting a receipt
from landlord because of the
landlord.
If the landlord is into deposit
the check the markets and
receipt if the landlord doesn't
get the check they're not
consent to receive.
So if the if the tenant.
Yeah I think a check is a
receipt I.
I think the provision as
problems support let me move on
page said on page six going on
page seven notwithstanding any
other provision of law.
you might not get that through
the Senate Judiciary what what
other provision of law are we
are we sweeping aside with this
language what what's the concern
here.
This is the.
A certain.
Sure Representative on this page
drafted with
Department association general
counsel is also.
From the landlord to turn the
state and it was language to
clarify that the case of verse
be out a way of applied there's
lots going out when a landlord
can and can't keep the deposit
if the landlord does not send it
out of my statement of the
deductions from the deposit
within thirty days and so this
is automatic clarify how that's
to be applied.
The so madam chair
representative and and experts
if we struck that freeze and
just started with nothing in
this section shall present.
Do we do we lose anything.
I don't see Madam chair
representative I don't know what
your concern is.
Do have a to that point
Representative I'm a little
concerned about changing.
Some of the language without the
partners who have had input over
the last two years so I I would
hesitate this bill is like
Lazarus it has it was house bill
one eleven and twenty twenty one
it was house bill sixty five and
twenty twenty two and these
people have worked really hard
both sides so I just caution you
about changing well without
consulting your partners well I
mean it is a Sanchez Bill I you
know I mean the advice is fine
but it means if that is the
Sanchez Bill Representative
McQueen.
Madam chair representative I
don't see the issue
I don't.
I don't see the issue with that.
Okay let's let's go on and maybe
come back to
The Madam chair representative
on page nine.
lines two and three.
What to seek redress in response
I mean.
Thank you madam chair and
representative the claim for the
question I'm so this is just
clarifying if you look at what
the what the original language
says.
This is talking about we know
when a tenant receives the the
three day hopefully eleven day
notice that they shall
immediately does deliver
possession of the dwelling unit
and that's not actually what was
ever required so we wanted to
clarify that the tenant has
choices they can voluntarily
deliver possession they don't
contest it maybe they just want
to move out of the unit they can
do that
they can contest the termination
in court that's option number
two and they can seek redress of
for example they think they are
being evicted illegally or they
are being illegally retaliated
against they can seek redress
for that so that's just the
reason that clarifying language
is in there
Tenants were never limited to
just delivering possession of
the dwelling the always have the
opportunity to go to court and
consent sorry contests the
termination.
So a see you
Madam chairs of the expert
redress in response isn't a
phrase it's just at the end of
the it's a secret dress.
And then it's added in response.
So it's just the it's a I
thought I thought seek redress
in response was like some sort
of common law thing I've ever
heard of but it's just the way
that the sentences structured
correct and chair.
Madam chair representative.
So so I no no the concerns from
landlords has been.
the retaliation language.
In the
On page fourteen and page
thirteen we've got.
You know stores set up that.
This is what they can't do you
if there isn't an to on page
thirteen point nine within the
previous six months has done any
of these things one of the
things is complain to the owner.
About the the variety of things
is there any requirement for
documentation on that.
Madam chair Representative
McQueen there is no requirement
for documentation that has been.
And madam chair to the experts
so so that would play into the
order of proof.
How would that.
How would that play out in the
order of proof on page fifteen
so if the landlord.
Retaliated and the tenet said
well I complained about the H.
back.
Here two months ago.
walk me through that how that
works in the order of proof on
page fifteen.
madam chair and Representative
McQueen and just to provide some
context so the reason this
provision in the law is a temper
tend to change it is because
overall retail you almost
impossible for
rural currently with the with
the current statutory scheme and
that's because of the summary
nature of these proceedings that
happen very quickly the hearings
usually happen within twenty
minutes or so state for five for
five minutes there's no
discovery rights so if a tenant
is trying to prove retaliation
it's almost impossible because
the owner holes.
The evidence that you know any
any evidence of retaliation so
what this is doing it again this
was a a discussion on a
compromise with the apartment
association to set up a burden
shift in this with this follows
the employment law burden shift
requirements under McDonnell
Douglas is that correct so it
requires that a tenant simply
they're if they're claiming
retaliation
Simple the the tenants would
tell the judge in the case I I
think I'm being this eviction as
retaliatory I complained to my
landlord that my water heater
wasn't working and I made a
demand for repair and the
landlord didn't fix it instead
he gave me a thirty day notice
Just give me to be out within
thirty days the burden shifts to
the landlord simply to just say
no I had a perfectly valid
reason for giving you thirty
eight day notice it wasn't
retaliatory for example I have
to move my elderly mother into
the property and so I can be
closer to her to take care of
take care of her.
Then the burden shifts back to
the tenant so it ends with the
tenant having to find a burden
that that responses pre textual
and this can be very hard for
them to do anyway right you
know.
An example might be all know it
he's not moving is elderly
mother and I heard him offering
the unit to another tenant in in
the building or whatever the
case may be so it it really it
it still bears a huge burden on
the tenant to prove that
retaliation happen.
Madam chair representative
expert how this intended if the
the complaint was oral health is
the tenant meet the tents
initial burden to prove that
they engaged in protective
conduct.
Thank you madam chair
representative McQueen the judge
will act as a fact finder so you
know he he will he or she will
take evidence from the tenant
and make a determination whether
or not with the tenant is saying
is you know there seems to be
any validity or veracity to that
and the judge will will be the
Does the winner get the
opportunity to say you never
said that to me is that.
Absolutely that that the next
step in this burden shifting
scheme Representative is that
the let the it then switch to
the landlord to say that's not
at all you know I'm not at all
retaliating that's my question
though.
Can the can the landlord is
because.
Proving that it's not a pretext
is.
Could be a challenge the you
know you're proving a negative
so that's difficult but the on
the first part of that land
tendances well I complained.
In landlord says no you did it.
Sarah what what what happens in
that case Madam chair
Representative McQueen I've done
hundreds and hundreds of these
cases not there's not much
retaliation things going on but
lender tentative this is an
eight may occur the group lots
of cases together twenty years
earlier the times I've watched
thousands of others and judges
don't like complaints that are
writing so at this time that the
tenant the tenant says here's
what I did and the landlord says
no you didn't and if it's a he
said he's he said she said and
there's no writing the language
in pretty good shape.
Because judges are not going to
on are going to consider that
there's not writing so I advise
everybody put everything right.
so the landlord does get a
chance to say no it didn't
happen.
Okay.
In the.
You the M. concern about the
refuses to renew.
Where are you madam chair on
page thirteen line seven.
You know I guess you look at I'm
a tenant right leasing office
and
I.
Generally have a previous
relationship with the landlord
one thing spring break keep
usually fixes them
but.
I always felt that.
At the end of my term you know
it's it's it's his building it I
I just I share the space with
them he's he's up front I'm back
with some other journeys
This is building so I I mean it
seems to me like he could stop
running into me with every feels
like it Madam chair
representative of that doesn't
change this is only if it's a
retaliatory acts very it's only
if it's contextualized as
retaliation.
Of the.
I I would say madam chair
representative experts that on
page fourteen the requested
reasonable accommodations
A kind of concern that that six
months is too short of a time
frame in that case.
Yes it's it's one thing if you
know something you're
complaining or do you relate on
your end but.
That.
Those concerns prove
Madam chairman my last question.
No not my last question so
each of these nineteen.
there's a process for that the
reserves to should be dismissed.
If if the landlord doesn't pay
their related to me the agency
see if I understand the landlord
doesn't pay their at.
There's probably late fees
there's this whole process think
of the court in at the last
possible moment land plan
ten it comes up with the the
money.
All that gets washed away in the
tent is back to.
What landlord into that are back
to square one.
Is that is that correct.
The when you get that this must.
Thank you madam chair
Representative McQueen if you
are able to pay you can stay but
you must pay all rents costs
fees and interest accrued so if
it's not just square one where
you get to pay go back to your
rent is late you pay that you
got to pay everything that's
accrued since the case was filed
and I just want to note that
there have been studies done in
other jurisdictions that show
that allowing tended to stay in
and keep going with the least
verses evicting and listing and
cleaning the unit it results in
an eighty four percent cost
savings for the landlord to so
it is cost effective to keep the
tenant
in the unit assuming they can
pay everything that's of.
Madam chair representative
landlord to to the cost the tent
has to pay include the costs of
enforcement for the landlord.
Madam chair representative if
it's found that the are at fault
for.
I'm sorry what are you sorry
which cost are you talking
about.
Yes so I mean and probably
attorney's fees centers of you
know the landlord the you know
at the end of this process a lot
of work has been put into this
does the landlord get reimbursed
for that so madam chair just
directed to twelve through
fourteen the amounts paid to
maybe due to the owner to court
to the court to be held in
escrow for distribution to the
owner upon dismissal of the
petition so if they're
successful in that endeavor
Madam chair representative and
all those rent costs fees and
interest accrued we'll go to the
owner of that rental.
Yes Fe fees fees.
Okay
so the judge Madam chair
representative has discretion to
order those fees
in relationship to that
dismissal.
It so Madam chair representative
on on line seven I see costs
fees interest what it does does
that include the landlords
attorney's fees that's please
madam chair representative.
Those are late fees.
Madam chair representative any
fees so late fees attorneys
fees.
And again madam chair
representative this is the judge
does at the judges discretion to
assess whether or not the that
person should be paying those
fees
some insurers and the the
concern here is that.
The landlord has to go through
this process they're they're not
gonna be happy about it right
there I mean it's a lot of time
an expensive landlord in.
They're not going to have to do
it more than once so I I mean I
could see where a landlord after
like going down fifty sixty days
whether it is might want to
start with another tenant
whether or not it's cost
effective to keep it at that but
if they think this path is gonna
be a pattern of behavior.
You sort of eliminated the the
landlords ability to move on
with a different to.
I mean it's sort of like that
the tenets last ditch effort is
you know they get the money from
maybe their family or something
like that they pay up their
current.
And then it seems to me like
everyone's back to square.
Madam chair representative we
just we disagree based on
everything we understand about
the process currently that's
just not the case with these on
the way that it's process
currently there's absolutely no
offer rate for the current some
tenants right now to have that
conversation to be able to go
through this process this is a
this is basically you know that
the situation with what we're
what we're trying to get that
fairness in the process as we
said right now you file this
it's it's a three day eviction
process of the forty five minute
zoom meeting with the judge and
it's done so and and all of my
expert Phil and why this why
this matters so much lose lose
just clarify do you ventures and
to disagree that they're back to
square one or do you disagree
that it's a good or bad idea
that they're back to square.
I first disagree madam chair
representative that they're back
to square one and all of my
experts explain why thank you
madam chair representative
McLean Representative the
reality is most of these
Most tendencies have a a one
year lease and it's highly
unlikely that you're going to be
back in court multiple times you
know hopefully this would happen
one time at most it could happen
more than that but it's it's a
one year lease after the one
year lease there's no
requirement to renew unless.
Other circumstances arises we
address in this bill but
typically there's no requirement
to renew did you want and madam
chair representative of all I'd
say is that this is to make sure
that the task that the landlord
is made whole if there is a
circumstance where someone did
not pay their rent and they had
to go to court it allows the
judge to assess all of those
costs related to having to go to
court for that process.
I want this will be my last
question chair
there is we see this bill a
couple times it is financed
previously a deal was struck
they were partners.
Are all those partners to on
board with this bill.
Madam chair representative we
have another meeting tomorrow
with the apartment association
we had had them neutral in
previous years post pandemic I
think we're in a different place
I'm not sure what it where they
were supportive of their pledges
in previous years so this hasn't
changed whatsoever we're seeking
their support again.
Thank you Mr.
Representative Nibert.
Madam chair if they're meeting
tomorrow are we taking any
action on this today.
Well
you know I was a little
surprised to hear that that
there's no meeting with madam
chair a colder's after the
Representative we've reached out
numerous times both during the
session and prior to this is the
same bill we've seen numerous
years where they have supported
in the past.
And you know twenty twenty
three.
That's the only difference is
this year madam chair is their
position.
I you know I have to say I and I
agree with what I think the
implication of Representative
nine point question is that.
If you're meeting with the other
stakeholders on this bill I'm
assuming you're doing that and
good faith which could then
accumulate in changes to the
bill potentially.
And.
I think it is for us to be
hearing it and then what would
happen you change it on the
floor Madam chair representative
it may be a tactic of the now
not neutral party or
oppositionist party to delay us
being able to take action on
this bill being the fact that
we've tried to reach out to them
and they have not engaged us so
madam chair representative
that's our concern I'm
advocating on behalf of this
bill.
Madam yes Representative
Representative Nibert.
And if we're gonna go on I'd
like to get you know I'm
concerned because
we have limited amount of time
and I would hate for us you know
what I'm hearing is I I'm hoping
you're going to be meeting with
them in good faith which I'm
assuming you are of course
Representative because I know
you if that is the case we could
well have changes proposed.
Which would then cause them
those changes not to have been
reviewed by us.
Yeah so I I feel like you know
maybe we should roll the bill
and bring it back on sorry with
all due respect we have worked
so hard on this for years.
The only difference right now is
the position that they're taking
the bill is in the same state
that it was when they were
supportive of it so what are
confusion is is what that what
has changed and as to their
position and including the fact
that we have reached out to them
requesting the meetings for any
reason as to why they wouldn't
be this year and so in any
conference tomorrow it's simply
meeting we we are meeting in
good faith we have no clue what
it is that they would be
interested in changing or
modifying in this bill again it
being multiple years that we've
been working with them to get it
to the state but it's and madam
chair.
I you know I'm sorry I I feel
like it in fairness we should
roll the bill and I apologize
for that had I known that there
was this meeting I would have
had that conversation with you
probably before we got into this
conversation into this
discussion so you know happy
what when our what time are you
meeting with them.
One o'clock and that madam chair
we don't we have had zero
suggested changes for this bill
we have requested that we
requested any given feedback and
there have been not so with all
due respect in all fairness to
the people who've been working
on this for the last.
More than half of session I
would really ask the US to hear
this in good faith today madam
chair you understand if we hear
it and their members are
concerned that that there hasn't
been adequate conversation that
could affect the outcome of the
vote.
Certainly madam chair and I my
recommendation because it might
affect the outcome of my vote so
my recommendation you know I'm
I'm sorry if my recommendation
is you meet with the
stakeholders and see what kind
of arrangements if any.
Can be made but at this point
in life I have a feeling of a
base owners but I might be doing
you a favor by suggesting you go
down this path really
Representative so
I'd like to roll the bill on
sorry about that and I think
we've done having a conversation
about it so thank you and.
Okay.
So we're now on the third item
house bill two thirty.
Nursing staff ratios and
committee.
Present.
Senator.
The first.
That was sent.
But come back is that.
good afternoon Representative
Joe is happy to see you again we
are on house bill.
Two thirty six yes madam chair
members of the committee thank
you for the opportunity to
present our bill.
Of house bill two thirty six
requires the department of
health to convene a staffing
advisory committee to establish
nurse staff to patient ratios
for New Mexico hospitals the
seven committee will be made up
of hospital administrators for
chief nursing officers in the
public and private sector and
frontline nursing staff who
provide direct patient care.
Currently further states the
proposed legislation that would
require hospital patient ratios
Washington Oregon Massachusetts
and Connecticut California has
had staffing ratios for at least
twenty years.
Studies show that safe staffing
ratios have a positive impact on
patient care outcomes nurse job
satisfaction and save and
savings in health care costs
nurses leaving the profession in
droves and many of them site
working conditions in the form
of high patient ratios nurses
want to provide quality patient
care to all their patients but
we hear more and more stories of
nurses baseline far too many
patients than they can care for
the for for their licenses they
fear for their patients lives.
We haven't taken the necessary
steps to ensure that nursing
staff in our hospitals are able
to do what they love best
providing quality patient care
to their patients H. B. two
thirty six the six to change the
conditions the nursing staff
were forced to work under and
improve patient outcomes the
hospital industry will tell you
that they can't possibly in
implementation ratios for all
kinds of reasons.
But what they're really telling
all of us is that they are not
willing to change the status quo
provide safe patient care
improve working conditions for
nursing staff and save precious
healthcare dollars it's time for
us to do better.
Madam chair I have with me one
of the co sponsors of the bill
representative Cynthia but.
I have also with me a nurse of
almost forty years marrying
bending and a labor attorney
Shane youth I'm gonna ask Marian
to speak
of for a few minutes with regard
to why this bill is so important
to nursing staff and then
followed by changing.
Thank you madam chair
representative thank you for
allowing me the opportunity to
speak to the committee I've been
a nurse for thirty nine years
almost forty I have a master's
degree in nursing as well as a
BSN from UNM I've worked in I
see use of worked in clinic
settings I've worked in home
care I've been a supervisor I've
been manager and I've been a
team member
a lot of my work over many years
has been in legal nurse
consulting as well I've worked
for very large medical
malpractice defense firms and
I've also written medical
continuing education and nursing
continuing education on risk
management I'm very familiar
with the types of situations
that lead to errors and I'd be
happy to
answer questions about current
research that shows that safe
staffing is a very effective
step in reducing errors reducing
costs and increasing the
satisfaction of the frontline
staff
we have to stop the hemorrhaging
of nursing staff and it's been
going on for many decades but it
is greatly exacerbated right now
so I just a couple of statistics
to close with a recent very
large study but done by the
American nursing foundation
found that fifty seven percent
of the nurses they surveyed
reported feeling exhausted forty
three percent described
themselves as as burned out and
only twenty percent of the
nurses surveyed very large study
said they felt valued by the
their employers this is an
opportunity to allow the
frontline staff to have a voice
to set stage safe staffing
standards that will improve care
for New Mexicans it will improve
the working environment for
frontline health care givers in
New Mexico and I'm very strongly
in support of the bill thank
you.
Mr youths and there members of
the committee thank you for a
hearing bill at the bill
effectively.
Reflects the fact that not all
hospitals in the state of New
Mexico properly or safely staff
their facilities self policing
in some instances in New Mexico
has failed H. B. two thirty six
simply provides an oversight
mechanism so that the department
and a committee created by the
statute have some oversight over
staffing so that we can ensure
that they're safe staffing in
the state of New Mexico one of
the problems often identified
with regard to this issue.
That we don't have enough
nursing and health care workers
in New Mexico that is the
primary problem in the health
care industry and this bill is
the best and most thoughtful
solution to that problem it
creates a long term solution to
that problem so that we can
properly staff our hospitals
here in New Mexico thank you
thank you
let's go to the audience those
wishing to speak in opposition
please raise your hand.
yes we do have a Mike that will
have in the center here and the
I'm gonna be keeping the total
amount on opposition to fifteen
minutes and.
One minute and thirty seconds
each and of course the same
rules will apply to those
speaking in support.
I am hi.
Sure yes on.
I apologize with the microphone
good afternoon madam chair L.
park on the behalf of the
hospital association I want to
start off by first thanking both
Representative Garratt going
Representative Chavis for
bringing this legislation it
really highlights what is a
critical nation wide issue with
respect to nursing shortage is
this is a issue that not only
affects New Mexico but every
state in the country and I think
it's important and I do
appreciate the opportunity to
talk about it on behalf of the
hospital association we do have
concerns that this is not really
the correct fix to address these
shortages let me let me say just
a couple of points on that which
is in a modern hospital.
We deal with the nursing issues
and staffing issues in a method
that requires great flexibility
because the needs of a hospital
change rapidly in for instance
an emergency room can be very
busy while an old war unit or
suite can be less busy and or
vice versa but the staffing
ratio legislation would do would
prohibit hospitals from
implementing flexibility in
their staffing to treat patients
in an optimal manner in addition
madam chair
We believe that the legislation
is potentially in conflict sorry
within tala I just want to say
is that's a very important part
and I'll be happy to talk about
more shift questions thank you.
Mr her thank you madam chairman
of the committee Larry Herman
registered lobbyists for
Presbyterian healthcare services
yes we do have a staffing issue
we also have an access issue
access to health care issue we
have a shortage of doctors we
have a shortage of nurses we
have shortages of all kinds of
providers at any time
Presbyterian has it has a
shortage of nurses of four to
six hundred positions and it's
we are trying to fill them and
we cannot and so we have
concerns with this legislation
where you when you're gonna put
ratios into rural that you can
have injunctive relief for
potential violation then you're
also going to restrict access to
care so where I point you to is
on page five of the bill
starting on line to the
Department of Health can ensure
the staffing ratios are
maintained by hospital there's
an ability to waive session
staffing ratios but that's only
for rural general acute hospital
so Presbyterian Hospital Russ
Medical Center you in hospital
they deal with the majority of
patients in our state and if you
have injunctive relief if you
have a violation the act
injunctive relief that I the
only one I can think of is you
have to say you can you have to
change the ratio and if you
can't get more nurses that may
just have less patience.
So using injunctive relief can
actually deny access for people
in hospitals I get calls from
people all the time for the
interim I have somebody who's in
the E. R. is been there for
fourteen hours we can't go to
bed can you help somebody get a
bed in the hospital.
This bill if passed in its
current form is going to
restrict access to health care
and session gonna damage
patients so we urge you to
carefully consider this
legislation thank you madam
chair thank you.
To protect our thank you madam
chair members of the committee
my name is JD Bullington and I'm
speaking to you today on behalf
of the greater Albuquerque
chamber of commerce which
opposes this bill this bill is
an over reach into the operation
of our hospitals mandating
greater nurse staffing and micro
managing staffing levels at a
time when we are simply not able
to produce or attract enough
nurses and our health care
system across the board with
certainty this legislation would
significantly drive up hospital
cost and result in the hiring of
even more highly expensive
contract nurses this bill would
affect the cost of health care
for everyone and result in a
reduction of any number of
services that hospitals
currently provide and the
chamber urges your opposition to
this bill thank you thank you.
Good evening madam chair members
of the committee my name's
Nathan bush I some staff at the
university of New Mexico I
appreciate you hearing our
concerns about the bill today
but before I explain that
briefly I do want to acknowledge
and respect the sponsors of this
bill for bringing a real issue
forward that we are more than
happy to to talk about and have
been for quite some time as you
know UNM has been laser focused
on the work force shortage in
the state we appreciate the.
Concern and advocacy frankly
from the legislature on that
issue and the governor what we
are concerned about is that we
are the state's biggest safety
net hospital it right it
requires a an incredible amount
of.
On the spot decision making to
respect the concerns of our
wonderful nurse expert workforce
but at the same time keep our
doors open and keep our maximum
budget vote.
I thank you all probably heard
some of the scary statistics
about how over
census we are on our patient
population and frankly this type
of a measure that restricts our
ability to put nursing staff
where they are best able to
serve patients patients must
remain our priority keeping our
budget at maximum availability
must remain our priority and
just to assume that other
hospitals that may have to close
down course our units and send
patients to UNM you see the
cyclic nature of that argument
what we're really gonna have
have trouble dealing with the
influx of patients of other
hospitals offer thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Chelsea
Canada and the director of
public policy at the New Mexico
chamber of commerce we
respectfully oppose H. B. two
thirty six we all have the
shared goal of increasing access
to quality healthcare New Mexico
data shows New Mexico is short
six thousand nurses and we need
more we agree our healthcare
workforce is extremely strained
with the shortage of all types
of health care professionals in
fact a January twenty twenty
three New Mexico chamber of
commerce poll showed that
seventy one percent of New
Mexico voters and those in their
household have experienced long
wait times to see a primary care
physician or specialist in last
year this proposal although well
intentioned may actually work
counter to the goal of
increasing access to health care
for New Mexicans mandated ratios
will prevent real time
flexibility and fewer patients
can be seen unintended
consequences to this labor
mandate complete to reduce
hiring and we also the other
important team members twenty
first century hospital teams of
the team of many working hand in
hand with nurses are designed is
respond to patient needs in real
time and those needs can change
very quickly we hope you will
support and up with proposals
that ensure we have a bigger
health care workforce by
expanding nursing schools
pipelines for health care
professionals retaining our
current healthcare workforce and
attracting those from out of
state as well solutions to this
public policy issue thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair Dennis are
representing loveless health
systems and I'm echoing the
comments you've heard previously
I would make one or two more
comments nursing burnout is real
it's a problem we deal with
every day a staffing ratio is
not going to create the
thousands of nurses that we need
in this state it just gives us
the choice of shutting down
budget hiring travelers if
they're available and there
seems to be a quite a myth about
the availability of travelers
they're just not there we're
competing with every other state
for those nurses we respect the
intent of the purpose of the
bill and we certainly respect
the job that our nurses are due
but we oppose the bill at this
time.
Thank you anyone else in the
audience wishing to speak in
opposition.
Those online wishing to speak in
opposition please raise your
hand.
those in the audience one hand
just popped up okay all right
there's somebody called zoom
user.
The very unique identifier.
Yes.
Zoom user.
I know I raise my hand this is
that that might be me my name is
Dr also has I'm the chief
nursing officer Roosevelt
General Hospital and partylist
and I just want to second
Senator the comments that were
made in regards to
you know the nurse burnout
unfortunately the staffing house
bill two thirty six it doesn't
address the fact that New Mexico
is short those six thousand
nurses it also would tax the
state's around us that are also
chair honors as as over two
thousand page estimated two
thousand patients could have to
be seen outside of New Mexico to
get treatment as they're not
able to get budget with in the
New Mexico hospitals or even
within their communities so I
respectfully requests that you
of ice respectfully oppose this
bill thank you.
Okay Kelly Rodriguez.
Madam chairman miss Kelly
Rodriguez and I appreciate you
giving us the ability to speak
today I do oppose respectfully
house bill two thirty six
related to the location of which
I am the director of nursing at
three crosses regional hospital
in Las Cruces New Mexico we are
a small hospital we are not
attached to any health care
system but we are also not rural
in nature and so therefore we
cannot have the waiver we are a
resource for many rural
facilities to transport patients
over to our facility for
specialist care if we impose
mandatory staff ratios this
would limit yes a limited US
limit us significantly in being
able to accept those patients
who need cardiac Services GI
services and and multitudes of
other services I have been a
nurse New Mexico for seventeen
years I worked in critical
access rural facilities and of
course private owned and what I
have always appreciated is the
fact that in the facilities I've
I've worked in we're not he
would be based staffing and that
allow the nurses to advocate for
their patients on acuity and and
of course the facilities that I
work and have an acuity based
drive and staffing ratio and so
I do opposed respectfully house
bill two thirty six thank you
thank you Thomas Whalen.
Well almost will instantly
eligible General Hospital a
critical access hospital in
grants New Mexico speaking for
the chief nursing officer he
said a letter to
committee member Lee L. call who
represents us.
The.
The flexibility for the patients
and not every nurses and nurses
and no so no time and have the
flexibility on cost trained
nurses to cover emergency room
that serves labor and delivery
we still need that flexibility
to be able to serve the patients
when we need to do so that
everybody has that flexibility
on past.
House Bill at two thirty six
would state title even more so
so please both no on this bill
thank you.
You I don't see any other hands
raised in opposition those
wishing to speak in support
please raise your audience okay
so keep in mind we're keeping
the amount to ninety seconds
fifteen minutes total so with
start over here and people just
maybe get in line great thank
you.
Good afternoon madam chair vice
chair and committee members my
name is a burning house I'm a
registered nurse and I have been
for twenty six years both in the
intensive care and emergency
rooms primarily.
I'm gonna be brief and blunt we
are already paying for short
staffing increasing premiums and
people are dying they're dying
when you get an infection the
secondary infection you develop
pneumonia your readmitted that's
all the result of the lack of
quality nursing care.
Every time someone is remission
or blood clot this is all
preventable with good nursing
care we're already paying for
it.
But nurses are leaving our
beloved profession.
Because of deteriorating working
conditions nurses are leaving
for safer less stressful jobs.
They're not necessarily leaving
nursing they're just leaving
hospitals.
And in the last fifteen months
I'd like to point out that for
my colleagues have died by
suicide.
Before COVID our state we died
by suicide at a rate of thirty
to forty percent higher than our
same appears same gender or same
age cult appears since COVID
that is gone up to forty to
sixty percent as our working
conditions are deteriorating.
Our lives are deteriorating
we're leaving our profession and
people are making horrible
choices we urge you to take the
step in the right direction we
know it's not the only answer
but it is a step in the right to
answer and then.
The opposition has had many many
many years to try and make this
right and they have done nothing
thank you thank you.
Any of the madam chair and
committee my name is John cho
cho bride I'm a critical care
nurse in New Mexico first of all
I just want to say that passing
this bill is for the benefit of
everyone in this room.
Likely everyone in this room
will need nursing care at some
point in their life and if you
were lucky enough to not require
nursing care you will love
somebody who does require
nursing care
as Adrian has said we're
hemorrhaging nurses I worked on
a unit here for many years we
were like a family I have since
left the unit and since me
leaving that unit less than a
year ago eighty five percent of
people I work with no longer
work there.
They are in New Mexico they want
to be nurses that wanted to care
for their patients and they will
go back to that side but only if
it's safe for them and say for
their patients thank you very
much.
Good evening madam chair
representatives my name is
Suzanne about I've been a nurse
in several specialties for ten
years now we heard all these
numbers together but I want to
tell you what on state staffing
means on the level of a patient
honors and just as a person
unsafe staffing means when you
push the button to tell your
nurse it feels like your baby is
coming out your nurses with
another patient so you said
they're terrified in pain and
alone in the liver your baby by
yourself even though you're in a
hospital unsafe staffing means
when you're on a ventilator and
I see you and three or more
machines to keep your heart
going if your name nurse takes
their only break in twelve hours
to go to the bathroom the nurse
watching you has their own to
patients so they're not really
watching your.
Thank you thank you.
Hi thank you my name's Nicole
Holmes and I'm a labor and
delivery nurse here in Santa Fe
New Mexico for over sixteen
years and I just really want to
plead with you all that we're
not making this up interstices
bedside nurses we are in a
crisis and nothing is working
right now and I do believe that
house bill two thirty six is a
step in the right direction you
know we nurses we are here for
all of you so it should be very
alarming when you hear that we
can't afford to safely staff our
hospitals that should really be
alarming because that's what's
affecting you and your families
mostly and I know we all know we
all love nurses nurses are
heroes and thank you for they
want you know we're getting
thank for what we do but right
now we nurses need heroes we
need you all to become our
heroes and to really get behind
us and really help us
sustaining grab some stability
and our field that is not
happening right now.
Thank you you.
Hello my name is Megan County I
currently work as a patient care
tech will going to nursing
school.
I would just say that I would
like also to carefully consider
this bill I think a state that
passes something like this would
draw other nurses from other
states I definitely know all be
watching
and considering moving when I
get a nursing degree to a state
that is safer to practice them
thank you.
Thank you good evening madam
chair and members of the
committee my name is Mike about
E. as and I am currently a nurse
in the pediatric ICU I have been
a nurse there for thirteen years
now.
And I am standing here in
support of HB two three six
because the working conditions
in the hospital especially since
the pandemic has began has been
deteriorating and I feel like my
concerns and the concerns of my
coworkers have been falling on
deaf ears within the hospital so
I feel like which is running you
know pope is running low our
patients are suffering.
I've been training a lot of
nurses over the last couple
years to train into our unit I
also train other nursing
students and most of them have
left for more lucrative travel
jobs are left to other states
with better nursing ratios and
I also have I I know a few
people co workers and colleagues
I have committed suicide and
have going through a lot of
depression and you know I won at
the sentence part for those co
workers and colleagues that are
going through that also thank
you thank you.
Good evening madam chair vice
chairman committee members my
name is Jessica point up I work
in the pediatric ICU I humbly
ask you to support house bill
two thirty six for state
staffing the passage of this
bill promotes patient safety and
a healthy work environment for
nurses without proper staffing
our ability to care for our
patients is impaired a recent
incident at our hospital
involved a new nurse who did not
have the support of her co
workers they're all busy the
Chargers had a full assignment
she accidentally
of remove the wrong medication
and a pediatric patient was
given a strong sedation
medication thankfully there is
not a Sentinel event but this
patient this nurse did not have
the support of her coworkers or
her charge nurse the American
Association of critical care
nurses has recently put forward
an editorial stating the
importance of state of safe
staffing
It is tantamount for us to do
our best to care for our
patients and we cannot do so in
the midst of the moral injury
that we are currently
experiencing.
And I just leave you with this
one question if we are not doing
this if not now when.
Thank you.
Madam chair of.
She.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Sharon
Arjun bright a master's prepared
registered nurse and have been
practicing nursing for forty
five years retired Air Force
nurse in the nineteen eighties
shortly after I began my career
there were consistently at least
four pages of classified ads for
nursing.
There has always been a nurse
shortage after teaching in
northern New Mexico to help
alleviate the shortage I began
to notice a trend which I did
not anticipate.
Nurse graduates were leaving
their first positions within six
months nurses trained and
educated in our schools have
left the profession entirely.
Why nurses leave their positions
prematurely is well researched
and substantiated in the
literature the media screens of
nurse anguish.
A critical care nurse standard
for patient to nurse ratio is
two to one not three to one not
for one double the workload is
impossible what we have going on
right now is a crisis nurse
retention representative code
blue for the profession please
vote to support nurses and pass
H. B. two thirty six thank you.
Thank you.
Hello chair madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Gloria Doherty I am a PhD
prepared acute care nurse
practitioner working in critical
care.
So I've been a nurse for over
thirty years I've been a nurse
practitioner for over twenty of
them.
During the COVID my whole
critical care staff turnover
tremendously.
There is that moral injury in
nursing we all go into the
profession because we care we
want to make a difference we
want to save lives we want to
make deaths dignified.
Without having appreciate those
or P. C. patient care
assignments we leave work
feeling demoralized and like we
were not successful so passing a
bill such as this to ensure that
nurses can call can redeem their
holding in their patient care is
very important so thank you
thank you.
Funds are collected.
Okay.
Madam chair members of the
committee and Deborah Walker
executive director of the New
Mexico nurses association
regardless of specialty area of
or practice setting nurses share
similar sentiments about the
workplace they feel overwhelmed
burnt out and stressed COVID
exacerbated long standing issues
and health care in adequate
staffing and flexible work
environments and workplace
violence are cited in all of our
studies as the main reasons
nurses are not just changing
employers but sadly are leaving
the professions.
Nurses are leaving bedside
nursing not just because they
don't love nursing not because
they don't love nursing but
because they're conflicted about
the work environment quality
care and outcomes for patients
Annonay recognizes that this is
a multi faceted issue.
Problems and solutions.
Sure.
Sorry mess.
Multi faceted problem I'm sorry
I know so many of nurses I'm a
R. and myself
our solutions must include
policies that assure adequate
staffing I want to emphasize
that as we look at the myriad of
issues facing our nursing
workforce in New Mexico anime
has a basic tenet and public
policy regulations and
legislation it is but nurses
from direct patient care through
management must have a pivotal
role please listen to your
nurses thank you.
Good evening my name is Kelsey
Reese and I am not a nurse but
I'm married to one and I just
wanted to go over to primary
points that I have you observed
over the past five or so years
the first is the emotional toll
that it that short staffing
takes on our nurses every single
day.
When my wife comes home from
work.
After her thirteen hour shift
she is exhausted she's emotional
she thinks over every second of
that day and what she could have
possibly done better.
The reality is is that she does
the best she can every day and
she puts everything into it.
Which you just can't do enough
she feels like she just can't do
enough because there aren't
enough people she has too many
patients to take care of the
security is too high and there's
too much going on to really be
able to provide the care that
every single nurse strives to
give.
The second.
Observation that I want to get
across is that the tax and the
certified nursing assistants
that work with our nurses every
day our our primary pipeline to
new nurse staffing those people
are always going to school
they're always going to nursing
school while they're working
their jobs.
They are seen how are nurses are
being treated and their scene
the stress the depression the
anxiety every day and they're
either deciding to get their
nursing degree and leaving the
state.
Or they're not finishing their
degree they thank you thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Gino and
I'm going to talk to you about
reality six weeks ago my dad
went into a hospital.
got infection was septic sudden
emergency room for thirty six
hours.
When we got to room at one point
in time I met about five minutes
nurses I met some tax after a
conversation with these next
that these techs and nurses.
The tech that I talked to had
twenty two.
Budget that evening.
In which like you just heard
that the pipeline the nurses had
eighteen hour shifts.
And they were working nine to
ten budget at a time.
And my dad is laying in a bed
septic.
Thank goodness for these heroes
and those tax.
That he was able to fight that
infection that infection so this
is the reality this is at
Presbyterian.
I talked to those nurses they
need to help all of these nurses
need to help these tax need the
help they need you all you all
god for bid.
Could end up in that situation
so with this legislation to be
passed would be a god sent and
like someone said earlier you
could be the heroes at this
point in time because they were
my dad's hero and I was very
thankful for so I urge you to
pass this bill and I urge you to
talk to your fellow legislators
to really push this bill through
because we needed other states
are doing it there's no reason
why this state can't do it thank
you.
So we have a few people on the
line and we'll we'll hear those
and then I think we're going to
have to
recess or adjourn until tomorrow
because of the hundred you know.
Bill party so
Marsha hunt mission hunt.
It is Moesha it's Michelle Lujan
thank you for analogy.
You may speak I'm I'm sorry I
used for yeah yes okay just a
contributor yes so my name is
Michelle Lujan registered nurse
I've been a nurse for fifteen
years in the state of New Mexico
I'm currently out of my state
working.
And I just see that so they can
now that I know that it works
because I've worked in places
where it works we're being sold
a bill of goods and I'm
concerned at the lack of
transparency because the issues
are real on both sides there's
financial concerns for the
business part of caring for
people but what's happening
right now have we not just heard
what has been shared this is a
job of humans caring for humans
and we're telling you we can't
do it this way.
We're dying.
Patients are dying what more do
we need this is a matter of life
and death not only for nurses
but for patients who's the
patient that's willing to take
the nurse that hasn't had a
break who's the nurse.
That's willing to care for your
family member when they know
they don't have what they need.
This is a matter of human life
this bill saves lives I've
worked in states and I'm working
in a state we for my home
because I can do it because I
can manage it because it's been
done properly guess what those
hospitals are closing down.
The profit is it done and over
with.
What we're we're being fooled
here folks there's not a
transparency it needs to be
transparent there's costs and
benefits on both sides and we
need to come together because
this is a matter of human life
we're telling you we can't
find quality care at all we're
asking for things show we're
going to have time for one more
hands and that's John Lipschutz.
John.
Our.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee John that was used
with The New Mexico federation
of labor are we represent
workers throughout the state of
New Mexico all and what better
workers to Representative than
the essential workers who worked
on the frontline.
during the COVID they always put
their patients needs in front of
bears these are workers that
deserve every benefit that we
can give every resource that we
could possibly give that to help
not only their job but to help
all of us and we really do feel
like this is more of a matter of
prioritization you know
obviously we all know that
medicine is a business and I do
hope that you know a number of
these businesses are these
hospitals many of which are
actually owned by out of state
you all large corporations could
hopefully prioritize our
resources to help their workers
which in turn will help their
patients all but more over than
profits so for those reasons we
very much thank the sponsors for
bringing up this legislation and
we strongly urge you to pass
thank you thank you thank you we
have a few more hands up but I I
think we've surpassed our
fifteen minutes so at this point
I'd like to conclude public
comments on the bill now
there's an event happening
tonight that many people are
looking forward to so at this
point I'd like to adjourn and
ask you to come back and we'll
have an act.
What what excuse me I'm we'll
have an actual discussion of you
know we'll have a full blown
discussion of the bill yes
Representative Abrego.
Thank you madam chair
I'm just gonna take one minute
and you can time if you'd like
no that's okay I don't think I
am really wasn't planning us
tonight but I I am really
impulse to speak
I saw what these nurses went
through of during the COVID it
was a very difficult time and I
can't even stress that enough
for our police fire and our
nurses and emergency workers
I have to share a story with you
really quick though before we
leave tonight because I I think
it's going to be very impactful
I have a niece right now and
some of you who know me I've
shared this with just a couple
of you
who is dying she went into the
hospital December thirteenth.
She is my oldest niece she was
in a car accident about twenty
years ago and broke her neck she
went in to have the screws
replaced in her neck because the
doctors told her that the screws
were
you know they needed to be
replaced
she went in good faith they
replace the screws and Senator
to a nursing home and she had an
infection so Senator back to the
hospital three times it's
happened three times he went in
and to the nursing home she went
back to the hospital she went
into the nursing home she went
back to the hospital three
times.
After the surgery so this is
actually four times
so Senator back to the nursing
home the last time and she had a
hole in her neck like that in
the back of her neck I went to
the nursing home and I said I
want to talk to a I'm she's my
oldest niece so she's very close
to me I told and the nurse at
the nursing home I want to talk
to somebody because her family
lives up north and I'm the only
person that and this is between
the legislature
I want to talk to somebody
because I want to get to the
bottom of what's going on here
Senator back to the hospital and
they fixed the whole
she is now back in the hospital
in.
The.
The
Coronary a cute.
Unit and I'm not gonna mention
in any hospitals or anything
like that but I just want people
to know that.
The care that she.
But they couldn't find the the
infection and this was day
before yesterday they did MRI's
they've done all these things I
think the problem and I don't
know for a fact but and I'm
waiting to find out actually but
I think she's septic and because
this infection has continued for
two months I just needed to
share that with you I think that
what I'm trying to say is that
the care.
And and I you know I I worked
really hard to try to get
somebody to give me some answers
You know I I hope that she
lives.
I really do I think it's
important that what I'm seeing
with all these nurses being here
tonight.
There is.
There is a.
A point where people giving
giving given and they're not
getting anything back and this
is that point and that's why I'm
speaking out thank you thank you
for sharing that Representative
and I of course we all of course
okay niece thank covers quickly
and I appreciate your sharing
your story thank you so much so
will bring this item back first
thing we're starting at ten
o'clock to more tomorrow so look
forward to seeing you again
and there we are lunch will be
of made available for our
meeting tomorrow so we can work
