Thanks to comments that.
Additive.
So that is.
Thank you so that we start with
possible one thirty.
Doing healthcare health team
well that.
Seventy two and lastly is house
bill six so that's the order
you have the floor
Representative center yes would
you like to look.
Representative.
Yes Representative present
Representative Lente.
Mr speaker.
Representative McQueen
Representative library there
Representative read here
Representative reading.
Representative said that he.
Madam vice chair here.
Madam chair here.
We have a quorum.
Thank you.
Representative Romero.
Thank you today madam chair and
committee members we are here
Education chair Andres Romero
and myself to present house bill
one thirty it's entitled K.
twelve plus program our expert
witnesses our legislative
education study committee
director Gwen Perea Warniment
and deputy director John Cena
this bill restructures
reorganizes and defines the
requirements for increasing
instructional hours to one
thousand one hundred and forty
eleven forty for schools and
districts who as a function of
local control choose to add on
additional of mandated days the
bill outlines a mechanism to do
that and get funding the bill
supports flexibility
practicality and local decision
making it honors the existing
systems and ours at schools
throughout the state of already
embraced so in section one it
calls for all schools to provide
eleven forty instructional hours
that's a hundred fifty more than
the current nine ninety four of
elementary school sixty more
hours and secondary schools the
fiscal report reminds us that
about a hundred and eighty nine
districts and charter schools
forty one entities already meet
the eleven forty requirement in
elementary sixty nine already
meet the requirement for
secondary and in section one it
defines what an instructional
our can be it's an hour and a
school or other location where
students received direct
instruction aligned with the
academic content and standards
from a teacher or other
qualified instructor it can
include a school program
identified by the local school
district or school it can
include in Richmond programs
that focus on problem solving
content that provides technical
knowledge skills and competency
of.
Hi learning research or evidence
based social emotional
interventions which we know are
really important after COVID and
finally instruction that occurs
when breakfasts this service I'm
gonna turn to Representative
Romero to talk about the sixty
instructional hours contained
within that eleven forty right
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Garrett so.
One part of this bill in section
one is including sixty eight
sixty hours up to sixty hours a
professional development for
educators and it seemed padded
with in the eleven forty that's
really important that it's
embedded into eleven forty
because the research shows that
to make it effective one aspect
of it being effective is the
fact that educators during the
school day can observe one
another mentor each other during
the school day and observe and
comment on what they're seeing
in the classroom to help each
other further their practice
some of the other provisions
include home visitation so for
elementary school students this
professional development time
could include home visitations.
Training professional
development as well as for
teachers is super super critical
and provided within that a
letter eleven forty framework
because we keep hearing that
it's not just the time students
spend in their seats that's
affecting their learning it's
the quality of that instruction
so if you can bet the
professional development
development hours with in that
school day and have teachers
working with each other in order
to improve their practice we
believe that's where we're going
to see the most effective
outcomes for our students the
other thing I think that's
important and and vice chair
Garrett had mentioned madam
chair was that this is all about
flexibility we spent the past
summer as part of our
legislative education study
committee working with
stakeholders educators
superintendents school board
members.
On this legislation and what
they would see because we've had
K. five plus programming we've
had extended learning
programming and we're seeing
large numbers of that money
referring into the public
education reform Fund we want to
make sure that we're getting
that money to the schools to
implement the sorts of
programming that they want to
see to further their students
achievement and provide for the
successes of our educators and
staff at the school site
and we have director federal
Warniment as well as deputy
director John Senate from the
legislative education study
committee as well.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee I'm I'm
not gonna add too much I think
both Sanchez have spoken
eloquently about this bill I
will add about on the topic of
research
you can use reserves essentially
to provide
or support your argument in many
different ways what's really
critical about this is the depth
of study I believe recognizing
that we are legislative
education study committee the
depth of study that went into
this bill and collaboration if
you imagine reserves in terms of
time to support education as a
pizza a pie chart right
typically we see data as a pie
chart.
You can.
I'll quickly see that half of
that pizza or pie chart the
research shows that what's
important is professional work
time for educators.
It's fundamental it is what will
change the trajectory for the
state.
A fifth of that pizza or circle
supports simply extending time
hours days in different ways and
for targeted students like high
dosage to during.
A third is research that says
all these other extra supports
out of school time network
experience will based ideas work
based learning interns
internships those actually
really make a difference as well
so leaning on that I think this
proposal really does show the
breadth of research and the way
that it actually is designed to
support the districts and the
most flexible and meaningful
way.
That madam chair will stand for
questions thank you let's go to
the audience and first I'd like
to hear from opposition and then
what we're gonna do is go to the
those in support I understand
that there are a number of
superintendents in the audience
and I've spoken with some of
them and the plan is in terms of
those superintendents wishing to
be identified you'll stand up
identify yourself you have a
spokesperson once you've
identified yourself this I'd
just that the spokesperson stand
up and down for yourself and I'm
trying to limit comments to two
minutes so if you could try to
work within those boundaries I'd
really appreciate it so okay is
there anyone who wishes to speak
in opposition to this bill.
Okay one hand.
Two hands all right
agency over here.
Okay and on this I don't see
that kind of put my check mark
in the middle there wasn't a
indicated that it's complicated.
But I am chair and members of
the committee and thank you for
having us here today I'm very
grateful for the Sanchez to
drive Warniment and we're seeing
now yes you do on behalf of New
Mexico students my position on
this bill is complicated I am in
favor of this bill HB one thirty
rather than rather than H. B.
one ninety four the flexibility
provided to districts to meet
their unique needs throughout
most of our state is crucial to
the implementation of any
extended learning time bill also
the embedded sixty hours for
teachers more for professional
development cleverness are you
in favor I am I it's.
I'm paying attention to what
you're saying and so far I've
heard a lot of in favor.
Okay all right if you're in
opposition I'm listening and
also talk for a minute.
The inventor of the chairs for
teachers meant for professional
development collaboration with
colleagues in planning time is
key going forward if this
legislature is determined to put
money towards more time for
students and educators eighty
one thirty is the bill to
support.
However it seems for quite a few
years that this government has
been pushing for the idea of
extended learning time as a way
to address the needs of students
in New Mexico.
and more of the same will not
serve our kids more of the same
will not address the issues in
the guys the Martinez case the
focus needs to move from more
time to more people in our
classrooms we need money for
full time counselors in every
building full time reading and
math tutors who can work with
kids this whole day all kinds of
these things kids were behind
will still be behind if all you
do is at times kids who struggle
with the tenants will still
struggle with attendance
teachers who are exhausted now
will be more exhausted if all
you do is at times I am worried
that extended learning time is
seen as the thing that will help
our kids grow so yes vote for H.
B. one thirty over HB one ninety
it's and it's but that what we
really need is money for human
beings to work with our
beautiful children thank you
thank you and I think there's
someone over here go ahead and
share members of the committee
made out of one executive
director New Mexicans can't my
aunt does money is also
complicated in that for all of
the components of this bill
certainly support extended
learning time certainly majorly
support high quality
professional development time in
collaboration for educators I do
think the remark in FY are and I
believe the governor's office
shares that concern is this
could potentially mean and that
impact cuts to the instructional
hours because of the flexibility
for professional development
time to be included as
instructional hours is
problematic I think that as New
Mexicans if we see that there's
a bill moving forward to extend
instructional time and in fact
we lose whole classroom time for
students that would be the
opposite of what we intend to do
so I'm hoping there might be a
third way approach between the
two bills that are currently
being.
Thank you thank you anyone else
wishing to speak in opposition.
online here
thank you.
Person named Aaron well sort.
During.
Are you speaking in opposition
Darren.
If you're not speaking
opposition please take your hand
out.
This is and okay all right thank
you all right very good I think
there is probably a pro.
So let's do that let's do it
let's hear from the
superintendents so I'd like
people to introduce themselves
and state your district you know
where you're from so people have
a sense about where you're
you're at keep it short and then
we'll go to your spokesperson
okay so where do you want to
start over here okay.
Madam chair members of the
committee on staff around the
executive director of state
superintendents association
you'll hear from.
With for the legislature
Representative Ferrary
these are just of the program in
New Mexico the lower do some
self making are COVID for us so
will rise and give that this
we stand community and support
okay so I know what I met a
bunch of superintendents so
wherever you are I think mostly
on the side but I don't want to
start over here and then we'll
come over here with us okay so
put to stand up and introduce
yourselves if you wish to speak
first okay Somers and the
superintendent of the Aztec
municipal school thank you.
House are superintendent more
areas with school districts.
Thanks David lacking
superintendent come up.
That this is our students
superintendent artesian not
actually opposed but I
understand.
Okay.
Okay.
The superintendent captain.
Okay.
Travis deputy superintendent
yesterday by the.
Problems the superintendent
Tularosa.
More two hundred superintendent
Santa Rosa order excludes.
Peter owns superintendent grade
school.
Brian Stacey superintendent our
office.
Connectivity secret one
superintendent Rio Rancho.
Scott elder Albuquerque.
This is the right to public
schools.
Steve Carlson C. presented
Senator Gonzales.
Curtis club superintendent
Hagerman.
But August for ten and then
there public schools.
Myself superintendents local
school district.
The military support for.
Twenty yield superintendent
Farmington schools.
The White superintendent loving
this in school.
Mark Sanchez superintendent
fuller consolidated schools.
Are are there folks over here as
well okay let's go.
For schools.
Yeah my municipal schools that.
Done a lot of quest to
independent schools.
Gary Allison Springer municipal
schools.
Nicole Burton tier C. meniscal
schools.
Standing on a sliding to the
schools.
Welcome to this.
Care it's not just create okay
by the superintendent.
Anyone else have wondering
superintendent of schools.
J. Strickler superintendent pops
meniscal schools.
Jennifer guys superintendent Los
Alamos public schools.
My name is funny like that
Medicare maybe I see printed and
house municipal schools also
president of the association to
present.
Anyone all over here for the
rest.
Very good did we miss
anyone does it or any other
superintendent who wishes to
identify themselves.
Okay now Mr Roche Roche to get
that right.
I often rush.
In this bill.
Madam chair members of the
committee.
For a Dennis Roch superintendent
of Logan schools and we we share
the the Sanchez passion for
moving the needle academic
achievement really feel like
passed house bill one thirty
gets us to better outcomes for
kids and adults what this is
about this bill helps to
accomplish that goal by not only
increasing learning time for
students but by empowering every
local school district to combine
learning time with professional
development because it's not
enough simply add more hours we
have to improve any quit the
professionals who deliver that
instruction and so by allowing
the types of things that the
chairman mentioned collaboration
with fellow to conditional
trainings to address the unique
needs of our students in the
unique needs of all of our
agents are different districts
and very different in different
diverse those the things that
really happened this bill
uniquely allows us to do that
give us the ability to to do
both in a way that values
everyone's district needs we are
often heard state
superintendents that more isn't
just better better is better and
house bill one third get this
better thank you thank you very
much are there others in the
audience who wish to speak in
favor of the bill of okay very
good all right let's start on
the side for a change so who
raise your hand here you go
thank you introduce yourself two
minutes thank you madam chair
of the legislative liaison for
the New Mexico school board
association and I'm very happy
to be here the New Mexico School
school boards association
annually needs and the member
strong come up with a list of
top this is one of our
physicians and our platform that
we hope to.
Three four seven.
Students.
Classroom the support facility
to Jessica Benham schedules and
budgets align
needed for extended learning but
we strongly support the sixty
are determined it is because of
legislation.
The same argument that part of.
And that's our teachers and
staff at our schools and our
students need to be successful
so thanks funds for that that
will give our teachers a
professional.
Training as well as professional
time to work and get prepared
for the classes finalized
superintendent association
supports flexibility options and
sufficient funding.
It's just there thank the
sponsors forward yes you will
consider thank you for your time
thank you very much who's next
on the side here wishes to speak
in favor
Good to see you.
Thank you for this opportunity
to address this committee.
All bandy I'm a member of the
Aztec school board.
And that we support this bill we
appreciate the flexibility is
this bill the school board makes
decisions about implement.
it's easy for us to do to
support it because we already.
This a minimum amount of hours
in our schedule.
And this is long is the
flexibility is there we we
really support to an we
appreciate it if this morning
more unfunded mandates.
Thank you very much Senator.
Thank you I think the gentleman
next to get going madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Matt Paul in the executive
director of public charter
schools of New Mexico we support
this bill we think the sponsors
for listening to the education
community and making the
adjustments and I've been a
pretty long debate over how we
provide more opportunities for
students to get together and
make good things happen to
classrooms we do have some
concerns on the funding of this
bill that may not be the purview
of this community out of this
committee but it really has to
do with folks who've been good
actors in the past those who
have added those school days in
the past to have added those
hours don't seem that as well as
some of the other schools school
districts and charter schools
that will be doing more here so
just flag for you all but we
very much support the bill and
the contents and thank you thank
you who's next over here
Johnson thank you madam chair
members the committee job or two
more confederation of teachers
we do see this approach to the
eleven forty additional hours
I've noted by supercenter rosh
I'm happy to be standing in
support of something with you
together
as noted many users already
meeting these minimums and we
also the second point that
brought us to be able to support
this particular purchase
legislation is the embedded
professional adult time hours is
how we talk about them so that
was brought up by a German Mero
and major Garrett so we did want
to stand in support today the
this is the right approach to
this out for the session.
Thank you JD thank you madam
chair members of the committee
my name is JD Bullington
registered lobbyists with Gallup
McKinley county school district
and that districts supports this
legislation thank you thank you
have we.
counted everyone on this site
right side for my right side now
move to my left who would like
to speak in favor.
A yes ma'am.
Madam chair members of the
committee good afternoon my name
is needed for is an education
reform director for the New
Mexico in the twenty twenty New
Mexico teacher of the year we
simply want to have we seen a
supportive extended learning
time because we know that the
research points so this is a
reform it can work we simply
want to emphasize that extend
the time must be implemented
thoughtfully to ensure that
student and teacher needs are
being met teachers are in our
third grade and fourth grade and
fifth grade classrooms and
beyond with students who
struggle to read basic point and
self basic math problems yet
they have no access to
additional small group tutoring
or reading interventionist for
math interventionist and
teachers don't have adequate
time to plan for so many very
student needs we won't see
results from this initiative if
we're not laser focused on what
happens on a daily basis in our
classrooms I also want to add
that when I told my own third
grade daughter about that I was
working to support more time in
the classroom she said no.
When I asked her what could take
a class on animation her eyes
lit up or what if you can learn
how to make your own website
that would be cool maam she
said.
That motivates our younger
students to learn and they can
boost attendance for folder
students should be part of how
we use the time wisely more of
what we have been doing is not
the answer more time for
innovation and transformative
practices is what our students
do thank you to the sponsors for
all your efforts and moving this
reform forward.
Thank you anyone else some to my
left yes Sir.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you so much for
this has to be given thank you
to the Sanchez my name is Chris
ideas of it on the head
administrator of a large charter
school here in Santa Fe we have
had over the last several years
more hours than is required so
we stand to continue to benefit
from this but we also received a
K. twelve plus planning grant in
this last year so I can tell you
how we have use those funds to
do some of the things that were
just mentioned this last year we
were able to provide
professional development trips
to take our teachers across the
country to visit new innovative
and this practice schools help
inform what we do as a school
ourselves we're also bringing
our students to go visit
colleges in New Mexico as well
as Arizona and Los Angeles and
partnerships to to raise their
aspirational goals for
themselves and to show them what
it would look like in a college
setting we're also partnering
with a local farm to do a
shelter study or fifth graders
are going to build their own
shelters and live on this far
for now to see the shelters hold
up because of the funding that
this allowed us we are allowed
to do things like that so I
encourage your consideration
extended learning time and the
innovation that we hope will be
brought forward by the
continuation thank you thank you
anyone else on the to my left
over here.
I don't see anyone I let's go to
the electro participants Sarah
fitzgerald I see your hand up
Sarah.
Okay.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee I'm
cert that sterile senior vice
president of the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
or in favor of this measure we
know that additional
instructional hours are what our
students need to close
achievement gaps and recover
from learning lost and we're in
favor of the flexibility this
bill encourages so not only
enable all of our districts and
charters to get on board with
extended learning but as you've
heard today it will support all
the innovative ways our
districts and charters are
already implementing longer days
longer school calendars for the
benefit of their students.
But there's one improvement that
could be made to this bill and
that would be to keep all of
this feels extra school hours
for instructional time that make
sure kids can reap all the
benefits of those longer days
and school calendars there is a
bill that proposes just this
house bill one ninety four and
so what we support this bill's
intent we also encourage the
Legislature to consider each
building one ninety four as well
thank you.
Thank you I do don't see any
other hands up on electronically
so let's go back to the
committee to other any
Representative Eli.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair.
H. three.
Paragraph C. line fourteen
there's a key word there I would
submit to the committee.
And so we're the sentence opens
up with the word may.
And I think that's really
critical.
For us as legislators I think we
need to be careful when you
entered the wrong education that
we take a what I would call a
top down approach.
I'm not an expert education I I
do try hard to study these
issues I'm very proactive in the
interim to try to get my.
Money round these but when I
have a room full educators who
tell me that discretion is the
better Path I think we should
pay attention to that.
I'm also predisposed to give our
local elected more control over
education because I I know that
the community very well but I
don't know the hops community
very well and so I think that's
a consideration for us as well
and then madam chair as far as
extending it to eleven forty.
Frankly with the decisions that
were made to shut down schools
for as long as they were shut
down I think we have to take a
really serious look about what
we need to do to get our
students back on track and help
them to catch up I don't think
this is the silver bullet but I
think it's one of a number of
pro tools that we need to
consider and so for those kids
that are falling behind and
further behind.
I think this bumped eleven forty
makes and so does my comments
thank you madam chair.
Ask questions.
Representative local.
Thank you madam chair I'm just
trying to.
To picture this the in in the in
the manner that I can understand
the now do it this way I think
we requests so this in first
grade.
This bill passes how much more
time if you're going to spend it
school.
A day.
Madam chair representative if
you could tell us the school
district we do have a chart lay
out exactly how much time.
So you in the.
Madam chair every school
district will have a different
way of a.
Setting the schedule and.
At every location he would be in
the the rent to local schools.
Madam chair and Representative
uncle and you are first of all
you are correct right now there
is local discretion in terms of
their calendars that is one of
the things in terms of local
control around how they set
their calendars of the minimum
that they have is nine ninety in
terms of elementary hours in ten
eighty and secondary and so what
they do with this local school
boards and superintendents do is
arrange their school calendars
around those hours in requests
in particular
they would add that looks like
twenty seven minutes at the end
of each day.
Thank you for your basically
madam chair you would have
another half an hour
to school every day.
Madam chair and representative
going that is one possibility
however the superintendent and
and grants could also say we're
gonna actually devote a couple
of days at the beginning of the
school year for professional
learning just for educators and
then less than the amount of
time at the end of each day for
those children or could devote
just the twenty seven minutes to
professional earning if it
equals it and it looks like it
does under sixty hours of
professional development so it's
essentially providing the work
time for those educators so he
many potentially not be impacted
at all but the educators would
be provided extra time to
support their professional work.
And I guess the other question
madam chair that I do have is a
I guess the last year or two
years before we had basically
the school's good voluntarily
use money that was available to
have extra hours and this
disputes refuse to to do the
extra hours for we're not able
to do that what I heard in one
and one of my school districts
is that the
The superintendent said that he
couldn't find any teachers that
would work the extra hours.
Is that the going to be a
problem this time and Madam
chair representative I would say
that
depending on the school district
it could be the case so even if
we go with the example of about
a half hour increase in the
school day community partners
could be brought in maybe the
counselors from the school could
be brought in to work with
students in various aspects of
their education one example in
Albuquerque public schools we
have an eight hour workday pilot
so I'm part of that pilot and
it's using federal funds and and
we're part of a cohort I'm part
of a national board certified
teacher cohort so my
professional development with
other of my peers is going
through the national board
certification process and so
there are other opportunities as
well so it's up to the local
district to work with their
stakeholders on crafting what
that school day looks like for
their students and there
educators and their staff.
Thank you very much.
Answer the question whether
personal madam chair is that
mention this I just want to do I
want to prove that there is life
after the legislature we have a
X. Representative band the over
there and thank Representative
Ross over here so that's just
the point that I wanted to bring
up thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative
Representative Chasey.
What the that on behalf of.
It's surprising.
House Judiciary but this former
educator and I I have to tell
you I start working on
legislation veterans down rounds
was review of Elia see we work
for the LFC when we got the
school age lowered for kids with
disabilities to H. three.
That was started line work with
some farmers
colleagues of ours but one of
the things that I.
Learn from the early childhood
educators with whom I later
became involved just how
important it is for kids to have
time to move.
And so I want to be sure we're
not cutting down AT.
Exercise time or.
PED or recess or tell me about
that madam chair.
Madam chair and
floor leader Chasey no not at
all in fact this four more time
I think in flexibility for local
districts and schools to be
creative about their schedule
and maybe put in time and breaks
throughout the day it and it's
actually supports in a much more
robust passion.
That is a huge relief madam
chair I I did have one email
from someone who probably was
not a constituent of mine
because it sounded like she
lived in more rural areas.
And she was talking about the
length of time that her grand
children spend on the school bus
and how early they leave and how
long it is before they get home
so tell me about what this meant
to in some of those instances
and
maybe provide a little relief to
these families who have that
particular concern Madam.
Madam madam chair and Madam
leader Chasey that that that is
a concern I think already
regardless of raising two eleven
forty I think we are aware of
some of the students across New
Mexico and the route
particularly those rural small
districts
we are recognizing and I think
supporting school districts and
superintendents to make choices
really by using the space of
professional learning and
professional work time for
educators as really important
driver in terms of
Recognizing how much time in the
day should be for instruction
and then how do you also build
in time and honor the time for
educators and their professional
work time and so really that
balance so that students aren't
there the entire time and you're
still really recognizing that
part of the days for educators
and their work time.
Hello thank you chairman but if
the email took me back to third
grade when I was in I went to
rural school in Tucson Arizona
which is now in the middle of
town by the way but we would
ride it was a long ride on a
dirt road eight miles to
School and it occurs to me that
we probably learned a lot on the
school bus not all of it good I.
This is still I just there may
be opportunities whether.
Here it seeing or or something
like that the four just to
enrich the in which the ride but
I think they're all kinds of
possibilities and I really what
I liked is hearing from the
districts that it's going to be
unique to the district and I
think that takes the decision
making down to where it belongs
in education thank you madam
chair thank you all thank you
Representative McQueen.
Thank you madam chair of mentor
Sanchez.
So that.
The discussions about more hours
is it and.
I will reveal my ignorance of
the bill is it necessarily
longer days or is it or or or
longer school years also an
option on madam chair and
representative they could be
either or both depending you
could do some days and somehow
time within the day you could do
days you could do just hours
throughout the school year and
madam chair Representative
Romero that's the a district to
district level decision how to
do that Madam chair
representative yes.
And madam chair is a Romero so
so all of the districts will
meet this increased
instructional hour mark they
just have different ways to do
it Madam chair representative
yes as long as they're meeting
the minimum of eleven forty and
plus the up to sixty hours a
professional development yes and
madam chair and representative I
just want to remind everybody
that hundred and ten districts
and charter schools already meet
the eleven forty instructional
hour requirements.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you
Representative night Burt.
You are less.
Thank you madam chair.
The first question I want to
know is.
Our kids safe today.
I look out every superintendent
is here.
So thank you
I I to have a couple questions
regarding the time and and just
so I can understand it
madam chair and representative.
If I take the sixty hours of
professional work hours.
In on page three lines twelve
through seventeen.
If I subtract that out of the
eleven forty were back to ten
eight so far goal was to have
more time for.
The students education.
If I do the math right.
Not there.
You for adding the sixty hours
to the eleven forty were up to
twelve hundred and so.
Is a sixty just a practice in
reserve sixty in addition.
Madam chair representative it's
a new path it in so traction
from the school in.
So in essence the instructional
time with the students is still
one thousand eighty out from
injury.
Madam chair representative
Nibert it's would be actually an
increase in terms of elementary
so elementary right now the
minimum is nine ninety so
elementary where we are seeing
them most impact in terms of the
COVID side that is impacted our
elementary students the most of
their instructional hours would
increase for those educators
But for secondary they would
stay the same but there would
still be honored professional
work time now on top of that.
And and so madam chair and
representative.
Based on that answers the focus
really is on the younger grades
to get them really more class
time really no impact on the
upper grades if I understood the
answer correctly Madam chair
representative Nibert again this
is that local discretion the
idea is for superintendents who
know their educ students best
and there are educators best to
make decisions because the sixty
hours is not the.
Required it's it's a possibility
for that superintendents so for
superintendent in the room says
we actually just like to do
eleven forty of instructional
hours we're going to go ahead
and do that because we feel like
our students really need that
time so I think Representative
Lane pointed out for leader lane
that the
it's a may right and it wasn't
designed as such because it's a
at the discretion of the
districts.
Well we are I read the words may
madam chair as well but I heard
the representative more say I
shall earlier so if it's.
May is not required but
it sounded to me like it really
was intended to be a requirement
to have the professional
development and I'm not so
challenging that
And then the only other thing.
Madam chair and.
Representative I like pizza real
well and and one fifth plus one
half plus one third as I have a
piece.
Of our comic here today.
I really appreciate the calm the
presentation and the approach I
am not gonna speak for very long
but All I Want to say to all of
you educators in the room I
trust educators and I trust you
to to be thinking about our
children and doing what's best
for them so I just want to thank
you for the work you're doing.
Alright with that let's zoom
call the roll.
Representative.
Well I didn't hear anyone say
no.
Zero move a do pass second.
Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey yes.
Representative Lane yes.
Mr speaker.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative night there yes
Representative read yes
Representative green.
Representative semansky yes.
Madam vice chair yes.
Madam chair yes.
By a vote of nine zero we have a
D. pass one thirty.
Great thank you madam chair
thank thanks for coming.
So if we could exit quickly and
quietly that would be super
helpful do I sound like a school
teacher.
Because.
So you're going to be my dears
two bills.
We're gonna have
the hap.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Thank.
Sure he wants to.
Thanks for being
here
by.
Is this right I.
The amendment.
Romero.
Okay madam chair three hearing
house bill thirty one go ahead
and proceed when you're ready
thank you madam chair we will be
brief it's a pretty
straightforward thing or trying
to do this bill removes the
requirement that to publish a
name change in a local newspaper
and.
It also clarifies who receives
notice and if a parent or
guardian is involved and what it
does is it removes the
requirement that both parents be
notified if there is a potential
issue and and lease it to one
parent to work on behalf of
their minor child in terms of
the name change process it also
creates a provision in the bill
that discusses
You know when court records or
other records may be sealed and
and the process for that and
that is on page two the
amendment that we have madam
chair and I don't know if you
wish me to bring that up now or
wait and I the much covered the
what the bill does.
Why don't we go to the audience
for is it.
It's it's a pretty brief
amendment and it's it's just
correct some things for examined
simple extends legal parents to
legal guardians as well.
Check we just I just wanna make
sure that interim committee has
the amendment okay you and it is
in the Here file.
Newman.
Thank you madam chair I had.
Yes thank you it's the amendment
number is two two four six nine
eight point two.
And it what it does is it
extends legal parents to legal
guardians as well clarifies that
in the case of a danger of a
child of a parent or a child the
applicant is the parents in.
I believe that covers the bill
generally and in terms madam
chair of a policy recently I
hope it's evident to all of you
we're trying to protect
individuals who might be subject
to harassment or.
Violence or other other sorts of
you know negative activity as a
consequence of their interest in
changing their name and this may
involve members of the LGBTQ
community or individuals who've
been the object of violence or
domestic violence you know those
kinds of things and really it's
not a necessary process is also
cumbersome and potentially
costly because there are no fees
involved when these kinds of
things are are percent so we're
making it less expensive more
accessible and it's intended to
protect individuals who wish to
change their name for whatever
reason.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you madam chair did you
want to introduce your yes
expert and then we'll go to the
audience I will ask her to
introduce herself that's okay
good afternoon members of the
committee then vice chair my
name is sherry Weinstein a
little bit about my background I
spent nineteen years here at the
district attorney's office and
first usual district have been
spent six years at the
administrative office of the
courts as the deputy director of
the magistrate court division I
retired in twenty fourteen and
twenty fifteen I started doing
voluntary voluntary legal work
at the transgender resource
center of New Mexico where I had
clients who I help to their name
changes which is my background
with this particular bill.
All right if that concert will
go to the audience now is there
anyone opposed to this bill.
a anyone online opposed to this
bill feel free to raise your
hand.
Right I'm not seeing any propose
is there anyone in favor of this
bill.
All right for those if you'd
like to speak will start on the
side of the room in favor.
Anyone in favor on the side that
like to speak of sorry go ahead
back on this back to the state.
Good afternoon my name is go
with the New Mexico coalition
sexual assault programs but we
fully support house bill thirty
one fifty legal statutes
research unnecessary burdens on
survivors of domestic and sexual
violence seeking to change their
name for security for personal
reasons.
This is especially true for
individuals in rural areas and
the.
House bill thirty one protects
survivors safety and privacy as
a human donor experience and as
the further take control over
their story for identity
enterprise.
The reason for your here
particularly about the licensing
of protecting and affirming
trans people.
Or how.
Madam chair and members of the
committee my name is Haley is
often I'm from the southwest
with false center.
Okay for for the public once the
change is a small step state to
make life safer for New Mexicans
this is what I thought was with
the father the bush family
support is okay thank you thank
you
folks on the side.
Would like to speak ahead.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is required or
not as I'm with the quality New
Mexico the state's LGBTQ
advocacy organization
what will support of this bill
this antiquated law.
It's important but it also puts
forward seeking funding change
in danger especially
transsexuals and survivors of
domestic a domestic violence
thank you thank you.
Chairperson of the committee I'm
Christine Armstrong probably not
by their eight percent and a
director of advocacy at the
trans gender resource centre.
And I'm here in support of HB
thirty one as an individual I
belong to to communities most
harmed by this bill is a
domestic violence survivor and a
transgender non binary person.
As a community organizer where
we transgender gender non
conforming and non binary people
on a daily basis all of our
hi but the specific requirements
at the very least those who have
the privilege to be able to.
Make such a change have the best
the publication requirement is
an undue burden that worst
affected people's physical
safety.
The social determinant of health
we must remove the publication
component of the change process
as such I urge all of you to
support this bill thank you
happy black history month thank
you.
Chairman of the committee my
name is Cat Sanchez policy co
director of the teachers we are
an organization statewide I am
for black indigenous women and
people of color I could not have
said anything better than some
of the folks who are already in
this room we are in strong
support.
You.
Students for members of the
committee my name is Kayla
hearing with and in fact not be
sentenced transported this
legislation is we support any
efforts that support people to
live their to authentic
including missions in name
without barriers thank you.
Anyone else speaking in support.
Chair of the committee my name
is Yvonne Thomas director of the
Center policy change extended
support of HB thirty one the
fact that also supports trans
and non binary kids but also
victims and survivors of
domestic abuse and other
marginalized groups and
communities we have to twenty
does report favorably upon the
nature thank you thank you
anyone else speaking in support
and online we have Jamie.
Go ahead Jamie I.
We have one here okay there.
Madam chair members of the
committee I am in support of
this bill although I do not fit
into any of the categories that
have been so far spoken of my
wife and I have both been known
by names other to nose on our
birth certificate our choice for
over thirty years and.
In California all you have to do
is change your name and.
As long as you have no intent to
defraud by that name change that
your name on all legal documents
here in New Mexico it's been
different we are.
Going to get it changed both of
our names by court decree this
removes a barrier a costly
barrier to so doing so I stand
in strong support of this bill
for ourselves and for all of
those people who would be more
negatively impacted if it were
not passed thank you and can you
state your name for the record
please our.
James C. Fraser rate F. R. A. as
P. R. hyphen PA IGT thank you
thank you James we have next
week Janet.
Hello I'm Janet Williams with
our Santa Fe national
organization for women and we
stand in strong support of this
bill thank you.
All right back to you madam
chair madam chair would be
appropriate to have a motion on
the amendment and then we can
take a motion make sense.
Right we have a motion the
amendment is there any
opposition to drive yep okay is
there any opposition to moving
the amendment okay will go to
the committee questions.
Representative Nibert.
Thank you
Is.
On page one line.
Nineteen twenty we're changing
the the current age.
Was there the their reason for
that are.
Members the committee
representative Nibert I think
don't we were changing the age
we're clarifying the language I
think that it's just
instructional to say fourteen
years of age or older the old
way we used to say this was over
the age of fourteen so it
clarifies what we mean by that.
What I mean is if you look at
this bill the original law says
over the age of fourteen and
then we have a set the section
that has miners which is under
the age of fourteen to this
clarifies that what is meant by
over the age of fourteen is
fourteen and up not leaving the
fourteen year olds out and and
they give us land.
So winds nineteen twenty of
change because the existing law
says over the age of fourteen
which would require you to be
fifteen or above where now it's
fourteen in about a miss miss
madam chair and representative I
may since I was the one when I
was working on this that asked
for that change in I felt that
it was unclear because actually
over the age of fourteen is
fourteen and one day
Right I mean that's really what
it was to me when I was reading
the bill originally is fourteen
and one day is over the age of
fourteen so I felt that that's
what was intended by the law
original on this madam chair and
representative so that's why we
change a language I take
responsibility for that I
wasn't.
Madam chair.
The committee.
the Attorney General.
Okay madam chair and
representative I've just been
informed just as well that last
time this bill was presented
that change was suggested I
guess by the attorney general's
office as well so they must've
read it the same way I did.
I I think the original statute.
In light of what goes be low.
It did need clarified.
Because you had fourteen year
olds I would disagree with your
interpretation of what over
fourteen means but but you have.
One provision that said over and
one provision that set and and
what do you do with fourteen
year old you and so there was an
ambiguity in the existing
statutes I just wanted to know
why you want to where you went
on the page two line.
Nine which is now been amended
the state all legal parents.
I'm wondering if you're getting
yourself in a box and are
explained.
This requires notice to now all
legal parents.
There's a lot of parents out
there that can't be found.
What do you do when the
requirement is that you have to
provide notice call we go
parents in you can't notify one
of them.
Thank
can do the procedure.
So I don't think that your
intent but that's what it does.
So just leave you with that
thought
the next area use program the on
page two winds fifteen through
twenty one.
Pretty cumbersome but I'll just
get to my my main point.
Often times we think we do
people a favour by sealing their
records.
Maybe it makes sense to seal a
child's record until they're
eighteen.
But this provision provides for
the ceiling of those records
ostensibly forever.
I can tell you that when the
courts did that.
With respect to all competency
proceedings by court order for
spring court mandated all
competency proceedings the
serial.
The impact is not doing the
people educated and confident
any favors.
Because people like myself that
are examining title trying to
figure out who owns property
who's entitled to payment of
large sums of money from oil
wells of secretary of.
if those records are sealed.
It's pretty easy requirements
suspend the runs entitled to
jondo.
To be millions of dollars.
And what company that cares
thank you to suspend.
When we got to see those records
we could see.
Who.
Was appointed conservator of the
estate who was appointed to to
step in their place we we can
get that stuff handle.
When the spring court my that
rural we couldn't do that
anymore.
So I'm just suggesting to you
Madam chair madam chair that you
might want to put.
Some limitation that those
things are sealed well that
person's of minor and that they
become automatically unsealed
when they turn eighteen years of
age or something so that people
know that.
Jondo is now John.
Smith.
That's information that the
business community needs it's
probably information that they
need
and and the only way you're
going to get that is if you can
see the records can't see the
records.
That exist in there may be some.
For consequences as a result of
that provision bowed out there
for thank you madam chair and
Representative I might comment
if you look at line nineteen
through twenty one the record
show only be vote by a court or
based on a showing of good cause
so that's not in perpetuity if
if one wishes has a good costs
showing then one can open the
records.
Thank you I don't disagree with
you madam chair madam chair I'm
telling you that.
I'm not going to proceed with a
proceeding to open those records
I'm going to suspend those runs
and go on down the road and
nobody's going to to to ever
open those sites it's going to
be out there.
And you know.
There's a lot of money they get
suspended from oil wells because
people can't be found or people
who step in their shoes can't be
found like this and so you know.
I think I understand why you
what you're doing you're trying
to protect that person for a
period of time but once they
become adults I don't I don't
see.
Why the protections necessary I
do see commercial reasons why
that information should be
available and I see consequences
for that information not being
available on.
Madam chair and representative I
think the rationale is the risk
of harm.
Doesn't end when someone Reese
the age of majority or whatever
number you're you're picking in
some cases that person will be
at risk for quite some period of
time if not forever I'd like
society to change so that we
wouldn't have those issues but
we haven't changed and
unfortunately it seems we're
going in the wrong in the wrong
direction so that's the
rationale I think madam chair
madam chair and representative.
There's there's just other
consequences vote up there.
Any other questions in the
twenty.
All right I'll entertain a
motion for the.
Thank you.
We have a motion for a do pass
as amended by Representative
Chasey and a second by cause
Martinez go ahead and call the
roll.
Representative Alcon the.
Representative Chasey yes.
Representative Lane yes.
Mr speaker yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative night for the.
Representative reeve yes
Representative green.
Representative Penske yes.
Chair yes.
Madam chair.
Yes.
Thank you my my other bill.
By a vote of ten we have a few
passes amended on house bill
thirty one.
All right here you have to have
house bill thirty one as
amended.
Thank you.
We'll go to the next.
I.
Yes.
Thank you so madam chairs
magistrate court changes house
bill one thirteen I just want to
make sure.
Okay.
Full.
Yeah but.
For.
Get right.
Hey madam chair if you want to
go ahead and introduce yourself
yes
so madam chair thank you very
much I think this is house bill
one thirteen and it is a bill
that is a priority bill for the
Supreme Court.
What it does madam chair and
representative is it
establishes the magistrate court
is a court of record.
It creates a number of
qualifications for magistrates
that are
both age changing the age from
eighteen to thirty and also
offering some cry job I guess
you'd call them job
qualifications are
qualifications to serve
including eight years of
experience as a magistrate judge
court clerk or equivalent has a
four year degree from accredited
institution of higher ed or two
year degree and four years of
work experience in teaching
social services law enforcement
arbitration mediation etcetera
you know court system counseling
The current magistrate judges
are grandfathered in under the
bill it also changes some short
jurisdiction jurisdictional
aspects of magistrate judging
and what it does is magistrate
judges now are limited to the
county in which they are elected
this would allow magistrate
judges to also I guess you could
say work in counties that are
part of the judicial district in
which there county a so like
first for this county the first
district that Santa Fe Los
Alamos and Rio Arriba that would
allow them they magistrates in
any one of those counties to
serve in the other counties
it also provides that a
magistrate we'll have statewide
jurisdiction over
Criminal traffic violation motor
vehicle violations except for D.
W. Y. so we felt that the W. I.
has a more local component to it
many if not most and I'm sure
I'll I'll introduce my expert
sentiment can talk about how a
lot of the hearings center are
done remotely now and so that's
a viable option is as we move
forward I think I have touched
on everything that I'm not judge
Travis you did okay so if you
would interest self your
introduce yourself magistrate
judge I'd appreciate and your
colleagues I appreciate that
thank you madam chair members of
the committee hi my name is out
John Travis from the magistrate
judge an operable in New Mexico
coming today by judge to foster
his the magistrate judge's in
Artesia as well as the president
of the magistrate judge's
Association and so we're both
here to to speak about this bill
to thank you and that was then
and without madam chair open for
questions thank you madam chair
welcome to our committee will go
to the audience for those in
opposition to this bill is there
anyone in opposition.
Anyone online in opposition of
house bill one thirteen.
Right see none we anyone in
favor of this bill today.
Hey anyone wanting to speak on
behalf of this bill.
Chair members of the committee.
I.
Director for operations for the
off point one of my roles in
positions on the table I
measure.
so I can tell you from
experience that the
responsibilities of the
magistrate judges have the
priest there's
as these judges here tell you
and responsibilities including
setting conditions of release
for vast majority of cases.
Most felony cases
and DWI cases have become public
complex.
the anticipated statutes you'll
be hard pressed to find criminal
statutes more indications of
that we wind thank you so that.
The issues that the judges are
facing so we believe the
increased responsibilities it's
appropriate to raise the
qualifications for my district
judges and also have those
important decisions being made
on the record and also give the
judicial districts with
management district for thanks a
million thank you to which the
cases within.
Thank you Sir any other
testimony in support anyone
online.
All right that concludes
what we'll start with the
Representative right.
I am thank you madam chair and
representative I just I'm trying
to press one of the things in
here first I love that this
would be a quarter of record I
think that would be great it
would save a lot of time on
appeals and things of that
nature but on page.
Three the territorial limits
line twenty two I'm I'm thinking
I understand what the purpose of
this is that maybe you can
clarify if I'm correct Madam
chair representative so is this
is this to deal with the
situations where you have that
let's let's just take Santa Fe
County for instance you have
Santa Fe counties extremely busy
then you have let's say
maybe
the TA that's not as busy so
statewide jurisdiction or
allowing them to hear like
traffic offenses is this so
another judge is not as busy can
take on some of that case load
and then if so what's what's the
statewide part I get not need to
be wise but how is that
determined and my on the right
line of thinking of that Madam
chair representative madam chair
and representative I think you
are but I'll let magistrate
judge Thomas address that more
fully thank you madam chair and
representative so you're exactly
right and so use simple of TA
that's a good example another
would be Los Alamos them about
two hundred sixty six cases
compared to the six thousand
five hundred here in Santa Fe so
it's a great example of what
we're trying to do is to level
we actually already do this by
court order District Court judge
to judge could designate of
actually to hear hear cases
this is little more transparent
this is basically you know up
front that a judge of not Los
Alamos a TA could be assigned to
to a case here in Santa Fe again
this happens already this just
codifies and makes more more
transparent that's the district
piece the the the statewide
piece has to do with traffic and
so not all jurisdiction only the
traffic and and not including
the wives and so right now all
of our administrative traffic
cases are heard on by video and
that's how we do
did your telephone arrangements
and then we go to trial there to
my video and so this will allow
again the same idea you have.
The case load state and and
wonder what district has may
five thousand six thousand cases
and then you have a magistrate
of for instance and and Harding
County with a very low case load
they get here they could do
those arrangements thank you to
those trial no one has to travel
so when I make an impact on law
enforcement to go from a
different place or not making
defendants go to a different
place you just find equity to
the number of cases that are
signed between those judges okay
madam chair Representative and
yes thank you that answers my
question I I thought that's what
you were trying to do and I I do
think that's a great idea
because I do know I can Harding
County I sometimes wonder if
they even sometimes up to come
to work every single day you
know because there's not a lot
going on there first of a larger
jurisdiction
As far as the qualifications go
madam chair representative so
you're upping the qualifications
for magistrate court judge can
you explain a little bit the
thinking behind that.
Madam chair and representative I
think the thinking behind it is
when this court was created we
lived in a different time and
world and though it the cases
have become more complex the
ability to analyze and exercise
good judgment has become more
critical than in when the state
constitution was formulated and
we are very caught I know the
Supreme Court and certainly I am
cognizant of the fact that many
counties don't have lawyers for
years there is talk about what
might aren't they all lawyers so
this to me Madam chair and
representative of strikes a fair
balance where we're putting some
educational parameters and some
level of maturity associated
with the age requirement but if
you wish to add to this.
Of this thank you madam chair
and representative and so
exactly for the face of the more
complex that we've also expanded
the jurisdiction so you look
back to nineteen six nine fifty
five years ago was when we had
the qualifications haven't
changed in fact it was traffic
tickets a civil under certain
dollar amount it was petty
misdemeanors only over time with
with added to that there's been
a drip drip drip misdemeanors to
felony Plumeri examinations the
cases have got more complex
civil cases about more complex
and the time that I've been on
the bench kick matters of got
more complex well when I started
I didn't have to make any
written findings on domestic
violence case but today my
written findings are input into
the FBI database of farms
database things are changing and
they're changing rapidly and so
we we we we did that and then
Representative made a note to
the fact that the shortage of
lawyers this also makes a nod to
the fact we have a shortage of
of of really degrees throughout
the state and so we don't want
to just say let's just make this
about a bachelor's degree and so
the magistrate judge's
Association came up with the
options that are presented
inside of this bill and they
propose the thirty the the the
the the age of thirty and then
we negotiated with the
magistrates and and touch faster
that that discussion and this is
what we came up with and we we
want to make sure we're giving a
balance to education but also a
nod to the rural districts where
that might still be a problem
with shortage of teachers for
instance and so educate the X.
work experiences outline of the
bill we believe is appropriate
to substitute that education
gives a nod to the rural
districts really.
Madam chair representative of I
get a create and how do you come
up with so you said the
magistrate judges came up with
the qualifications that they
thought were appropriate.
But yes so we've had
conversations about
qualifications of the years a
lot of our conversations this
incident this year was different
this year the the sprint achieve
to justice exercising great
leadership reached out to Mexico
association and and adult foster
conflict that Anastas Hey what's
your what what do you think
about it be and then we took
some of the recommendations that
came out of the minister of off
the court we we we change those
or modify them and they accepted
all recommendations these are
from the magistrate judges that
sick Carly in New Mexico.
Right madam chair and
representative and I know that
And no we're talking about this
earlier.
If there's a high also up.
A high level of civil experience
now you know kind of required in
magistrate court also
and so do you think these
qualifications madam chair
representative address lake you
know those areas as far as the
landlord tenant contracts stuff
I'm not extremely familiar and
as I do criminal so I I just
wondered if you felt this was a
good list for everybody.
Please madam chair and
representative yes as absolutely
and and there's two components
that one is that that age
requirement you know so
I took a bunch of at forty and
fifty six and still weighs
heavily on my heart would have
to affect the family in the
winter time this is hard
business hard to do and and so I
think the age requiring the some
of the life experience whose
rate bills whose whose rate make
it mortgage was paid rent to
understand the complexities of
what you're doing and then the
weight of what you're doing when
you have to order the vixen in
terms of the education
requirements I I think that the
the educate the experience what
wind and the education that
we've with the noted really kind
of a we're trying to I guess the
noting this is that there's an
intellectual curiosity of the of
the judge that wants to pursue
their education the and again
those some the the ability to
research and to reason an
appropriate judgment on on a
civil matter and so absolutely I
think he's really do a very
complimentary to the to the task
at hand okay and and lastly
madam chair representative so on
the quarter of record part and
and I think Representative
Chasey nervous discussing
whether this came up before so
does that mean you have your
trial magistrate court you still
get it done over trial in
District Court and then what.
And
madam chair and representative I
believe the same appeal process
currently exists but there's
there's a stage two if I
understand that but I don't know
which one so that so madam chair
representative so so yes right
now this bill doesn't change the
the the renewable it District
Court there is a delay
implementation until July first
of twenty of next year of twenty
twenty four and so we can
proceed twenty training for my
district I just will do this I
quipping them what the F. T. R.
inappropriate software and
recording equipment that's
necessary but madam chair
representative it's also
Two point nineteen we did just
that we we for the metropolitan
courts we amended some statues
thirty five thirteen to eight
thirty five of four eight a six
to allow a direct appeal to the
court of bills and and with the
we believe that would be coming
before the legislature next
chairman that same language but
we want to have that delayed
implementation time to equip
train and have that conversation
it madam chair representative
judge I I like I like this idea
because I've been a magistrate
court so many times and it's
kind of a playground for
attorneys and it's very
disrespectful sometimes and it's
unprofessional and it's because
everybody knows is not recorded
so people push it may push it
and and it's you know often very
inappropriate and and I think
that would really help solve a
lot of the things that happen in
magistrate court because there
is a recording so I definitely
think that's another round to
think of and I like that so
thank you madam chair and
Representative and judge I
appreciate it at all yield.
All right next we have
Representative Eli.
You madam chair of question on
the become a court record.
Madam can I get some information
on practically what does that
look like for the court to
change from the change to a
court record.
Madam chair if I may ask judge
of us to just madam chair and
leader lane so
right now we have a trial a
magistrate court of some of
bills that they get a trial de
novo District Court or a new
trial in District Court and then
there is an appeal there would
go up to the court of appeals in
the Supreme Court so provides
the apple what what this would
do long term initially nothing
we would still have that that
that the novo as the wheels
right and but if we implement
the language we differ from
actual court for all the right
reasons in magistrate court you
would have a uh record recording
of what happens in my district
court and then that record would
be reviewed directly at the
court of appeals and so we've
been looking for reversible
error will be looking for the
state can discretion those types
of it literally Madam chair so
okay so the bill need to be some
type of technology equipment
that's I didn't ask very precise
question I'm sorry I understand
that the noble peace but Madam I
guess I'm just asking so does
that entail purchasing recording
equipment making sure
everything's capture the audio
madam chair leader late we
already or puts a record four
point examinations we do have F.
your equipment already in our in
my district courts for the
purpose of that we would
probably make that remote more
robust and expand that there
there would be some equipping
that would come with that but
that's what that limitation what
offers literally madam chair I I
know there's not appropriations
with bills which is kind of
driving my original question
just wondering you know I worry
about sort of the more rural
courts that are trying to cover
I know district course now have
to cover a lot of the mag of
court budget and so does this
create any kind of unfunded
mandate for district courts and
now have to provide technology
for automatic courts would defer
to Mister madam chair and
representative if it's it the
pleasure of the chair could we
ask RT pep and administrative
offices of course to answer yes
go ahead.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Lane.
That's a good consideration I
believe if there is a gap in the
technology that are exists
because of the preliminary
examination.
Capabilities match records and
what we would need to really put
them on the record and there's
probably a few really small
courts and then to preliminary
examinations.
Are we will be coming and making
a request for an appropriation
in the twenty twenty four
sessions.
Failing that of we would ensure
that we got the equipment there
one way or the other we have
you've given us were recommended
in the special section of house
bill two
something like eleven million
dollars for technology if we
could get this piece funded we
have to look at some other
appropriation that's broad
enough to allow us to do so we
would do it either way.
Thank you see I mean it Mr Ross
of course we do not that would
require the districts.
Madam chair I think my chief
district judge would like to see
than writing for
economic if we could have an
exhibit attached.
no I appreciate actually that
consideration because that I
think we all agree that court
records it's long overdue would
soon make sure that our district
judges this of course I'll have
to pick up the tab for that on
unnecessarily
question on section three madam
chair so I I confess I'm not
real knowledgeable about how
venue works in the criminal
setting.
So if we open up madam chair
it's to statewide jurisdiction I
think what I understood was that
let's say I buy get a speeding
citation in San Juan County this
doesn't authorize the the
officer to file that state in
Lee County because I think then
you would prohibit that is that
right that's correct Madam chair
representative and leader lane
that would be filed in
Farmington and then it would be
a direct assignment to attach
the the part of the state but it
would be a case in the county
for the offense occurred so
madam chair be similar to the
one we have conflicts and in
cases and and district judges a
conflict it out of that that
district and and deployed to a
judge from different districts
similar concept and Gerry lane
that's correct okay that helps
and then the last section and
Madam chair representative read
kind of hinted at this so we
look at the new qualifications
these make sense to me thirty
years of age or older if you
look at the type of decisions
that are happening I think
thirty is very reasonable eight
years experience as a judge a
court clerk or court went I
think that's objective four year
degree from accreditation of
higher education that makes
sense to me but the the piece
that I I struggle with and I I
hope that maybe the sponsor will
will consider this is a two year
degree and four years of work
experience the two degrees very
objective madam chair and then
we get into four years work
experience and we we sort of
women that to teaching social
services law enforcement
arbitration mediation the court
system accounts and.
And I'm just worried.
For a couple reasons one is I
don't know that it's wise for us
as.
Legislators to pick what the
qualifications should be
for other electives in the sense
of what their vocation is that
qualifies them for the
experience so I think objective
things like age college degrees
those things make sense to me
but whenever we start carving
out a few things like law
enforcement teaching you know
one of the things that I thought
of as well of if you've been
involved in commercial
residential real estate for
thirty years but you don't have
a degree
I don't understand why you would
be qualified to be measured
judge if you have a two year
degree plus that kind of
experience and so I I'm
concerned that were were
unnecessarily excluding future
electives and then the other
thing I think we need to
consider is I I and I I think we
need to really jealously guard
this piece which is we we don't
want to open up
Political angles into our our
judicial system and and let me
explain that manager.
So let's say that I have a two
year degree and I have
experience let's say in in
social services why I don't
really know what that means and
maybe it's four years and maybe
I work part time in those four
years I file to.
Get on the ballot and now the
center for that politics could
be introduced to challenge
whether I'd meet all those
qualifications are not and I
think we need to be really
careful the isolator judges that
they're completely removed from
the political shenanigans so to
speak and so I I just think I
think these are these are
important things I think maybe
just leave it at is as a two
year degree
or if we think that that's not
enough of four year degree I I'm
not sure what the solution is
but I just worry once we start
sort of.
Cherry picking these professions
that make you qualified that
we're going down a path that I
don't thanks very wise.
This
chair and and Representative
Lane we start with the same
issue with the masters about
property.
the originally the issue is
going to decide if you met
publication we decided that was
about it.
If we give the lanes within
which the experience level goes
we felt that that because the
secretary of state the ability
to determine if candidates meet
the qualifications but
You're right it's it could be
broader could be more narrow
my original proposal would have
been a four year degree but
that's impractical that's not
going to work well for the step
down from the four year degree
you know what what do we like
the folks with the to to have a
little bit of experience in some
field that will make them better
equipped for the for the metric
bench but you're you're a point
this and that's a good one is
what we struggle with that we
had discussions with mass rich
about.
What do you think is the right
areas are the right areas in
which.
With a two year degree would
make you qualified at age thirty
to to do the work you do that's
the best I can tell you and
madam chair I and I don't mean
to come across as rude but at
involving the current elected
magistrates to me not is not
that relevant for me because
what you're really doing you're
not restricting current
insurance your restricting
future electives and so the the
fact that they are so so going
with the stakeholder I I think
they're the wrong stakeholders
there the one thirty elected
that the ones that are excellent
exempted from this so I just
worry about the future elected
seats in what this kind of
language would do to limit
people that would otherwise I
think make good measure judges
and really let the people decide
who they think are the best if
there's multiple candidates and
not sort of have process
legislators picking the specific
fields that we think are are are
the best and most qualified so.
If you want to respond chair I
am conferring with perhaps we
could entertain some sins if we
can then then we can come back
to Representative eight point
thank you madam chair and Felipe
has merit so that that's that's
pretty much it I think I think
overall we this is a large step
in the right direction I think
this is going to produce a lot
better results for four people
involved in and I don't know
also monitor how familiar folks
are on this committee with the
measure court system but to a
large extent it's designed for
people to represent themselves
and so to the extent I think we
can get them a better result you
know in terms of justice or
civil actions I think that's
better because a lot of times
this is there the representative
also don't have sophistication
of resources in this is the end
of the road for them thank you
madam chair.
And Lane we'll go to
representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair Madam
chair madam chair is a word the
or the words magistrate
districts to find somewhere else
in statute.
Madam chair representative I am
informed by our money various
experts apparently not.
Madam chair madam chair I'm.
I might suggest that that become
a.
Defined term within this
Bill.
It would help.
because.
I think there's several changes
going on here all tied to
magistrates districts.
And the the districts if I read
this correctly and tell me I'm
wrong but magistrate districts.
Now become synonymous with.
Judicial districts.
Would that be accurate madam
chair madam chair
representative in many
situations yes.
And and so.
Magistrate districts today.
Are smaller.
In imperiled staff.
Then judicial districts in most
cases I believe that would be an
actor's statement would not
madam chair.
Madam chair representative I
think that is an accurate
statement.
And so my I guess my concern is
and I'll just take my own fifth
judicial district that's three
counties at the lien chalice.
If I recall correctly there's
maybe four or five magistrate
districts in Lee County there
are.
To magistrate districts and
Chavis and maybe two or three
and Eddy County.
And so now all these magistrate
districts would now cover the
entire fifth judicial district
and so my
one question would be the people
all elector team the magistrate
judge's does that change by
virtue of this legislation.
Madam chair madam chair and
representative I do not believe
we're changing anything about
the electoral process related to
magistrates so Los Alamos
magistrate judge is elected by
month Los Alamos residents right
and same for the other two
counties and there's no change
in terms of who madam chair and
representative will be electing
these individuals that's I'm
sure a constitutional
point.
I can share with yes of the that
I spoke our illustrious district
is defined as the county which
semester to law can it still be
elected within that county the
territorial jurisdiction that
they're authorized to exercise
would be the contiguous counties
that make up the district in a
multi county district.
Under the cement.
You madam chair and and Mr Mr
peppermint I read this is be
more expensive than that
you're just reading that are it
looked like we were going to to
bigger units and have one simple
maybe on page two lines twenty
four twenty five.
magistra districts with the
population more than two hundred
thousand persons if magistrate
districts are the judicial
district that's different than
if it's a magistrate district
being a portion of a County.
Madam chair and representative
that's existing language it is
that okay so we're I mean eager
magistrate districts in
different ways in in this bill
with new language all language.
madam chair if the judge Chavis
could answer and chair
representative so there's three
things so and so what we have
the the district which is the
county we have the territorial
jurisdiction which would exit
which currently is County and
then a little more for currently
for trafficking again with this
but this we expand the
territorial jurisdiction for the
entire district and then earlier
you mentioned the different
courts with divisions State of
magistrate divisions of two
divisions and Travis county for
instance there's three divisions
in Valencia County for instance
but might might my district is
Valencia County and this
modifies that the territorial
jurisdiction for cases that come
before the committee heard by
the the judge assigned in that
within that tractors disorders
Dixon chair representative is
also true that some metric
counties are distributed within
the county either I federal of.
Decree or by federal decree that
was then put into statute so
that district is defined as the
electoral district the county or
the piece of the county for
their district is but the
jurisdiction is a different
issue.
Judge Travis for pointing that
out.
And that's part of my point is
we maybe we ought to try to fix
all of that with this
legislation for do it but over
on
Mike McGinn on page two lines
twenty four twenty five.
District with more than two
hundred thousand persons if
we're going to to the this.
This enhance the qualifications
for the judges will.
Should that be changed.
Madam chair madam chair.
madam chair and representative I
guess I'd like to understand
your week rationale for posing
the question.
Well it's hard for me answer I'm
not sure I understand where
you're coming from madam chair
and representative.
Madam chair of.
It seems to me that we are
wanting to go toward a more.
I hate to use the word but maybe
A.
Judicial system that has more
highly qualified individuals
service.
And the highest would be the two
hundred thousand person about.
And I'm just challenging should
should we include counties that
that don't work.
Magistrate districts that don't
have two hundred thousand
persons who we lower that
threshold to maybe a hundred
thousand should should Los
crucis and and Santa Fe for
instance have.
The same.
Qualifications for the
magistrate judges as Albuquerque
for or do you feel that.
The current system the
differentiation between
Albuquerque because hi presume
Albuquerque may be the only one
that fits that category.
No one what's the other one you
on a journey of okay it if there
are other counties in the state
that.
Would benefit from higher
qualifications like Dona Ana and
Albuquerque or Bernalillo then
should we lower that threshold
to accomplish that.
Madam chair and representative I
will defer to.
no chair and representative
so so.
The push of taken with to this
bill as we've we've looked at
the the fact that we have the
the counties over twenty
thousand in this case Dona Ana
County this page has a
magistrate court and then of
course from the metropolitan
courts with slightly different
animal to match record of
special special jurisdiction
when we look at the at the
threshold of population we fill
that because there is shortages
we have a lot of that legal
desert within the state we don't
want exasperated at by lowering
that threshold down population
wise we think we can get to the
same qualification and
professional standards using the
educational in the H. P.'s and
and if we need to revisit that
and and several years we could
certainly do that but I think
right now it's V. throughput the
the goals of the Supreme Court
in terms of professionalizing
Judiciary through increasing the
qualification age I'm sure
Representative.
Madam chair and judge I I would
suggest to you that Santa Fe
County alright certainly has
enough lawyers to probably fill
those positions
Are you object.
Of.
Ago on over on
Page two again I'm gonna focus
on lines fifteen through twenty.
I didn't bring it up in the last
bill but but.
You really read this section.
It basically says the monsters
red yellow or blue and has six
legs.
What is that monster look like.
If you read.
It said referring to the page in
the lines and I didn't see any
word that was monster in this.
H. two one fifteen three point
okay the qualifications you have
qualifications we have have
three course so hello
Representative Lujan green yeah
you and.
Six works.
So do those things modify the
for your work experience modify
the prior three for just the
last one and there's no
punctuation there's no.
There's no clear way of reading
that paragraph in my opinion.
And and I think it needs some
serious work and and I know that
the
somebody really ought to rewrite
that that paragraph because.
It does not say what I think you
mean yeah okay.
On that point.
Because because Representative I
conferred about this.
He said okay used to teach
English so here but I was also
listening though to
Representative lanes comment
about.
You know why couldn't a real
estate.
Professional take this so I
think there is still made some
comments but I was thinking
maybe.
And this always goes to party
here because.
If you.
Thanks to a better from lines
fifteen to nineteen and stop
after experience.
So that you're not saying what
the experiences in.
It's a long Representative Lane
was saying.
And just put professional in
front of work.
Because I just looked up
professional a realtor can be a
professional.
But somebody who follows a
profession who has studied and
has worked in it for a while so
that's an idea.
I honestly think you've got to
have some comments in that.
As well so that's.
That's a my feedback to the.
My colleague from Travis county
I agree.
Madam chair that may be my one
victory this session.
You Mr.
Percent interest
madam chair and Representative
okay I don't was it on I'm sorry
was that on that point as well
but for if we were doing the
Batman on English.
Sure but so madam chair I and
the just going along
Representative Chasey is
comments and
Speaker I referring about maybe
another possibility as well and
I think it cures the common
problem all at once but
my suggestion would be in line
seventeen strike to work for and
substituted with to.
Finish out that line and then in
line eighteen after education
you strike the rest of that line
all of nineteen twenty and so
what you end up with is a two
year degree and let me explain
why I think that fits with the
sort of what we're trying to
accomplish already which is the
big changes the thirty years of
age or older.
So what that what that
guarantees then as you have
somebody it's not like it some
some cater just graduate from
high school and it's a two year
degree in high school and he's
eighteen he has so you have a
two year degree and by the time
they reach age thirty there do
have life and work experience so
I think it accomplishes what
you're trying to accomplish you
have an objective standard from
which we can make sure politics
don't slide in here
and then may we would make sure
that we're still increasing of
the professionalism of the of
the of the bench.
Madam chair and representative I
appreciate the from.
Suggestions I and conferring
with my experts they would like
to be able to verify the changes
with the Chief Justice who
obviously had conflict and could
not be here so perhaps what I
would suggest and perhaps we
could hear the any additional
input because I want to be able
to bring the bill back in a way
that's appropriate and covers
everyone's issues to the extent
we can accommodate them but so
if there other sort of technical
comments for sure I'd love to
hear those so that we can think
of for with the Chief Justice
and verify Representative free
just had a comment about this of
the Madam chair representative I
I just disagree respectfully
with my leader I just don't
think it should be a two year
degree that matches are getting
paid hundred seventeen plus
thousand dollars I think it
needs to be a four year degree
their pay is very very high and
so that is my concern that a two
year degree I I just I think
that's just not enough for that
type of pay that was my only
comment thank you.
Any comments on the yes I I I
the the all fair points
I did want to if we're gonna
wait for the chief clerk to look
at the message I'm sorry Chief
Justice.
On the floor
if we're gonna every way for her
to to give us comments it might
be good to take all of the
suggestions yes and maybe
draft the committee sub Sir so
that it's cleaner assuming it
passes once it's the floor thank
you madam chair.
Any other comments on the
technical qualifications for
this qualifications rather.
This is that okay thank you
madam chair I don't like on that
for you to just get but most
shut because I think it's kind
of unfair that people just jump
in and on the my point this is
that but I am exactly on that
same area how many magistrate
judges are there right now.
How many magistrate judges do we
have with the state of New
Mexico Representative sixties
sixty six seven sixty seven
sixty seven okay.
And how many of them have a two
year degree right now.
Madam chair representative I I
don't I don't information.
You don't have that answer but
you do a lot of to have a two
year degree of like correct
madam chair so.
My problem is.
Administrative divisions of
people's court.
That's what it is supposed to be
nothing more than a people's
court.
For us to be sitting here and
say that we want to make this
a higher level system to where
is getting above to where the
local the young guy that one
person or one woman that wants
to come in and represent
themselves.
If to make it difficult for them
to do it and then for this
changes everything around many
of those magistrate judges came
from the farm to be a judge.
Under your qualifications the
pharmacy qualify.
And then I would have been
farming for twenty years and the
because the judge but it doesn't
have a two year degree or she
doesn't I would do your degree
so therefore he doesn't they
they don't qualify to be a debt
so we're said to category to
where we're going to allow these
amount of people to be
magistrate judges in the court
that is supposed to serve the
people that is all that it's all
about sure to people so how do
we qualify a four year degree.
It's a you have to have the four
the your degree subject to the
serve the people of the state of
New Mexico.
How do you do that
Madam chair representative we do
that now with District Court
judges the disclosure just are
not the people's court madam
chair they are represented by
attorneys madam chair.
Representative we're gonna.
Take the feedback I think it's
been well recorded that we want
to improve this part of the bill
and I think we're going to.
For any other feedback on
improving that suggestions will
we're gonna go ahead and no more
for the whole for all forgive
myself for this will.
But will we're gonna moving
forward Representative some
pants you just moved out stepped
out and then last we actually
have Representative welcome so
if you want to continue your
questioning or.
That's pretty basically are we
expecting if we got sixty seven
judges right now I can almost
guarantee you that fifty percent
of them will not fit into these
categories that you've got there
so you can note a lot of people
that have or are good people
that are serving the state of
New Mexico with this
qualification is that you have
here.
And that's all state it's this
is like I say it's a people's
court we got to work at the wait
continues to serve the people of
the state of New Mexico and not
an attorney scored connected
Thank you madam chair thank you
for the feedback we really
appreciate it and we will work
on and probably consult some of
you directly and come back
hopefully next week with a
substitute thank you for the
great conversation more COVID of
from Representative Nibert and
then I just have a look thank
you madam chair
going to look at it I would just
suggest to you that maybe there
are other counties which have a
substantial population not a
dearth of attorneys but but
certainly have a number of
attorneys who if we're going to
go to this.
Maybe should be considered as
having the other requirements I
agree with with the
representative from McKinley
that with respect to portions of
the state.
There's a dearth of attorneys
there's not any attorneys and in
several counties in the state
and and so having having people
who can discern.
the things that are before judge
without maybe some of that other
stuff is is fine but but in
counties that have substantial
caseloads substantial attorneys
what have you we're putting a
lot of
Responsibility supports and and
in those counties having the the
additional.
legal training what have you
thank may be important and so
you might want to look at that
two hundred thousand dollar
threshold thank you.
You madam chair I share many of
the comments and this was the
actually the section that gave
me heartburn during the interim
as well I'm I'm not necessarily
even agreement with the thirty
year threshold I think there are
some very mature twenty five
year olds that would love to
serve their community in this
regard and have the state have
the skill set so I'm I'm all for
Gen Z. stepping up to the judges
I'm not sure I am.
That said I think this is an
area for improvement again that
may not even belong in statute
per se so you know something to
consider about who and I don't
know who actually is in charge
of making those decisions and
who higher I mean who is the
ultimate higher hiring person is
it is that they see you said you
didn't want to take care you
want you don't want AOC to be in
charge of hiring but who hires
the magistrate judges always
resist people
had the electors of that Senate
I I again I think it makes sense
then to take it out of perhaps
out of statute on how those
qualifications run for for
community.
Thank you madam chair look for
to the revision and I think
we're thank you for your help
thirty one percent.
Thirteen for.
Except this bill I'm seventy
two.
Okay.
Your in house bill seventy two.
Okay.
We have Representative Roybal
Caballero.
Okay.
Thank you been a long day.
And then we Representative
Senator Lopez and
Representative.
We can use to the.
Right Representative Travis
here.
I don't know where Senator
business.
Yes.
Committee.
For.
And then we have to hand this
to.
And that.
Thank you.
The representative.
What.
Those are.
So they don't they will accept
these chairs set the ocean one
this is.
I guess I don't know why but
maybe there's a little.
You want to ask you.
before we get started madam
chair just wanted to let you
know that senator Linda Lopez is
presenting a bill and about the
financial she will probably step
in but she's key to this
legislation so I don't know how
we want to manage a time on it
for when she comes in.
All right I I didn't realize she
was a co sponsoring the bill yes
her name Senator Lopez is a
sponsor and representative of
Eleanor Chavez okay great well
Presheaf that will certainly
give her some time but we are
time constrained we had
conversations about trying to
limit the amount of the
presentation time so keep that
in mind Representative so the
floor is yours Representative
thank you very much good
afternoon madam chair members of
the committee I know it's been a
very long day it's been a
celebratory day today so thank
you
Senator Lopez Representative
Chavis and I am the expert
witnesses here today I'm here to
present house bill seventy two
which is relating to crime
creating the crime of unlawful
possession or transfer of a semi
automatic firearm converter
providing exceptions providing a
penalty making an appropriation
and declaring an emergency.
And before I move on I do want
to talk about two things the
main thing is what this bill
does not to.
The bill does not infringe upon
an individual's right to bear
arms under the second amendment
of the United States
constitution or.
Article two section six of the
New Mexico constitution.
Real important point that I
wanted to make because it's
often times confuse with
violating constitutional right.
Second point I want to make it
is I've been authorized to share
with you that shared Bernalillo
county sheriff Alan.
Attorney General Torrez.
Bernalillo county DA Sam Bregman
are all standing in support of
this bill each one of them for
their own reasons were either
out of town and available to be
present on due to family matters
and the second thing and finally
I do want to share why I've been
pursuing this legislation and
other similar legislations for
years one is and and that is and
it's it's hard to RigCount every
time but we had a family member
nineteen year old.
Family member.
Who was shot and killed along
with his two other companions
provide any rapid fire machine
gun type.
Economic.
Nineteen years old he was a
student in the New Mexico
military institute he was on the
honor roll and he was on to a
military career
he wanted to pursue the career
that my father had who was his
godfather so this is been one of
the reasons why personally I
pursued this but also as we all
are aware madam chair members of
the committee we have a great
deal of other stories such as
this that have occurred over the
past few years and I will now
turn it over to Representative
Eleanor Chavez.
Thank you representative madam
chair and committee members I
want to talk a little bit about
why this is important New Mexico
is only one of five states that
that do not have any state level
regulations of machine guns by
banning these fire arms fire arm
converters at the state level.
We give local law enforcement
the ability to keep these out of
civilian hands which reverse for
the server Southern Poverty Law
Center says far right anti
government extremists seek
machine guns and twenty twenty
one members of the Google voice
and an acceleration is movement
that hopes to spark a second
civil war used weapons equipped
with this used to attack a
federal courthouse the number of
arms like this is growing in
circulation in two thousand ten
two thousand seventeen only
twelve of them were seized by
ATF.
Twenty twenty three hundred
twenty twenty one fifteen
hundred.
It shows a dangerous and
shocking spike of out of Sears
and circulation.
The US market is supplied by
China the out of Sears and she
are are shipped as tools with
false documentation and
packaging labels they can also
be created on three D. printers
they are sold on Instagram and
Snapchat.
According to federal court
documents an investigation found
that a company in China had sold
out of Sears to US customers
twenty four hundred times over a
fifteen month period as for as
cheap as nineteen ninety eight
per device.
I am concerned about the
increase in semi automatic
firearm converters and believe
that this legislation is is
important for the safety of the
citizens of the state of New
Mexico thank you.
Madam chair I will introduce
Our expert witness sitting with
us today is Maranda fiscally she
Representative New Mexicans to
prevent gun violence and she
will say a few words but I also
need to mention that we also
have with us to give and provide
answers and expert responses
should we need them David Baker
was a department deputy
secretary of the department of
public safety and we also have
Dr Robert Bob Larson who will be
available as well and now Mr
Scully.
Madam chair members of the
committee Representative just
explain the why the growing
number in circulation in the
market I'm gonna quickly go
through some of the definitions
of semi automatic of the semi
automatic firearm converters
because I think it's important
so basically a bump stocks are
for semi automatic rifles and
allow for the recoil of the gun
to be used to push the trigger
basically replaces the handle
the stocks of the shooter can
fire and not an automatic right
with a semi automatic firearm
see only it's a more that your
shoulder is just pushing the
rack the Act have rapid it can
go you can after twenty
seventeen the Las Vegas shooting
ATF issued a new rule that went
into effect affecting twenty
nineteen clarifying the bump
stocks meet the definition of a
machine gun and should be
regulated as such but then
there's a different nother type
of firearm converter and that's
an auto cedar and that's also
known as a switch or chip I
think you all have a picture
that was given to you and that
was actually taken that's a
photograph we took of we were
doing a gun buy back in
Albuquerque back in twenty back
in December of last year and a
man brought in twelve of these
auto cedars we were and they
were three D. printed
the look on the police officers
face when he took them and when
AP took the man was palpable
because they were so relieved to
get these out of circulation and
also made us realize that well
the you don't have a the picture
I can pass this here when you
look at the the kind of square
one that's the size of the
thimble so basically what
happens is you're putting that
you putting that into a semi
automatic handgun which turns it
into a machine gun the ATF has
said that these are legal since
the nineteen seventies they can
also be used in long guns but
for the most part to being used
in the locks because the way the
clock is made it's very easy to
put that auto sear or switcher
chip what everyone.
A college into the fall into the
handgun to make it a fully
automatic a fully automatic
firearm it takes less than
ninety seconds to convert a
Glock into machine gun and
require scant technical or
knowledge or tools it takes ten
seconds to load a hundred round
drum with the clock expect
assess rise with an auto sear
you can see many YouTube videos
on I've watched probably way too
many at this point because a lot
of people are filming what they
can do and you will see that
these are very very dangerous
little pieces that can create
havoc there's a huge uptick of
them being bought and sold and
as the representative said
they're being sold for nineteen
ninety five there's two websites
that you can buy them on and it
and as well as like the
representative said the the the
Chinese company that's selling
these we'll call them the pool
calling them I think a on.
like something you would hang
pictures on like a picture
hanging tools on to that's how
they getting into this country
with that I will bring it back
to Representative thank you.
Thank you and last who I will
call in for a very brief on
statement of because he's that
valuable to this of presentation
and I think we're still on our
our time frame so I will last
October up Bob Larson if you
would just
relate very quickly state your
name and relate your comment.
Good afternoon
thank you for listening to me
I'm residents Santa Fe intact
the vice chair is my
representative I vote for you.
I hope that doesn't some of us
you off he said that so I'm
retired.
Clinical professor at the
university count for San
Francisco I taught forensic
psychiatry.
And I deal with cops and
firefighters my both wounded
workers I had handouts for you
all was up for a Pulitzer Prize
it won awards from the New
Mexico book Association the
nonfiction author Association
and it depicts tells the tales
of for first responders and
critical incidents the proceeds
from my book go to a retreat for
first responders.
We're dealing with here.
And stuff I see people in mass
shootings they don't forget
about it they don't get over it.
We don't need machine guns in
this country to take an A. R.
fifteen and convert it to
machine gun has missed the
school has just said is not very
difficult.
And in my book there's a chapter
we have a problem with guns.
For about forty thousand people
die of gunshot wounds in this
country about a hundred thousand
people are shot not all of them
died.
We're looking at statistics are
comparable to El Salvador okay
there's no of the civilized
country that puts up with this
we have nine times the death
rate from gunshot wounds as
Canada twenty nine times the
gunshot wound that's compared to
Japan.
It's so dangerous out there
machine guns are not covered by
the first amendment at six in
the second amendment and so I'm
on the side of the cops and the
firefighters in California
they're of major cities there
that they have to actually give
firefighters kevlar vests
because they have to go into
active shooting scenes they
don't get paid enough for this I
testified a few years ago when
you pass the pope bill and I'm
glad you did that I think we can
make this state a bit safer with
this legislation if it goes
forward so I'm all for it I just
want to close by saying I'm also
one of the people in the state
the police you guys should get
paid.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair we now
stand for questions thank you
very much.
Representative.
So
follows.
This legislation.
I see no opposition those
wishing to speak Interahamwe
online okay I see for our hands
right so I just want to clarify
anyone wishing to speak in
opposition please keep your hand
up if you were speaking in favor
please take your hand down.
Okay so I still see the four
hands will start with deren was
sort.
There in.
They're in are you in opposition
to house bill seventy two.
There and we can't hear you but
can you look to be on muted so
there may be an issue let's move
I'll come back to Darren in a
minute let's try Zack Ford.
Sec.
Yes yes.
Yes madam chair members
committee thank you for the
opportunity to speak to you
today about house bill seventy
two my name is Zach what I am
the legislative affairs officer
for New Mexico should sports.
We are opposed to house bill
seventy two there's a couple
different comments I want to
make on the bill first reduce
ambiguity the language of the
bill it's not clear exactly what
this bill would actually cover
the widest possible tradition if
you actually cover everything up
to including a rubber bands
which can be used to increase
the rate of fire firearm or it
may actually be and nothing at
all due to.
After many of the devices are
still out are not do not
actually simulate the words fire
she auto Sears our goal
federally and I'm not sure
exactly what having duplicating
federal state law the two if the
if the intent of this bill will
spend this year specifically and
I think the developer probably
needs to be re written in such a
way to do that but.
Needless to say my main point is
due to in the unit also actually
clear what this bill would work
for you all.
Thank you thank you Mr Ford but
let's go to Jamie Fraser page.
Jamie Frasier page.
Madam chair members of the
committee can you hear me yes
proceed.
I think in opposition to this as
vice president of the New Mexico
shooting sports association as a
former law enforcement officer
and firearms instructor
Mrs calling spoke eloquently
about locks which is an all
those years both of which are
illegal by federal law and by
extension would be illegal in
New Mexico if they were found in
someone's possession they are
designed to convert a weapon
into a national firearms act
covered fully automatic weapons
bump stocks don't do that the
fifth circuit court of appeals
as recently vacated
the ATS position on bump stocks
which has wavered considerably
over time and largely comes from
an off hand comment made by
former president trump.
The same is true binary triggers
they don't meet the definition
of strict definition of a
machine gun as.
Defined in the national firearms
act of nineteen thirty four this
is vague if you're seeking to do
away with auto shears or clocks
which is I have no problem with
that because they're already
illegal they convert of a semi
automatic firearm into a fully
automatic firearm possession of
which is a federal crime and a
possession which in this state
if I am correct.
Without having a gun registered
as a NSA item is also a crime
show this is redundant and today
thank you for your time I
appreciate it thank you Stephen
white.
Stephen white state yes my name
is Steven it takes awhile to get
on mute no I understand.
my name is Steven vita
Representative the San Juan
wildlife federation and I am
opposed to this legislation have
some problems with it
the semi automatic firearms
definition is so broad as.
It would ban virtually all
competition triggers
being a highly skilled
competition shooters kins using
aftermarket triggers can fire
their semi automatic weapons as
fast as an automatic weapon so
I'm opposed to that I'm also a
competition shooter I have
thousands of dollars invested in
my competition equipment which
allows me to shoot faster and
more accurately is during
competition this legislation
provides no grandfathering for
all already owned devices that
were legally purchased.
And it provides no compensation
for the destruction are
confident confiscation of my
personal private.
Which was legally purchased.
So for these reasons and others
I ask you to vote do not pass on
house bill seventy two.
And I thank you for your time
and your careful consideration
of this legislation.
Thank you let's try Derren well
sort again Darren are you able
to
speak your it looks like you're
muted so could you on mute
yourself I see.
There's a mute indicator there
on your under your name.
All right here and we're gonna
have some trouble here I'm gonna
move on to the next person Nate
eski.
Nate.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee house bill seventy
two is technically ill informed
and targets law abiding New
Mexicans the property Sanchez
claims this bill addresses
emergency that's necessary for
public peace health and safety
the act perfect immediately.
Zoom than what they're wanting
to address criminals armed as
they said would legally modified
weapons because law abiding New
Mexicans on and things like
stocks.
Hardly constitutes an emergency.
Hello this is San switches and
fears are already regulated
under federal law making Doug
doubly illegal does very little
to turn prosecute criminals.
Bill defined the semi automatic
firearm converter is anything
that increases the right amount
of that arm simulate correct
fire of an automatic far.
As Mr Ford sent another bump
stocks or binary triggers nor
other things this bill may or
may not regulate to stop the
rate of fire both below that of
a truly automatic fire.
More fifteen equipped with bump
stock will fired right around
four hundred rounds per minute
for one round every.
Point one five seconds sure can
match that rate without the
assistance of any aftermarket
device part.
In contrast to fully automatic
and for his rate of fire over
eight hundred rounds from at
least twice as fast and
unmatchable even with a bump
stock a binary tree.
For the doctors point the
Supreme Court held in two
thousand eight however that all
arms useful for military
purposes were protected by the
second amendment and that does
include automatic.
Thank you.
Thank you I don't see any other
hands raised
so now we'll go back to the
presenter any concluding
remarks.
Are you in
Tardiness I was looking to
some of the partner member of C.
arrived disciplines ensuring
bill that doesn't address our
concerns and that's.
All of my teachers and my
weapons are altered or modified
with stern working.
Devised so that I can access my
triggers I see nothing this bill
that addresses that and I
question does that violate the
American for disabilities act
because all of my triggers have
to be modified I'm a competitive
and recreational shooter so all
of my triggers a modified due to
my arthritis thank you for the
committee for let me drop that
to address sure thank you thank
you Sir all right we've heard
from opposition those wishing to
speak in favor please raise your
hand.
Okay we'll start over here with
the chief.
The committee here necessarily
for opposed to technical things
or if anybody else.
Worsening of pieces that we we
have slight concerns about the
money coming to us most
distributing it to local
agencies and jails we believe
that best fits of the DFA who's
up for that by statute so.
Thank you don't have people
that.
Thank you have to take that
responsibility we would ask for
this season for the purpose of
the staff that part of the
department of public safety
thank you thank you
when we go across this way and
then across this way so starting
over here however.
Thank you madam chair and with
any money left a district leader
for students maximum of New
Mexico about firstly getting
into the data highlight this
bill is needed specifically in
New Mexico that New Mexico's
gotten right deaths increased
from fifty three percent from
twenty eleven to twenty twenty
it compared to thirty three
percent increase nationwide and
increase and data CDC offices
that I funds are the leading
cause of death for children.
Now.
This and be really that the real
implications of the mass of
identified by asking for for
favor please on the bill because
if I think.
Thank thank you next.
My name is Deborah Baca
volunteered with New Mexico moms
demand action
my statement is that machine
guns have been tightly regulated
under federal law since nineteen
thirty but bump stocks and other
conversion devices are designed
specifically to skirt the law
and mimic automatic gunfire any
can increase the lethality issue
these guns equipped with bump
stock.
Used in the largest and
deadliest mass shooting in
modern history in Las Vegas
where fifty eight people were
shot and killed and hundreds
more wounded a bump stock is a
device like you've heard that
harnesses the recoil of a
semiautomatic firearm to fire
several shots in succession
mimicking automatic fire one
distributor slide fire solutions
advertise their device it that
it is able to sheeter to fire
one hundred rounds in seven
seconds.
Clearly this is one example of
their attempt to skirt around
the national firearms act which
has successfully regulated the
sale machine guns and other
deadly weapons for nearly a
century thank you and I want to
encourage you to give this a do
pass thank you anyone else on
this row of up front here.
Yes miss madam chair.
Members.
It
was.
On.
My name is Alex.
I'm a military family member
three generations I do not
oppose the second amendment I
want to make that clear this is
not about the second amendment
I'm also a volunteer member
month in an action.
I have spent two years trying to
rebuild my life because of what
happened to me and my son.
This is not about taking away
options for sports.
This is not about taking my
options for anybody who is a
lawful citizen who lawfully
possesses firearms this is about
criminals this is about people
who go under the radar will do
anything but they can.
To get.
Converters anything.
My.
Perpetrator had an arsenal.
I didn't know how much he had
until afterwards this happened
for over one year one year.
We were repeatedly attacked I'm
very fortunate to be here I'm
fortunate that my son and I are
here I spent twelve years
rebuilding my life and I'd like
to say I'm stronger for it.
There is no reason whatsoever
that there should be not passed
in to law.
I want to thank Representative
then Senator Lopez for
sponsoring this bill.
And I truly hope that it
receives a to pass on this
committee I hope that it goes to
the house floor I hope that it
is signed passed and signed into
law thank you for listening Q..
In a.
The next madam chair members
many New Mexico with the
Mexicans to prevent violence
standing up strong for.
Thank you anyone wishing else in
the audience wishing to speak in
favor.
No it's go to the are electronic
participants I see Jamie Frasier
that's probably not the Jamie
spoken before Janet Williams.
Hi Janet Williams our president
of Santa Fe national organ.
Organization for women I we
stand in strong support of this
bill thank you thank you.
I don't see any other hands
raised on the computer so I
think we're we've heard from
those wishing to speak about the
bill so I will just go back to
our committee I have first
Representative McQueen and
Representative Freeman.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair representative I.
Several years ago I you're just
similar bill I am supportive of
the concept to your bill I do
have some questions or concerns
about the language in the
structure.
when I air just my bill Senator
the prior governor it was during
a short session did not receive
a message so never moved never
the less I received.
Of course a lot of
correspondence about it.
in in the course of her working
on the bill
I learned more about bump stocks
than any previously
so my first question servicers
questions on the bill my first
question on beginning on page
one section eighty one.
Is this state or any political
subdivision visions use these
things
why should the.
Madam chair and representative I
didn't hear the section to
repeat that again page one
section AT one line Swetser
twenty four and twenty five the
exception.
This doesn't sound to me like
something we want our law
enforcement use.
And
chair and representative.
I was told that when we use the
language the state or political
subdivision of the state we're
referring to law enforcement the
state for example would be the
department of public safety in
any other state agencies that
are in law enforcement the
subdivisions of the state or the
local governments so it would be
shares police chiefs that's what
I was told and that's
What is the language that the
drafter used.
To
identify in general terms I
don't know if it was antiquated
language or where he got the
language but
madam chair and representative
that's I had that question and
that's the response I so so
madam chair representative cover
here my my point is.
I think the language is correct
I just don't see to be in there
I don't think shares and please
need.
A semi automatic weapon
converter and when you watch the
videos online at these the
different bump stocks the thing
that's striking to me is the
lack of control that you really
just spraying bullets all over
the place.
Law enforcement into that law
enforcement should be very
deliberate when they use a fire
I I don't see how they can be
with these.
By this I understand.
Thank you so I I I think that
language to come out I.
On the next page subsection two
on page three I have no idea of
the armed forces use these
things I think.
Kind of doubt it.
Because if they need automatic
weapons I think they have access
to automatic weapons
so I you know I I'm less sure
about the provision and.
The provision I am more
concerned about.
movie on.
So
Page three line six.
designed or functions increase
through the fire so so one of
the things I learned is to
achieve on fire.
you don't need a whole lot there
are nicely manufactured
attachments that you can use.
But you could also use a stick.
And just if by holding the
weapon properly it in and the
with the right pressure on that
the Ford pressure on the
economic backward pressure on
the trigger you can achieve from
fire.
So I think the word functions.
Is is to prop it is not accurate
enough
I think designed or constructed
or manufactured.
I think what we're talking about
is a
He built the by and they might
be mass produced as the ones
coming across from China
probably are.
I've also seen videos where it's
basically someone's got a
you know a screw put into a two
by four.
I think that she qualifies
someone that this taken the
effort to make their own device.
They should have that they
should be doing that.
but I think that the language
could be more precise there.
and then in the next two lines
point seven and eight.
the words simulate in
achievable.
I think the concern me in there
somewhere that odds.
It's my understanding that
different automatic weapons have
different rates of fire.
we heard public testimony I
believe it's accurate that the
the bump stock.
Increases the rate of fire but
it's not the same as in on that
question so.
Is it is it.
Achievable you know are are
those the same if you have a
bump stock that.
You could fire you know hundred
grants if you set a few seconds
but that's still half of what a
fully automatic weapon might be
able to fire.
so I'm can an concerned about
that language.
and I'm wondering if it's
possible to tighten that up.
and then
the the the concerns from the
department of public safety that
they might not be the right
fiscal agent for this money
when agencies raise
administrative concerns I try to
take them into consideration so
in terms of of receiving money
and funding other agencies
That might not be the best fit.
so Madam chair representative so
those are my concerns with the
bill
the concept that the bill I
fully support.
In the end.
The plan would make is that you
know this makes a dangerous
weapon much more dangerous
there's.
There's no logic legitimate
reasons for having a weapon that
can fire that fast.
It's I believe highly
indiscriminate in terms of.
A lack of accuracy so you can
mention firing something like
that into a crowd we're not
really concerned about
Targeting people individually
you're just firing into a crowd.
so I I mean I would I would like
to see this move forward I I do
believe that bill needs to be
tightened up.
And madam chair since I've to
rattle off a bunch and I would
like to give the Sanchez
opportunity to respond.
Madam chair and representative
when I I think I asked you
permission when I first
introduced this because it was.
Patterned after the bills that
you have been presenting so I
just want to go on record and
tell you thank you for letting
of the for passing it on and
letting me carry it and some of
this has been replicated through
the years I think we replicated
your bill originally and then I
think we continue
to do so except madam chair we
did update the language the the
analysts updated to reflect the
national own movements in
language that was being
formulated by other states I
just wanted to to to say that
and I did want to also thank you
for fair comments
Madam chair and and I don't know
if Representative Chavis has any
other comments.
So we welcome your comments and
Those of our chief.
I think that when we a few years
ago when we introduce this bill
it was told to us the those of
us that were at that time that
the appropriate body would have
been the department public
safety if that's not the to you
know all the appropriate body
and they all they also
recommended this before your
time Jeff
madam chair the the did
recommend the amount also so you
know there there's been backs
and force but we're willing to
correct language we're willing
to amend language on to address
the concerns that you raised so
we we do appreciate your
comments and
Thank you madam chair if if I
may make one more comment or two
more comments first up when I
introduce my building get
message so I I like I had
amendment right ago so they were
to get to change that so that
that's one thing to keep in mind
second thing is one of the a
member of the public reference
the the there's a recent
decision in the fifth circuit
which invalidated the ETS ban on
bump.
so two things on that one is I
looked over the case I didn't
read the whole thing.
It appears to be ruling that the
ATF lacked the authority to ban
the bump stocks not that the
bump stocks were inherently
protected.
in the second you we have a
number of the members of the
public said that the auto Sears
for already illegal and so this
would be duplicative I'm kind of
okay with the to put duplicating
that but if you were pointing
out that.
If other circuits follow that
this circuit and.
If they don't often but if that
happens
the bump stocks would be fully
legal again so so it would be
the you have the opposite of
duplicative it would be
necessary that we would have the
the state level plan because
there would be no more federal
plan so thank you madam chair
thank you representative madam
chair I miss the school we would
like to at something real
quickly madam chair members of
the committee Representative
McQueen is exactly right the
right now the.
The environment The the but the
environment of the Supreme Court
is going after Lara laws a lot
of gun laws so if that's another
reason why it's very important
that the state of New Mexico
becomes one of the other many
states that have done this in
addition to that we always talk
about you know as the criminals
as the criminals let's uphold
the laws we already have this is
simply make it so that law
enforcement at the state level
can upload what law we don't
have many ATF officers in New
Mexico this gives them that
opportunity to to take the that
work into their own hands and
make sure that their communities
are safer thank you very much.
The thank you madam chair
representative so I'm I'm kind
of I understand what we're
trying to do here I've kind of
looked at this more in a legal
perspective as we've been
talking researching the cases
that have been at the US Supreme
Court and what's actually
happening and I don't know a lot
about guns and I'm learning so I
was researching and and so I'm
sure someone will correct me if
I'm not understanding this
correctly but what I it when I
researched
any component that makes a semi
automatic firearm work
regardless of the speed in which
the component causes a semi
automatic firearm to fire will
fall under the legal analysis
under the basis I think that
some people mention which is
Heller contando and brewing
brewed and these cases of all
held that as long as a fire or
its components are in common use
which is I a common possession
for a lawful purpose which is
could be hunting self defense or
shooting at the range they are
lawful and the Supreme Court
just ended their analysis there
and they said no deeper inquiry
was needed so there was no they
did they didn't even go into
public peace health a safety
analysis or anything like that
and are that's only tests they
use for semi automatic weapons
And so while these triggers like
slightly increase the speed I
understand which you know you
can fire semi automatic weapon
these figures do not convert a
semi automatic firearm into a
five automatic firearm is my
understanding like period so
then they discussed a lot about
this federal firearms act which
requires all automatic firearms
be registered and obviously if
you violate that I mean it's
it's like a crazy penalty of ten
years and a two hundred fifty
thousand dollar fine I believe
so yes pretty rare that
civilians have these because
they're so regulated and have to
be registered so have you been
able to find a case
a U. S. Supreme Court case
holding that that says semi
automatic rifles even with these
triggers are to be evaluated
with such a low constitutional
standard as public peace health
and safety
Because the only thing I'm be
able to find is a they're saying
that anything that is in common
use for lawful purpose is okay
and constitutional so what I'm
afraid of and as you said these
cases are being reversed as that
you pass something like this and
this is just going to be
reversed isn't consistent with
where the law is right now so if
you've been able to find a U. S.
Supreme Court case that that
goes to such I I don't see a low
standard but that's what they
say you know they're using
common use
I guess a lower standard of
safety public peace
anything like that.
Madam chair representative I'll
defer to Mister Scully madam
chair members of the committee
so since the nineteen seventies
machine guns have been illegal
books in nineteen thirty nine
but some nineteen seventies
machine guns have been illegal
as well as accessories they
don't slightly increase the
amount of of both coming out
they greatly increase you cannot
with a semi automatic handgun
goes through what was it
in ten seconds unload a hundred
round drum through the chair
please I'm so sorry sorry chair
members of the committee so
sorry.
But so you can't you can't shoot
that quickly with the semi
automatic at the and there are
and I have to look at the
statute but there are laws that
have been passed the state
machine guns in this country are
illegal so I I don't I I think
that the tough thing that we're
addressing here is that these
auto Sears make those semi
automatic handguns into
automatic fully automatic
weapons thank you and madam
chair representatives I I guess
I don't know if you really
answer my question you keep
saying there's Lazar's loss but.
Would you agree with me that the
US Supreme Court cases are seen
its common use that there is not
in the U. S. Supreme Court cases
out there saying that it's to
let your your standard is to
look at public peace health and
safety.
It's common use so legally if
they're using the firemen or the
converter or whatever with in
common use stature inquiry
that's what the Supreme Court
will look at so if you're using
it for lawful purposes like
hunting self defense of shooting
at a shooting range you don't
even get to that analysis of
public safety and so I just
wanted to make sure that you
were aware that that is what I
understand the current status of
the US Supreme Court case law to
be and that I see this being a
problem going forward building
up held with by the US Supreme
Court where is where it'll
probably end up.
Madam chair representative.
Representative Travis and I and
Senator Lopez are not attorneys
and we can.
Not in the position necessarily
to pull back basis or to
interpret case law at this point
do you.
But what we do know is that we
want to prevent the ability of
these type of.
What are being referred to madam
chairs of Sears converters.
Of being in the hands of
civilian hands irresponsible use
and to give law enforcement the
authority to be able to help
keep them out of the hands and
the whole objective madam chair
and representative is to
prevent.
The mass shootings that we've
that we've seen
and I believe there were some of
reference to the twenty
seventeen horrific mass shooting
and so it is our opinion I can
save money and I believe our
opinion that we're in the
perfect position in New Mexico
to be able to.
Be prepared.
In advance.
And I'd rather defend of court
case and have us defend a court
case.
I'd rather do that madam chair
than to sit here and or sit
anywhere.
And.
Hold hands and bodies of those.
Individuals that are left
without family members because
of a mass shooting that we could
have done something to prevent
I'd rather do that because we
have madam chair the legal arm
in our state.
With through the Attorney
General through other legal arms
to defend court cases.
That's what the people's
attorneys for.
And I'd rather do that.
They have to respond to families
and victims of these types of
shootings so from a lay person's
perspective someone who's been
in the trenches for all these
years
working in communities that's
what I'd rather do and that's
and I believe strongly madam
chair that our state of the
state Attorney General and are
dust and all of those that are
there to defend our public are
well equipped to be able to
defend the case should be handed
down but I'd rather be in that
position thank you madam chair
and madam chair representative
of I understand that and I and I
feel I've been in the trenches
to and I understand exactly you
know what you're trying to do
and I I if anybody understand
what it's like to deal with
victims I I did that for years
and years and years as a
prosecutor but I also am trying
to balance out with what the law
says and and not pass something
that that I don't believe it's
going to be upheld in the
current state of what we're
seeing today being reversed and
coming back to these different
state so I a do appreciate what
you're saying and I understand
what and and I and I think it's
it's great what you're trying to
do but I just I have a feeling
this legally will not hold up
and so anyway that's that's all
I have to say madam chair
representative thank you thank
you Representative night for and
then Representative Chasey.
Thank you madam chair
Representative.
Looking at section two of the
bill which is on page three
line.
Thirteen.
Regular procreation to the
department of public safety and.
I'm just questioning whether or
not.
That appropriation would
actually has the mechanism to
get where you want the money to
go.
Your very thoughts on.
How the department of public
safety is going to distribute
that money.
And do have a mechanism to do
so.
Madam chair and representative
as I stated earlier previous
guidance on preparing this bill
led me to believe that the
department of public safety
would be the appropriate fiscal
agent
To receive an appropriate these
funds
we heard from the chief his
concerns and if we have to make
that change
you know based on his concerns
and maybe maybe we were not
directed in the right direction
I think what's important madam
chair and representative is that
we don't.
Introduce.
A little piece of legislation
that is not supported.
Our hope Madam chair
representative was that or is
that law enforcement in their
budgets are already equipped to
address
You know crimes in in in
criminal behaviors and and all
that law enforcement does and
it's part of their
Budgets and it's part of their
authorities and it's part of the
work what we wanted to do Madam
chair representative was just
ensure that we weren't adding on
without appropriately providing
the adequate funds to be able to
administer or oversee or in any
way
follow the intent of the bill so
that was that's all I can tell
you at this point Madam chair
representative.
Well I direct your attention to
line eighteen of.
The department of public safety
is now going to have to deal
with another branch of
government in providing funds
for the court processes that may
ensue.
Madam chair and and
Representative.
Continue with.
Mr I understand that that's part
of
the work of department public
safety in their in their realm
it's also part of the sheriff's
work it's also part of the
police chiefs work with regard
to mention was also supportive
of the Albuquerque city police
chief I understand that all all
that has to do with enforcement
I don't think that a quick
process necessarily
in this as as we're saying this
I think that whatever processes
administrative processes that
each one of these law
enforcement entities are
responsible for on that that's
part of it and I think that's
why that was written in there
because it's it's just part of
the position administrative
position of of these entities
and that's how I understand it
to be so it's not anything I'll
side of the room their duties
already there are already
enforcing the law this is
another law that they would be
enforcing and we're just
ensuring that because we're
adding it that we're applying on
amount of money that could be
appropriated for that if you
know of we need to remove the
appropriation madam chair
representative for happy to do
so but we understood that this
would be a helpful on a
mechanism to be able to assist
the department of public safety
since they were named Madam
chair representative I have no
other way to answer you no
matter how the way you raise it
at this point because I just
don't I mean that's the best
answer I can give.
I guess I'm just not familiar
with any other statute that
would provide for the department
of public safety to.
Right checks to the judicial
branch for the processing of the
court administrative process
generally that's a standalone
budget so we within the
judiciary not coming from the
executive to the judiciary and
so I'm a bit confused by that
likewise
We have incarceration that with
the money going from one agency
department of public safety to
the department of corrections
and I don't know of any other
staff.
Any statutes.
That.
As we have.
A requirement for even a
suggestion that money from the
department of public safety
would be transferred to the
department of corrections for.
In the incarcerations that would
result from the enforcement of
the law that you're bringing
for.
Are you familiar with any types
of
Statutes that would provide for
such.
Madam chair and representative
as I mentioned earlier we don't
study the law or or practice the
law ourselves in any form or
fashion from an administrative
standpoint I just we saw this as
an administrative part of an
administrative process that
would oversee that would assist
I'm not so I can't answer you
two I can't answer your question
specifically to be able to refer
to a particular statute again
because we're not attorneys we
don't practice and study the law
in this capacity however this is
something that we were advised
that would be helpful and not.
passing another mandated
unfunded mandate and so we
thought it would be something
that would be helpful and it was
written in to be able to be
helpful again if it's
problematic to the department of
public safety on if it's
problematic in any way
and it it it complex madam chair
and representative I don't I
can't imagine that it would
conflict with any other state
statute but again I'm not an
attorney and I can quote a
particular law to you
but I don't I I see this is
absolutely helpful to be able to
assist law enforcement to do
what we just described and that
is to keep these isn't out of
the hands of those that should
not happen and to prevent any is
you know tragedies further
tragedy so again as I mentioned
madam chair and representative
I don't know how else to answer
that's the best I can give you I
don't know if someone else.
Sitting here or or anywhere are
able to be able to respond to
that question
no Representative Chavis is not
able to and our expert witnesses
and again because we thought
this would be something that is
helpful for the department of
chair for I guess that's why
confusion I don't understand how
a million and a half dollars
going to the department of
public safety.
How that assists them when the
courts will come knocking for a
piece of that and then the
department of corrections will
come knocking on the door for
another piece of that I don't
see how that advances the law
enforcement of the funds if
you're creating by this by this
piece of legislation Madam chair
representative I don't think
that the department of public
safety actually does
Any of these particular accesses
but they do participate in
whatever their role calls for in
these processes and that's how I
see this as being risk
responsive to whatever it is
it's under their authority is
the department of public safety
that they already do.
which is part of this process
interject yes ma'am we're
talking a lot I appreciate where
you're coming from I heard the
representative said she was
going to take a look at it so
what you know I my suggestion as
we move on from this point I
would point out it might be good
to contractually consult the the
entity to which you wish to send
money before you send the money
but you know we can we can
resolve that issue as we're
going going for and so I think
it but we we didn't we didn't
get full clarity of okay so all
right so why don't we move on to
something another topic.
You madam chair I I would say
that
The lack of clarity there is is
maybe problematic throughout the
throughout the preselector
solution that's in front of us.
Madam chair and representative.
Some statements that have been
made in the I'm not sure.
That I would agree with them and
and so my question is madam
chair representative.
Are up are automatic weapons
illegal in the United States.
For the for for citizens of the
United States we can.
Law enforcement exclude law
enforcement is with the military
but can a can a.
Citizen.
Legally purchase.
An automatic weapon.
I think.
You want to go ahead and.
Madam chair members of the
committee it's my understanding
and I could be wrong and I'm not
an attorney that the to purchase
a machine gun of our automatic
weapon goes through a lot more
background checks a lot more
scrutiny than if you just want
to buy for instance say they are
fifteen thank you madam chair
members of
madam chair and and
Representative Madam expert.
If you can go through a lot more
scrutiny and get.
A permit to purchase one you are
not possessing that weapon
illegally are you.
Madam chair members of the
committee now.
Of the day TF has made the auto
Sears and the chips and these
Farm converters is legal.
Thank you.
Madam chair representative.
Are you aware that automatic
weapons sometimes include a
selector switch that allows that
same automatic weapon to be
utilized as a semi automatic
weapon.
madam chair and and
Representative.
Yes this Madam chair members the
committee yes thank you.
And so madam chair
representative.
This bill.
Makes a person who lawfully is
carrying one of those weapons.
They fell on under the secretary
of the not.
Madam chair and and
Representative this fiscally
madam chair members of the
committee no this is
specifically for something that
converts and not just which but
the actual piece of the
converter so the firearm madam
chair members of the committee
that the representative that
you're talking about
this is very different that's a
switch on a fire on.
It is a switch on firearm madam
chair and representative and
let's look at the definition of
semi automatic firearm
converter.
So on page three lines four
through eight.
The pharmacist three or any
other device.
Alright or combination of parts
designed that is designed or
functions to increase the rate
of fire of a semi automatic
firearm to see simulate a rate
of fire otherwise achievable
only with an automatic fire.
So you have this semi automatic
weapon that has a switch.
That allows it to become.
An automatic weapon.
This bill.
This bill.
Makes that possession of that
firearm otherwise legally
acquired legally possess.
It makes that person subject to
to
the provisions of this act and
may.
Are guilty of a fourth degree
felony upon conviction.
That not at an accurate read of
your bill.
Madam chair and representative
The one part I don't think I
heard you read is
To increase that functions to
increase the rate of fire of a
semi automatic firearm to
simulate a rate of fire.
I.
I didn't hear you continue that
so I'm not quite sure we.
We believe that that is accurate
we believe that's why it's in
there we believe that that is
what is what we want to achieve
and that's what we're proposing
Madam chair representative
of Madam chair representative
the the pharmacy talking about
was specifically designed.
Comes from the factory.
As a semi automatic weapon that
can with the flip of a switch.
The selectors which can be an
automatic mode for Camby in semi
automatic mode.
And that's exactly what you're
your productivity here.
I'm representing to you that the
person that legally possesses
such a firearm right now.
Would be subject to this act and
and that is the.
Conundrum I think you're in
because that.
Will.
Because you tremendous problems
in enforcing this bill and and
and frankly defending this bill.
If it gets taken up to sprint
for because there are people in
this state right now that have
those types of weapons.
You could say it's common you
could say it's maybe on COVID I
guess accord  has to determine
the commonality but but I mean
there are people with with those
types of weapons today.
but I'll move on
Madam chair representative.
If.
The type of weapon I just
described.
Is manufactured in the state of
Arizona.
It is be being transported to
the state of Texas where they
are.
Lawfully marketers.
And that the truck driver gets
pulled over and has a whole
truckload of these types of
weapons that truck driver would
be subject to this act with with
would they not to Madam chair
representative.
Madam chair and Representative I
believe you're correct those
Madam chair representative
In reviewing and I did spend
some time on working with
analysts on reviewing other
states and how they frame to
their language and their bills
and I did one of the things that
I noted is that
not all the state to the past
these bands and they've been
several states already I think I
can't remember I think twelve or
four sixteen states have already
passed the spans they all did
not they are very to a certain
degree but they were all very
brought in some of the and
defining what these converters
are Madam chair representative
because they're getting more and
more sophisticated with how it
is that they can convert these
weapons because they're becoming
more and more popular I don't
know what the enticement is
madam chair but just for example
in Nevada
the definition that was passed
was they could be manual they
could be power driven or
electronic it was it was
you know the the I don't know
why the states madam chair and
representative have refrained
from clarifying other than what
I understood was that because
the technology in the tricks of
the trade that are being used
are just changing rapidly and
because they're changing rapidly
the preferences been among so
state of to kind of not zero in
on the actual definitions or
clarity's around click the
converters but to allow.
What we do know to be written
into the law and then to be
broad enough to be able to for
it to be enforceable that's how
I was reading the trends and how
these other states have been
treating
they are there bands in their
language and so we try to
capture that language in in this
bill so as to be able to.
Whatever the legal mechanisms
are to fit them into
If there is an important
Situation in prosecutorial
situation that we'd be able to
have that.
Brought enough and to work
around the the the tricks of the
trade so to speak Madam chair
representative that they're
using more and more.
Madam chair representative of
there's no exception for
The types of economic I
described being transported
through the state for sale
elsewhere I didn't see
exceptions would you agree with
me that there are no exceptions
This is.
You madam chair and and
Representative.
Just a moment please were just
referring to clarifying the
question.
Yes so the answer is yes.
Thank you Mr madam chair percent
Madam chair representative us I
would simply suggest to you that
you have.
Some consider this bill raises
some.
What I'd consider serious
concerns regarding the Commerce
Clause and and there is no.
Exception for.
the transport of.
Automatic weapons that have a
switch that can make it a semi
automatic weapon.
from passing through the state
and those types of weapons.
Our.
Legally marketed to people who
need that increase threshold
that you talked about.
They can legally be purchased
they can legally be possessed
and they can legally be use.
And yet there's no exceptions
for those people there's no
exception for the manufactures
is no exception for those truck
drivers there's no exception for
people who may be traveling
through our state with such a
weapon.
So I think you're I think you
have some serious concerns are
and I don't even think we need
to get to to some of the other
concerns that
my colleague from curry county
raised earlier.
For the I think you have some
serious holes here and I'd I do
think that.
Our tourney General will
probably have his hands full
with this and gets passed into
law thank you madam chair thank
you Representative thank you
Representative Chasey.
Thank you very much madam chair.
And I won't take long because I
think the sponsors have
indicated that they wanted
feedback because they're going
to go to work with
the chief and look at changing
it to DFA rather than department
of public safety so I think
we're don't need to go down that
path for like thirty minutes of
time.
I also want to say that even in
Heller Scalia said the second
amendment is not unfettered it.
This is not.
Free range you can have anything
you want and I would like to see
the analysis as well as
subsequent bills to see if
somehow this particular.
Type of
Life is implicated because we're
one of five states without.
A bill like this excuse me a law
not a bill a lot.
So and I also think I'm
disappointed that more law
enforcement people aren't here.
Saying if they don't.
This needs work hi I'm surprised
there aren't more saying how can
we help because when this
fiscally described the.
Law enforcement officer who.
Picked up the I whatever the
excess here what seer.
Out of Sears.
And you could see the fear was
palpable and the relief was
palpable to get them off the
streets.
So
I just want to mention that.
Somebody else there's an
emergency.
One of the public Madam chair
commenters.
I think I for me the emergency
started way before sandy hook.
But.
Do you of all days I honestly.
Think there's an emergency and
that isn't even go to el Paso or
Las Vegas there is an emergency
when we with the assault weapons
ban was adopted in nineteen
ninety four mass shootings
dropped by forty three percent
but in two thousand four when
the ban expired mass shootings
increased by two hundred forty
five percent so that's there's
that's my emergency.
And.
I would like to see us figure
out how to do it there states
with Republican governors that
have outlawed semi automatic
firearm converters Massachusetts
Florida Maryland New Jersey and
member.
So let's not get filled up in
what to the Supreme Court say
Sunday let's let's join the
other states and try to add more
protections here I don't have
any suggestions I think you
heard some good ones and I think
it's certainly worth looking
into some of the potential.
Falls
Representative McQueen has a lot
of
I don't remember that that you
had that.
But he has some experience in it
and I think we should frankly
try to get to work with law
enforcement and the others and
and get this moving thank you
madam chair thank you
representative Representative
Rehm then Martinez and then
Romero.
Madam chair and I'll try to be
brief madam chair and
representative
So let me start off with the
auto sear just the mere
possession of it is a ten year
two hundred fifty thousand
dollar penalty with alcohol
tobacco and firearms spend my
experience as an officer
that when we found something
like this and turn it over to
eighty of that they pursued
firearm vault of violations you
know they really if if you had a
firearm violation you turn it
over to ATF they really pursued.
Let me go for a moment on
another angle that you spoke of
Madam chair representative so is
it the legal to go ahead and
mail contraband or prohibited
items in the mail.
So madam chair and and
Representative there's another
violation but as we've gone
ahead and heard
of previously that
Of the an analysis that they go
ahead and say that
Passing a law just putting
people in prison doesn't do
anything for solving the problem
but I want to move on.
Let's.
Let's for a moment talk about
the Las Vegas shooter and madam
chair and representative of I
hope we all agreed that he was
mentally ill.
And I hope we all agreed that
that's where we need to start
spending more of our time
because we see that mass
shooters all have mental illness
but let's go to bump stocks were
enrollment.
And madam chair and
representative
I spoke to my fellows of friends
in law enforcement and in fact
they purchased a bump stock.
To see how it worked.
And they found that it was
extremely difficult to keep the
gun from jamming.
Let's go back to the Las Vegas
shooter.
What did he have he had multiple
guns with bump stocks and they
were all found in a jam
situation so you know just
having a bump stock doesn't mean
that you're gonna have a fully
functional machine gun or
something similar to it.
I do agree with that yes the
phone testimony madam chair
about firing machine guns and
that they're very difficult to
control I fired of.
as a police officer they are
difficult to control.
And that's why the military is
gone do with three shot burst.
One madam chair I want to go to
a real problem that I think you
need to think about.
So I'm.
There are many different
manufactured triggers for all
types of different firearms.
And if we won't look at a
competitive firearm like we have
a man back here shooting it's a
very low pressure trigger.
If we want to go to somebody
that's County there's so
generally in the three and a
half to maybe six seven pound
traders I want pointed out is
there manufactured that way for
this specific use of that farm.
In this bill a tax that.
What was Madam chair
representative was school will
further so we have a disabled
fan back here.
And we're going to say you're
going to give up your
recreational shooting because
your trigger.
Or whatever mechanism you have
to assist you New Mexico in your
competition is the legal.
Madam chair representative how
we gonna respond to that.
Madam chair representative.
Excuse me.
That is the responsible gun
owner and he's doing a
responsible whatever he's in
gauging in here she
already.
We're talking about keeping
these mechanisms these bump
stocks these converters out of
the hands of
ordinary people that are going
to cause harm one in mass.
Basically and that's what we're
talking about
the persons with disabilities
that are already in these
positions
from what I understand.
Have already ways and mechanisms
to a system so beyond that I
don't know madam chair and
representative I know I just
know what this bill is trying to
do.
Madam chair and and
Representative take you back to
page three one four we've gone
over the definition of semi
automatic firearms for and
that's exactly what you would be
using.
Anyway madam chair and.
Representative what do you think
about something else.
So we took the.
Qualified immunity.
Off everything in the state.
So if we.
The state committed a civil
rights violation second
amendment violation.
Miss the man in the back that's
disabled does that give him a
cause of action.
Mr
Representative I think we can
agree that we don't have any
lawyers at the panel here and
okay maybe that's not a fair
question to be asking them.
Madam chair I think that there
because I think there is enough
problems with bills so far.
Representative Martinez thank
you madam chair just Google very
quick question so.
is it true that the ATF and
these accessories Madam chair
representative so.
Madam chair Madam chair
representative here correct so
madam chair representatives of
they're currently illegal to
process or use.
Madam chair representative they
are okay.
Madam chair representative so
the purpose of the legislation
is to create
I guess you could call it a more
prohibition.
Regulation on the success Reese
is that accurate madam chair
representative madam chair and
representative that's correct
and not being lawyers think that
exactly what we okay
So to the issue of folks who
might be using the successories
four
you know because of a physical
disability or otherwise.
The federal government already.
Bands their use Madam chair
representative would you agree
with that.
Madam chair and Representative
yes correct okay now with regard
to ADA for example I think those
are very valid points.
I'm not sure how we gel those
here when federally.
The success stories are already
banned Madam chairman and
representatives.
now I understand there are court
cases that are I think they're
competing court cases and this
probably ends up in the Supreme
Court but it is not the job of
this body to legislate based on
what some future Supreme Court
decision might or not be.
I lease as not the way I I think
about it
We are not this legislation is
that seeking to ban.
A fire arm Madam chair
representative.
It is banning an accessory have
you not banning the car you're
banning.
A loud muffler maybe.
Right.
In terms of the reception to the
bill madam chair where we deal
with the appropriation.
I I won't I won't repeat
everything that's been said but
that's a pretty simple fix I
would get together with the
appropriate agencies and make
that amendment.
and and fix that but in terms of
the substance of the bill is one
remind the body that.
This is already legal at the
federal level and we're simply.
Trying to more.
What is already.
In federal rule now up all.
I just not a federal statute
this is a rural.
And perhaps that's what you know
the Supreme Court or these
federal cases are based on.
But at the end of the day it's
still the applicables rule right
now to all in the third thank
you madam chair thank you
Representative thank you
Representative Romero.
Thank you madam chair thank you
for bringing this forward I am a
along with some similar lines
with
The speaker madam chair I just
looking at some of the technical
issues that I would recommend is
since this bill again goes back
to the the alright the the
addition to or the customisation
of
that's what we're talking about
the device part or combination
of parts that being that the
substance of this bill since
that definition comes later on
in this law maybe making that
the for front of the the first
definition in sequence so that
way we're starting with we're
just looking at the part and
then we're looking at the
firearm and everything else so I
would just the ordering is
recommended to not to just put
that first so we're just talking
about that the customisation
to re talk about the Commerce
Clause and everything else we
just named off how many
different states who have
already passed the sauce so I
don't think there's an issue.
On that on constitutional law
regarding commerce I think the
issue is that what we're trying
to do here is put this substance
into state law in order to
ensure that we are uniform with
what we're trying to see in and
making this band statutory
and we've seen so many other
neighboring states do this so I
don't see an issue with the
language that's being used with
this.
And in the bill I don't think
it's vague I think in fact it's
much more complete and state
Nevada who has a very
interesting sort of take on what
A firearm is or what the
customisation would be so I
think this this is a really
sounds definition
In that said Madam chair
representative I don't even know
if you needed an appropriation
we had talked about where it
should go what it should do this
is already federal rule this is
already under the guise of our
law enforcement so if there's
negotiation room there
why we would need that I don't I
don't yet know of with love a
justification for the
appropriation and again because
of the confusion of where it
goes to court processing
enforcement and incarceration
it's very broad if we don't need
it said that for them to enforce
the law I would like to
understand why we do
and then finally just on the
challenges that have been made
madam chair to in the federal
circuit courts about this the
Supreme Court as of June twenty
twenty two declines to hear this
these cases on the federal ban
of bump stocks and so you know
when we look at the the court
case for the fifth circuit cargo
V. garland they didn't want to
hear that case so we're it we
still have that role and until
they take it up we don't have an
issue there so I think again
with what we've been continue to
see states do and should we
follow suit with us and that we
don't have an issue with with
making this law so thank you
madam chair just wanted to share
some might some thoughts and and
some of the analysis that we did
see that capable and we look
forward to a another iteration
thank you meaning that madam
chair and conferring with
Sponsor of Chavis I don't know
if you're through with your
questions I'm sorry no no no I I
had a couple questions but I
wanted to offer this maybe as a
you know it might help with our
discussion there's been some
really good recommendations made
and I appreciate those that were
made by Representative McQueen
and The appropriation as has
been indicated set fairly easy
fix
so I don't know how you want to
go with this but we're willing
to work with the recommendations
and if you give us an
opportunity I don't know what
they are supposed to work on it
so I was getting to that okay.
So first one question I will
have and this is so that when
you're when you come back you'll
have heard everybody's issues on
technical issues I was wondering
if the semi automatic firearm
converter where that definition
came from and is it consistent
with the federal definition so
that would give me some level of
comfort if I knew there other
definitions that
we're following that and.
That was the frankly the key
point so you've heard some
technical issues brought up
about is the definition
appropriate and clear enough and
then that we had a lot of
discussion about the
appropriation piece which I
would like to think is
relatively easily resolved but
so my suggestion is to take what
Kerr if you have questions
about.
Some of the information you
heard from a specific members of
the committee feel free to reach
out to them and get some clarity
if there's some concern that way
I would suggest that you come
back with the committee sub and
be prepared to tell us what you
changed in and why
Let us know when it's ready
we're meeting tomorrow but I
don't know if it's realistic to
think that any changes can be
done by tomorrow given the fact
the staff is our our drafting
staff is very overwhelmed so let
us know when you're ready to
come back with a bill that we
can we can vote on and I'd
caution the committee will then
be talking about the actual
language of the bill we won't go
over the constitutionality or
and those kinds of things just
to be fair to all of us who have
I want to move on to other bills
so that's my suggestion we'll
talk about the specific changes
we won't reiterate a lot of our
concerns pro or con in terms of
constitutionality.
Okay that is that clear for
everyone Madam chair that's
absolutely clear in okay sadly
what we wanted and I appreciate
to thank you and we'll let you
know as soon as we can get the
changes to very good and so.
my suggestion is if
Representative re willing
indulge us perhaps we could go
home tonight and pick up your
bills first tomorrow what's your
how you feeling.
Sure we could do that on this
one are are you budget your bill
voted down very quickly.
We.
Okay thank you appreciate it was
very that every I appreciate
everybody's cooperation is very
good discussion thank you.
At two tomorrow to tomorrow.
Yes.
