Hall. Here.
Representative Hockman B. Hill,
here.
Representative Martinez.
Speaker Martinez.
Presentative McQueen
Here.
Representative Reeb.
Here.
Leader Sapansky
Madam Vice Chair.
Madam Chair, here, Madam Chair,
you have a quorum.
Oh
Um, to remind everyone we heard
House Bill 79 and House Bill 81
on Saturday.
There were amendments that were
discussed and.
We decided we would ask them to
be turned into the committee
subs, and we would vote them out
of committee today.
So the first one is
How's it's house bill 79, but
it's committee sub.
Number 230892.2.
And, um, Cherry Thompson, I told
her we could have one of our
members come sit in and take
care of it for us. So vice chair
Romero.
Uh, Madam Chair, you'll recall
that the addition and the
committee is about background
checks and some small cleanup
bills or cleanup language for
House Bill 79, right, someone
want to um.
Move forward this committee sub
so moved, Madam Chair.
So we have a motion for due pass
on.
Wait, but do not pass on House
Bill 79 and a due pass on how to
judiciary Committee sub for
House Bill 79.
motion made by Representative
Hochman B Hill, do we have a
second? And seconded by
Representative Obeda.
Would you call the roll, please?
Representative Beta, yes.
Representative Chavez, yes.
Representative Hall.
Representative Hoffman B. Hill,
yes.
Representative Martinez.
Speaker Martinez.
Represented McQueen.
Yes
Representative Reeb, yes.
Peter Sapansky.
Madam Vice Chair,
Madam Chair, yes.
Madam Chair, you have a do not
pass on House Bill 79 and a due
pass on committee substitute for
House Bill 79. And I noticed
that, um, chairwoman Thompson,
OK, so if you wanna come on up
or are you happy with our vis
share taking care of this for
you?
OK, very good. We're now on
House Bill 81 and there's a
committee sub, uh, madam chair
is that's being handed out,
you'll recall that this was also
the addition of background
checks. 81.
So I have in front of us.
230893
And I the vice chair, did you
get one?
Did you get a sub?
Oh
And as the vice here said, this
had to do with adding some items
on background checks, so anyone
wishing to make the motion.
So with madam chair.
OK.
We have a motion.
To, um, for do not pass on a
House Bill 81.
But I do pass on House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 81.
Made by Representative Hoffman
v. Hill, and do we have a
second?
representative of beta.
So, um, what you call the roll,
please?
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Beta, yes.
Representative Chavez, yes.
Representative Hall, yes.
Representative Hoffman B. Hill,
yes.
Representative Martinez.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen.
Representative Reeb, yes.
Leader Sapansky
Madam Vice Chair,
Madam Chair, yes.
Madam Chair, you have a do not
pass on House Bill 81 in a due
pass on House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 81.
Very good. OK. So, thank you,
um, vice chair, for taking care
of that for us. No problem.
And the next item we have is
house built. Oh, it's you. I
spill 2:15. No use of AI for
rent manipulation and a.
The floor is yours. Thank you,
Madam Chair, um, over the course
of the interim, um, it was
brought to my attention that in
New Mexico, um.
Landlords have the opportunity
to use software, um, AI software
that allows them to price,
create a price point for their
places, um.
That unfortunately, in many ways
violates antitrust laws, um, we
won't get into that, but for
this, for the under the landlord
Tenant Act, um, essentially
prohibits this practice. What's
being, what's happening right
now in New Mexico.
Is that we're seeing the
manipulation of price points um
in different neighborhoods in
different geographic areas in
order to essentially manipulate
and raise the price, um, and
these companies are not mincing
words about it, they are advert
advertising exactly that, that
if you, um, essentially use
their algorithms, you'll get the
maximum price available for
this, essentially violating not
only our antitrust laws, but
certainly the trust of the
people, um, who are renting in
these, um, areas.
areas. We saw a massive 60% rise
in rents, um, and since the
pandemic, um, and we think this
is, um,
Many of you have heard of the
company RealPage, um, which is
being sued by the federal
government right now for this
practice that um currents.
Litigation is in court, um, so
this is very real. The CEO on
the record has um.
Uh, basically said that yes,
they expect a 15% increase in
rates, um, this is what we're
seeking to prohibit, um, and
ensure that landlords, um,
understand that within the
landlord tenant law, um, and
that's what we're here to talk
about today, madam.
vice chair, do you, do you there
we have a record of a committee
sub being submitted to. OK, I'll
move that for discussion. Um,
and in this committee sub, Madam
Chair, um, our drafter flagged,
thank you, um, and I can give
the 202 number. OK. 230943.
OK. Um, this committee said was
just flagged as to where the
jurisdiction would need to be
for these, for this type of
case, um, and so we clarified
that it's in the local, the
local jurisdiction of.
Uh, we're, of which this the
situation may arise, so we
wanted to clarify that and I'm
just trying to figure out where
that ended up.
But that was the, the, the major
change and then also speaking to
advocates, um.
Wanted the definition
coordinator um included in the
um
In the definition of um the bill
as well. So we
did both.
the committee.
OK, very good. Um,
So we have a um we.
You presented the committee sub.
Let's go to the audience, those
wishing to speak in opposition
to the bill.
Please approach the gentleman
with the microphone.
And limit your comments to up to
one minute.
Madam Chair and committee, my
name is Alan Lesek, and I'm the
executive director of the
apartment Association. I want to
say that we completely
understand what we're trying to
get at with this bill and the
antitrust laws, but the way this
bill is written, it's way too
broad. It actually bans the
collection of public and even
historical data, um, like I say,
I think what we're really trying
to get with is already covered
in antitrust laws. Another point
that I'll bring up is that by
putting in this in the New
Mexico uniform owner resident
Relations Act, you're actually
putting it into metro.
magistrate courts, uh, so you're
leaving this up to litigation in
a place where people normally do
not have legal representation,
um, which I'm not quite sure if
that's, that's where we wanna
go, but, you know, like I say,
with respect, we understand
where this is going, but
ultimately the market sets the
rent, um, not AI. So thank you
very much.
Um
Madam Chair, Richard Gay with uh
representative real Page, uh, we
actually the spirit of this is
100% uh understandable and
sponsors been communicative on
this, we appreciate that. We
just have a.
issue of broadness on the
language, we, we really don't
have a non-public versus public.
Language definition and I I I'll
finish it with.
Uh, the Attorney general
actually will state there's case
law that actually handles this.
That's a legal matter that um
that I won't speak on, but right
now, we still have to stand in
opposition of it, but we do
appreciate the sponsors.
Communication that, thank you
very much.
in opposition.
Who are online, please raise
your hand.
OK, I see one hand.
Jean Vance.
Uh, yes, um, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, I'm a
lawyer practicing in this area
for about 45 years and uh I
oppose this bill for the same
reason that Mr. um, the.
Uh,
outlined first off, putting this
in magistrate metropolitan
courts through their own
resident Relations Act is, is
problematic because it will
automatically expand the
jurisdiction of those courts.
There's a court of appeals case,
Martinez versus Cedillo that
sets out that that the limits on
these courts go away if it's
specifically in the owner
resident relations Act that they
Where they have jurisdiction.
And the second thing is the real
Page case is, is a real issue,
and, and that needs to be
addressed, but this bill says
the owner can't collect
information by, by himself or
herself. I can't use public
information and collect it in
their own computer in their own
spreadsheet. We need to hone
this down to to the real AI
issue and the issue of a third
collecting information from
various different competitors
competitors and synthesizing
that into a rental
recommendation, uh, and, and
this bill is going quite a bit
beyond that.
OK, um, those in the audience
wishing to speak in support of
the bill, please approach the
gentleman with the microphone
and please limit your comments
to one minute.
Good evening, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, um, I
come today to speak in favor of
the bill. Um, my name is Winter
Torres and I'm the CEO and
founder of New Mexico Eviction
Prevention and diversion, and
every day we are seeing the
impact of the rise in rent, um,
the 60% statistic that
Representative Romero just
quoted came from the Pew um
research center, and I just want
to say that um the way it works,
so they can right now look at a
certain what a two bedroom costs
and
a certain place of the west side
of Albuquerque, and then they
can all charge the same rents.
And that's what's going on. Rent
changes from day to day. You
can't, you don't know what the
fees are, you don't know what
the rest is gonna be, and um it
is.
Very much connected to public
safety, as we know people are
ending up on the streets because
they can't afford rent.
And we um need to do what we
can. This is something that we
can do right away and um there
are landlords that are using
this, um, you know, my own was
using this in New Mexico.
Thank you.
Anyone else in the audience
wishing to speak in support of
the.
Those individuals online wishing
to speak in support, raise your
hand.
Right, I see.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, we thank the
sponsor for this bill and the
New Mexico Center on Law and
Poverty stands in strong support
of this bill because all New
Mexicans should have an
affordable place to live, uh, as
you all know, New Mexico is in
the midst of an ever-increasing
housing crisis, with
skyrocketing rents, many New
Mexicans struggle to find
affordable housing. And right
now in New Mexico, nearly half
of all renters are cost burden,
meaning they spend more than 30%
of their income on housing. For
many, that number is even higher
for
forcing them to make impossible
choices between rent, food,
health care, and other
necessities. And some corporate
landlords are using AI to game
the system, sharing pricing data
in a way that undermines fair
competition and drives rents
even higher than they already
are. Uh, these tools don't just
suggest prices, they
automatically hike rents and
discourage discounts like free
months' rent or move in
specials. These deceptive
practices maximize profits for
some corporate landlords while
harming renters, especially low
income families, senior
and essential workers.
Uh, when AI is left unchecked,
it forces people out of their
homes and makes the housing
crisis even worse. We need real
people making fair decisions,
not algorithms driving up rents
to boost profits. For these
reasons, we strongly encourage
the committee to pass this
important piece of legislation.
Thank you.
Thank you. Anyone else online
wishing to speak in support.
please raise your hand. I don't
see any other hands raised back
to the sponsor. Anything you'd
like to add, um, representative
before I go to the committee.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Just a
few, just that there are at
least 3 states that have already
adopted um legislation close to
pretty much exactly what you're
seeing, um, and we modeled it
closely with um that said,
there's about 30 bills filed
across the country right now
since it's such a new issue. Um,
so we just wanted to um.
Just prime everybody that in
mountain. Thank you. Who um
members?
Comments
Representative Martinez.
Madam Chair.
Romero, um.
Can you help me kind of
understand.
What the purpose of this is, if
I, if I want, I'm gonna.
try to keep myself competitive.
And that means gathering data
from
You know, maybe the apartment
complex down the street.
Wounded
You know, trade journals.
Gathering information from
wherever I can.
Can you, can you tell me?
I
Once
want to stop that with Madam
Chair Representative, that
practice is what we know, we
understand to be the.
Practice that folks talk to
their neighbors. What are you
charging for rent? How is that
going for you, etc. But AI is
doing in this regard, um, Madam
Chair Representative is
essentially manipulating that
whole process. You enter, you
know, your address into an
algorithm and it pops out in
real time, what that would cost,
including the fact that we know
that if you keep that off the
market.
Maybe you can raise the rent in
another month, a couple months.
So we're seeing also um sort of
changes in the way that
landlords are also arranging
their leases.
To a 12 month lease or a 2-year
lease renting for 13 months or,
you know.
Uncommon sort of thresholds in
order to raise the price in
order to keep certain things
vacant.
To be able to manipulate that
pricing. Um, and that's what
we're seeing with the ability to
raise that rent, so, um, so
quickly from um the use um is an
abuse of that using the
software, Madam Chair
Representative.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Madam
Vice Chair.
Um
Two things
First of all, if I, if I own an
apartment, if I don't have
somebody.
In that apartment I'm losing.
Well, I'm, I'm not, I don't.
Understand the practice of
holding it for a couple of
months.
Try to raise them
I would rather have somebody in
that apartment.
Um, as soon as possible, and
The idea that
I've been a 6, 12 month lease.
No
I remember way back.
I'm in an apartment that had a
15 month lease and it worked out
perfectly.
Because
You know, I was working on.
Moving to another location.
12 months
would have left me out on the
street.
Or having to move in with friend
until new place was was
available.
Or if it was
24 months
I was gonna lose out on this
deal so.
I don't
I don't know that that's.
Uncommon
It may be, I, I might have just
gotten lucky.
Um
The idea behind this is simply
to limit.
The use of AI in
Germany
rents, is that
Is that what, what the purpose
is, Madam Chair, um.
Uh, representative.
There's twofold types of things.
First is that it's a
manipulation of the market
itself, so the demand, right, if
you're able to take places off
the market, you're creating
artificial demand and therefore
you can actually raise the rent
price across the board, um, so
that's one of the practices that
we're seeing within that
manipulation. And the second bit
is that we know that AI can do
that.
Instantly
Um, and again, with real time,
um, projections on price, you
can.
raise the price every single
day, every single month.
Um, and we know that the
landlord tenant laws lend to
that. Um, in our opinion, a very
rapid rise in the rent with.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Madam
Vice Chair, um, so when you say
that.
You can change the prices.
On a daily basis.
Um
kind of explain that to me
because I'm not.
Something's not clicking there.
Uh, Madam Chair, representative,
so AI, um, on the back end,
right, is an algorithm that can
collect data instantaneously.
Um, and so if it's crawling the
uh Internet to collect, however,
you might build the AI to
collect that data, it would
respond to um essentially the
market reacting immediately, so
it can immediately collect an
entire neighborhood, an entire
city of information, um, and be
able to um.
collate that information to to
spit out that data on an hourly
basis, daily basis. Um, and
that's unfortunately, what we
are seeing right now is an
antitrust practice, something
that's um.
Uh, essentially a violation of
trust within our communities and
a practice that we're.
When you say antitrust, you're
not talking about antitrust law.
Uh in the.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative,
I'm, I'm talking about both
actually, um, but because we
already have antitrust laws on
the books, this is about
informing landlords, um, that
this is a practice that we do
not want them.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Madam
Vice Chair, so if I decide to
invest in.
Additional properties, you know,
maybe a couple of duplexes.
I would want to use everything
available to me to.
Um
Be able to do make a profit.
You know
Being a landlord is not the
easiest thing in the world
because you have upkeep, you
have.
Your mortgage payment, you have
insurances.
If you're not doing it yourself,
you're paying a
Property manager.
Um
So I would want to use all the
tools available to me.
Be able to be successful.
I think, I think there is
enough, um.
I think there's, there are
enough laws on the books that
would.
Oh
Stop me from, from abusing the
system, and if I am over pricing
the market.
If
Better yet, madam Chair, Madam
vice chair, if.
The guy down the street.
is overpricing the market.
I'm gonna try to
Keep it at, at
Market prices so that.
I can have tenants living in
In my unit.
That's how I make money.
That's how landlords make money.
Oh
Uh, I'll, I'll listen to the
rest of the debate. It just
seems that
me
As a business owner, I want to
use every possible tool
available to me.
be successful.
Now, if, if I'm.
Running a uh.
Property, Madam Chair, Madam
vice chair, that.
Simply wanting to take advantage
of my tenants.
I'm not gonna have tenants for
very long.
Um
I was in a situation.
25 years ago.
Where
I I was born 6 month leases.
Because I was looking for
another place a better part of
town.
My 3 sons with me.
Um
And I noticed that.
There was a lot of people
moving, you notice when you're
in an apartment complex, if you
see a lot of U-Hauls, you start
to figure something's wrong.
What
The apartment complex had been
bought out by another company.
Um, and immediately you saw the
Um
Madam Chair, Madam vice chair of
the
of the neighborhood kind of.
Getting a little sketchy. So I
was happy that I had a 6 month
lease. I finally.
But I think the market has a way
of
Writing itself.
You're taking advantage of
people, word's gonna get around.
Not gonna have
And it's for very long, so I.
I'm not sure that I can support
this bill, but I will listen to
the rest of the debate. I do
appreciate you bringing it
forward.
Because I always enjoyed the.
Conversation
Thank you, Madam Chair, Madam
Vice Chair. Thank you. I have
Representative Reeb and then
Representative Hall.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative.
I, I'm kind of struggling with
this like representative
Martinez because this bill seems
to really apply to the owner,
um.
It's not limited to AI um or any
outside.
Um, the outside firm suggesting
rent, it it kind of actually.
Affects the owner.
Um, because under your
definition of coordinator, it
seems that it prevents an owner
from using, you know, outside
information or public
information, um, for the owner's
own use, and I, I have a problem
with that that similar to what
Representative Martinez said,
Madam Char representative that
so is the owner not allowed to
use public information to
determine, you know, what to
charge at all for their rent.
Me, uh, Madam Chair,
Representative, so I'll just
first mention that the
definition coordinator came with
being able to include that, um,
when we're, when we're talking
about what is unlawful.
Um, so that first and foremost,
and then Madam Chair, um,
representative, the idea is
about AI specifically, right? I
mean, it's, it's we we we all
are.
In the midst of toiling with how
to define that.
This was a definition that has
been widely um.
Accepted uh across various
states that we were just
talking.
Um
And so
When we're looking at this, um,
as far as being able to define
and real in AI specifically, um,
this is a comfortable definition
that we've um been able to look
at for the use that landlords in
particular, why this is in
Aurora, not.
Um, in any other part of the
statute so that they understand
that this is a practice that we
don't want to have them using
um.
Mexicola.
OK, and so Madam Chair
Representative, you said 3
states have passed this and.
Um, we have Virginia, New
Jersey, OK, and the other state
statutes that have been
proposed, you said there's
those, um, do those exclude, uh,
I'm not sure, Madam Chair, I
haven't been how all the other
states are going about it, it
because Madam Char and I've
I've, I've uh been given lots of
information on this that they
are excluding public
information, so I just and and
do you know anything um on that
topic, Madam Chair
representative that that's the
person who made the comment
about the Attorney general and
the.
Case law decision, do you know
what that was in reference to if
you could kind of clarify that
for me.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative,
I believe it's in your FIR, but
it does touch on the um
Department of Justice, um, at
the federal level, um, going
through litigation with um.
Real page, um.
To they they issued a memo, I
believe last year, maybe the
year prior at some point, the
administration on this practice
and that they were looking at
targeting it for removal and
then that they were going to, so
I didn't print out the 170 page
piece of um what's currently
going on, um, but, but you can,
you can have a look at what's
what's currently being reviewed.
OK, and Madam Chair and
Representative, so.
This is, so this is a covered
under the unfair trade Practices
Act, basically.
Uh, correct, Madam Chair
Representative, would be under
the antitrust laws, um, it's
been called tacit collusion.
Um
Conscious parallelism, uh, so
it's essentially using this
practice to manipulate prices.
It's not not competitive any
longer, Madam Chair, it's
getting together to decide what
the price, thank you for that,
Madam Chair representative, I.
It's so 3 states have passed it.
I, I feel this is still kind of.
a lot of different states
proposing different things this
lack of using public information
is concerning to me. If I were a
landlord, I sure would want to
be able to access I'm, I'm, I'm
really just not comfortable with
this um where it stands right
now, but again, I'm also
willing.
Um, Representative Hall, Madam
Chair, Madam Vice Chair.
I was, uh, as we sat here.
I got on chat GPT.
Speaking of AI,
I'm trying to get all modern
here.
And I just asked for the rent on
my casita I'm staying at,
because I was just curious how
we're gonna do that and all it
says I don't have real-time
data.
To provide the current rent for
specific address like the
address I'm staying at. However,
I recommend checking popular
real estate websites such as
Zillow.
Realtor.com or apartments.com.
For up to-date rental listings.
Are those the kind of things
where
Talking about here is going to
those types of.
Uh
So I have a property and I list
mine for.
600 a month.
And someone checks around and
then I discover I'm either low
or high, is that kind of what
we're talking about here with
this coordinator issue, Madam
Chair, Representative, what
you're describing is just being
able to look at different price
data across and you deciphering
what the best cost would be for
you. What we're talking about is
this useful page AI tools, um,
they're being, if you, you can
look for them to, uh, real
estate prices using AI and
Google that, see the companies
that are doing that, and they're
they make make mince no words
about it, they're there.
Many of them to just raise the
price, um, that you're looking
for, so it's, it's again using
uh what is being described as an
antitrust sort of situation
where they're not competing
against each other any longer
where you're trying to find the
best price using Zillow or ask
to realize what what is the, you
know, price point and collecting
your own data, this is.
Essentially polluting that data,
um, and manipulating it within
the algorithm of the AI itself.
Madam Chair, Madam vice chair.
So there is a
And
And I'm just
Want the figure this out because
it seemed kind of broad to me.
What
So there's a difference between
me as a landlord.
Doing my research just going out
and checking sites.
Versus going to one of these.
AI artificial intelligence
fueled.
Sites and they just create
something. Is that correct?
Uh, Madam Chair, uh,
representative without getting
into how AI works directly, um,
is, is essentially, yes, it's a
different type of tool, um, that
we're talking about that becomes
anticompetitive, uh, when you're
using these AI tools.
So another, I guess.
If this were to pass, how do we
How do we educate landlords.
On
What to do, cause I've only
owned one rental property, and
it was for a bunch of college
kids and most of them were my
kids, so I, I could control all
kinds of things.
Madam Chair.
Great question, Madam Chair, uh,
representative, I think this is
sort of like a step one in
educating folks that we don't
want this practice in New Mexico
and our first committee folks
were saying, well, are we
penalizing landlords for using
this, no. What it really is, is
helping both landlords and
tenants understand that if this
practice is happening, um, that
we don't want to suspect that
there was a uh AI was being used
to manipulate the rent price in
your apartment building or in
your rental, um, that you had a
cause of.
to be able to bring forth to
court to say, you know, I really
feel like my rent is being.
You know, manipulated by a tool
and you prove it in in a court
of Madam Chair representative.
and
Chairman and vice chair, so
improving that, I mean, just as
a
Hypothetical
If I, I wrote here on my
questions, if I own the
property, I, what if I just
decide to raise the rate,
someone can take me to court and
say I have unfairly.
Manipulated that even though
The burden of proof is on them
even though I just went from I
wanna rent it for 600 to 900
next, next.
Uh, contractual cycle, Madam
Chair.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative,
correct, and I mean, they could
do that already, right? Um, the,
the use of these tools, though,
as we're saying.
We're already, we already know
Madam Chair representative, that
there are tenants experiencing
this, so, um, as per the data
that we've collected to be able
to inform this process is that
you're in a, you know, a, a, say
you're in an apartment, a vacant
apartments that aren't actually
up for rent any longer. They're
being left, um, vacant in order
to raise the price on everybody
at a certain point in time.
Um, if that's the case, Madam
Chair, Representative, that's,
um, in the case that you brought
up, you know, if you could
easily prove or prove that, you
know, that that I was just
collecting data, it sounds like
a whole neighborhood's
collecting more rent than I am,
um, you know, this is how I came
up with this number, and I think
it's fair, you know, they could
still potentially bring you in
for a cause of action, um, but
you would be able to.
Madam Chair, that's, that's kind
of a concern to me that I can be
brought in for simply.
Trying to do what I consider due
diligence as a property owner,
but
That's my biggest thing. It just
seems a little broad, but thank
you for, thank you for answers
and, and thank you for bringing
this matter. It's, it's an
important one, Madam Chair,
thank you.
Uh thank you, Representative
Chavez, did you want to be on
the list? OK. I have
Representative Chavez and then
Representative McQueen.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, um, as we're
going through this, I just
Googled in my zip code, um,
house rental pricing in zip code
87122. And it brings lists of
examples that brings the price
per month, how large the house
is, how many bedrooms, I guess,
um, I had the same
questionsresentative Hall had
and you answered those, but my
next question is then.
If you pass this bill or if we
pass this bill.
How, what makes you think that,
um, landlords are then gonna
stop looking like I just did on
an average and then still do the
same thing that you're saying
they're doing now. I mean, I
would do the same thing and look
at what's comparable based on
size of how square foot and and
do the same thing as far as um
you know, being able to price my
house.
And still try to make a little
profit.
While paying my mortgage, I
guess, um, so how is this going
to
Stop that.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative,
we wouldn't want to stop that.
That's not part of this bill at
all. It's just the. So I guess
I'm just.
Confused like representative
Hall.
I don't understand.
How this would change um what's
currently happening or how.
I guess we would be able to
prove that.
Madam Chair representative again
under pre AI practices going and
collecting that data or, you
know, using Internet tools to do
that that um, aren't and again
in the category of tacit
collusion, um, as the federal
government has put it, that's
what we're trying to prevent
here, um, is where it becomes
anti-competitive where folks
aren't um actually trying to,
you know, compete against each
other, see if they could, you
know, get a little more here, a
little more there as a practice
and seeing what.
A neighborhood may increase to
or decrease to, um, what we're
seeing is a manipulation, and
that's what we're trying to
prevent.
OK, Madam Chair Representative,
thank you, cause I think I'd be
like representative Martinez
trying to
be less expensive than, you
know.
Somebody down the street so that
they would rent my house first,
um, so I completely understand
that, I guess, um, this makes a
little bit more sense. I guess
my next question is.
Have you seen cases where the
states that have passed this
law.
have those tenants actually won
in court. Were they able to
prove this? And how did they do
that,
Madam Chair, representative, so
this is a very, very new bills
that have just gone into law,
um, so I think we're gonna have
to wait and see.
Madam Chair representative,
thank you.
Representative Thank you, madam
chair represent Romero.
The, the short title of the bill
relates to AI, but the bill is
broader than that. Is that
correct?
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
um, we believe it's, um,
confined to AI.
So, ma'am Chair Representative.
The coordinator
Who had a database that wasn't
AI.
Based
Couldn't
Just signed up a bunch of
clients and raised the rent.
In the neighborhood.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
again, this definition of
coordinator came directly from
real pages, something they
wanted to define it as, um, that
they felt more comfortable with
understanding that.
This is, uh, the, the definition
that confines it to AI.
Um, if that's
The read that I, I mean that
they have, I don't know what I'm
missing, Madam Chair
Representative.
Thank you, ma'am Chair.
Uh, thank you, Representative.
Anyone else with questions?
Um
Thank you, Representative for
bringing this bill. So, um, are
you, give me some examples. I
always, I will also, this is
something that sometimes called
dynamic pricing, is that right?
um, representative, yes, OK,
and, um, if you go online and
look up the dynamic pricing.
You'll see, um, you know,
airlines use dynamic pricing, so
that's like you can have and it
allows you, if I understand it
correctly, Madam Chair, I mean,
Madam Vice Chair is that.
Um, in seconds, you can change
the price of something, and if
there's high demand, you can do
that multiple times a day, and
you can change the price on a
rental unit so that you are
maximizing the price of the
commodity.
And you can also lower prices.
If there's low demand, but are
we in a low demand situation,
Madam Vice Chair. No, Madam
Chair, in fact, we are in an
exacerbated.
Demand situation when do we
expect that?
High demand situation where the
landlords have all the leverage
to go away, Madam Vice Chair.
Not anytime soon, Madam Chair.
It's a years long and you know
I'm sure you have these little
frustrations, um, where you're
sitting next to someone and
they, they somehow got some deal
on cheap tickets or something
and you paid the 2 $2500 for the
deal, right?
So just imagine that an
apartment complex and
Um, the landlords are using this
dynamic pricing, and they can
change it on a daily hourly or
whatever kind of basis to
squeeze out the maximum price,
so in the old days.
Um, you know, there'd be
something in the one ad, yeah,
that's public information and
you'd kind of know the guy next
door down the street is charging
$650 for a single unit
efficiency, and you'd say, oh
well, maybe I better charge 625
if I really am desperate. That's
how it works now.
And it's really slow and it's
very open because everybody's
reading the same one ads, and we
know how it's happening, right?
Generally
You can get the information just
by reading the paper. We don't
have papers anymore, so go
online and find it and you sort
of get a sense for what's out
there.
But this is different.
This is, it's all in this
algorithm we call it, you know,
the black box, and I'm gonna be
talking about this with my bill.
It's a black box.
It's run by a company, and they
can help the landlord.
Squeeze out every penny uh on a
profit.
And your rent could be $100 more
than your guide living next door
because of the day that they
happen to sign the lease or the
thing came through. And so the
question as a I think as a
policy is, is this a good thing?
You know, is this fair to
consumers? Is it transparent?
Do people understand, you know,
what the situation is. I just
feel like it's just another tool
that um a group of people that
already have a fair amount of
leverage.
Can man, you know, rely on even
more in a situation where you're
short on housing, we have a high
homelessness rate. We have high
rentals for units that many
people would agree are way
overpriced, um, and you know, I
just, I do think we need to
start getting a handle on this
stuff and I'm gonna support your
bill.
So
happy to entertain emotion one
way or another.
I'm sure just point of
clarification versus sub on my
desk, and I apologize for
showing up late, but did you all
move to the subway on the
subject? Yes, we are on the we
moved the sub for discussion.
Got it. OK. Um, that clears it
up. Thank you.
Yes. I really do not pass on uh
house judiciary. I'm sorry,
House Bill 215.
Um, and a
You passed for the committee
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 215.
We have a motion for do not pass
on the original bill and I I do
pass on the substitute. Do we
have a second?
OK.
So before us is a do not pass on
House Bill 215, but I do pass on
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 215,
what you call the roll, please.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Abeta, yes.
Representative Chavez, no.
Representative Hall.
No.
Representative Hoffman B. Hill,
yes.
Representative Martinez.
No
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative Reeb.
No.
Leader Sapansky.
Madam Vice Chair, yes.
Madam Chair, yes.
Madam Chair, you have a do not
pass on Helpel 2:15 and a due
pass on House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 215.
Thank you, Vice Chair, um, next
on our agenda is, um, house.
Oh
I've been reminded there is food
in house in room 308, so people
are free and and grab something
if you want, but I do want to
keep running the agenda, so, um,
we will have, um, we are on
house bill 24 now and there is a
committee sub representative
Garcia.
And um the presenter um.
Adrian Oglesby has uh with a
little bit of a slide kind of.
Guide for us here.
And if people want to step out
slowly and get something, that
would be great, you know.
Let him um.
Uh, we're working off the
substitute bill if you could
move us up for discussion
purposes. Um, somebody want to
move.
So moved by um Speaker Martinez
and the number is 2.
30345.1.
We got it.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, um, I was 24, the
sub.
Uh, make some streamlining
changes to our
Community governance attorney
Act.
Established in 2020.
As a tuition waiver program for
Third year law students to
engage in providing.
Free legal services to our
Spanish land grant Aseca.
And colonial communities.
Madam Chair, the need for legal
services has been a
long-standing priority.
Of our centuries old Spanish
language communities.
Since the inception of the
legislative land grant Interim
Committee in 2003.
And Madame chair as part.
Of a rocket docket agenda in the
2020 session.
That dream became a reality.
And since then our community
governance attorney program.
has gone through some growing
pains.
And these growing pains are
resolved in our substitute.
Which is a collaboration.
By the committee governance
attorney commission.
The UnM School of Law and the
higher ed department.
And I would like to yield to my
expert.
To introduce himself and to
elaborate on the needed changes.
On this really significant
program. Thank you.
Good evening, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Adrian Oglesby. Um, my
day job is I'm the director of
the Utton Transboundary
Resources Center, which is
housed at the School of Law
where a public service center
that works on water issues for
all New Mexicans. We work from
the farm field to the roundhouse
and um.
Uh, I'm actually here today
because I serve as the dean of
the law school's designee on the
commission that runs this
program, and I serve as the
chair of that commission.
And um we're very grateful to
work with um Representative
Garcia. I'm bringing this to
you. Um, as you mentioned, we
just have some growing pains on
the original bill, um, well,
very well intended, um.
Had some responsibilities that
we would like to rearrange.
And um I'll just point you
directly to the very last slide
and that slide deck that was
handed out and go through these
quickly.
Um, the initial act that was
passed, um, had the advertising
of this program as the
responsibility of the higher
education department. Uh, we'd
like to move that responsibility
to the school of law because we
work with the students, we know
the students, we can recruit and
inform them about the program.
Um
The
Um
Responsibility for administering
the legal contracts with the
legal service providers. These
are the law firms or nonprofits
that these students go to work
for after they graduate.
would change from being a
contract held by the commission,
which is just 5 appointed
people.
Uh, to actually being
administered by the UNM School
of Law, which has the
administrative capacity to
actually administer contracts,
um, that's the 2nd change. 3rd
change is um the selection of
the students who uh get to
participate in this program is
currently um
The purview of the higher
education department, HED would
much prefer for the commission
and the school of law to be
making that choice again as we
know these students.
Um
So again, we're just trying to
clean this uh this act up so
that it functions more
efficiently and puts
responsibilities in the right
place.
Um, here we get into something a
little bit different, um, the
definition we have of an
eligible legal service provider.
Again, those law firms are
nonprofits that these students
would go to work for.
Um, we would like to expand that
definition, um, because we want
to
Make this program successful as
possible, give these students as
many opportunities, different
places they could go to work.
And so, um, one we would like to
include state agencies um as a
particular uh as an option for
places where these students
could go to work, in particular,
um, Department of Justice has
the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo
division, which serves these
clients, um, and it would be
wonderful if we could play
students within DOJ and would be
a great, great experience for
them.
Um
Collonius are particularly hard
to represent because they are
not political subdivisions. And
so we've uh we're requesting an
addition that counties and
municipalities that have
colonies within their boundaries
could be eligible to participate
in this program. So if you had a
county attorney who's
representing Collonius, they
could get a half price lawyer
for 2 years to help them with
that.
Now, this is only going to be
possible with the next change
we're requesting.
Which is um the current act
limits the cost share to
non-state dollars.
That probably worked pretty
well, uh, you know, in years
gone by, but we're seeing
federal dollars dry up and we're
very concerned about that, um,
and that also is a problem for
Department of Justice, for
example, and some of our other
local service providers who who
just don't have access to
federal funding or to
philanthropy money, but do have
state dollars in hand sufficient
to partner with us and bring
these lawyers and and train them
for 2 years.
One other change we're going to
request um the original act
limited the starting salaries to
$50,000. That was probably OK in
2019, um, but after checking
with career services at the law
school, I can tell you starting
salaries for lawyers in New
Mexico is more around 68 right
now.
So to be competitive,
Um, the language that we've
asked to be inserted in place is
just let them start at the
standard starting salary of that
legal service provider.
Um, and we as the commission
will make sure that that's not
taken advantage of. That's our
job as the gatekeeper there.
Um
And so uh that that's
essentially what I've got for
you. You may have noticed in the
FIR we do have one housekeeping
um.
Issue with the substitution and
I apologize we weren't able to
deal with it uh at the last
committee, but that was a
committee substitute bill, um.
And so there was some
resistance.
On the bottom of page 4.
Uh, the drafter inadvertently
deleted.
The representative of the law
school and the representative of
higher education department from
the commission. um.
Well, that might make my
personal life a little bit
easier, um, we think it's
important that the law school
and higher education department
still be represented on this
commission and can assure you
that was simply a mistake made,
made in haste and um no, no, no
disrespect to our drafters. We,
we know they do a wonderful job,
but that's one correction that
we would ask for the bill that
you have in front of us.
let's have it.
Oh, they've got it.
Oh, wonderful. Sorry, I did not
see your sub had that, so we're
all taken care of.
And I'm sure with that be
separate questions.
Um, those in the audience
wishing to speak in opposition
to the bill, please step up to
the micke.
Don't see anyone.
So those online into the bill,
please raise your hand. Those in
the audience wishing to speak in
support of the bill, please step
up to the mic.
If you could limit your comments
to no more than one minute.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Arturo
Arleta. I am the operations
director for the New Mexico Land
Grant Council, uh, the New
Mexico Land Grant council is in
full support of this
legislation. This has been a
program that the council has
been working with the University
of Mexico school of law and with
the community governance
attorney commission on
developing as a result of the
first um sort of graduate from
the program or select or
applicant from the program, um,
land grants of seos and colonial
communities have been able to
receive services.
Um, in these underserved
communities that wouldn't have
been available to them. And so
with that, Madam Chair members
of the committee, we ask for
your support.
Good, good evening, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Paula Garcia, and I'm
the executive director of the
New Mexico Association. We
strongly support this bill
because it has improvements to
the current program as proposed
by the UNM Law School and it
expands the options for the
students, uh, in terms of their
qualified employers.
Our communities are dealing with
complex legal issues, and this
program is very important in
addressing the needs in our
communities for legal
assistance, and it really helps
us in our succession planning
for some of the current
Uh, attorneys such as David
Benavides at New Mexico Legal
Aid.
And we're, we need more
attorneys in our communities as
we fight uh uh for justice in
our community. Thank you for
your consideration.
Good evening. My name is Monica
Rodriguez. I'm a paid lobbyist
for the New Mexico Ase
Association. I also sit on the
New Mexico Land Grant Council
and was recently appointed to
the community governance um
commission. Additionally, I work
for the judiciary for over 20
years, um, in that role, I, um,
managed on administratively
managed the self-help center.
And so I understand that the
rule of law is only good if the
whole system works, and that
means well-trained, um, prepared
attorneys, and we need attorneys
in this field desperately.
communities have complex issues
as um Ms. Garcia already spoke
to. And so we stand in full
support of this bill, and we
urge your support as well.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Megan Veitch, and I am
the honors attorney at the
Department of Justice.
Excuse me, in the Treaty of.
I'm here, uh, with division
director Enrique Romero.
To say that the Department of
Justice stands in support of uh
HB 24. Um, the treaty division
has worked with stakeholders,
including the New Mexico Land
Grant Council, uh, the New
Mexico SAA Commission and the
Mexico Asea.
Association on identifying the
most meaningful ways to protect
New Mexico's land grants.
And a.
Um, based on those
conversations, we believe there
continues to be a gap in,
uh, HB 24 has been successful at
creating opportun engage with
these traditional communities,
uh, as a new attorney myself, I
know both having
Both the financial support and
mentorship, a program like this
would provide, uh, to help
bridge the gap between school
and practice would have eased my
mind as I prepared to sit for
the bar exam.
Uh, the amendments to HB 24 will
increase the opportunities new
attorneys have to give back to
their communities and without
the substantial burden of
student loan debt.
Uh, for these reasons of HB 24.
Thank you. Um, let's go online.
Those wishing to speak in
support online, please raise
your hand. I don't see any hands
raised.
Um, sponsor, anything else
before I go to committee?
No, Madam Chair, we stand for
questions. Thank you. Anyone
with questions.
Um, Speaker Martinez, thank you,
Madam Chair, real quick, um.
Representative and Mr. Oglesby,
thank you for being here and for
pulling this together.
Very important program, a couple
of very quick questions, uh, out
of curiosity, how many counties
or which counties have colonials
in them.
Madam G I
You to uh
To
Madam Chair, I, I honestly,
Madam Chair, in uh Speaker
Martinez, I don't, I don't know
the exact number. Um, we have
them in Bur Leo County. We have
a along along the southern
border.
this is a, you know, significant
part of our population who just
really don't exist in the legal
world.
Yeah, um,
Very good. And in terms of
funding, it, it was unclear how
this is funded, Madam Chair and
Representative Mr. Oglesby, how
is it funded and, and should we
be looking at future years at
growing the program because as
you just stated, I think the
need is, is great, particularly
when it comes to to these.
Um, political subdivisions and
communities that have gone for a
very long time without.
And, you know,
to Mr. Ogle's me to address
that.
Um, Madam Chair, Speaker
Martinez, um, currently, uh,
this program has a state general
fund appropriation of $96,000.
Um, that is sufficient for us to
have one student enroll per
year, probably for the next year
or two. at that point, um, with
inflation and um you know, the
increased costs and tuition and
associated costs, um, we
anticipate we're probably going
to need 112,000 in the next year
or two, as an expansion on this
budget.
To maintain one student in the
program. The program is
authorized to have 2 students at
a time. That was the original
vision, so we would just double
that amount um to to get to the
floor.
capacity of this program.
Great, uh, Madam Chair, I, I'll,
I'll commit to you to in this
coming interim to work to build
up this program to where it
needs to be that these
communities get exactly.
Uh, the type of legal support
that they deserve. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Madam Speaker Martinez, the
Department of IRL is on board.
In terms of pursuing that
initiative in terms of the
increased funding.
OK, um, I, I think I have
Representative Hall and
Representative Reeb, is that
right? Yeah, OK, go, go for it,
Representative Hall.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative expert. I was
just a couple of things, so um
The bottom of page 4 going to
the top of page 5, it says 3
members appointed by the
governor.
Provided that one member shall
be a and then it lists A, B, C,
is it just, are those oars or
has to.
Uh,
And
Carter past member.
Of the Acacia mission.
Er or past member of the land
commission for current and past
member.
The colonious infrastructure
board and a resident.
Just the way that red.
Um, Madam Chair, I just, just a
little bit of clarification on
that, please.
Man rips in the hall, uh, those
are the three members that the
governor will appoint.
So it's just, it's a man. They
have to be, it's an end.
OK, thanks with those
credentials. All right, I saw
that. I just wanted to make.
Sure, and then, um,
If this passes.
the bottom of page 5, the
university shell, the approval
of the commission, it goes enter
into contracts.
Over onto the final page, page
6, the contract shall be entered
into with the university. The
university.
Law school
is entering into contracts with
the University of New Mexico. Do
I understand that, right? I'm
not as dumb as I look, but if
you would please, to answer
that.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Hall.
I may, I may be as dumb as I
look, so, um,
yes, the uh the the the
contracts are actually entered
into between um the university
um
And the legal legal service
providers. So we would contract
say if um Department of Justice
was able to bring a student on
the university would enter into
a contract with Department of
Justice, um, to manage that,
that transfer of funding,
essentially. Um.
the reason we want the
university to do that instead of
you know the commission is
commission is just.
Well intentioned appointed folks
with the university, you know,
have the structure and the
administration to handle those
kinds of contracts without a
problem. So it's not the
university to the law school, it
is the university out to.
Whoever is the legal service
provider, law firm, nonprofit.
Thank you and Madam Chair, is
there any other states that do
something so I know we're very
in this with acacia and a few
things were very unique, but
Maybe Texas or Arizona along
something along, I'm just kinda
curious.
Or maybe they have a similar
program that didn't have to do
particularly with acacia or
colonius, but.
Where they can take this 3rd
year law student.
Relieve them of their of their
uh tuition as long as they go
and do this work is.
You understand what I'm saying
or I go too long.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Madam
Chair, uh, Hall.
Uh, Spanish land grants.
And
The present
Are
Basically, uh, specific to New
Mexico.
And southern Colorado.
Asecas in the traditional sense,
Madam Chair, that we
No the system is also
Difficult to New Mexico and
Southern Colorado.
Madam Chair, my, my, my last
question is just out of
curiosity, how do you pick the
student or students.
That want to perform this kind
of law because it's a
The distance in travel and does
the school. How do they offset
if they need to go down to
alonius or or come north to
visit a Saki's, how does that
work,
Madam Chad Oglesby to answer
that.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Hall, um, so, so
while the students are in law
school while they're finishing
up their 3rd year of law school,
um.
They do have an opportunity to
participate in our legal clinic,
which does represent these
entities, um, in that case, the,
the law school pays for their
travel and such. Um, once
they've graduated and they're
out in the field, um, those
expenses, you know, are covered
by the legal service provider
with the legislature paying half
of that salary and benefits for
that that lawyer um travel
expenses are not included and
So those have to be covered by
the legal service provider.
Thank you, Madam Chair, that's
all.
OK, um, representative Ree.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative, um, expert.
I'm trying, I, I had never heard
of this program, so I'm just
trying to kind of wrap my head
around it a little bit, um.
So you already got this program
in place trying to make these
changes and your representative,
so how many?
Um
Law students attorneys have
participated in the start of
this program. Madam.
I yield to Mr. Oglesby.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative um
uh first year too, uh, we didn't
have funding, so um that and we
were standing the program up.
um, but at this point, we've
enrolled 3 law students into
this program and um two of them
we hope we're going to be um
starting with legal service
providers this year. We have two
that are entering the program
this year because one, we
granted a deferral um because
they got a judicial clerkship of
the Supreme Court and we
thought,
That's a pretty good excuse to
take a year off, yeah, I would
analogize this, um, you know,
while you may not have seen this
type of program for law
providers. Um, this is fairly
common here in New Mexico for
medical providers, so.
Getting out of med school, you
get that last year paid for and
you promised to go work for a
rural community. That's the
spirit of what we're doing here.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair, and
representative expert, um, so.
I guess I'm trying to, I know
this isn't a New Mexico issue,
so do you anticipate having like
how many attorneys on staff and.
Do they just travel all over the
state, um, I know if the
Department of Justice takes one
or I mean I just I'm trying to
understand like how many how
much travel and where did they
all go, madam?
I'm sure, are you able to uh Mr.
Willsby.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Reeve, um, so a
part of our intent here today is
to expand the opportunities
where, where these students can
go.
Um
You know, they will be say, say
for example, they went to New
Mexico legal aid, um, they will
be representing New Mexico Legal
Aid's clients and working within
their system. So if they have
clients, you know, down on the
border or up north, those
students are going to have to
get in the car and travel for
sure. Um.
If they go to work, say for a
county on the southern border
that is.
Dedicated to working for
colonius, maybe they'll just be
working for Colonnius, um.
The, the, the intent here really
gets to to to the heart of
something you, you said earlier
on, um.
A lot of folks don't know about
these communities and especially
don't know about the deep legal
complexities and history that
these communities deal with, um,
and so part of our concern at
the law school was, we don't
want these communities going in
front of judges who don't know
what
They are, um, so our hope is to
get as many, you know,
lawyers out into this program as
possible. Again, right now we're
limited to one per year. Um.
With the maximum being 2 per
year.
an expert, so.
Um
This is just for a New Mexico
students law students, not not
other states that could apply to
this or that nature.
I'm sure that's correct.
And Madam Chair, an expert
representative and so I'm
assuming just from your
testimony you're anticipating
there is plenty of work for
these positions, um.
Is there too much work, not
enough work for one or two, or
can you kind of put that in
perspective?
Representative.
I'm sure you'll do.
Thank you. Um, Madam Chair
Representative Reeb, um, my
sense of the matter is there is
plenty of work out there, um,
and this is complex deep work as
well, um.
Uh, and so, um, you know, I
think the talking to folks
within these communities, they,
they would want as many of the
people in this program as
possible. Um we're we're just
limited by the funding and
authorization that we have.
There's huge legal demand out
there.
I feel like I'm a little more
just have such a lack of lawyers
all over the state and.
No, I'm, I'm I was trying to
figure out actually how many
students were gonna be waiving
tuition for when we have so many
opens in state government all
over the place, um but I
understand what you're trying to
do, I appreciate you.
Giving me the answer my
questions and thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Representative.
Anyone else question or comment?
Happy to entertain emotion.
move it do pass.
Second,
move it do not pass a do not
pass on rural development, land
grants and cultural affairs
Subcommittee substitute for
House Bill 24, but a do pass on
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for house rural
development, land grants and
cultural affairs Committee
substitute for House Bill 24.
That's your motion
and do we have a second?
So that motion made by
representative um McQueen
seconded by Speaker Martinez,
would you call the roll?
OK.
Representative of Beta, yes.
Representative Chavez, yes.
Representative Hall.
Yes.
Representative Hochman B. Hill,
yes.
Representative Martinez.
Speaker, Martinez.
Yes.
Representative McQueen. Yes.
Representative Reeb, yes.
Leader Sapansky
Madam Vice Chair.
Madam Chair, yes, Madam Chair,
you have 8 yeses.
excused for a, for that long
motion. We got it. Thank you
very much. You're welcome.
OK, I hope people are getting
their food.
Yes, all right.
Yeah
Why, why don't we break for 5?
Why this is what we're gonna do.
We're gonna break for 5 minutes
so people get their food. But
please come back, you promise
you'll come back.
It was.
Oh, did you go out there?
OK.
Yeah, so promise you're gonna
promise.
We'll be back in 5 minutes.
sorry.
It's really good.
Ah
Of course.
Good, I'm glad you enjoyed it.
Okey dokey, we're ready.
Oh.
We are on House Bill 74.
You, Madam Chair, and thank you
for the votes.
in the
Um
So this is a fairly simple bill.
It really is
no, so it, it's relating to
behavioral health enacting the
firefighter in emergency service
provider peer support Act.
Allowing state, local, and
regional public fire agencies to
create peer support programs for
their employees and volunteers,
making the services uh
confidential and limiting
liability for the provision of
peer support services and the
part of this came.
Um
Came to me when I got a call
from a firefighter, a friend of
a friend who
Who said, you know.
We have
PTSD, if you don't the first
day, you do the 2nd day.
And, and he, he said, our
supervisors advise us to use
alcohol to deal with it, and I
said, oh.
No, that's
not the best way, so, um, so
this is, this is just setting up
the framework.
I will, I will let my expert
talk a little bit about it, but
it does include volunteer fire
department, so I will let my my
expert.
I, uh
Representatives, my name is
Miguel Tip and I'm the president
of Level 244, which is the
firefighters represent Burley
County and Albuquerque, fired.
Departments, also the vice
president and domeso
professional firefighters that
overseas more than 2000
professional firefighters across
the state.
Um, the reason we brought this
bill forward is to uh
We are established the
foundation for this very needed
uh modality in the fire service,
really in in any occupation but
specifically to the fire service
which we know about.
Um, we are 6 times more likely
to get PTSD. We had more
suicides than line of duty
deaths starting in.
2019 and every year since.
We have historically like uh
Representative Thompson said
historically been very bad with
coping with alcohol and
substance abuse, uh, we are
higher risk to get anxiety.
We're higher risk to get
depression.
And the worst case scenario is
suicide and we deal with that
more times than we.
you'd like to. So what we found
historically is that
firefighters are more willing to
be vulnerable or at least speak
their issues with somebody with
liked lived experience and
that's other firefighters. So we
started training firefighters in
peer support and creating these
lists and creating these
curriculums, um, that
firefighters can now have that
avenue, have that path to get
help to be referred to a
professional to be referred to a
clinician to be referred to
inpatient treatment.
facilities to be referred to
inpatient out in.
Outpatient treatment facilities.
So the idea is that we, uh, we
hammer down the foundation of
peer support and by doing that,
there's always been a question
on confidentiality, what if,
what if somebody comes to me
with a question and my
department then asked me, uh,
you need to testify or you need
to um.
Interview based off of what you
know.
We've never really known the
answer what this bill aims to do
is solidify that confidentiality
aspect because that is really
the, the most important aspect
and without it, it's, it's uh
it's a useless modality. So
that's what this um
This
This bill does in essence is
create a peer support, um.
Function for the state so that
the state can oversee the
training that goes out to all of
the other departments in unison
and collaboration because lots
of times we use each other's
department, for instance,
recently in the past two weeks,
Santa Fe City had a suicide and
anytime there's a suicide in the
department, it's, it's almost
too close to home to where your
own peer supporters are affected
and they're, they're not as
effective. So we sent a team
from Albuquerque, peer support
team to come address the needs
of city. So we really work in
unison with all of the
departments statewide. We aim to
enhance those teams. We aim to
enhance the curriculum. We need
to enhance many more
firefighters to be trained and,
and the many different
modalities through the state
farm marshals as, as it's
referenced in the in the bill.
Um, and we ask for your support
and we stand for questions.
Um, let's go to the audience.
Anyone wishing to speak in
opposition to this bill, please
approach the gentleman with the
microphone.
Anyone online wishing to speak
in opposition to the bill,
please raise your hand.
Anyone
In the audience, wishing to
speak in support, please step up
to the microphone.
Good evening, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, Randy
Varela state fire marshal. We
fully support this bill.
Anyone else? No? Anyone online
wishing to speak in support.
3, I see.
Four hands raised, please keep
your
Remarks to a minute or less.
Um, John Lipshuts.
John
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, John Lipshut
with the New Mexico Federation
of Labor, uh, on behalf of our
over 40,000 workers throughout
the state. We stand, uh, in
solidarity with our first
responders, uh, our
firefighters, heroes that, that
run into burning buildings to
rescue those who need it.
very much. Thank you. Thank you.
um Juliana.
Madam Chair, members of
Committee. My name is Julian Kub
and I represent the New Mexico
Trial Lawyers Association and we
worked with the sponsor and Mr.
Titman on this legislation and
really appreciate the
collaboration, um, and drafting.
We stand in full support. Thank
you.
Thank you, um, Eric Masterson.
Good evening, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name's Eric Masterson. I'm the
fire chief for Sandoval County.
I also represent the New Mexico
Metro Fire Chiefs Association
and the fire and EM affiliate of
New Mexico County. On behalf of
all those agencies, we strongly
support this. We appreciate the
bill coming forward. We
appreciate your support to help
take care of the firefighters
and EMS personnel throughout the
state of New Mexico. Thank you.
Thank you. And one last um.
Paul Bierce
Was no longer there. No, I'm,
I'm sorry, uh, I, the mute
button button didn't come up.
OK, go ahead. Thank, thank you,
Madam Chair, uh, and members of
the committee for the
opportunity to speak, uh, on
this important uh support bill
for the mental health of our
first responders. Uh, my name is
Paulier and during my 25 year
tenure in the fire service, I
experienced and witnessed the
mental health tool.
Uh, uh, that chronic exposure to
trauma can have on fire in EMS
personnel. As you are well
aware, there is a lack of mental
health resources, specifically
in rural areas of our state, uh,
peer support is a foundational
approach to help normalize the
feelings that these first
responders may be having during
their careers.
Trained peer providers can help
their colleagues get through an
acute crisis until they're able
to access a professional
provider. This bill is critical
to developing a sustainable and
supported program for many of
these small departments that
have very little resources. I
fully support House Bill 74, and
I appreciate the time to speak.
Thank you.
Thank you. Um, that concludes
public comment. Anything else
before? OK, members, I have a
representative Martinez.
Madam Chair
Representative Thompson, thank
you for bringing this forward.
This is a
issue that I'm very passionate
about.
Having dealt with
veterans
These issues
First responders, law
enforcement.
These people run towards trouble
when we're running away.
And I think we need to do
everything we can as a
legislature to support these.
Men and women
Um, who show up every day.
And are ready to do what most
people would.
Be afraid to do.
basing some of the things that
they face on a daily basis, it
starts to build up.
And they could try to power
through and power through, but
someday.
They're going to reach the point
where they need help.
And I think this is a great
first step.
And I
And proud to stand in full
support of this.
Thank you, rep, um, I have
representative Hall and the
speaker.
Madam Chair, Representative,
expert witness, um.
Echoing my
Friend's comments across the
aisle there I fully support
this.
I was an EAP peer within the FBI
and uh we actually offer.
Suicide prevention counseling as
individual agents for those who
wanted to do it.
Very possible, it's to help.
This is an issue that has been
ignored. I've had several
friends who've taken their own
lives, two of them in front of
their families.
So I'm in full support of this.
Thank you, Representative
Speaker Martinez, Madam Chair, I
move a due pass on House Bill
74.
A motion for it to pass on House
Bill 74 made by Speaker
Martinez, seconded by
Representative Martinez, to call
the roll, please. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Representative
Abeta, yes.
Representative Chavez, yes.
Representative Hall, yes.
Representative Hockman B. Hill,
yes.
Representative Martinez.
Yes
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen. Yes.
Representative Reeb, yes.
Leader Sapansky.
Madam Vice Chair.
Madam Chair, yes, Madam Chair,
you have a due pass on house
Bill 74.
Thank you very much. Thank you,
Representative.
timing representative.
normal
We are on house Bill 98.
Automatic expungement of
eviction records and we have
representative Ona Nonu here
present. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, members of the
committee, um, for giving me the
chance to.
Present House Bill 982 this
evening. Um, this is a subject
that is very near and dear to my
heart and my districts.
Um, as we all know, having an
eviction on your record can be
severely impeding when you're
trying to buy a home.
Or rent an apartment or home in
the future.
And what this bill aims to do is
simply.
Reduce the punitive effect of
having an eviction on your
record by expunging that
eviction after 5 years, um, AOC
has a mechanism in place that
they've used.
Or evictions for um cannabis,
uh, charges, and we would just
simply modify that tool that's
already in existence to
automatically expunge evictions
once they hit the five-year
period and with that, Madam
Chair, I will stand for
questions.
Well, let's go to the audience.
Those in the audience wishing to
speak in opposition to this
bill's, please approach the
gentleman.
With the microphone.
Madam Chair, committee, my name
is Alan Lesek and I'm the
executive director of the
apartment Association. Um, we
have some issues with this bill.
First, it's not the definition
of eviction is not clearly
defined, therefore, it's kind of
It's, we don't really know when
the 5 years start, um, you know,
in the FRR you'll see that
there's other states that have
done this, although there's
differ where it's either when a
tenant has resolved the
eviction. Um, this one does not.
This one applies to anyone. So
this could be for an eviction
for a substantial violation,
they would get the same
protections as someone who
simply fell on, you know, maybe
hard times. The 5 years is also
an arbitrary number because a
judgment with a lien is valid
for 14 years. Well, this would
essentially make that back pain.
of rent, damages uncollectible
after the 5 years. And so we do
stand in opposition of this
bill. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Brent
Moore. I'm a registered lobbyist
for the the Mexico Association
of Realtors. We stand in
opposition to this bill. The
automatic expunsion of eviction
records removes critical
information which landlords rely
upon when making a screening
decisions about tenants without
access to that information,
landlords may unknowingly rent
to somebody who has a a history
of nonpayment or has committed
lease violations or damage to
the property, and that
increases the financial risk for
the landlord. If landlords are
unable to access these records,
they may turn to other
alternatives to try to protect
themselves, including higher
security deposits and increased
rental rates, and that just
exacerbates some of the problems
that we see in the housing
market, and I do think it's a,
it's an interesting question
when you talk about judgments
based on evictions and whether
or not you're going to be
expunging those records after 5
years when judgments are around
for
14 years. Thank you very much.
Um, let's go online.
Those wishing to speak in
opposition, please raise your
hand.
All right, please keep your um
remarks to about a minute.
Enrique now from the Chamber of
Commerce.
Wonderful. Thank you, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
Enriqueel from the Chamber of
Commerce. Uh, we do stand in
opposition to this bill, uh,
landlords have a lot at stake
when they rent a property. It's
their livelihood and many
properties are substantial
personal investments, property
owners do have a right and need
to know who they are renting to,
uh, past actions, as we know,
are often a predictor of future
behavior, eviction is a tough
course. The landlord has to
establish legal grounds, served
notice to the tenants, wait for
a response or compliance.
File an eviction suit, attend a
court hearing and prevail in the
case. Um, it is not something
that they take lightly. Uh, we
do ask for a do not pass on this
bill. Thank you.
Thank you, um, Jean, um, Vance.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. I, I have
similar concerns about the
techno technical aspects of this
bill. The automatic expungement
in this bill requires that the
records be wiped out and
destroyed, and that in essence
wipes out a judgment that a
party to a lawsuit received, and
there seems to be an assumption
that landlords always win, but
tenants sometimes win lawsuits
too, and tenants sometimes get
judgments against landlords, and
this wipes that out too. Uh, if
you just take it completely out
of the records and destroy it.
Um
It's there are other ways to get
at the, the record issue. I
would actually say you could
look at the bill introduced by
the vice chair of this
committee, the 253. It does not
do any of this and does a lot
less damage
in that, by its approach.
Thanks.
Thank you, Mr. Vance. OK. Anyone
else wishing to speak in
opposition online?
Don't see anyone, anyone in the
audience wishing to speak in
support.
OK, for you to approach the
gentleman with the mic and.
at least try to keep your
comments to about a minute.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair and
committee members. My name is
Austin Weai. I'm the interim
state director for New Mexico
Working Families Party, and we
stand today in strong support of
Hospital 98. Uh, we believe that
5 years is plenty of time for
people to show that they can be
responsible and avoid another
eviction, and that this is
crucial to allowing people to
qualify for more houses. We
obviously know that housing
stock is an issue. There are a
lot of problems with our housing
market. This is a very small
corner to allow people to get
into and to
get access to more housing. We
believe that 5 years is plenty
of time and ask for a new pass.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Winter
Torres, um, uh, founder and
president of New Mexico Eviction
Prevention and diversion, 5
years is a long enough time to
not be indicative of behavior,
um, HUD, whatever it is gonna
become now previously was
looking at a rule of far less
than that for um for housing
discrimination cases based on uh
criminal history, so I don't
think 5 years is anything to
ask. Um, they could hold on to
the
judgments and prove them at a
later point. Um, and the right
now, the information that's
coming um that they're getting
out of the courts is 50%
inaccurate, at least, because
about half of those cases are
getting dismissed, but the third
party information providers that
are sucking the information down
and scraping the websites,
don't, it's too hard in our
system to be able to figure out
what the decision was in the
actual eviction, um, we could
fix that, but that would take a
Technological fix. Um, and also
I think um industry is ignoring
the common practice of informal
evictions, so the estimate is at
least 2 households are being
evicted for every one that is
formally evicted. So I don't
know how concerned folks are
really are about um about those
indications. I understand risk,
but 5 years, you.
Right, those wishing to speak
in.
Support of the bill, please
raise your hand.
Um, I'm gonna take the 1st 5.
Diane McCash.
Good evening, chair and
committee. My name is Diane
McCash. I'm speaking today as a
former landlord. My husband and
my primary income for decades
was the rent we collected on the
units we own. I've heard
landlords speak against this
bill on the basis that the
revisions would cause them
financial harm. My husband and I
believe that keeping eviction
records indefinitely has done
much more harm to our community
by indefinitely punishing people
who are renters. I who have
faced eviction proceedings. It
is expensive to be poor, and
it's heartbreaking to lose a job
and suddenly.
we have no way to pay rent. We
hear all the time that having
felony convictions has many
collateral collateral
consequences, sorry, affecting
people's access to jobs and
housing. I think that in itself
is a shame, but having an
eviction on my record, which
isn't a crime with no reasonable
timeline for expungement can
affect me in a similar manner as
having been convicted of a
felony.
5 years is more than enough time
to punish a person and their
Thank you, Diane. Thank you.
Patrick Barrett.
Good evening, Madam Chair,
members of the community. My
name is Patrick Barrett, and I'm
the executive director of Mexico
Center of Black Excellent
excellence, and we strongly
support this bill, and we hope
that you do a due pass on it.
Thank you. Thank you. Um.
Alyssa Cortez.
Cori, I'm sorry.
Uh hello.
Yes, um, so, hi, my name is
Bernard and Hardy. I had to use
a list, Alicia's phone, um, um,
hello, uh, chair and committee
members. Um, I'm with NM Native
Vote. I'm Hamus and Dana, one of
many urban natives living in the
international district. I'm also
a renter, um, we really support
uh this bill, uh, mostly because
the renters in the ID are we're
rent for longer periods of time,
um, but also
We wanted to also just say that
the
The eviction records harm and
cause forced displacement. Um,
it keeps our families shackled
in a cycle of poverty, forcing
people to live in unsafe housing
conditions contributing to
homelessness, um, and other
collateral consequences. Um,
this bill will help many of our
families who are, who, who are
entitle One programs and to move
their kids into better housing.
So we urge your support. Thank
you.
Thank you, um, Kurt.
Breaker
Good evening, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. This
is Kurt Reger with Lutheran
Advocacy Ministry of Mexico and
I'm also here to speak the
position of the conference of
churches tonight. We are in
strong favor of HB 90 as well
for the reasons previously
stated by supporters. Thank you
for your time tonight.
Thank you. And the last person,
Monet.
Over.
Um,
yes, um, good evening, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Monee
Silva and I'm the executive
director of the New Mexico
Coalition in Homelessness, and
we stand in support of HP 98.
According to the National Low
Income Housing Coalition.
Eviction filings can have
lasting and harmful consequences
for individuals regardless of
outcome of the eviction case.
Even in instances where an
eviction judgment does not
result in an immediate
displacement of the tenant, the
mere presence of the eviction on
the tenant's public record can
be a barrier to securing safe
and stable.
accessible and affordable
housing in the future. We
strongly urge the committee for
their support.
Thank you, um, back to the
sponsor, did you wanna add
anything before I go to
committee.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, I just
want to point out before we go
to questions, um, and you can
feel free to ask me about it.
There's nothing in this bill
that prevents a property manager
from collecting if they receive
a judgment and also, um, in
terms of the definition of
eviction, and eviction is a
civil matter, you have to go to
court for it, so the definition
of eviction already exists.
Madam Chair. Um, thank you,
Representative.
Um, I've got McQueen.
Representative McQueen.
Thank you, ma'am, uh ma'am chair
representative.
So just I was curious about the
collecting judgment.
Um
Uh, what's the statute of
limitations on that and
It is the record of the
judgment.
still intact
Thank you Madam Chair, thank
you, um, Chair McQueen, thank
you for asking that. So yes, um,
the period of time to collect on
a judgment is will not affect
that because at the time that
the judgment is awarded, you
would receive if I were a
property manager, I would
receive a certification of the
judgment.
And I can, I have 14 years to
collect.
And Maner representative.
If I had been asked how long
that's limitations was I would
have guessed 3 or 6.
Any idea why it's 14?
Madam Chair, Cherry McQueen, I
do not.
Thank you, ma'am Chair.
OK, I have Representative Reed,
Representative Martinez, and
then representative of Beta.
Thank you, madam. Excuse me,
Madam Chair and Representative.
So is there any process um in
this procedure. I'm kind of
comparing it to expungement of
criminal records where you
actually have notice, you have,
you know, a chance to um have a
hearing on it and things of that
nature. This just seems so
automatic without any process,
so would you be able to respond
to that, Madam Chair
Representative.
Yes, ma'am here, um,
Representative Reed.
There is no process, we are
making this automatic because.
The process to file for an
expungement can be extremely
timely and extremely, you're
going to be expunging records
for people who oftentimes afford
rent, we are just removing that
additional barrier of cost and
making it, Madam Chair
Representative, that's kind of
my concern about the whole thing
is it would be one thing I think
if you were saying.
It was a person who paid their
judgment in full or um.
The eviction was dismissed,
let's say something like that, I
believe Oregon is a state that
does it that way, um, before the
records are just, you know,
destroyed. It, it could be
somebody who's destroyed
property who's, you know, not
just falling on hard times, just
been a really, really bad
tenant. And there just seems to
be no difference between the
two, and, and that concerns me.
I'm Chair representative because
we're, we're not really.
We're not really treating it
like how it should be treated.
Um, and again, comparing it to
when we expunge records for
somebody that's, you know, has a
criminal conviction, let's say,
whatever crime it may be, it
does have a process, you know,
there's notice given to people,
the judge has to decide, and I
think it would be better
practice with something like
this. Well, I understand your
intent is to, to have a process
so that we can get in front of a
judge and decide, OK, what was
the reason so that we don't.
rent to somebody or somebody
like myself who's paid my rent
and and everything I need to do
and let's say, you know,
Representative Hoffman be held
here she, she didn't pay her
rent, she, but she, it wasn't
about rent, but she destroyed
all the property and broke
things, it was just a horrible
tenant, maybe it was loud, you
know, loud parties, whatever,
whatever she's doing it's just,
yeah, it's just I see it just as
a little different than
somebody, you know.
Um, who just fell on hard times
for someone who's just a bad
tenant. And I just feel there
needs to be some distinction
there, um, like I said in
Oregon, I mean, Oregon's a state
that makes sure that you
You have paid your judgment off
and or the eviction was
dismissed. So have you thought,
Madam Chair, represented about
not having it so broad, um, to
accomplish what you're trying to
accomplishment. Thank you, Madam
Chair, and thank you,
Representative Reeb, um, yes,
but to be clear.
The only thing that this bill
would expunge is the eviction
itself, so if the person was
charged with a crime of like
property management like or not
private man, excuse me,
destruction of property.
Doing drugs on the premises,
anything like that would stay on
their record, this just removes
the expungement.
And Madam chair and
representative. I, I understand
that I will tell you, those
aren't often filed, it's just a
landlord tenant thing, I mean,
they may be doing drugs in the
residents, they may have left
the residence and and destroyed
the property and criminal
charges may not even been filed.
It just goes through a, a
landlord tenant type of
situation. So, um, what about in
a situation like that,
Madam Chair thank you. Sorry,
Madam Chair, representative, and
in that situation again, I would
point out that this would not go
into effect until, well, I mean,
it would go into effect.
immediately, but we're talking
about something that would
happen 5 years or more ago and
the whole point of the language
of the bill.
is to make sure that we are not
holding people.
Responsible to the level that
they are being overly punished
for the crimes of their past.
Or the
Hard times of their past, so,
and I think half a decade of
behavior is more than enough of
a snapshot to see where someone
is at presently, like 7 years, I
think is far too long, um, but
to the point of the property
managers who spoke in opposition
to the bill, it is very valuable
information to have before you
run to someone, you want to know
what kind of person they are,
um, in Minnesota, for example,
automatic expungement happens
after 3 years. I looked at that
and I thought, you know, that's
not enough time.
That is not enough time, um, who
you are at 23 and 26 could be
very similar people, um, so in
the interest of making it fair,
that's why I settled on 5 years.
I believe that 7 years was far
too long. 3 years was not nearly
enough, but half a decade of
behavior, I think is more than
enough information when choosing
to rent to a tenant, Madam
Chair, representative. So, Madam
Chair Representative, what is
the intent of your bill?
Is it to
To basically allow somebody who
fell on hard times, let's say
through COVID, um, and wasn't
able to pay their rent, even
though that's the situation I
feel kind of the landlords, you
know, we're, we're kind of in
the bat and they kind of took it
on that end, you know, they,
they were forced to keep all
those tenants and into their,
those apartments and they had
that rent to pay or that
mortgage to pay and their own
mortgage to pay and, you know,
people just couldn't get kicked
out of their homes for all, you
know, a couple of years, I
believe it was. So is your
intent to
To basically not punish someone
who fell on hard times or you,
are you seeing the difference
that I'm, I'm talking about
between the bad tenant and the
tenant who fell on hard times.
Do you see the difference of the
two Madam Chair representatives,
Madam Chair Representative, yes,
um, I believe that people
deserve a clean slate after half
a decade, um, in terms of the
bad tenant versus good tenant.
If a bad tenant's a bad tenant,
you're gonna see that in 5
years, whether we expunge or
not, you will still have that 5
years of behavior and if they
continue to behave.
poorly and not be responsible
for themselves in any apartment
or home that they rent, you will
continue to see that, so.
My, uh, the intent of the bill
is for people who are being
responsible, behaving
responsibly, have a full time
job, can afford their rent.
Just have give them the
opportunity to be able to rent
and not hold them.
Punitively resu representative.
Madam Chair Representative, I.
I understand that, um.
I just don't see a process here
and um
To protect landlords also. I
think there needs to be a fair
process and so um I
I think there's just not enough
in this bill. It's just very
vague. I, I'm concerned about
um.
The two different types of
players we're trying to address
here and how that can affect
People applying to be, you know,
tenants, um, someone who's never
done anything but pay their rent
and be respectful of property
versus people who've destroyed
property and, and, you know,
done things of that nature, not
just falling on hard times, so.
I, I just cannot support this
bill, um, with the way it's
written, um, but I will listen
to the discussion and um I think
you representative, thank you,
Representative Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um.
Respect for the committee. I'll
try to get through my 12
questions as fast as I.
Um,
I, I shouldn't have fed you.
I haven't, I haven't eaten yet.
All I got was this. OK, well,
good, um.
Uh, I'm, I'm all for giving
somebody a second chance.
Understand
Some people
All in hard times.
For whatever reason.
They're just having a hard time
bouncing back.
The question is, how many times?
Um
Or is there a limit?
Or how many times a person can
have their records.
Somebody rents an apartment.
21 years old.
evicted 5 years later, they're
Your record is clean, but when
he's 22, same thing happens.
This guy goes through 5 or 6
apartments.
Um, how many times?
And this happened
For an individual
Madam Chair Representative, we
did not set a cap.
Um, like I say, you will still
have as a property manager, you
will still have a 5 year window
of behavior repeating that
action and you see that in 5
years, you say, oh, well, maybe
not, maybe not this kid, job
that he has and he can afford
it.
He's got like
Three evictions in 5 years,
maybe I don't want to rent to
him.
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative.
Thank you, um, Representative
Abeda and then the speaker.
Thank you, Madam Chair, I think
you representative.
I have a question, um, earlier
we were listening a little bit.
Making sure that landlord.
Oh, I understand.
From what I understand, this
bill will.
record.
But does it prohibit landlords.
The appli.
Madam Chair Representative, not
at all.
They, uh, the landlord is on
their um applications if they've
ever, if a tenant has ever been
evicted, they are free to ask
that.
OK, thank you.
Thank you, um, speaker.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I
think my question uh was um.
Asked in part by Martinez, and
I, I think I'm just gonna ask
you just for my own peace of
mind here.
If you're 21 and you rent an
apartment and you
get evicted.
By the time you're 26, that
record would be expunged.
If you rent another apartment
for whatever reason, somebody
rented an apartment at 22.
And then you got evicted from
that one.
27, so it's, it's not like
there's no record.
Um, to go off of for a landlord,
is that right, Mr. Madam Chair
and Representative, Madam Chair,
Mr. Speaker, yes, that is
correct. You will always have a
rolling 5 year window of
behavior.
I, I reckon somebody could like.
Get evicted at 21, and then they
have this master plan.
To not rent another apartment
and then they got a clean state
at 26.
And then they could all, you
know, at that point do the same
thing they did when they were
21.
Just some I'm very uh.
What's the word, manoso in
Spanish tricky.
Um
Never been evicted.
Knock on wood,
uh, Madam Chair Representative,
do you, and you, you may not
have this in front of you, but I
do wonder.
What percentage of eviction
eviction cases are just because
people fell on hard times and
couldn't pay rent.
Versus drugs.
Destroy destruction of property.
I mean, I, I would assume it's a
combination, right? If you're.
Not if you're not respecting the
property and you're using drugs
and selling drugs, you may also
not be paying rent, right? So
it's sort of a
All of the above, uh, but I do
wonder what percentage of the
eviction cases are just people
fell on hard times, they fell
behind on their rent by a few
months and then they got
evicted. Do you happen to have
that in front of you? Madam
Chair, Mr. Speaker,
unfortunately I don't have those
numbers, I know that the housing
group that, um.
It's made up of uh.
Law professors at UNM, they are,
they do studies in that area, so
I would be happy to um some
numbers that they can provide
you. Ma'am, I think should this
bill move forward, I think it
would be interesting data to
have because I do think there is
something to be said for people
who are.
This inherently.
Um
productive and and destroying
other people's properties.
And folks who just fall.
And I think that this, this
seems like a very surgical.
Attempt at ensuring that people
can keep accessing.
Rentals
Um, and not just be cut off. I
think one of the public
commenters said that.
Past behavior predicts future
behavior. I mean, if you all
would have looked at my credit
score when I was 21.
That was probably not supposed
to be here.
Uh, we all make mistakes, um,
and, and I don't think past
behavior necessarily predicts
future behavior. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you
representative.
Uh, Representative Chavez.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, and I.
Thank you for bringing this and
I see both parts, um, but as you
were talking and stating states,
um, it.
Looked like Minnesota did
require a hearing and a court
finding.
And so just agreeing with the
process, and I know people on
both ends, whether it's family,
friends, people I went to school
with, people that have abused
the system or just want to
Utilize the system and knows how
it works, know how it works or,
you know, a single mother that
lost her job and is in a hard
times, but just because, um, you
know, there is no process here.
Is there a way, um, can people
go prose and would they just be
able to go to a hearing if we
did have that option to just.
Sit in front of a judge in a
hearing and state what happened,
I mean, would it really cost
lawyer fees for that process.
Representative, um, yes, it's
like the process of expungement.
Just extremely prohibitive, even
like I think I'm a high end, it
can be about $1400 which.
is maybe not that much money,
but to the people that we're
talking about even.
Especially when we're talking
about housing.
Like the whole point of the bill
is to make sure that we are
making the housing market as
Brutal as it already is at this
time.
fair to everyone. And so I, I'm
a big believer in the automatic
process because we already have
a mechanism in place by AOC,
which has proven extremely
successful and
rolling window 5-year window.
To go prose. I'm sure.
Madam Chair representative,
thank you, and I don't know what
that process is. Would they
Look up their name or does the
state just have that in the
system already and would
automatically every
5 years or every month.
processes, how does that work?
Yes, ma'am sure represented the
process is actually laid out in
the FIR.
So you can
Look into that, um, and it's
also done by that at present.
AOC
keeps an eviction record on file
for forever.
Your evictions are still on
record even after you die.
So
That would be the processes laid
out by the FIR using the
expungement tool representative,
thank you. Those are all the um.
I just an observation. I find it
very strange that there's.
Something that
I don't know how that got
through the system, but.
I have an idea.
Um,
anyone wishing to make.
OK, we have a motion for it to
pass on house Bill 98 automatic
expungen of eviction records.
Which called role playing. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
in beta.
Yes.
Representative Chavez pass.
Representative Hall. No.
Representative Hockman B. Hill.
Yeah. Representative Martinez.
No
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen. Yes.
Representative Reeb, no.
Leader Sapansky.
Madam Vice Chair,
Madam Chair, yes.
Representative Chavez.
No.
Madam Chair, 5 yeses and 4 no's.
You have a do pass.
On House Bill 98.
Thank you, representative.
Thank you. Have a good evening.
Thank you committee members.
All right, we're on our last
bill.
House Bill 220.
Ignition resistant construction.
Um,
I understood the amendment
wasn't gonna be presented.
But
I.
Um
But I learned from staff since.
We send amendments out.
early, which we should, of
course, we can, um, we just have
to acknowledge it's not gonna be
presented. Thank you, Madam
Chair. That's correct.
right, representative.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Committee, um, good evening.
Tonight we're presenting uh
House Bill 2, 220, um, very
simply, it's relating to
property, ensuring fire
mitigation by allowing ignition
resistant construction and
property interests and limiting
conditions that pose fire
hazards, allowing ignition
resistant construction and
homeowner association bylaws and
limiting conditions that pose
fire hazards. Now, Madam Chair,
the reason why this, this
came about was during committee
hearings during the interim.
Uh, with LFC.
Um
And so
What happened during the um
interim is we LFC committed to a
task force to work on the issue
of a fire mitigation in our
states and so we had the fire
marshals OSI, New Mexico
forestry and construction
industries.
Um, come together with a
subcommittee to discuss some of
the issues at hand.
And even prior to that, the
superintendent of insurance, uh,
was in front of the committee
and gave information about the
issue of oh HOAs.
Uh, having a construction that a
pro.
proponents of fire hazards, so
with that, that's why this bill
came about and to my left, uh, I
have my special my expert
witness and she'll introduce
herself.
And then to my right after.
We know Elizabeth.
Good evening, Madam Chair and
Representatives. I'm Melissa
Robertson. I'm the property and
casualty bureau chief for OSI.
And good evening. I'm Elizabeth
Johnson. I'm associate.
Madam Chan representatives, the
goal of this bill is to allow
New Mexico constituents to
mitigate their property.
Safely, for against wildfire
while still living in an HOA.
Um
As we all know, New Mexico is
facing several wildfire
challenges right now, along with
the challenge of obtaining or
even keeping their insurance.
This rolls, it's a snowball
effect, so if you can't get
insurance, you can't get a
mortgage and the real estate
agents cannot also sell the
property.
Um
I'm gonna go through. I pulled a
couple covenants from different
areas in our state. These are
all located in high wildfire
areas per the insurance
industry.
Um
Approved list of materials for
walls and fences, coyotes,
coyote, and latia fences, cedar
and pine slats.
All fence and wall gates shall
be.
Constructed of wood.
All disturbed areas are to be
re-vegetated with native seed
and native trees and shrubs all
planted to match the same
density of vegetation
surrounding the untouched land.
And lastly, trees and or plants,
drought resistant evergreen
trees and other similar types of
plants.
are approved screening method
when sufficiently dense and or
used in conjunction with
existing structures.
So as we see HOAs have mandated.
Essentially constituents to.
But trees next to their houses.
But up wood fences that are
extremely combustible.
which has not only led to a fire
hazard, large fire hazard within
the HOA, but also to the entire
community that border that HOA.
go to the audience, anyone
wishing to speak in opposition
to this bill, please.
Um, approached the gentleman
with the microphone or um person
woman with the microphone.
OK.
I don't see anyone, anyone
online wishing to speak in
opposition, please raise your
hand.
Anyone in the audience wishing
to speak in support.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, uh, my
name is Miguel Tipman. I'm the
president of IFF Local 244 also
representing 2000 firefighters
for the NMPF.
MMP FFA.
Um, we are in strong support of
HB 220. Uh, I have covenants and
restrictions in my neighborhood.
I'm not, I'm not opposed to
HOAs, but there's no reason the
HOAs and covenants and
restrictions should be limiting
our ability to keep our
properties and our houses, uh,
fire safe, um, we do this on
deployments all the time where
we have basically when we go in
the urban interface which is
pretty much all over New Mexico
we just sent a strike team to LA
and the LA wildfires. A lot of
what we do is people's yard
work, so we
at their shows and we uh we make
their property, um, more likely
to for the fire to miss or less
likely for it to, to catch fire.
So, um.
Love my HOA, love my covenants
restrictions, but they should
not be limiting our ability to
protect our property, so we
stand in strong support.
Those online wishing to, oh, I'm
sorry, sir.
Go ahead. Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Anthony Lebo,
Deputy Chief State Farm
Marshal's Office. We stand.
Thank you. Um, those online,
wishing to speak in support,
please raise your hand and limit
the amount of time. Eric
Masterson.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee.
Again, Eric Masterson here with
Sandoval County Fire.
Also on behalf of New Mexico
Metro fire chiefs and the fire
and EM affiliate with New Mexico
counties. The fire chief
strongly support this bill, and
we ask for your support as well.
Thank you.
Thank you. I don't see any other
hands raised.
Sponsor anything else before I
go to committee?
Representative
Um
Thank you, man.
Anything else before I go to the
committee? I think I think we're
ready to.
Very good. I have represented my
queen and then Speaker Martinez.
Thank you, ma'am, Chair. Um,
ma'am Chair Representative Luhn,
uh,
And
Understand what you're doing, I
guess I'm, I'm
Given the fire risks we face,
I'm skeptical how impactful this
will be.
Um, I appreciate the examples of
covenants. I was trying to think
back, uh, and Kevin and I had
seen.
What would be uh
Subject to this
And I had a hard time coming up
with any.
Um, you know, the typical
covenant we see.
Certainly in the San Fe area is,
uh, you know, full Adobe
construction and, you know,
that's probably relatively fire
resistant.
Uh, flat roos, you know, or
typically.
Uh, you know, rock or tar, um.
Uh, I, I can think of.
Pictures, particularly of the
fires down in Rhodoso.
And
Uh
What I remember is.
Houses nestled under very large
pine trees.
Um, and that I think is.
A much bigger source of concern.
Um
The
Uh
I'm, I'm a little curious, uh,
if there was a covenant that
said,
Perimeter fencing had to be coy
fencing.
And which I think is.
That's a good example. I think
that's fairly common.
Um
And that was now an enforceable.
What happens? Like, can you
build
Uh, a cinder block wall.
And you do chain link? I mean,
what, what's the, what's the
default?
Madame Chair Representative, so
through the insurance right now,
uh, there is a company leading
science right now when it comes
to fire mitigation and
essentially saving your house.
It is IBHS, the International
Business and Home Safety
Institute.
Um, they
Or catch actually they've caught
up on science with wildfire, and
we can actually get you, they
have a very direct list of what
would need to be done, um, the
first thing is the 0 to 5 ft
clearance. This means no trees,
no shrubbery, anything within 0
to 5 ft of your house that's
where embers tend to.
Uh, compile and then combust.
When we talk about the fence,
same thing by having a dry
coyote fence. You've essentially
created a matchstick around your
yard. Now that links to your
house. So without having that 5
ft air barrier, you've basically
created a wind tunnel that will
drive the flames in and up your
walls.
So
By and this is essentially
saying.
Your HOA cannot.
Mandate, they can leave this in
their covenants, but they can't
stop you from wanting to
mitigate your property.
Answer your question,
ma'am, expert did not.
My question is, if the covenants
specify cody fencing.
those are now unenforceable, and
you build whatever you want.
Madam Chair Representative.
You can.
Based on, I'm sure you'd have to
get prior approval. However, the
whole goal of this is to
actually mitigate your property.
So by creating that concrete
fence or that block fence or the
adobe fence, you still have.
That chance of ember pile up in
your backyard and that wind
driven.
not my question.
But my question is, does the HOA
have any control once the
covenant is invalidated.
chair and representative, I
would hope they would have some
control, but, um, I do unders I
think that this would force HOAs
to look more closely at the IBHS
regulations to determine what
the alternative to a coyote
fence would be that there that
they're now recommending.
So I, I would hope they wouldn't
go straight to cinderblock, but.
Ma'am Che represent an expert,
so.
You know, a lot of the, the
issue is a lot of the cos we see
are old.
Uh, they're poorly written,
their enforcement is
questionable.
Um, it
It's sometimes impossible to
change things.
You might need a supermajority
and getting a supermajority of
an HOA is a challenge.
Um, you know, the
The largest subdivision in the
state, which is in my district.
The great Chicken wars, they,
they spent $100,000 in court for
chickens, and they, they tried
to fix the cabinets.
To clarify it one way or the
other, they give people both
options and neither side got to
the, I think it was 2/3 required
to actually amend the covenants.
Thank, thank you for that
question, and I understand the
chicken wars because here in
Santa Fe
and.
And it was a very serious matter
to your community, and I, I was,
I was there when all that
happened. But this would give
us, this would set a precedent
and I think would give um.
Give the legal uh.
Avenue for those conversations
not to have to go into
litigation, I would hope they
still could, as we know, but I
would hope it would not because
this would give protections and
I hope that.
In in.
In the process of
Of the concern of of those um.
This homeowner's not even being
able to be uh insured, I think
this would, this would.
There are concerns out there,
uh.
With that, I think that this
leads to us needing and looking
at this and and passing
something like this and also the
support of, I believe one of the
biggest HOAs in the state.
For this legislation has come
forward as well, I I believe
that if you want to add to that.
Madam Chair Representative, yes,
we have been working with the
HOA out of Alto, so 2500 plus
homes. We have had several
meetings and in those meetings
they are actually looking to
fully adopt that I uh IBHS into
their CCNRs. We've also met with
two large HOAs here in Santa Fe
who are doing the same, um, one
of them.
He's taking it
a very extreme extent, um, and
then we also have worked with
one up in Towson Angel Fire.
Um
Thank you, ma'am.
Thank you, um, I have Speaker
Martiana Martinez.
Mover do pass whenever you're
ready.
Representative Reeb.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um,
representative, I guess I'm, I'm
confused. I'm trying, it says
this just applying to um.
People who are ready are under.
Or going into a new HOA or is
this gonna apply to, cause I'm
in an HOA and I'm trying to put
myself in this position where I
know I'm in Clovis, so it's we
do have dry climate stuff, but
so let's say my HOA has, we have
to have cinder block fences and,
you know, we, we have our
landscaping and I do have some
pine trees near my house and
things like that. Would I be
required to, let's say if it was
a wood fence and you felt that
was a fire hazard or.
Or would I have to take that
down and actually put up a new
fence or cut my trees, or is
this just something that's
saying you can't put something
in a HOA that's.
Am I getting it? OK, yeah, the
question well received, we, we
had the same question in the
last committee, but I'm gonna
let Elizabeth on the legal side
answer that. OK, thank you.
Madam Chair and Representative,
actually the first sentence, I
think I spoke to Melissa was
this better not be retroactive.
So this is um a lot of money
into my fences and I'm like
so to answer your question, it
is only prospective as of the.
Perfect. Thank you. And so, um,
just one more question, Madam
Chair represented. So then
enforcing it, how is the
enforcement done? I mean, I know
how difficult it is to force
something in an HOA.
um, but what do you foresee the
enforcement?
Madam Chair and Representative,
we also got this question in the
last committee and there was a
little bit of a
misunderstanding. I think that
some people were under the
impression that we were going to
be that there was gonna be an
enforcement mechanism against
the individual homeowners and
that's not the case. Essentially
the homeowners associations
bylaws moving forward will need
to comply with this statute.
I'm representative, so it, yeah,
it's more, it sounds like it's
more with basically the
homeowners association and their
bylaws more so than the
homeowner, and I think that's
what I was trying to understand.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative.
But, um, Representative McQueen
jumped in for a second cause
there was a so on on that point,
um.
OK. I, I, I would describe this
as retroactive.
It absolutely would validate
existing covenants, covenants
going back in time. I don't
think it imposes a duty on a
homeowner.
So it would not prevent you from
building, from putting a bunch
of bushes by your, your house.
It just would prevent the HOA
from requiring that.
So
chair Representative, I believe
that is correct, but.
If there's anything else,
Elizabeth, you wanted to add
ma'am, did everyone get that?
Yeah, we get it. Can you
rephrase reset your question
though. I want to make sure I
got it.
This is important
is an important point. The
question from Roe was, is it
retroactive, and you said no.
I think it's retroactive in the
sense of we're not invalidating
covenants that get recorded
after it's effective date.
We are going back in time.
I think what's important that
like if, if you have covenants
and you have a cowdy fence.
And you have Bush's.
It's not imposing an obligation
on the landowner.
All we're doing is addressing
the covenants, but certainly
this bill would apply to
covenants that are in effect at
this time and maybe have been in
effect for 50 years. So Madam
Chair and Representative McQueen
and I got very well briefed on
this this morning. My
understanding, at least as of
that time, was that the
covenants that are, so we have
two sections of law that we're
amending.
The first section.
Um
Which I guess is section one.
Those covenants would no longer
be valid because they would be
against law.
However, the second section
relating to homeowners
associations, essentially
contracts that are in existence
now.
We could only apply that
prospectively.
Which I know I just
overcomplicated.
I, I, and I appreciate that. So,
The Mater, we're, we're not
going back in time and telling
people to tear down fences.
We're, we're just saying in the
future,
If that's, you don't want to
build that fence.
You don't have to, even if
you're covenant, say you do.
And there's this process.
Where you go through the HOA and
you ask,
build the fence and they have 60
days to respond.
And
You know, if, if
It's
uh by the uh.
Law
They can respond however they
want, but it still violates the
law, so you don't have to build
it so that, so.
back in time
Current evidence.
Thank you, man. OK, anyone else?
Um, Representative Romero.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair.
So just so that I'm also
wrapping my head around that.
We're not asking HOAs to
proactively, um, think about.
Fire mitigation in any
meaningful way.
We're asking them to.
We're asking them to
essentially, um,
For those that
Perhaps purchased a home or got
into a an a.
A new sort of situation with
which they are evaluating.
High mitigation and now have
Potentially more options.
If, in fact,
They don't wanna.
Follow the HOA because of fire,
potential fire.
Um
Risk. Is that correct, Madam
Chair Representative?
Madam Chair, um, representative,
um, you're asking if there's
some meaningfulness to this, and
I would say that there is
because we're we now have a HOAs
that are looking to include the
IBHS plans into their.
Um, they're
The covenants and also the
second part of your question.
Is
Regarding whether.
And correct me if I'm wrong,
homeowners or property owners
can now.
Um, or they don't have to uh.
I by the by the.
A covenants of of having to have
these types of constructs.
Correct me if I'm wrong.
Is that the second part of your
your Madam Chair, I guess I'm
trying to understand.
Where the crux of the um.
Like
What are we trying to get at
with how this gets implemented,
I guess. So we're asking HOAs.
Um, not to change any of their
current practices, essentially.
We're saying
If you're trying to enforce the
current practice, however, it
should this be enacted.
That potentially creates a
greater fire risk.
You can't enforce that rule on.
However, OK, so I'm clear on
that point. But why wouldn't we,
Madam Chair, Representative,
want HOAs to be more proactive
about fire mitigation, but I'm
sure.
So to your point of uh or to
your question of implementation.
This has been implemented in
Colorado and maybe can you give
us, uh, I'll have my expert uh
give a little more information
on that, and that my answer your
question as the proactiveness of
HOAs.
So Madam Chair and
representative, I think 100% we
do want HOAs to take this
seriously, but the reason that
it needs to be pro.
Prospective instead of
retroactive is because we have a
constitutional provision that
says that we cannot.
Interfere with an existing
contract which an HOA bylaws
are.
Um, we have it on good authority
that several homeowners
associations we've been working
with um intend to amend their
bylaws after this is passed
because they feel like it'll
give them the teeth to make a
solid argument for amending the
bylaws.
Um, but, but we would hope that
obviously all of them take it
seriously.
So then on that point, Madam
Chair, Representative, if we're
saying.
But I just heard you say was
that current contracts that are
already being enforced by HOA.
It is in the constitutional or
is this a statutory framework
you're talking we can't uh
retroactive, um, a contract
that's already in place, so if
that's the case, Madam Chair,
representative, um, experts.
How are we able to modify.
They're an HOA's ability.
To
Not enforce its rules through
this legislation if it's
constitutionally preempted.
We are not currently Madam Chair
Representative able to amend the
provisions in a contract. That's
why it has to be prospective,
however, we were brought forth
this this idea of buy homeowners
associations that said it would
be easier for us to on our own
free will amend our contracts if
we had a statute and a policy
decision on fire mitigation.
So, so, Madam Chair
Representative.
But based on the fact that they
already have a contract in place
in HOA with their current, um,
HOA members.
If
Somebody decided that.
They
I guess I'm just trying to
figure this out. If they were
essentially wanting to put into
place something that was uh
risk.
Created a greater risk.
Was and was myself confused. I'm
trying to figure out like how,
how if somebody didn't want to
follow the current HOA practice.
And the HOA said we have a
contract in place. They come up.
Bring this law and say, look, I,
you can't ask me to comply any
longer. I'm not putting in a
coyote fence. Um, it's to high
risk, the HOA.
And has no cause of action at
that point.
To enforce their HOA law.
You're also telling me, Madam
Chair, representative experts
that.
HOA law.
If it's already on the books has
um an enforcement mechanism
right now that we couldn't
actually ask them to be
proactive.
So how does, how do, how can
both be true?
That's a great, I'm following
you now, um, Madam Chair,
representative.
So
Currently
With the contracts that are in
place.
Those contracts remain in place.
So moving forward with new with
the.
With the, with this in place, it
gives the HOA or and the
homeowner's ability to say that
they don't want to.
Uh, or take down those um
mandated constructs if they
want, because at this time.
They, they don't have that
ability and what we heard in our
last committee were um
homeowners that came to testify
to say that they would like to
have that amended or have to to
have the ability to not have to.
Have those um current um
recommendations or enforcements
from the HOA, Madam Chair, I
guess I'm just in the legal
quandary quandary of the fact
that.
You're, you're first saying
that.
We're, we're telling HOAs they
don't have to enforce, but if
they wanted to enforce.
Um
They could.
Even if this law was on the
books.
Madam Chair and Representative.
No
If a new HOA starts on June 20th
when this passes, that HOA will
have to comply with this
statute.
If one exists now that doesn't
have these provisions.
They're still under the
agreement that they're under now
with their um homeowners.
That's why I'm saying, how can
both be true, Madam Chair
Representative. You're under a
current agreement with your
homeowners.
The homeowner says, Not not
putting in a coyote fence.
Under the current agreement.
And the HOA says you have to
because we have a current
agreement.
That homeowner comes back and
says there's this law that just
got put into place, I don't have
to put in the coyote fence.
How, how can we, how do you
proceed?
If you already had an existing
agreement to put the coyote.
So
They proceed.
Yeah, you, you would have to
proceed under the terms of that
current contract.
So then I don't see the.
How this can be both either
retroactive or proactive.
The HOA can still enforce.
Any
it's losing our guys, so.
Go ahead. Yeah.
What I hear said is let me just
summarize cause we can go round
and round is this has limited
application and enforcement
ability. It's not even really
clear it has any enforcement
ability.
What I do think we might be able
to say is if someone wants to
take the bushes around their
house and take their fence down,
the HOA cannot enforce any
covenant or rule and so on. So
can we all agree to that? OK,
OK, but beyond that.
There's not much we can't force
them to push, take the bushes
out. We can't force them to take
the fencing down. We can't force
them, and the HOK can't force
them, and so on and so forth.
OK, so that that's the bottom
line.
All right, let's leave it at
that. Now, OK, there.
We're getting a little tired.
OK.
Go ahead, OK, so, Madam Chair,
so if and I'm an officer on the
HOA, so that's why I'm just if
my HOA decides we're going to
mend the covenants.
OK, and now we have these
amended covenants that however
percentage had to agree on to
do, but, um, and then those pass
and let's say they, you know,
have different restrictions.
Let's say, you know, I still
don't want to take down my
fence. I know. Do I have to take
down my fence?
No, madam, you would not. But
the HOA could be.
Amended Madam Chair would they
be liable.
Or they be, I'm gonna defer that
to. Does that make sense? OK, I
don't know. I'm sorry I'm tired.
Never mind. This has nothing to
do with liability. I mean, OK.
Um
OK.
It could be, well, I'm not gonna
go there.
I got all kinds of things to
say. I'm not gonna say it. All
right, um, I'm happy to
entertain emotions.
I'm over the dope. All right. So
we have a motion for a due pass.
Um, is there a second? And we
have um.
Speaker made the motion 2 by
Representative Hall.
We call the roll.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Abeta.
Representative Chavez, yes.
Representative Hall. Yes.
Representative Hoffman B. Hill.
Representative Martinez.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen.
Representative Reeb.
I guess, yeah.
Yeah, I know. Madam Vice Chair.
Madam chair, yes, um, Madam
Chair, you have a due pass on
House Bill 220 and and before
people leave the speaker, I
wanted to say something. Thank
you, ma'am, I won't keep you all
long and um, I, you know, this
is really full of folks on, on
Zoom. Um, I've noticed we're
about halfway through session
and uh a few years ago we
instituted this rule that we can
participate through Zoom. And
the idea is, well, the idea back
then was COVID and allowing
people public comment even
though the building was closed.
Um, it then morphed into.
Uh, a sort of thing that we kept
doing so that our constituents,
particularly those that are
homebound, the elderly, those
who live really far away in
rural communities, uh, you know,
maybe people that are sick and
can't be here, that they can
participate in the process. Um,
and what I'm going to say, say
with all due respect and love
for everybody, but I've noticed
that, um, paid advocates and
lobbyists have been using the
Zoom platform. I'm assuming out
of convenience, maybe they don't
want to make the driver out.
Um,
there are some incredible
advocates and lobbyists and a
lot of them were in the audience
today, including one right now,
who stuck it out till 8 o'clock
at night with us. Um, and it
just seems to me that if you're
paid to be here, you're a
lobbyist, you're an advocate.
Um, try to be in the room.
Feels a little disrespectful for
Members of the committee for our
staff who put in long hours.
To have somebody just zoom in,
it it happened today in tax, uh,
which is my other committee, um,
in fact, there were some repeat
offenders that just, I guess
we're on Zoom all day, um, and
it just, it's, it's, it's a real
shame that that they are not
showing up doing the work the
way the rest of us are. So I'll
leave it at that. Thank you all
for indulging me.
Oh, thank you, Speaker, um.
We adjourned.
