He said it is a clean air
Representative not here
Representative Reeves here
Representative reason.
Representative Stephens the
Penske.
Madam vice chair.
in.
Madam.
Working here and I just notice
Representative all.
He's here to so we are where we
have a quorum just a couple
items I'd like to discuss first
in terms of the order of the
agenda Representative Rehm asset
I roll his house bill ninety
seven
we have two bills on page
Representative Thomson is a
sponsor house bill forty and
house bill forty three so I
advised her that we would have
here those bills next forty and
forty three and then will to my
bill house bill twenty six and
last but not least we will do
house bill nine so that's what I
hope everybody can adjust to
that the other thing I want to
talk about his
sort of meeting protocols we are
getting into a very heavy
agenda load and so I have
reserves are seven the room this
room for Saturday's moving
forward I don't have an agenda
yet for Saturday afternoon but
in anticipation of us needing to
start digging in I'm I started
to do that now we can
I'll let you know if we do have
the agenda but just be aware we
will be getting close to that at
some point where the scheduling
Saturday meetings the other
thing is in terms of
presentations I've told the
presenters that it's very
helpful if of the be a brief and
to the point and I know
everybody's and cooperate in
that regard in terms of public
participation I'm going to be
living limiting people's
comments to two minutes and I
hopefully will be able to
competently operate this timer I
will do my best to but give me
some get cut a little slack for
me as I get adjusted to in terms
of that but that's how we're
going to be doing things we have
a lot a lot of lot of things
going on Wednesday we are going
to have not we won't be hearing
bills but.
We'll be hearing a presentation
from LFC on if there how they
have studied criminal justice
issues in the state and around
the country already happen will
be here also to talk talk about
pre trial detention issues as
well so it's more of an
information educational
component I expect it will be
maybe a couple hours I'm hoping
that we can have a you know a
really good conversation amongst
ourselves on on those topics as
well as hear from people who've
been studying this in the state
for for a while so thank you
and we are now ready to proceed
with representative Thompson
house bill forty okay thank you
madam chair and members of the
committee and.
I'm gonna tell you a story so
most of you know I have a son
with autism so I have a lot of
friends who are parents of kids
with autism or adults with
autism is that may be.
And one of my friends son's was
he was working and is care giver
came to pick him up at his job
to take him home and he had to
go to the bathroom so the the
caretaker was speeding and the
police pulled them over the man
with autism saw bathroom and
jumped out of the car and then
they pull their guns on him and
we hear these kind of stories
throughout the country I don't
know that we've ever had one in
New Mexico and I also have
different and I say what do you
do when you're stopped by the
police well I go in my pocket to
get my card and while they're
screaming hands up or we'll
shoot you're just trying to get
your card so that's what this
bill is trying to address I
think it's it's a very simple
bill essentially it's to create
another space on your car
registration so that if if
someone in your car or the
driver has autism or is staff or
has a seizure disorder that may
be triggered by flashing lights
or cerebral palsy or brain
injury or whatever so when the
officer stops you and they they
run the place this will pop up
and and and so hopefully and
before anyone says I took my
first thought about a sticker on
the license plate and the deaf
community came and said no we're
already targeted we don't want
to stick out so so this was this
was my decision this is all all
my bill and I've been running it
for years and I think it's
urgent to pass it I I just I
don't know how anyone could be
against it but with that madam
chair I will stand for questions
Thank you very much
Representative let's go to the
audience those wishing to speak
in opposition please raise your
hand.
I see no no one no hands raised
and I'm looking like chronically
electric those of you
participating remotely is there
anyone is to speak in
opposition.
Raise your hand okay I think I
think I see a hand Stephen white
Steven we do on mute yourself.
Steven are you speaking in
opposition.
Stephen.
Okay well yes I am okay.
You have the floor.
Yes please limit your time to
two minutes.
I'm sorry this is a wrong bill
now wait till later to my bill
comes up sorry that's okay.
Okay those in the audience
wishing to speak in favor.
Yes.
Over here.
Over here.
Members of the committee I for
Representative Thomson I'm
name is Ashley and I am the
first.
Transferases provide funding the
state funds that also flashing
lights will create a seizure
activity for myself to very
careful and I drive not drive at
night or when that is to be an
issue my alternative for
communication would be better
but I might need for the
reduction lines in this
pardon me Madam chairman of the
committee.
Did this would be an option for.
Very much for your support of
the bill thank you thank you.
Is there anyone else wishing to
speak in support yes.
Representative Taylor members of
the committee sponsor I also
have a son who is autistic and
deaf and he is often expressed a
concern and fears about being
stopped he wouldn't understand
the directions of the police
officer be taken away so I
understand and support this bill
thank you.
Anyone else wishing to speak in
support.
yes Sir.
The leader.
I've been in there Strittmatter
committee.
Okay I'm working on my
strictness and.
We'll get there thank you
members of the committee.
You don't have to hold what was
that yes right turn it off.
Madam chair members of the
committee the DPS in the state
and state police we just wanted
to know a couple things we are
not standing either your name
Troy we Sir deputy chief New
Mexico state police
we're just standing in
opposition or for the bill we is
broken we appreciate sponsor
bringing this bill
it's always beneficial to have
more information anytime that
we're interacting with the
public we spoke with the right
spoke of the sponsor right
before the bill here just to
bring up a couple of the
technical items that
state police would like to have
addressed if the bill was to
move forward technical item the
primary concern is the mandatory
nature of the check before any
interaction
with a with the driver there's
numerous reasons are instances
where that is not necessarily
feasible you're given the a
unfolding public safety
situation it's not always
reasonable to be able to do a
check before we make contact
with the driver and also given
the rural nature the state state
police in particular there's
many parts of the state that
even now we don't always have
coverage of the ability to get
checks either because of cell
coverage for
And as well
I like trying systems they go
down for maintenance and they're
not always available so we just
would asked that a working with
a lot more flexible and we have
a I spoke to the sponsor
and we plan on talking with
afterwards to a look at some
other possible wording that
would be more
flexible thank you.
Us thank you anyone else wishing
to speak in support.
I don't see any additional hands
on.
Representative do you have any
closing words before we go to
the committee yes.
I'm sorry forgot
I see Ellen.
Pines wishes to speak in favor
go ahead on.
Thank you madam chair can you
hear me now yes Representative
Ellen pines representing the
disability coalition we
represent the interests of
people with disabilities of all
types and we stand and support
Representative Thompson's bill
as we have in past legislative
sessions unfortunately
encounters between people with
disabilities and police
frequently turned very ugly and
even deadly and that's because
the police don't know of a
disability or don't understand
how to interact with the person
with the disability whether it's
definite autism or variety of
other disabilities yes the
sponsor mention this is only one
step in addressing that issue
but we think it's an important
step and hopefully it will save
some lives there have been cases
I can say to to at least one
case where a deaf man was shot
to death by police for failing
to comply with instructions they
gave him that he couldn't hear
and we recently had the tenth
anniversary of the death of you
can Saylor young man with
developmental disabilities who
was killed by police because
they didn't know how to interact
with him when he wasn't leaving
the movie theater when you want
to see the movie a second time
so these encounters can be even
deadly and often detrimental
even if they don't rise to the
level of death so we think this
is an important step in
addressing that we urged
committee support thank you.
Thank you Elon Jim Jackson.
Jim.
Thank you chair Janet Jackson
here for disability rights New
Mexico and madam chair in the
interest of time all to say for
the reasons that Ellen and
others have outlined we think
this is a really important bill
appreciate the sponsor sticking
with this to bring it to your
attention again this year and we
encourage your support thank
you.
Thank you Mr Jackson.
Okay I think we're ready to go
to the committee Representative
lane and Representative Rehm.
Madam chair and representative
of what what what Representative
lane and then Representative.
Thank you madam chair
so.
I I actually got a call from my
chair fund similar.
Issue
so there was a consensual money
who at night was pulled over for
a routine traffic stop.
And
thank god the I mean officers
had fabulous training so it
officer handle it really well so
kudos to the to those guys.
but made initial contact the
driver the driver had I think
some speech problems and was
having a hard time understand
officer to think there's some
issues with the window working
properly an older vehicle the
skinny of it is is that officer
thought the person's intoxicated
what you know what I think is
probably a result group
conclusion to draw.
And so have the person step out
to do some at this excuse me
this map just teasing and during
that interaction realize that no
there's something else going on
here so the the person went on
you know without about their way
but I I think it was a bit of a
troubling
event for that person and from
my perspective I think as much
information as we can get to law
enforcement to help them do
their job that should be part of
our goal.
so I think that's why I think
there there may be a need for
something like this my concern
though madam chair I will say is
we need to be careful that we're
not creating liability where we
don't intend to
so as as the deputy chief
testified we need to make sure
that we're not creating an and
no resolution on realistically
high burden that that officer
has to either choose to comply
with or maintain safety in order
so I think we need be careful
about the language use along
those lines and I suspect madam
chair that that be part of the
discussion that'll take place
offline
And then the only other thought
I had an early this to you is my
constituents so that they might
also like the option to opt out
at some point in the future to
have their name removed from the
registry like this they they
were concerned about being
permanent forever and so maybe
look at that is that just a
practical little add on to it to
address that and madam chair
Representative Lane it's my
understanding that it will be
every time you register your car
you will you you can check or
uncheck essentially.
Yeah and okay yes
Representative right.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative.
I I wanted to point out a lot of
what state police is pointed out
one particular incident I
remember when I was a cop we
were communicating with the
individual that had been in a
collision.
And the responses were slow and
and
we went ahead and said you know
have you been drinking and
why remembered because a
response was to point out I
tried to read your lips.
But you know I don't want to
downplay the incidents that have
been tragic but in CIC is not
reliable in the vents full
unfold some time so quickly all
you could do is notify vehicle
description of that you're
stopping that vehicle I almost
wonder if this shouldn't be a
long line of symbol of something
on a driver's license
you know I I understand you
don't want to have a decals on
the back of the car but I think
what we need to do is roll this
over and fix us before we move
it to the floor
and you know state police can
work with you and get that done
go ahead go ahead and share no
it's not only the driver my son
doesn't drive will never drive
but he is six foot six half
black and can be very very scary
if you don't know and then he he
acts those are only a lot so so
it it can't just be on the
license plate because frequently
PED those folks don't drive or
their kids or whatever but I'd
be willing to roll it and work
with these guys and come back
soon.
very up my suggestion is we get
all the input we can get okay so
that okay you know we get all
the changes that are needed at
this point and then we'll call
you back for it soon okay
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair and I
suspect my comments are are
longer same vein because it
looks like.
My comments all deal with the
page two from line twenty four
through page three.
Really line seven but probably
through the and.
One twelve.
That is a very cumbersome cents
hand and it's the mandatory
sentence that I think
Raises the concerns that we have
so I think your focus on bad
information in that paragraph I
think you can get where we would
all be comfortable maybe
Reflect reality as the officers
are are pulling the car over
particularly and.
Part of the state where we don't
have cell service we don't have
ability to communicate and often
times that's where a lot of
these things could take place
and go awry so if you have shall
consultant you know require all
that here it would be a problem
there so I would just point you
to that language if you're gonna
work on that we appreciate your
willingness.
And I think that was my my only
comment Madam can I ask I I
can't quite figure out what I
mean it's not she may be I mean
we want it to be as strong as it
can be but putting so do you
have language suggestions.
What.
But I guess if I were to drafted
I would make it a practice not a
requirement okay and if it's a
practice then you would expect
them under normal circumstances
if if they have it but I don't
want to.
Wait I can't go approach that
driver.
Until I get this information and
in the meantime there could be a
lot of things go awry and we
don't want that to happen either
so I I I think when I read it I
was your health to looking at
the word shall the word
determine you know the those
were just jumped off and I was
thinking you know.
In real time.
There may be circumstances where
the shell doesn't work if if
this person had blown through
three barricades and and here
are
driving aggressively of
threatening other drivers.
The shall not going to work we
want that driver stopped and
have pretended not listed in
some other variables but but I I
think having a.
Having a.
Practice of.
A suggestion that they engage in
this on a routine basis it is
kind of what I was.
Hearing and and like you to see.
In a statute like this thank
you.
Representative Romero thank you
madam chair representative on I
so appreciate this bill and seen
it over the years and the tire
we can get it some through the
process I'm sure I just had one
comment just because it was
brought up to me before session
from a group of dementia
advocates if this could pertain
to them as well being that one
in three drivers one and three
people diagnosed with dementia
are still driving and they could
have.
The diagnosis for eight to ten
years before perhaps symptoms
arise and other issues on the
consideration of adding
dimension to your list on page
two.
Four I think just you know
pending any issue but being able
to opt into the registry could
be very helpful so would love to
yet and madam chair I think in
some older versions are I and I
thought in this one it would say
and and other disabilities as
you know determined by the
department or so because we
don't want a limited that was
just what I could think of so
definitely open to that.
Thank you madam chair that's it
Representative Chasey.
increases.
It was off the table.
My mask is
as he was talking I was
thinking.
What else could we do and I did
hear that some people don't want
to do cal.
Some people might not mind.
When Representative remain I've
never student issues where I'm
trying to figure out who to
arrest or not I believe him that
NCIC may not be up.
And so you're counting on
something that may not give you
what you need.
So I wonder if there if you
I understand not wanting to pose
a statement but if somebody is
perfectly willing to have it
could just be a symbol doesn't
have to say.
I'm deaf be nice to me or
whatever it or I have a
disability just just a symbol
that would alert.
Madam chair and Representative
Chasey I think that might be a
little confusing I mean to have
both I don't know.
I don't know I I was just
thinking that why not have both
and efficiency high CO two
thousand on it then you've got
it on the car but I I it's just
as we try to solve the problem.
And madam chair and I understand
this of people have said the
police the training often I
don't disagree with all of that
I've been pushing this baby step
for ten years and now I'm not
ready to bring in everything
else that that would fix the
world because I don't have my
magic wand anymore.
Madam chair with
would lead.
I want my money back.
So I anyway I I think it's it's
it's worth it it's really worth
trying to figure out and
The the stories.
It's not just the driver who's
involved it may be a passenger
and and a lot of the folks
who've been described by various
those individuals in favor.
Would.
Certainly want to protect them
from any injury and with.
No law enforcement officers want
going to want to.
Engage in appropriately either
so.
Thank you.
Thank you Representative any
other representatives
so thank you will roll your bill
my suggestion is you for the
comments and we've got some
great legal minds on this panel
and you might want to run by
some of your you know to some of
the folks who had issues about
wording and that kind of thing
and that that might help us as
we move forward really
appreciate thank you we're now
on house bill forty three
the floor is yours
Representative okay and get my
experts up here.
So I will start madam chair so
this is another bill that's been
around for quite some time and
the entire purpose of this bill
is to have is to decrease the
amount of sexual assault sexual
violence stop being all those
good things by teaching our kids
in their health classes from
ninth grade on that I call this
bill only yes means yes so for
years we heard well she didn't
say no are you know she was too
drunk or whatever so this sets
the standard as if you don't
have an affirmative yes you
don't have sexual contact so I'm
gonna let my experts take over
from that from there.
Thank thank you would you
introduce yourself please yes
madam chair members of the
committee my name is Alexandria
Taylor and the executive
director of the New Mexico
coalition of sexual assault
programs thank you for having us
today I just want to note that
this that Representative Thomson
first introduced this bill in
twenty nineteen it receives
broad bipartisan support made it
through the house in ended on
the Senate floor we introduce it
again in twenty twenty one again
broad bipartisan support in in
it set and run out of time and
Senate Judiciary so many of you
the ones that are not new to the
body of seeing the bill before
is also stopped there
For now.
Thank you any thing else
representative Thompson no thank
all those in wishing to speak in
opposition please raise your
hand.
See anyone live anyone on
electronically or virtually what
opposes the bill please raise
your hand.
Okay I don't see anyone
electronically those wishing to
speak in favor please raise your
hand.
All right will start on this
side Charles you go first.
No more than two minutes.
The committee on Charleston
drive speaking.
And half of myself my my sixteen
year old daughter nineteen year
old daughter.
Today
Yes it should be sorry.
Being clear about
this so important.
It's important for everybody.
and just to have thank you thank
you for.
Who else please raise your hand
of the woman in the green scarf
please.
Chair.
Members of the committee on
Jennifer Williams president.
National organization for women
and we stand strong.
Bill thank you who's next.
Yes in the.
Good afternoon Madam chairman
members of the committee my name
is Jennifer Rafael gets in the
executive director for the
commission on the status of
women.
And I think it's really
important to note that studies
have shown that early education
program differences between
consent and sexual assault
can greatly reduce the number of
instances in later years and
that it is extremely important
that we begin these
conversations with our children
interviews so that there is no
confusion as they become adults
we at the commission stand in
support of this bill thank you
very much thank you who's next
there's a hand to the left in
the back and then to their okay
whoever you guys decide.
Chair members of the committee
my name is Naomi Valdez and the
director of policy for the ACLU
New Mexico we stand in strong
support thank you yes Sir good
afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is crystal Roy I am the public
policy officer for our New
Mexico our New Mexico
representative individuals with
intellectual developmental
disabilities we stand in strong
support of this bill individuals
with disabilities are seven
times more likely to be sexually
assaulted the special
accommodation and this type of
and forming and teaching of
individuals of the junior high
and high school level the
extreme and dangerous thank you
very much we stand and support
thank you know moving to the
side of the room who wishes to
speak raise your hand okay so
there's a woman with red showing
in your responses if you to
introduce yourself and the.
Committee my name is Adam one
sentence I work with you and who
I'm here to speak on the have a
plan are there okay motives we
are in support of this bill as
we know that comes in is key
when it comes to victims of
these.
many of you have heard of this
bill before us best number of
dissent and it should always be
a partisan issue thank you
everyone who has supported this
bill because it is important to
know that only yes means yes
thank you.
The person on in blue please
introduce yourself chair members
of the committee my name is yes
on just on the policy co
director for gold futures as an
advocacy organization for women
and people of color in New
Mexico one aspect of our work is
access to resources for you so
that they can be strong adults
I'm also a parent so HB forty
three is at the intersection of
my personal life and my advocacy
my partner and I have had
incredibly productive
conversations with four of our
kids two boys two girls about
life skills and relationships
including consent based on
feedback from our kids who are
graduates of our public school
system two of two of them our
point and miss you at lands with
consent and consent inclusive of
queer relationships is severely
lacking we urge your support on
the bill we have been working on
in coalition organizations
across New Mexico to get past
for several years thank you
thank you.
and the gray or green miss
blonde.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my
name's Haley is often I'm staff
attorney at the southwest with
this Law Center I learned about
affirmative consent in college
and speaking from experience
that it's far too late you have
the opportunity to make firemen
for students across New Mexico
to learn what affirmative
consent is before it's too late
and that is why the southwest
with what Senator stands in
support of this bill today.
Thank you for Marshall.
Madam chair members the
committee Marshall Martinez
executive director of equality
New Mexico Facey and pronouns we
stand instructs part of this
legislation is LGBTQ young
people are three times more
likely to experience sexual
violence that are cisgender
heterosexual peers speaking is a
game and myself I will say that
I didn't learn that I had the
option to pay for not consent
with another man until far after
college which is incredibly way
too late we should not leave the
teaching of consent up to pop
culture we should be teaching
every young person at as soon as
we have an opportunity so we
have to support.
Thank you anyone else in the
audience
now we'll go to the virtual
world
Mona arcitec.
You have the floor.
Thank you good morning madam
chair and members of the
committee my name is Mona arch
back and I'm speaking on behalf
of the New Mexico Black central
organizing committee we stretch
we stand in strong support of HB
forty three because it requires
every student will be educated
about affirmative consent and it
is not focused on punishment but
is focused on providing positive
guidance to educational
institutions thank you for your
time.
Your thank you Tiffany.
Hello can you all hear me okay
yes.
Hello my name is Tiffany rona I
am the policy and advocacy
director for the coalition to
stop violence against native
women we are fully in support of
house bill forty three as one
and for native men and boys are
victims of some form of violence
sexual violence and what into
native women and girls are
victims of some form of sexual
violence and just inside number
indigenous communities that
eighty five percent of sexual
violence against children are
committed by family members we
are in full support of this bill
thank you thank you Barbara
cheddar G..
Barbara.
Would you on mute yourself
please.
Barbara.
Let's move to the next person
Emily Wilkes.
Emeli.
Hi there madam chair members of
the committee my name is Emily
Wilkes New Mexico state director
for every voice New Mexico I'm a
two time UNM graduate and I'm
here to express my full support
for this legislation and reached
in a recent action on climate
survey they found that one in
ten students experience sexual
violence during our time on
campus the implementation of
affirmative consent education
resources for survivors on
college campuses and protection
from retaliation for minimal
student code of conduct
violations will dramatically
benefit all students across New
Mexico while some of these
resources are available at some
of our institutions of higher
education it's a disservice to
students at other colleges and
universities jot have access to
the same resources which is why
I fully support this bill
becoming law protecting our
students is worth it and the
time to make changes today I
hope you'll join me and
supporting this legislation
thank you.
error code DC.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee Erica
Davis Cup I apologize for the
deviation I thought I had fix
that I am the director of
advocacy here at girls Inc and
we have stood in strong support
of this bill for years my
students are unable to make it
today as they have class
otherwise they would have but
affirmative consent in middle
and high school is a small step
forward in giving everyone a
common understanding of consent
which is something we've done
here girls think in our
programming for three years we
Stanley State strongly stand in
support of this and ask for you
to pass today thank you so much
for your hard work sponsor and
executive director Taylor.
Thank.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee Stacey
I use within the New Mexico.
On behalf of our members we
support this bill simply because
it's the right thing to do for
our students.
We're all wired to naturally
respond to danger.
when faced with fear our brains
will tell us to fight freeze or
simply take flight.
But we can do better.
And the intent of this
legislation is to increase
students safety and educate and
empower students to responding
case they fill their right to
affirm sexual consent is being
denied.
We thank the sponsor for
bringing forth this legislation
and we ask that you consider
voting in favor thank you very
much.
Thank you I don't see any other
hands will go back to the
sponsor is or anything like that
just just one thing madam chair
the last time this was on the
house floor there were a total
of seven votes in opposition so
it's a strong bipartisan bill.
Thank you for that any yes
Representative reap.
Madam speaker Representative I
haven't seen this bill before so
I'm just trying to get a little
bit of clarification of what
this bill does so it it
basically year providing
education to through
Administration to students about
sexual assault and and no means
no and yes means yes it is that
kind of right that's that's the
broad madam chair yes that's and
madam speaker and Representative
so that does the institution do
a some type of investigation is
that involved in this bill also.
Madam chair representative thank
you for your question the bill
has two parts there's the one
part that you articulated that
requires K. through twelve in
the existing health standards
that the the standard that be
taught in health class B. one of
affirmative consent the second
part of the bill affects higher
education and it does require
that higher is creates to create
policies hire its institutions
create policies that are trauma
informed and also follow and
affirmative consent standard and
so as it relates to
investigations that means the
educational institutions already
have to follow title nine that
now they are looking to see if
an affirmative consent standard
has been met okay Representative
madam chair representative so if
let's see the institution finds
that they believe you know one
way or another it does it
prevents any type of criminal
prosecution from going forward
and your recommendation would
not be part of any criminal
prosecution
but that's really my question.
Madam chair representative
you're correct okay thank you.
Either of.
Representative Alcon thank you
madam chair I would do that
House Bill forty three.
We have a do pass by
Representative el Cajon in a
second by Representative Romero.
any further discussion
would you call the roll please
Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Rehm.
Mr speaker this.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert.
Representative read yes.
Representative green yes.
Representative the the Penske.
Madam vice chair yes.
Madam chair yes.
Nine two zero we have to pass on
house bill four we do pass on
house bill forty three thank you
Representative.
All right now
oh oh oh she's trying to wrestle
the gavel away from me even
before I got up.
To do
so
I have house bill twenty six and
I expect the vice chair to be
combines me.
Wait till a certain.
I don't know if you want to sit
over here to be able to see.
Okay you can see by okay.
If you go for it and some of us.
So.
Thank you Representative good
and start when you're you're
very good good afternoon
everyone.
I this bill has does have an
amendment that I'd like to
present at some point it's a
very minor amendment and I and I
think it's being distributed
right now as we speak
So.
How many of you have open but we
don't have to raise your hand.
Many of you I'm sure have had
the experience where you open up
the newspaper and you've seen
this long list and if you're an
Albuquerque Representative I bet
it's really long and I see a
bunch of you who are Albuquerque
Representative so in the list is
a list of people who the state
tax department believes may have
abandoned property that is in
the possession of the tax
department all right and what
what people do of course because
we're people and we're nosey is
we go down the list and we see
okay is my name on the list as
the first thing and then we
start perusing it to see if we
know anybody who's on the list
if we do we say all we got a
call Johnny or we better send
Johnny an email or something
because maybe we can help amount
they might get some money back
or get their property back and
that has been the long long
standing practice of how as
least one way to give notice to
the public that there's there's
a possibility that the tech
support department is holding
your property wealth last I
think two years ago twenty
twenty one in our what we call
the kind of tax departments
cleanup bill there was a
provision that eliminated that
practice.
Instead now what is happening is
the tax department posted on its
website and engages in sort of a
public you know information
activity you know and they might
go on TV and remind people to go
check it out that the list has
been posted and so on and that's
great and people have have
reacted to that and happily
people are responding and
claiming their property however
there are many places in the
state where that's not
practical or their internet is
not this you know sound or
reliable or it's not their
practice to be perusing the
internet in the way that every
single one of us on the appear
to and we feel that we should go
the extra mile and get back to
the practice where there's also
a newspaper publication so we're
happy we're great we're really
super happy that TRD has been
active in publishing online but
we think there is an additional
step that would be helpful as
well and what this does is put
back into the law the need to
publish in a paper you know a
local paper the a list of people
who might have you know have
abandoned property at the tax
department that's all it is is
just one additional thing and
what we did is the amendment
simply strikes the home address
and says just as where the
county where the person lives
because some concerns have been
raised about safety you know if
you have a you know the actual
home address of the person there
might be an issue so we're just
saying County and then that
person can go that person with
that name can go explore further
if it's actually them you know
because there could be more we
recognize it could be more than
one John Smith and you know Rio
Arriba county years such so
that's what the bill does my
experts is Larry haraam if Larry
would you like to introduce
yourself and share anything else
you wish to offer thank you
representative madam chair
members committee Larry R. and
rich lobbyist for the New Mexico
macro.
Association and Albuquerque
could be a publishing company
just to be clear what happened
in twenty twenty one it was in
the bill it was in the FIR was
are COVID session we just missed
it we would have objected had we
caught it but we didn't see it
so we're back here trying to try
to go back to the way it was
taxed Rev now is required to
publish in the newspaper there
is a they are required to
publish website where you can go
and the secretary and it and it
talks about it in the FIR they
have gone to great lengths to
trying get people they're
there are abandoned and
unclaimed property in using
newspaper I'm sorry using
television using broadcast media
they've seen great success we
think that's great we think we
should do everything possible in
order to get people are
unclaimed property so we don't
think it should just go back to
the newspapers we think we
should all go forward using
every possible means available
to get people to reclaim
property and I don't know if
they hand out was provided by
the press association did a
survey and the survey indicated
that seventy seven percent of
people surveyed believe the
state to local governments
should publish public notices in
newspapers and that eighty six
percent of those surveyed
site local newspapers newspaper
website is the most trusted
place to for public notices
versus other sources I apologize
the press association folks
could not be here that doctor's
appointment otherwise he would
be here to present that it's
also just will stand for
questions.
Thank you madam chair Leary will
go to the audience now for
support is there anyone in
opposition to this bill.
All right go ahead and speak.
Good afternoon members of the
committee and and madam chair
I'm seventy Schardin Clarke and
the secretary the taxation and
revenue department as much as I
hate to see opposition to chair
Chandler's bill it is my job to
advocate for the needs of the
department
the main concern is the funded
mandates to the tune of about a
hundred and twenty thousand
dollars per year
link then
thirty three advertisements for
make annually from what is now
fairly shortly and yet
informative
legal something very long help
we will look at it again with
the amendment before you today
to certainly if we only need to
publish the county and not the
whole address the dental.
I think members of the public
will appreciate that too concern
I think about crime victims and
folks of restraining orders and
having a full addresses and fees
every year those are the
amendment sounds like it would
solve that problem which is
great.
But with about a hundred twenty
thousand dollars per year
on funded mandates that would.
that would force our revenue
processing division to keep
about three positions vacant
that will decrease our
performance as far as timeliness
of processing tax returns and
getting out refunds and credits
and things like that so that's a
concern and we're we do have a
big improvement is that has made
a big effort to do outreach
we're doing all kinds of earned
media with local radio and local
news and also we have a new
automated system it's maybe
easier than ever to search so I
just question you know the the
return on investment of the
state gets for this money and
then secondarily
techconnect have that but just
for reference after the last
time we published a long form of
the legal notices the number of
claims we received right
afterwards it costs about eighty
dollars per claim that was
received to publish these
notices where is the vast
majority of the claims that were
claimed for for less than eighty
dollars so in other words we
paid more to newspapers to
publish that people that getting
a property so I think we're
trying really hard to work
smarter not harder get out the
work every weekend and the only
about the unfunded mandate and
whether that return on
investment for the taxpayer
thank you.
Anyone else in opposition.
Is there and anyone in support
can raise your hand.
Do you like to speak.
Madam chair members of the
committee on top.
I was a legislature one
That was a long.
Lawyers for.
But I've always been a problem
of some of the few so.
In those.
also.
additional.
The last night for the.
When I get out of the water is
normally committee
of.
Thousand loan check working
that some of what I would have
I'm going to.
Probably
Disclosure of the paper we told
them we of this morning I have
to die the more passionate about
this the sister.
We have a problem do that'll.
Property quite often you're
gonna.
For
Tell you.
All.
Well I.
It's important to live fall
through the frontier.
At.
My mother in law.
Representative of the secretary
of defense of.
The
stock portion of the and and
share images show.
The individual
sector and should include all
the important I that was nine
eighty two thousand dollars.
have we not know about the we
would have.
And so forth.
Tension and I.
The secretary of state lot I.
And the secretary correct
I just want to the the state is
that.
Thank you it goes Miss Vigil one
Fund.
What.
He just sits there I also want
jobs no there's probably some
way if you need to charge some
for food.
About to help them well for.
Of.
I do I I do want to.
The whole one that.
But for commercial I I.
Hello.
The official out
I.
I.
The cost of war thank you Mr
hunt for your service and for
your support of our ambassador
Udall in New Zealand just risk
it recognizing it sure over
there is there anyone else else
would like to speak in support.
Okay madam chair did you want to
introduce your amendment yes I
hope you all have it it's on the
to to to number now called to to
number is point two two four
four six zero point one.
And as I said it's pretty simple
it on page two line thirteen the
strike last known address and
just insert County then again on
page two lines fourteen and
sixteen strike an address or
location and insert instead
County.
For any discussion on the
amendment.
Okay we've got the.
Percent second.
Third option is there any
opposition to adopting the
amendment.
All right we've got an amended
bill.
madam chair did you want to say
anything else about the bill or
just one point I recognize
there's some expense involved
for TRD and I ate I am I as I
said the secretary general last
year and more than happy to work
with her on on getting the
funding she needs I'm a little
surprised that three positions
would be implicated if the
funding is a hundred and twenty
thousand since that would be
forty thousand dollars a person
and I have a lot of strong hope
that I hope there are more for
paying more to TRD employees and
forty thousand dollars
for three people but my
suspicion is it it that we can
make some economies there thank
you madam chair.
Thank you madam chair
is there any discussion on the
bill.
Mr speaker thank you madam chair
and and madam chair.
Just to help me understand a
little bit so.
It was in the twenty twenty one
tax package that this
requirement for publication was
removed.
Which now.
When the department has to
publish the list for unclaimed
property they do through their
website is that right.
Madam chair madam chair and
representative that is my
understanding and apparently
they published in the paper a
little maybe a legal at the
scene and over the secretary so
so what walk me through where
you where do you publish this
list.
The secretary can that's okay
with you madam chair sure.
We are now.
The old way which is what we
refer Act and fill the staff
accomplish the main address of
every
Our record of our sins and
pieces of property
in the twenty twenty one section
house bill ninety eight redid
the statute that requires us to
publish still something in the
paper and every one of thirty
three counties annually but it
short is basically says you may
have unclaimed property here's
where you can find out about it
you can go to our website you
can go to our online plans page
you can call our staff our staff
and it directs people to get in
contact with with us for all
those methods instead of listing
the long for.
Thank you madam chair thank you
madam chair and thank you
secretary of so out of the
three.
different methods of
communications have the check
the website email us then
there's a phone number of.
I think this reversion back to
the old system is to ensure that
people who are not.
who may not have access to the
internet or just may not be
Well you know as familiar with
technology.
Can see this in the paper
otherwise under the current
system you'd you'd you'd see
your name and then you have to
reach out.
If you call the department we do
you have.
Do you have dedicated call
centres to two feet field all
these calls.
What is the wait time what is a
customer service experience like
when you're on the phone with
somebody from TRD.
Mr speaker
We have a staff of four.
Property
revenue taxes.
All two of the property do not
go through the tax policy center
and waiting all it goes directly
to the administrative.
Never heard of getting three of
those I think I found you their
email the second act of the
Energy this is the.
Can.
Mr chair and representative just
to correct something I
understood the notice in the
paper it's just saying hello New
Mexico citizens we may have some
of your property.
It is that not right.
Madam chair representative and
expert madam chair Mr speaker if
you look on.
On page two and sixteen the bill
that's the the line this is
inserted twenty twenty one so it
it's a advertisement that
contains the website.
On page to search for
information about abandoned
property so you don't get your
name until you go to a website
and search
it and what make sure that I'm
speaking correctly madam
secretary and then also there's
the telephone number in an email
and so we left those changes in
because it sounds like they have
a really good system but it's
also than just was the
requirement that you put the
names as well but there still
would be a requirement to direct
them to website if they chose to
use that route.
So could under the current
system Madam chairman chair.
You you publish in the paper.
The name of the person.
Who may have a claim property.
And then they reach out for you
just say there because I'll
believe you example.
So when this first came out I
think it popped up on Facebook
or something just weird so I
went in there is like a little
and I.
I started putting like family
members names in the right so
like my dad apparently has some
of the property my mother a lot
definitely had some but I have
to do that.
Had I seen this in the paper all
they would have said is Hey
we've got a claim property blank
no names go to the website.
That's what it would have that's
what it says.
It doesn't say a name we doesn't
say have been working as you may
have a claim property go to the
website.
Madam chair and representative
yes that's my understanding got
it got it okay so so.
So a person in a community may
see their local paper and that
local paper advertisement will
say there is unclaimed property
with city New Mexico go to this
website if you want to make sure
it's not yours or call this
number questions.
That's the current system Madam
chair representative I believe
that's correct okay.
Yes which I think.
Eight two some issues given who
may have or not have access to
technology.
And given who may or may not be
able to utilize that technology
right like my grandmother would
be lost completely.
In that system.
Now whether or not she's going
to take time to read the paper
and look for her name.
That's another story but but at
least there's that option under
your under the reversion to the
old system.
Yes and actually it's not a
complete reversion because we're
keeping the website yeah
understood
Okay
As far as.
As far as the cost.
So I think I heard a hundred and
forty thousand dollars madam
chairman chair I thought I heard
hundred twenty twenty your take
yes.
Okay.
We do have a.
We do have a nine point four
billion dollar budget proposal.
I'm pretty sure if this were to
pass I've been look I'm not
gonna speak for for the
appropriation folks but it seems
to me that
This is a very tiny rounding
error and I would assume and
hope that the department can
absorb.
At least part of it
I appreciate the face unfunded
mandate but then I also think of
like no child left behind which
was like you know in the
billions this is a hundred
twenty thousand dollars.
And I would hope that.
It is passes.
That this can be baked into the
budget at some point later on.
Or that the department can
shuffle resources although again
with a nine point four billion
dollar budget I don't see why
the department would have to
would have to make do without
resources so
Thank you madam chair and thank
you madam chair for the time and
thank you for entertaining by
confusing questions to.
My confusing argument but I
appreciate it.
Our next that we have
Representative McQueen.
Thank you madam chair.
madam chair madam chair
This each county had the paper
of general circulation.
Madam chair representative I
don't know I a will defer to my
experts Madam chair
representative we apologize
because it's the press
association through the bill
answer that if I don't believe
probably every county does but
if they don't then it's a
newspaper of general circulation
that they have access to New
Mexico.
Which would be something could
be a statewide paper or large
regional paper for example the
Santa Fe New Mexican which I
received in Los Alamos.
Mentor mentor this Los Alamos
having Mr we have to electronic
papers and one of which
publishes a paper copy once a
week.
Madam chairman chair the.
I'm skeptical of this
I think you do the process that
the speaker described is the
likely process that people find
out about this that a relative
or friend split around on the
internet and putting in name
since he sees to see what pops
up.
I've done that myself.
I think publishing it in
newspapers trying to figure out
you know the the last.
in in each county of the state
in which located the last known
at.
I don't
I mean I think her newspapers
are hurting I'm sympathetic to
that the the sort of helps
because its business.
But to me that's not a reason to
do it I don't see this as being
an effective means of
communication and finding
people.
I I just.
so thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative next we
have Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair representative madam
chair.
C..
The.
It seems like the world's moving
toward.
Electronic notice on a lot of
things yeah and yet we have.
And I think I've heard several
argue over the course last
several years with we probably
do need in the state of New
Mexico the.
Electronic notice border
something where legal notices
get published but yet.
We still publish in the
newspaper and and and often
times in newspapers that are set
up solely for legal notices that
nobody other than lawyers read.
And and so
You know it was interesting when
this came up last time the it
seem like we were moving in that
direction and now.
We want to move back and and and
this of course just covers one
slams been slice of notices that
are required to be be given by
various statutes
so.
Ultimately I would like to see
New Mexico find a place where
people can go and get all sorts
and
But as it is now we don't have
that available and so people.
Who.
Have
are are subject to maybe notice
of a probate proceeding in a
county they need to go to that
county and look at the newspaper
to see if if that probate is
them file for same thing with
with various lawsuits
And there's no one place where
we accumulate that that I just
so this out because I I I have
the hope that maybe at some
point there would be some
traction but I understand Mr her
hands clients may not like the
the movement in that regard
because it loses out on business
but on the other hand
We have to recognize that many
people are looking at that
At things online trying to get
information and there's a lot of
things that we don't put online
don't have a mechanism to put
online in that regard so this
we're not giving notice
I don't have any particular
comments regarding the act just
seems a.
We were moving in that direction
now we have a stop sign were
made to move that and trying to
go back to publish everything in
the newspaper and
not not encourage people to use
online access but you may
disagree with me on that but it
just seems that way to me.
Madam chair if I may ask I think
it in the government we had a
very of lively conversation
about all the rural and they're
more frankly serious rural
people in on the government
committee and they were very
sympathetic to this idea that
rural communities just aren't at
that place yet where they're
roaming the internet looking for
notices and so at I just want to
point that out that we we have a
variety of types of people that
live in the state with a variety
of access ability and there that
there are people still who do
not have easy access to the
internet services and I also
know it's not exactly a legal
notice like those little ads in
the newspaper it's actually a
pretty big ad in I have myself
being a nosy person or whatever
you want to say have scan those
lists to see if I could find
anybody I knew or whether I you
know and that's a helpful thing
really to be able to call up
your friends down the street and
say Hey go check this out you
might have twenty thousand
dollars sitting somewhere so
it's we still not at a point in
terms of rural New Mexico it it
to be able to be easily
accessing the internet and I'm
sure some of you been hearing
that from you more rural parts
of here on counties and
districts and Madam chair
representative if I may.
So I still carry around the bill
locator and I still carry when
bills when I'm doing a bill and
I didn't I didn't think of
myself as a dinosaur hello this
I thought of the retired ones
giving your debt.
Many of my colleagues make fun
of me because I still get I
still get paper copies of bills
one the Massey last week was a
bill and I don't know the
building this I don't know if
you knew this but last week the
internet in the capitol we're
talking to rural New Mexico
we're talking here was down to
the part of the week so you can
get the bills you can find a
locator unless you had it with
you which is why I always care
the backup copy and it made a
good argument against all my
friends make fun of me all the
time.
And I'm happy to show anybody
where the building is if you
need I don't know where that is
thank you madam chair
I just have a few questions
along the same lines
most and and to the secretaries
question are these posted on
Facebook these these lists of
people currently I'm just
thinking about rural New Mexico
as well I don't know a single
person in my community that
doesn't have access to social
media that way I'm just curious
if the secretary the yes the
department posts that
information in a place where is
commonly sought after.
Chair.
All number of places to just get
the word out anyway we can the
main place is unclaimed.
Sorry and employees that please
property dot com at the new
online system that we launched
in September we track closely
the number of claims it's been
pretty much the highest on
record every month and September
twenty twenty two so that system
is working great and there's a
lot more automation in being
able to claim their money
without even contacting us to
thank you verify identity
through that system so that
that's great we also put things
occasionally but we we made like
a second.
Do you think you think about
the floating around out there.
Basically.
Yet.
It shows that.
We track the number of claims
received after each the the
lotus and after each for example
two to three.
Story that runs on local TV.
The ads which costs the state
nothing other than fifteen
minutes of my time maybe.
Generate more clear.
Although the authority three
paper so that's why we're center
so the hope about getting out
the word in those ways it's cost
effective for taxed rather the
taxpayer funded
the point that work thank you
madam chair thank you Secretary
so if I just to clarify there's
no difference because this is a
natural experiment we eliminated
putting it into the newspaper
and now we're trying to bring it
back but in that time was there
any change to people being able
to access that information is
there a dearth of people calling
in at such a that change the
amount of people accessing that
info.
Vice chair hello claims in total
are up since we.
Do you the amount.
S. history published in that
because.
Legal notices went down and we
actually still.
Budget claims after they
published the for important but
we've just been proactive about
earned media and everything else
that we can do to reach people
thank you madam chair I just if
to the sponsors and you know the
on to the question about the
unfunded mandate is there an
idea that we would put I mean a
hundred twenty thousand dollars
is like a whole position well it
maybe one position three
positions I mean I I don't
because positions are burdened
and so on so a forty thousand
dollar position is going to be a
seventy five thousand dollar
position I so
As I said we are in the budget
prices right of process right
now the secretary is fully
capable of amending her budget
to address this issue and I
think we all know the specially
those of us who attend have been
attending LFC every department
in the state in the state has on
funded the has significant
vacancies I could easily you
know that the funding for those
vacancies could easily transfer
to pay for something along these
lines that's one really want
full purse after E. type person.
Thank you madam chair so I guess
the idea is to possible I I
potential things one is to send
it to appropriations and attach
an appropriation to make sure
that it gets into the budget or
potentially putting a sunset on
something like this since that
would be recurring in perpetuity
if we put it into statute to.
Basically say at a certain point
we keep watching the data that
it is unnecessary for people to
be informed of something like
this that you know we're seeing
increasing or if at least based
on what was proposed today that
it's not changing the ability
for people to access the
information in fact the amount
of claims of risen so I'm just
seeing like a conflict and what
we're seeing the need for versus
what is being presented is
information I'm pretty agnostic
to the topic I do not get the
newspaper Senator and I know
that my grandma does but she's
also has a smartphone and can
access all of these things as
well so I'm just on both sides
of this you know would be
interested to see how we can get
the budget for it do that well
and make sure that it gets paid
for but we're not adding
additional cost to the taxpayers
for something that may be
unnecessary in the future well
it just a few points first of
all there a hundred and twenty
thousand dollars in a multi in
on million dollar budget is not
a significant amount of money it
can easily be absorbed I suggest
you by the tax department given
the on fund the vacancies that
are already in the department
that's point one point to keep
in mind the state is holding
property that belongs to
citizens in the state it's not a
trivial thing to say that we
should do everything we can to
make sure private citizens to
get their money back otherwise
it's sitting in account at the
state so this is not.
You know like a small thing like
we get let's if it's convenient
let's do it it is really if
you're thinking about what's and
in the interests of the taxpayer
it's getting their property back
to them and so we commend the
department for the electronic
stuff they're doing what we feel
strongly that to ensure that
people who don't have access to
the electronics who aren't I get
three newspapers so.
Two newspapers every day plus on
Sunday three newspapers so I I
wouldn't assume given your own
personal circumstances that you
are you know not going to be
getting newspapers a lot of
people read newspapers and
they're big this things that
people can see so it's a very
clear way to notify the public
what's going on.
Thank you madam chair I
appreciate the discussion and
what does the committee with the
will the committee with.
Right we have a due pass
by leader Chasey and a second by
Representative Rehm.
we'll go and call the roll.
Representative.
Representative.
Representative Lane.
Speaker yes.
Representative McQueen though.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
But
if that is the Penske.
Madam vice chair no.
Care for.
Yes.
Have.
Thank you.
Shares of the.
Yes you need other you madam
chair I have no idea the.
The side.
Thank.
All right we're on our last
item.
House bill nine.
Representative.
Herndon Sir are you a member of
the press okay could you just
situation self in one place and
that's the place you're going to
be okay and for future reference
I've been told that we need
permission from the chair before
photography and video speak to.
I do.
Floor is yours Representative.
You might want to introduce our
guests at a certain point of
thank you madam chair members of
the committee and Representative
Pamela Harnden and I will be
presenting house bill nine today
hi I have with me to experts who
will be actually three and I
will in let them introduce
themselves right now the first
one
Please.
Madam chair of the honorable
members of the committee my name
is Damon Martinez the senior
policy adviser at the
Albuquerque police department.
Madam chair honorable members of
the committee my name is Luke
language I'm a commander with
the Albuquerque police
department.
You madam chairman James Taylor
believes now with the twenty
general's office.
Madam chair members of the
committee what I will do forces
briefly describe what house bill
nine does and then I will turn
the the proceedings over to buy.
To my
To my experts to answer the
questions and I think we can do
this very so simply and to
provide you with the information
that you need to surely support
and pass house bill house bill
nine is the child access
prevention law that holds gun
owners accountable with their
guns are not securely stored
when money is gain access and
someone is in danger are
injured.
Under house bill nine an adult
will be charged with a
misdemeanor if they negligently
store their fire on and a minor
axis is the fire on the brand
this is they don't cause any
great bodily harm and no one is
killed the of the maximum
penalty that this propose within
the bill under those
circumstances is a misdemeanor
but what happens if the child
access is and negligently stored
gun and then uses the gun to
calls great bodily harm either
because the data some person if
that happens the legislation
puts a maximum penalty that
could be charged as a poor for
the felony H. B. line house bill
nine does not identify how a
fire arm must be stored we are
very cognisant of the fact that
New Mexico is economically
diverse and how one person may
store something securely may be
different from another person
who may be in a different
economic category one of the
things that we one of the things
that I do want to try to clarify
is it very briefly it's
something that the bill and what
the bill does not do this often
a misunderstanding and
categorization of what the bill
does and does not do I do want
to point out that house bill
nine again does not impose a
financial burden on firearm
owners to buy a very expensive
storage unit for keeping their
firearm but and it does not
prevent minors ability to hunt
or engage in shooting
competitions if that's indeed
what happens when we do know
that that record that that
absolutely is a difference
between what may occur with
students who and minus who are
in rural areas as opposed to
those who are not.
in addition we do make note of
the fact that if of that there
are some exceptions within the
bill that we want to point out
is one of the exceptions is that
an adult will not be charged
when the firearm was stolen from
the house of from other from
another premise that they may
phone in addition we point out
the fact that.
No doubt will be responsible if
the
If they do minor is engaging in
making sure that this self
defense for themselves and their
and their family when the fire
are misused so with that madam
chair I do want to point out
that child access prevention
laws do work and there is
evidence that they can reduce
the number of children who are
kids are into it and
unintentional shootings and also
in adults and individuals and
other individuals who may be
injured or killed in
unintentional spit in
intentional or unintentional
shootings so with that I will
turn this over to my
To my experts that they have
something to add we certainly
welcome that and we recognize
that we're asking you to please
this.
Madam chair members of the
committee Mr speaker of the City
of Albuquerque New L. A. P. D.
strongly support this bill and
we're here to answer your
questions.
Madam chair madam vice chairman
members of the committee Mr
speaker again my name is look
like no commander with
Albuquerque police department on
behalf of AP we are in support
of house bill nine I also like
the opportunity to just talk
about my personal experience
working as a police officer just
to share some of those
experiences with you
currently I'm the commander of
the southeast area command the
City of Albuquerque's split into
six different area commands and
I have the southeast heights of
of Albuquerque in my age then
you have the two largest
hospitals you have the two
universities it's home to the
international district the
historic knob hills shopping
district ridgecrest
neighboring therefore space I I
pretty much of all walks of life
regardless of ethnicity race
socio economic status I pretty
much have it all in my area
command and I do have experience
in investigating gun crimes
unfortunately and I've seen the
the the damage that gun crimes
have committed that's been
committed on our communities
in the past I help the City of
Albuquerque specifically more
color with the formation of the
violence intervention program I
was the the the the point person
for the Albuquerque police
department on that initiative
since it started it's now went
over to the community safety
department more personnel have
been added and they're doing
great work I have been involved
in what we call custom
notifications but these are
personal interactions between
myself I went on as a commander
I went out with the social
service coordinator sometimes a
member of the prosecution team
to explain the
The the the penalties of of of
gun violence to individuals that
were even either arrested or
suspected of being involved in
gun crimes so I personally also
have been involved in
creating a public service
messages or announcements
Regarding the importance of
securing firearms especially in
vehicles in your home
the dangers of of children
having access to those firearms
and these videos are pushed out
through the media social media
I've also been responsible for
creating literature
and what what I've learned in my
experiences in addition to
education and literature
educating the community on the
importance the importance of
safety securing your firearms
it's greatly needed and I and I
continue to to support that
that's my position that we need
education but in my experience
what I've seen as a police
officer in Albuquerque we need
we need more we need to do more
anything that we can do to
prevent another child from being
hurt I feel it's our
responsibility to do so thank
you.
Thank you the next Gen.
Of the Attorney General's office
is in strong support of HB nine
and I'm here to answer any
questions at the Representative
and Mr Martinez is incapable or
can't answer I'm sure.
You are here to assist.
With three different.
Thank you
any further.
Audience before we go to the
audience representative madam
chair we have no further
comments in the central
questions very good thank you
those in opposition please raise
your hands.
Okay those of you who wish to
speak in opposition keep your
hands up.
All right so the lady in the
plant and we'll go this way and
then they act this way okay.
Good afternoon madam chair
committee members my name is
terra mention I am the New
Mexico state director for the
national rifle association and
we are in opposition to house
bill nine.
Generally our legal system does
not punish someone for the
criminal actions of another but
this is exactly what has to do.
The bill applies to any place
where a gun is captive stored
without limitation applies to
whoever keeps our stores the gun
not just the owner.
Mexico law does not prohibit
minors from owning or possessing
rifles or shotguns liability
could be imposed on parents or
guardians in cases where the
minor is the actual owner of the
fire.
No clear exception for consent
or authorized to use of a fire.
Use the fires by miners have to
offer protection from criminal
liability this measure could
have a chilling effect on use
accessing firearms to engage in
activities such as hunting for
H. or shooting sports and
competition.
Lastly house bill nine
Thanks thank you M..
Persons yes.
Hi madam chairman of the members
of the committee and Mr speaker
do we have laws against adults
beating up other adults in
elementary schools yes we do it
in twenty fifteen the shooter's
mom and dad assaulted a woman
APS is Judy elementary school
and the woman's back was brocade
and APS paid out in the lawsuit
says he does were not prosecuted
little one was nine do we have
road rage laws that protect
others from assault with a
firearm yes we do and twenty
eighteen welcome Saucedo junior
left the confrontation after
being hit with the bat he went
to his vehicle and retrieved a
firearm that he shot a man in
the hands of the thigh when he
could have given away he was
near a school but he was not
even on public property at a
pickup areas Saucedo was not
prosecuted immigrants get
special treatment state
insurance city laws say
immigrants Cappy return to their
country and cannot be prosecuted
state insurance cities our
global strategy for global
billionaires global billionaire
George Soros donated to the
former Bernalillo county DA's
campaign look it up on the New
Mexico secretary of eight states
website idea The Washington
middle school principal New that
one's junior was under a program
to be monitored for being
violent and yet he was already
fighting on the school property
the day before and I guess
bringing the gun is showing
students and staff New the
school failed him they feel
Benny Hargrove the field
protective passing a defective
law well unfortunately not
breathing American Benny
Hargrove fast to criminalize
Americans.
For something that the parents
of four American parents for the
Albuquerque public schools
absolute failure to protect the
failure the Bernalillo county DA
to prosecute earlier done all
salt incidences by the one in
four parents I want to parents
who were put above Americans and
above the lawful not correct
anything your kids I hired for
their constitutional rights.
Thank you thank you thank you.
Sorry I told you I was going to
need help with sorry there we
go.
All right yes in the back in the
lavender thank you.
Madam chairman members of the
committee mission of our major
on behalf of New Mexico cattle
growers in New Mexico our.
In the next several communities
it is.
Madam I used to locally owned
business rifles shot guys that
have been gifted or passed down
generation to generation kids
are taught at a lot of the young
age the responsibilities that go
along with that we can get
protection for sporting
activities also I will have a
huge huge X. huge effect on are
use to high end participate for
forage steel sporting events and
who work on the ranch a lot of
on the weekends these activities
are part of our growing up in a
rural communities it teaches
them sportsmanship S. self
discipline we encourage you to
look at more education on
responsible gun ownership rather
than taking away issues that
have been handed down from
generation to generation.
Thank you who else.
anyone else on the side no okay
yes ma'am in the front here.
Madam chairwoman
Representative.
Representative sponsor I stand
against this bill because as the
representative mentioned that
they kept things as vague as
possible but the ambiguity
actually
infringes more on the legal
citizens right to have their
guns down the firearms and to
store them as needed she
mentioned that
They're not requiring a specific
law but it could be here could
be there it's too ambiguous and
then it opens up to
These definitions of of not
knowing clearly and is what I'm
doing in my home going to cause
me to be guilty of a misdemeanor
what is what is negligent
disregard of a miner's ability
to access my my son is a U.
shooting competitor on the left
of me allowing him to have his
fire arm to take it out is that
they look negligent access every
time he carries it to the truck
I understand that the bills
designed to say that it's a
misdemeanor.
If you Madam brandishes and
threatening way will who
determines it's threatening if
the person walking down the
street with the dogs just
happens to see a farm stand are
they gonna immediately assume
they're in danger I also want to
note that and section see number
five one of the exceptions is by
illegal entry to persons
property before family moved to
New Mexico we had a guest of our
family in our home did not have
the legal entry but they did it
legally steal firearms from from
the home that were locked.
And so then it's still putting
an undue burden on me and I
think the section G. especially
it's concerning to me because
the wording says if you had a
firearm safety training course
it'll be a mitigating factor is
that mitigating factor saying
Hey you've taken you've to
you've taken New Mexico under
safety the miners taking New
Mexico under safety no one's
been injured if you're good to
go there is a need that that I'm
even more firmly liable.
Yes ma'am I'm sorry if I did my
name is Jennifer Graham thank
you who who else wishes to speak
in opposition woman back here in
the black in please give us your
name.
Madam chair committee members
thank you for the for the New
Mexico County outfitters and
guides first I just like to say
that as a mother who has small
children and also those in home
I truly do appreciate what the
Sanchez trying to do we keep our
guns in a locked safe all the
time I understand what the
intent of the bill is however as
an industry we have to stand in
opposition to the bill.
The language surrounding minors
in possession of a firearm is
just too ambiguous specifically
the term negligent disregard on
page one and page two and then
on page two the statement
regarding a minor displays a
firearm threatening manner the
phrases are very subjective they
mean different things to
different people and we fear
that this portion of the
exploited by anti gun
individuals of similar to what
the the previous woman indicated
and could have unintended
negative consequences on your
hunting and shooting sports
thank you for.
Anyone else in the audience and
wish to speak in opposition.
Okay now let's go to the
electronic I see a number of
hands up is everyone's hands who
is up in space wishing to speak
in opposition.
And if you are not wishing to
speak in opposition please take
your hand down.
Okay Mr Collins David Collins
please you have to make up to
two minutes.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Representative
pardon I do want to speak in
opposition to HB line on
principle largely in part I
don't think it's appropriate to
hold a third party criminally
liable for not densely taking
part in the crime I think that
the civil court is the proper
venue for holding people
accountable for such actions
however if this is the route
that we want to take I'd like to
first Representative Hernan to
reconsider subsection B. so in
cases of like imperfect self
defense or involuntary
manslaughter I don't think that
should be treated the same as
what happens like if you're the
of fortunate instance of
Washington middle school right.
And.
So are you know I think that you
know we should probably we
should it at the very least you
perfect self defense for sure
but.
R. as worst accidental firearm
deaths one thing I want to point
out is that from the beginning
of twenty eighteen to the end of
twenty twenty one the CDC
reported fewer than ten deaths
of minors under the age of
eighteen in New Mexico from
accidental firearm discharge now
this number could be zero could
be nine or could be any number
between we don't know because
they like to keep the exact
number under ten
they don't their release that
because of the conversation
concerns but anyways yes so
those are my basic concerns for
that bill thank you.
Thank you Mr Collins Nate.
Eski.
Thank you madam chair Mr speaker
members of the committee one
house bill nine seems to be to
me the farm storage requirement
dressed up as a public safety
measures with no explanation
provided as to how will actually
enhance public safety I didn't
hear an explanation that affect
last week in committee nor last
year when this bill was up.
In health and public affairs
Attorney General torrez upon
this law be likely to survive
challenging court made reference
to a balancing of interests
between the rights of New
Mexicans owning use firearms in
public safety.
As you should well now interest
balancing tests are not lawful
in cases like this they'll
decide last year in the United
States Supreme Court.
Staging of firearms in the home
for self defense is been
protected explicitly since two
thousand eight with Cork folding
that quote a prohibition against
rendering any lawful firearm in
the home off of oil for the
purpose of immediate self
defense violates the second
amendment and quote.
The opinions of those who was
the courts and something else
are hardly controlling law I
would encourage the committee to
carefully consider the topic
thank you.
Thank you Mr eski there's a
person named Louis Louis could
you give us your full name
please and you of up to two
minutes.
Louis would you on mute yourself
please.
Can you hear me Madam yes two
minutes up to two minutes.
Yes hi my name's Liz I'm a
former police officer and were
tech age I'm highly opposed to
this bill reasons being I
believe that we're taking our
toes into something else more
let more less of contract we're
going to build a gun controls
I think we should tread lightly
I believe that this is just
testing the waters to see how
much we
Well as you are legislation and
get away with a putting more
bills on the table or further
along with a different tax bills
I mean if we really wanted to
help younger children our
children are not not have
accidents to deaths I mean we
could look as far as schools
schools can more children than
the arms do a yearly also thing
with legal drugs drugs on I
don't see those on the table
because I believe that this is
true we in general just a gun
grab
and thank you.
Thank you
Caitlin's sprayed Lee.
Good afternoon madam chair can
you hear me yes I can thank you
but after noon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Kate once probably and I'm a
registered lobbyist with New
Mexico farm and livestock bureau
we're the oldest and largest
agricultural organization in the
state representing more than
twenty thousand member families
we respectfully oppose house the
line rural residents are often
raised utilizing fire arms as an
essential tool when hunting to
provide food for their families
working and for personal
protection for themselves their
families and our livestock farms
use in life threatening
situations must be easily and
quickly access by the person in
need rural residents often live
and work in very remote hard to
access areas and do not have the
luxury of a speedy response time
for threatening situation
because of the location and a
lack of rollovers funders I'm on
forcing we still raised concerns
about how this bill might affect
legal you programs like support
shooting sports program support
shootings for sports program
allows you to learn the safe and
responsible use of our arms
Martin chipped and the
principles of hunting and
archery for these reasons we
speak stand and respectful
opposition on behalf of our
members thank you for your time.
Thank you Nick cost Stellus
costs the less.
You madam chair and members of
the committee my name is Nico
Stallis I'm not necessarily in
opposition to the bill itself
and the intent my concerns are
with the way that the bill is
written and possible unintended
consequences we already have in
statute in thirty dash seven
dash two point two and on lawful
possession of a handgun by a
person with the only is geared
towards minors which is eighteen
and under as defined by statute
that's already a misdemeanor
I it seems like the focus of
this bill is more on the adults
so my biggest concern is having
a statue with such broad
language that this could on the
apply to juveniles as well and
like I said already having a
statute on the books that would
take care of that I'd like to
see some language in this bill
that would exempt juvenile from
this statute I believe it's a
pretty easy fix I think on page
one line twenty two and on page
two line eight inserting
language very similar to a
person nineteen years or older
and then run straight into the
existing language would take
care of my concerns would still
allow juveniles to fall under
the existing statute but would
not subject them to this
proposed statute thank you so
much for your time thank you.
Jane Ferris.
This this is actually Michael
Pearson using.
Jane Sarah says pad was the only
device I had that would
accommodate the zoom with a
product so with that and I may
begin sure what what and
chair members of the committee
of citizens in attendance.
I agree basically with the a
couple of prior opponents I
would like to point the
especially the attorneys on the
committee to the cases state
verses Yarborough that was a
nineteen ninety six dash NMSA
dash oh six eight and it
specifically said that using a
negligence standard in order to
convict in the case of
manslaughter involuntary
manslaughter for three felony
same as this would require.
And the I didn't write this but
this is a summary off of Lexus
and I have looked at the case
and I agree with the summary
have been licensed to practice
for thirty two years is the
Senate was convicted of
involuntary manslaughter by
careless driving you hello Court
reversed defendant's conviction
the court affirmed the right of
the parking the Supreme Court of
New Mexico
the firm the reversal the court
held that a conviction for
involuntary manslaughter under
Mr leader manslaughter rule
required showing the print was
not negligent criminal which is
which is a higher standard the
court held a careless driving
required showing ordinary
negligence is there for the
improper predicate offence for
involuntary manslaughter so I
would encourage expectant you
share a committee to consider of
this and my recommendation and I
would like to say to
Representative heard and you've
done a wonderful job I mean
that.
And that I would like the
penalty for the felony
conviction or felony crime.
In paragraph of.
Well at following grant to okay.
The reserve your two minutes is
up thank you.
You for your patience.
Sorry.
Sack for.
Sec.
Yes yes.
Madam chair members the
committee my name is Zach
reports I am the president of
New Mexico shooting sports
association collectively we
represent the interests of
thousands of gun owners across
the state New Mexico we stand in
a respectful opposition to house
bill money to it to me and we
agree with a number of the other
concerns and brought forth to
date one other concern we want
to bring up is the potential
that a third party other than a
gun owner could provide the
firearm to the minor and the
owner of the fire would still be
the individual in charge of the
crime as they are the lawful
owner the fire even though they
may not have been the party that
provided access to the minor of
the firearm so that's another
concern in addition to the other
ones have been brought forth a
today.
We do we would we do acknowledge
that New Mexico has a crisis of
child abuse in our state and we
strongly believe that any of
bills that are meant to deal
with this crisis take a holistic
view of all the dangers that
children New Mexico face thank
you thank you.
Then Barker.
Hello madam chair and members of
the committee my name is Dan
Barker I am a mother of two a
gun owner and I'm also the New
Mexico state director for the DC
project I oppose H. B. line and
they don't want the government
tell me when where and how my
firearms are stored in my own
home my home as a private place
where I think sanctity waving
public critical ridicule and
judgment a place where I know I
can be me and that the way I
want to live without anyone else
telling me what to do as if I'm
being managed such as out of
place of employment.
Each family situation and safety
needs are different we think
about the families of women of
New Mexico I will not be able to
defend against home invasion
right or even worse a murder if
they are not able to reach their
protective tool in time.
Think about all the single moms
that have taken up arms to feel
safer against an aggressive ex
husband or boyfriend it doesn't
appear or respond to protective
order being given.
If these told us that the
parents are locked away for
immediate access it will be
enough time to find the key to
get the **** of its locking
Tina floated and then use that
H. B. line is looking to do just
that is looking a lot of the one
thing that can stop an aggressor
that is bigger and stronger than
I.
As someone else access is my
parents I could be charged with
a crime this to be the only
instance in New Mexico for
someone could be charged with a
crime for the odds with their
party I'm not held responsible
if someone steals my car and
kills that so why would you make
me responsible for someone
stealing my gun thank you.
Thank you.
let me see a person name Robert.
Robert.
Robert are you on I'll go on to
the next person.
Hello hi you have up to two
minutes.
Thank you our committee chair
and chairman I'd thank you for
your time today I do stand
opposed to.
As my previous our commenters
are discussed actually second
all those motions however act I
also want to expand to this
style was also sent we also
already have laws on the books
that protects children against
negligent acts of adults and so
this was just another way we are
and taken this trying to
stymie our way to
all are actually educate our
children as to the dangers of
firearms respect to firearms and
also
how to properly use firearms in
situations that would be
applicable whether it being a
hunting support for self defense
manner that once again also
going back to self defense
others have raised and I'm sure
he's experts cannot to to this
are
in vulnerable areas such as
Albuquerque APD's response time.
Several years inference.
You're looking at in some
instances.
These are having spotted.
Call.
Are having responded twenty four
hours later due to the fact that
we didn't have.
police presence in our metro
areas but a lot of our rural
areas there's travel time
and your staff.
so.
With respect to what this bill
is trying to get
us on.
Right more security thank you
Robert Robert your time is up
thank you very much thank you.
I'm a person name shows up is
the name Chavis if you could
give us your full name please.
Yes my name is John Chalmers I'm
a resident of house County and I
stand in opposition to house
bill nine until at this violates
our second and Fourteenth
Amendment rights as defined in
the Supreme Court hello Heller
decision that we have the right
to bear arms in our home for
self defense my home is my
private place and sanctity and
my farms are my own personal
private property I feel that the
government has no authority to
dictate what and how I store my
private property and are we
going to have to lock up our
kitchen knives are cleaning
chemicals and power tools that
are equally as capable of great
bodily harm or death or face
criminal liability for the
actions of another person and to
again to address what was that
for product as far as being that
I have harms in my home what if
my partner where to find
firearms you know to to her
nephews let me go out and and
and think in our yard being that
we live outside the city limits
are and
completely lawful in doing so
what and somebody happened to
drive by and.
Risk based concern about that
will would I then as the owner
of the firearms be charged with
the crime simply for
participating in our second
amendment rights as a family.
As well as a group requiring a
safe which can range in cost
from four hundred to several
thousand dollars is very did
this advantage to those people
that are and a port and Economic
setting myself included I do
keep my farm to take care and
less they are within close
proximity to me and aid this.
Place that is separate from my
home but it is padlock on the
door so late under this bill and
its ambiguity would that be
considered safe storage building
that they're not in a safe but
they're in a locked area that is
generally inaccessible to anyone
that is an authorized and it's
for these reasons and many
others I don't have time to
express that I stand in
opposition to house bill nine
thank you thank you cart Carla
and if you give us your full
name please.
Good afternoon madam chairman
and members of the committee
it's Leri Sonntag here I'm
looking individual responsible
gun owner father and a former
law enforcement officer.
And the a lot with lots of the
room like they do I want.
Our children to be protected
I oppose house bill nine
because having been to court
many times the last thing we
want to do is I unintended
loophole and this bill does
cross over into New Mexico state
statute thirty dash sixty dash
one which talks about abuse of a
child.
Senate Bill for the use of the
child includes placing a child
in a situation that may endanger
the child's life for health
having a gun negligently this
falling into that the penalties
under that statute or third
degree felony for no death
involved a first degree felony
for great bodily harm or death
that's actually higher than
house bill one.
House Bill line says it would be
a private negligent access by it
a child had negligent access to
a gun and displays the gun of
reading matter.
We just accessing the gun which
is a crime under the abuse
statute would not be a violation
under house bill nine.
The bill is not necessary
because of other laws that have
mentioned and the child abuse
laws which I mentioned encourage
you to vote now on house bill
nine thank you.
Thank you Stephen white.
Stephen.
Thank you very much Jim I can
now yes.
My name is Stephen white from
Farmington New Mexico.
I stand in opposed to H. B. line
and representative of the San
Juan wildlife federation which
has about nine hundred members.
If this legislation is passed
becomes law will do nothing to
stop it or prevent children from
doing violence against
themselves or others.
It's only a punitive measure
which and it can be taken after
the violence has occurred.
And there are are already
sufficient statutes on the books
to take care of those situations
the statute will have unintended
consequences such as leaving the
remaining children or minors of
convicted parents involved
homeless and become wards of the
state.
Restocker for responsible
parents you could could curtail
participation and of their
children and ROTC faro junior
ROTC for H. and other you
shooting sports programs.
The legislation does not specify
how the air responsible person
in the household or location
will be determined.
Will all of the all persons in
the household or location be
charged.
Currently miners may own their
own firearms through gifting in
the center will parents still be
charged for firearms and not all
statues would also make someone
else responsible for another's
crime of which has been
mentioned many times before for
these reasons and many more I
ask you to vote against this
bill thank you for your time and
consideration.
Thank you
David Venus.
Even right yes can you hear me
yes yes ma'am chair a committee
members items David being a cell
number this is about perky and I
stand opposition to this bill
for many reasons that have been
mentioned already but out I want
to address is set a specific
concern at this point exceptions
on page two line twenty three it
talks about the Department
that'd be captain the lock
container and securely stored
the I think the term securely
stored as rather Hey and I think
it could open up some up your
far more extreme lack or the
your culture would have you to
liability so I think info people
who want to do the right thing
the store the farms correctly I
think we need to clarify that
and what was specifics as far as
what we what is meant by
securely stored and once again I
stand up session thank you for
your time thank you Brooke
Odell.
Good evening hi
I apologize if I.
I'm not fully prepared I am a
fifteen year old teenager who is
and for H. and R. shooting
sports my brother's a sixteen
year old teenager who also to
shooting sports I was in ROTC
last year junior ROTC last year.
And I am opposed to this bill
because it takes away our right
to shooting sports if we go out
shooting and.
Someone views us as a threat.
We are a group of teenagers that
goes out and shoots guns to some
people to do a personal loan or
at that.
We have a.
Private range at our own house
if we go up back there and shoot
our priorities if I neighbors
then call the cops are we then a
threat for shooting our guns on
our property.
Thank thank you thank you Tim
Newstead.
To.
You madam thank you members of
the committee my name is to meet
the new step I'm a four H.
shooting sports coach as well as
a volunteer for Santa Fe County
I stand in opposition of this
bill as the chilling effect it
would have that everyone else is
already mentioned on for eight
shooting sports especially
around the brandishing a
provision because that is
extremely vague
the a child maybe handling a
weapon proper lady but to on on
train person it may appear
threatening and I feel that has
a major chilling effect on board
shooting sports which is
actually one of the safest
things that kids can be involved
in I ask you to consider these
and possibly table this bill
thank you thank you a person
with the initials C. R. H..
All.
My apologies madam.
Chairwoman my name's Chris
economy I'm a resident of Los
ranchos.
I'm gonna tell you the truth I'm
I'm I'm kind of on the fence
with this one five years ago I
would have been absolutely in
opposition I'm just being honest
at that children might use of
moderated a little bit however
please understand I was
seventeen years old when I went
to do cap basic training as a
member of New Mexico Army
National Guard where identities
machine guns and rocket
launchers grenade launchers.
If this if this law was in
effect back then
my dad who was a police officer
in town you cannot of let me you
know part one of this this is
going target shooting after I've
already been trained under used
you know actual literal assault
weapons and rocket launchers
on the other side of that
however I do view part of the
cost of owning a weapon it's not
just the cost of the weapon
itself what it is a state store
device of some sort of container
Association something but I just
would hope that we can narrow
this down to make a specific as
possible to keep people who
should not be in trouble for
getting in trouble and to really
crack down on those folks who
who are completely irresponsible
and and don't seem to have.
Any words about any of this so
thank you for your time thank
you.
I don't see anyone else who
wishes to speak in opposition
those speaking in favor please
raise your hand.
I will start on the side of the
room for changes.
And.
Members of the committee my.
Who present of the Mexicans to
prevent gun violence we stand
strong support H. P. line
Mexicans but it's actually
working to pass this for five
years since then we've lost
Bennett Hargrove the to be
of us in Mexico and the list
goes on and on into the person
you spoke with working on
children's too many.
Every tragically every single
one of these steps is one
hundred percent preventable the
leading cause of death for
children in the state in this
country is gun violence is not
swimming pools as the previous
person said the person that we
may have our respect on average
we're losing close to three
children every single month to
gun violence if the numbers were
locking up there's guns they
would be ending up in our
schools right now this day in
Albuquerque there educators for
Freitas doing good job educating
because they are afraid that
students are bringing guns in
their knapsacks to protect
themselves that's where we are
today the major school shootings
happen at the majority of school
shootings come the guns come
from the home of the parent or
that relative we work we was
students we see the fear in
their eyes we see their status
and we see there under confusion
as to why we are not doing more
in the state to keep them safe
from gun violence H. B. line is
simply establishing a community
standard in law it was forceful
not voluntary fully to be able
to do this by you know what is
one more tool in our toolbox
that will keep you safe from gun
violence and I think we deserve
the the thank you very much
thank you anyone else on the
side yes ma'am.
Excuse me madam chair haven't
talked.
And members of the committee my
name is Paul McLean I'm a
resident of Santa Fe a retired
teacher and vice president of.
New Mexicans to prevent gun
violence I taught in Denver for
over thirty years and as much as
I love teaching I'm thankful
that I've retired and no longer
a moving target school.
I also get up and say a little
prayer every day that my two
grand children will make it
through the day of school
without being shot what is wrong
with the country where gun
violence has become commonplace
I wake up almost every day to
another tragic headline to
headlines in New Mexico
recently were and I quote study
shows major spike in youth yes
for residents nineteen years and
older forty five percent
increase in New Mexico the other
headline read for young people
gun violence has become a way of
life.
Gun violence includes homicides
funded crimes attempted suicides
suicides unintentional deaths
and injuries to mass killings
just imagine the tragedies for
because a weapon is not
available to all my.
There are many things that we
can do to prevent more gun
deaths and injuries and cap laws
are a step in the right
direction and one way to prevent
some of these prejudice every
gun that is locked and secure is
a gun that will not be used to
create a statistic we have
twenty seven states and the
that that have cap laws let's
make New Mexico the twenty eight
states thank you thank you
anyone else on this side of the
room who wishes to speak.
Okay will move over to this side
the person in the stripe and
then we'll do you a.
Chairman and members of the
committee Representative.
My name is Kathy mostly at a
public health nurse work for
about fifteen years traveling
the state.
with teaching as much about as
much pediatric asthma.
My public health professor Dr in
Cleary was killed in a mass
shooting in nineteen ninety two
along with for physics
professors and a student.
She's very dear to me and her
favorite saying was the best
predictor of future performance
is past performance.
Child access protection laws for
CHP laws definitely do save
lives and we have a great deal
of evidence for that.
John pediatrics in twenty twenty
published a study in twenty five
states over twenty five years
and they divided child access
protection lost in two
categories.
H. B. line is what you call an
access and act.
And it results in a nine percent
reduction in pediatric
fatalities.
If you change the wording on
page two one one eliminating and
or replacing it with or if you
counties Hey.
Could access law which triples
the lied reduce pediatric deaths
reduced.
So I would ask you in light of
the past performances of these
laws which has been great to.
Support this law.
An even strength.
You could access level.
Thank you very much thank you
Nina and then the next one
sorry.
Chair committee members I stand
in support of HR nine.
I am here and I represent the
American Association of
university women here in New
Mexico in their support of the
widespread use of guns and gun
safety.
An editorial from the
Albuquerque journal last
Wednesday states it clearly and
I quote from the journal we've
seen too many preventable
tragedies.
All the children as well as
rampant theft of unsecured guns
that are then used in crimes.
New Mexico needs a statute
statute that spells out safety
safe and responsible storage of
weapons rules.
End of quote H. R. nine does
exactly that the vast majority
of children who commit crimes
with guns get their guns from
their own homes reducing this
kind of violence let's start
with getting guns out of the
hands of minors by securing
weapons and ammunition for
minors and the.
A UW New Mexico believes that HR
nine is a reasonable and
effective way to reduce crimes
committed by children with guns.
Thank you yes ma'am.
Yes hi our.
Chair woman and members of the
committee I'm Jennifer here
president.
Organization for women standing
strong.
Guidance in how to use a gun
properly target shooting and I
firmly believe that my parents
would never have voted for the
bill is this.
Thank you anyone else on the
side who wishes to speak in
support.
Okay we have some hands raise
that I recognize as people who
spoke in opposition so those of
you who are in opposition please
remove a lower your hand.
Mr Newstead I believe you spoke
in opposition could you please
lower your hand.
Okay Regina Griego if you're
speaking in favor you have two
minutes.
Thank you this opportunity the
importance of HB nine my name is
Regina Griego I'm from
Albuquerque I was born and
raised I'm a retired engineer
and an author coach and speaker
I now speak out of common sense
gun laws.
So this is very.
More my
Life and the lives of many
others were were changed forever
in a perfect storm of events
that land led to I tragic death
of my family members victims of
gun violence committed by my
troubled nephew my brother and
his family were dedicated church
members and were allowed in our
community grad with the fire
department chaplain and was
known for his his laugh and his
parkway north.
It's hard
and when I think about them.
I.
I think it is the power that
never and my brother his wife
and my two nieces and my nephew.
there were signs of the trust
and the family and I didn't
notice them and we didn't pay
attention to them I wish I'd
been more vigilant about what
happened what was happening in
my brother's household including
the fact that you can't eight
done and fifteen thousand rounds
of ammunition all of the
secured and all accessible to
children.
My nephew was diagnosed after
the fact with trauma induced
schizophrenic disorder and
severe depression and later
after medical can he was found
to have a traumatic brain injury
he used to of the gun.
Your family in a misguided
attempt to again what he
experienced trauma neglect and
isolation.
After seven years of legal drama
is now serving a life sentence
which means we lost a total of
six family members I'm convinced
that without easy access to the
fire arms my family members be
alive today.
Story thank you Mr Griego
appreciate your participation
thank you.
Barbara chatter G..
Mr chair G. R. U. speaking I yes
okay yes I'm speaking again in
support bill
thank you madam chair members of
the committee Representative
Herndon at.
I am a retired injury
epidemiologist I worked for ten
years with the state health
department and I have a fifty
year career in injury
prevention.
House bill nine is stab wishes
in wall our community standards
for the safe storage of firearms
them from getting into the hands
of an authorized by your
children.
It's section law the duty of all
firearm owners to meet that
standard.
Polls have shown that in most
sectors of our communities over
sixty percent of people supports
safe storage.
Likewise we hear often how
responsible gun owners
understand and store their guns
safely by codifying this
practice in the statute we
inform all gun owners that of
that standard and we can help
them meet it all with education
with other ones to do their duty
as responsible gun owners.
If they still don't comply this
law let's says codified in the
statute a law that holds them
accountable and that is what
makes this bill so very
important and I urges to
supported thank you for your
time.
Thank you Edward Lopez.
My name is that Lopez and former
superintendent of regulation
licensing longtime NRA members
turning up registered
libertarian second amendment
advocate and I speak only for
myself today although I
generally oppose most firearms
related bills that are pending
the session I stand here today
in strong support for house bill
nine because I believe the staff
there balance between our second
amendment rights and the social
imperative we have to reduce gun
violence in New Mexico
especially children with guns I
think it's significant that
Attorney General for this last
week and committee testified
that age being in line at the
currently written up used to be
constitutional I think that's an
important data point because as
we've seen you can.
Here in this room today fires
related bills are litigation
target almost from the moment
they're dropped in there then
the sort of different sorts of
secured a storage building the
US today I I had a little free
time this weekend to survey the
current status of the credit for
whatever it's worth.
committee members have a copy of
my incomplete up draft report
comparing the state secure
storage law that I also posted
up at in an H. B. line dock work
and in eighty nine dot org this
is not an advocacy piece but
simply reference document that
help me understand where New
Mexico stand for what house bill
nine stand many different
proposals are statutes on the
books today
I realize madam chair that you
members not had time to review
this of but if H. B. line is
fortunate enough to win your
critical today opportunity to
update includes documents should
be available to you and anyone
else on both sides of the issue
before the house today half of
this year
concluded the the the document
has about fifteen individually
recurring policy tactic on the
X. axis in the state of located
on the why of the statutes
generally fall into three
clusters right.
Miss Lopez your your two minutes
is up but thank you and you
madam chair look forward to
receiving that document thank
you
a person name Renee.
Yes I'm from Santa Fe I am I am
in favor of this law because in
New Mexico guns eight are the
leading cause of death for
children and teens in New Mexico
in New Mexico an average of
thirty three children and teens
staff from guns every year.
Of of which forty nine percent
is suicide.
Forty seven percent is homicide
this is way too much we as a
community as a state have to do
something to protect our
children and keeping guns from
them safely.
Is what we need to do thank you.
Thank you.
Of the single further com O.
excuse me
Trying to get through the agenda
folks so I've got to more people
but I think we're going to stop
it there so that will be John.
Thompson and then we'll be doing
more in Ole so John.
John.
This Madam can you hear me yes.
Thank you very much madam chair
committee.
My name is John post in Roswell
New Mexico.
As a certified firearms
instructor for a shooting
instructor former hunter
education instructor and range
all thrive personally witnessed
instructed you as young as eight
years old.
These you the been able to
confidently and safely use
firearms house bill Nye will
cause me and other uses
structures� to read.
Our son we are in in favor you
speaking in favor of the bill.
No you're not are you okay I'm
I've been popping on this thing
since this started and I wasn't
called during the other
questions you didn't have your
hands raised.
Yes ma'am I did well if did not
show on this and so we're moving
on to the next person Martin
Ole.
Martin on your main yes are you
speaking in favor of the bill.
M. okay madam chair committee
members my name is nothing lamb
I'm a resident of Albuquerque
and I'm a former teacher who
spent eighteen years in the
classroom including at one of
the elementary schools that feed
into Washington middle school
were penny Hargrove passed away
and I'm here on behalf of
myself.
I'm here to voice my support for
house bill nine as it's it's
it's it's an important step in
addressing parental negligence
with firearms and ultimately.
It will help reduce gun
tragedies with our youth.
Apart from the tragedy of
banning Hargrove one of my
saddest experiences as the
teacher was working with this
tune who accidentally shot his
friend while playing with his
father's revolvers.
The tragedy not only took the
life of a grade schooler but
also affected our small
community and all proper project
three of my former students
life.
I asked the committee what
message do we send when we
constantly extols systems of
accountability and
responsibility for students one
in school but not their parents
for instances of gregis
negligence that lead to
senseless loss thank you for
your time and consideration.
Thank you.
So we go back to the
Sponsor are you have you
concluded your presentation this
but yes madam chair we have
great and now we're open for
questions I have Representative
in the claim.
Thank you madam chair chair of
the a number of questions would
like say.
In the public yes my I heard
repeatedly that.
We're making people responsible
for the criminal conduct of
others.
In.
I for the bill that's clearly
not the case the what this bill
does is addresses.
Individuals their own
responsibility their own
conduct.
Of the leaving a gun billable.
Leaving again accessible to
minors.
There's nothing charge with with
the minor does with that.
They're being charged with.
The handling of the gun that
eight and I just when the when
the opposition to build
misstates the purpose of the
bill I think it undermined
threats there are so I want to
make that statement Madam chair
representative.
one of my concerns on the bill
is.
The phrase Nagel negligently
disregards.
I looked at the analysis the
majority now through her
committee and they suggested
sort of what what I consider
more direct language to me.
The phrase thank you the tone
negligently disregards of minors
ability to access the farm.
It's kinda indirect right I mean
the the language services just
was in in lieu thereof is the
person negligently keeps our
stores a firearm in a manner
that allows minor taxes fire.
I wondered if you if you look at
that language if you have any
thoughts about that.
Madam chair representative
Honorable members of the
committee of it's my
understanding that the
representatives of is also aware
of that concern and that
language works or
I think that another tough
another
Context for would be the person
keeps or or stores a firearm in
a negligent manner which
disregards of mine miners
ability but either one I think
works better
Madam chair representative.
Okay thank you for that
I think I think maybe a.
Okay good through the rest my
questions I'm sure other people
have questions and
Perhaps at some point we get to
the point where we feel we need
some revisions by that I mean
that that definitely is a
concern of mine just the I think
you P. E. state more clearly
another issue that was raised
was that.
This is a criminal statute in in
negligence is generally of a
civil standard of I I don't to
colonel I don't to.
The.
I thought to civil do that to to
to lawsuits it's contracts of
oil out of my area
but I was told that.
When the standard is.
Negligent disregard.
The jury instruction is willful
disregard.
And I wonder if if we're saying
negligent but we mean willful.
If perhaps we should use the
word willful and that that would
be clear to people reading
Reading the statute.
Madam chair representative
Representative
The negligent is obviously one
of the four types of men's raha
and
Speaking as a former prosecutor
I would I believe that this is
the way it's written with the
word negligent allows the future
DA whoever that person is to use
this as a potential to on
charging specifically that there
that the person was careless to
the peril of
Of the.
What the
With the.
A reasonable person would see on
some tongue tied on that but I
believe that negligent as
appropriate word okay.
madam chair Mr Martinez thank
you for that.
Keeping on the theme of civil
versus criminal I'm looking at
Page three section II Alliance
thirteen through fifteen nothing
in this section shall be
construed to proclaim preclude a
claim.
Pursuant to any other section of
wall or any civil action for
damages in my mind a claim is a
civil.
It is a is civil law.
And I wonder if that we're
claim should be charge I I think
what we're saying is it doesn't
preclude other criminal charges
or a civil action but.
When I read that language I hear
civil action twice.
Madam chair representative
members of the committee
Representative actually I think
that your recommendation your
clarification would would
actually help clarify that
because it's my understand that
the intent there is how to
prohibit any other type of
criminal charge and I think that
clarity make sense for.
madam chair Representative and
and experts a couple questions
just on.
How this would work in practice
in.
I I know that the the law can't
address every back better at me
I get that but just sort.
Thinking through the well as I
was reading it I did have some
questions for example of a
locked container
If there was a you can case and
it was locked.
In for convenience you left the
key in the lock.
Is that still a locked
container.
Madam chair representative
Representative McQueen
Again from my past history as a
prosecutor my sense is it's a
fax specific analysis and for
example it would depend upon the
type of container would depend
upon where the key was it would
depend upon that minor that
access to the economic
specifically did that do that
minor have could that money
reach the key those types of
facts and the I guess I would
just point out that it the.
The purpose of the prosecutors
to seek justice and to see if
the facts merit charging this
type of offense in the case.
Madam chair Mr Martinez at the
facts Act specific now says I I
think that's that's a fair
response at similar questions
recurring the language close
proximity to the person I've
read about
tragedies happening as a result
of women keeping a gun in their
purse leaving the person the car
with child I think a lot of
people keep a gun in the glove
box for under the front seat.
which in some ways is close
proximity but also
especially if.
You like you just you know you
run to the store to get
something in the concern the car
it's incredibly dangerous
but I I think the answer is
probably the same a tax specific
analysis will madam chair
members of the committee
representative queen
There's I think I think there's
a knowledge meant that that
language could be written better
and so what I believe if I may
speak for the representative one
of the considerations is instead
of the way it stated right now
instead of strike that current
laws insert there well the
person is actual or constructive
possession of the firearm.
So that puts it more in context
so the example that you're
talking about again you go back
to the facts and do an analysis
on the facts was that child in
the car was at a two year old
was at a sixteen year old and
how exactly accessible was that
economic for the prosecutor to
determine.
Madam can you just give me a
page number in line what I'm
sorry Matt Madam chairwoman
that's page three and that would
be lines one through to.
And the language that
I spoke about state specifically
while the person has actual or
constructive possession of the
fire.
Image service Martinez I I guess
I I like that language you know
if you're driving your car it in
your cans in the glove box I
think that's probably
constructive possession you put
you park your car and you go
into the store and leave a minor
in in the vehicle I don't think
you have position anymore so I
think that language to address
that.
Situation.
Madam chairwoman if I may I'm
sorry.
Projects the commander Lange
would has to be back in
Albuquerque may he be excused.
Absolutely.
Thank you for joining thank you
members of the committee.
Madam chair of the
presented an expert
mitigating factor that the
course our courses are available
over the internet.
Madam chair.
Representative is Representative
McQueen.
I know that I have access to
those students my military
reserve duty but I don't know if
they're open to the general
public I would assume that they
would be but I don't know for
sure.
Okay met M. service R. T. as I I
mean you could I mean there
could potentially be a really
high quality.
No error long video on YouTube
with that.
I do recognize that the intent
of this provision is to
encourage people to take these
courses and the.
I I would guess that the thought
is if they take the course they
would be less likely to
negligently store their
firearms.
Madam chair representative then
I met the Representative McQueen
if I may address that so this
person talking about the very
scenarios that it lays out there
whether it's in the charging on
the sentencing
that person I assume the person
is being charged the state's
main would be under oath and so
in speaking to the tribunal I
would be able to say I saw those
I saw those YouTube videos and I
would be sworn to what I was
saying and the the purpose of
that would be for the judge to
take into consideration what
what what those facts or.
Okay miss madam chair Mr
Martinez thank you
so much lost questions or or
less on the language and more on
the substance and we we saw a
version of this bill last year
and there are some
some questions asked that I
still have questions about in
those result revolve around can
the minor only done.
Leave a minor was gifted a gun
and it with their gun.
Is there.
Is there liability for the the
adults that live in the house is
there liability for whoever made
the gift to the minor we have
how does how does that work in
terms of can storage if the gun
doesn't actually.
Along to someone else.
Will
Madam chair representative so
Representative McQueen.
The very first element.
Talks about the person who
places it negligent position for
example on page two our I'm
sorry page one of the person
keeps our stores a firearm in no
way does that prohibit an
individual for a minor from
owning a gun is currently with
state law.
Thank you Mr Martinez so if a
parent or grandparent gave a gun
to a minor.
With the
If if the if the ownership of
the economic transferred to the
minor and that's my first
question can Miner own again
once the ownership transfer to
the minors then the economic
again.
Is the the parent or whoever
gave the gift.
Then free of responsibility.
Madam chair representative
Representative McQueen the this
bill doesn't talk about a parent
or a grandparent so the first
thing I point out you heard
reference during the comments
that the attorney general's
state spoke at the last
committee and I'm I guess I Ms
despair phrasing when he said
that that pass passes
constitutional muster I see then
else's would have been you know
had this violated any of the
other current state laws that
would have been a problem with
the flight so the second part of
your question is does that
relieve the responsibility of
the person who gave the economic
this bill this languages focuses
on that person who's responsible
for that economic that far.
So so mentor Mr Martinez I guess
If this is a a guardian.
whether the relations since the
guardian or anyone had a
Sixteen year old.
And didn't want to be
responsible.
And so instead of saying this is
Mike and
you can only use it when I'm
around under the circumstances.
Said This Is Your got.
You take care of it.
Is that person is the guardian
is the adult.
Still subject to liability or.
Not.
Madam chair representative so
Representative McQueen with
urinalysis there's some
qualifications there.
So that again I would take it
back to the the factor analysis
for the DA to understand whether
there was act who the actual
owner of the of the economic
ones I think that would be a
question.
For the thank you madam chair
thank you.
Thank you representative
Representative read.
And madam chair Representative.
I I kind of also had the same
issue with the the negligent
standard and I noticed last year
it was titled reckless and
you've changed it to negligent
can you explain why you did that
from the last draft of the bill
to now.
madam chair members of the
committee representative we yes
I can okay so if we look at the
uniformed jury instructions for
example and I have been here and
we'll share them with you so
book
It says here that a
that negligent this regards a
minus liability to access the
fund so that's within the bill
itself and courts have
interpreted negligence and
criminal statutes to take
criminal negligence standard and
it also says that this means
that a gun owner must have kept
our store the firearm with
willful disregard of the rights
or safety of others and in a
manner which endangered any
person our property so because
criminal negligence is defined
in the uniformed jury
instructions the criminal
negligence standard is
established and it did need to
be redefined and thought it was
a better way in which to utilize
it for purposes of this a piece
of legislation okay so Madam
chair representative so actually
when you get down to proving it
you're back to a reckless
disregard standard and the jury
instruction.
Matt madam chair members of the
committee of.
That would be correct if you are
interpreting the uniformed jury
instructions which would be the
applicables important with
respect to this bill and it
Madam chair representative I I
guess I do I am having a hard
time seeing the issue with this
statute when we have a statute
on the books for negligent child
abuse reckless disregard that
basically states when you place
a child in the situation that
endangers their life for health
and you do so in a matter with
reckless disregard which
basically says your conduct was
more than merely negligent
rather you must find that the
risk of serious harm to the
state to help the child a
substantial and unjustifiable
risk is one that any law abiding
person would recognize under
similar circumstances and the
cause any law abiding person to
behave differently so why.
madam chair and representative
are we now having another
statute when we can literally
addresses through the child to
be statute and charge a parent
prosecutor also and I've I've
looked at these cases and this
is the statute we look at we're
trying to decide if a parent is
negligent or reckless and the
fireman close proximity to a
child or not in a gun safe for
there's an accidental shooting
so why would we need a new law
when this laws on the books
madam chair members of the
committee representative three I
disagree with your
interpretation of the child
abuse that too as it will apply
with respect to the bill that I
have presented.
With respect to the Taliban
statue the statue itself madam
chair members of the committee
with first to the endangerment
of the child what we have with
respect to the statute it
focuses on an individual who is
the owner of a fire arm and kept
it in a negligent manner in
which a child was able to access
it and cause the death or bodily
harm of another so the child
abuse staff to refers to the
child itself in this piece of
legislation that I presented
with this house bill line refers
to the tile have been access and
causing the death are broadly
aren't into of another so the
child abuse statute does not
apply and madam chair
representative and I I
respectfully disagree because
you are one of the elements is
is this a parent or guardian and
you know as a person of that
nature that's responsible so I
know when I've looked at cases
of accidental shootings and
Madam chair representative you
you kind of have to focus on
accidental shootings as a big
reason for this bill this is the
statute that we analyze it under
and again fact by fact situation
where a district attorney looks
at it and decides if that parent
put that child in a situation
that endangers our live for
health IT leaving a gun in close
proximity to where they should
another child or leaving a
firearm out to where maybe a an
older child goes and you know
she to the school however you
however you want to say it so I
I guess I I disagree with you on
on how that statute to use but I
I do understand what you're
saying
Madam chair representative
I actually was the prosecutor in
a mass shooting for the Clovis
carver library K. and I've heard
a lot of comments on this would
prevent situations like that in
my case the guns were locked up
in the sixteen year old still
access those firearms and so my
question is to you it doesn't
really prevent necessarily
something like that from
occurring madam chair
representative like in that
situation.
Please Madam chair
representative so Representative
re.
I think what you're describing
with the specific situation that
you prosecuted
that may fall into one of the
five identified exceptions
within this bill and as you
being of prosecutor now
I guess I would I would say and
I I would assume that you would
agree with me that as a
prosecutor when you're doing the
analysis on all the facts for
example sometimes you don't have
all of child endangerment I
think there's four elements with
for months I remember correctly
with that one you may not have
all those important elements
that you can prove as a
prosecutor or you may be
question one one of those four
so you need other tools or other
potential charges are to
consider and what this does is
this gives you another potential
tool to look at to charge of I
don't think that this is going
to be the end all and answer all
the questions out there but this
will be giving you as a
prosecutor something else to
consider when those facts
revolve around a minor obtaining
a weapon in either hurting
themselves or hurting somebody
else.
And madam chair and at Mr
Martinez do is are you saying
that it would actually be a just
a lower burden because a stable
gins Madam chair representative
Representative read
it.
Well this one the.
To speaking context this one has
its burden which is negligent
obviously most of the.
Most of the state you to to deal
with have higher higher men's
right.
so again depending upon the
circumstances what you could
prove with those elements this
would just be something else for
you to consider as a potential
charge madam chair miss Martinez
Representative I just find that
this statute is really ambiguous
and it has a lot of defined
terms and things that I'm really
concerned about moving on to our
second amendment rights
I have a big concern I've heard
from many of my constituents I'm
in a rural area
when you have your guns locked
up in a safe and criminals come
into your home and you can't
access them.
Quickly to protect yourself I I
see that as a problem and what
do you say to that madam chair
Mr Martinez Representative to
those people are concerned about
the fact that you know we're
punishing law abiding citizens
who are trying to protect
themselves when you know weird
set of really focusing on the
issue that we face in New Mexico
which is preventing crime
I don't know if the statute
actually pre vents cried and
that is a concern I have.
Madam chair representative
Representative read
what you just identified as one
of the exceptions that in the
course of self defense or
defense of another and madam
chair representative my concern
is I could probably get a safe
opened in time if the current
was coming in my house to do
something to myself or my child
R. anybody in there so so that's
my concern how would you get
your firearms out in time to
protect yourself the someone
breaks into your home.
Madam chair.
Yes.
Madam chair Representative
Representative right
You're talking specifically
about locking it away this
doesn't require you to
specifically walking away just
the the languages just do not
put it away in a negligent
manner you can you you
safeguard.
And madam chair representative
Mr Martinez I understand our
state may still have major
concerns of that especially if
you have children in the home
but I appreciate your answers to
my questions and I have no other
questions.
You representative
Representative lane.
Thank you madam chair
so I think there's a theme here
and frankly I think the theme is
actually highlighting part of
the the foundational problems
this bill so.
We don't use the phrase criminal
negligence in the bill madam
chair if you read the Mexico
case law what what what are
judges of said is that the
legislature isn't clear whether
it's civil negligence standard
criminal negligence standard
than the court's going to assume
that it's a criminal negligence
standard.
so madam chair I just I just
like I guess confirmation that
you're saying is even though
used the word negligent you're
you're saying this is criminal
negligence.
Madam chair representative
A line.
If we look at again the universe
instructions.
It becomes very clear not only
to the court but to a person
meeting this within this bill so
it's the court submitted very
clear that
that when the term negligence is
used in a criminal statute that
the term a criminal negligence
is defined in the forms of
instructions.
Madam chair my my understanding
of of the criminal jurisprudence
in New Mexico is.
That you could have a civil
standard but if the if the
legislature doesn't make it
clear that the courts can assume
that it's criminal negligence
and the jury instruction I think
it's fourteen dash one three
three it does in fact to find
specifically what criminal
negligence is.
And madam chair you know what
we're on that point
what that jury instruction reads
is in order to be found.
Liable of of criminal negligence
on the you have to show that the
defendant acted with willful
disregard of the rights or
safety of others.
madam chair is that is that a
correct understanding of that
you're instruction I think you
have in front of you.
So madam chair members of the
committee representative line.
This bill specifically describes
acting with negligent disregard
for the fact that a minute could
access the gun or fire on so
this exactly what we're looking
at and that's what happens when
a minor access is a gun and
causes the danger and the harm
that is described in the
legislation.
Madam chair the jury instruction
on criminal negligence
negligence.
Does it provide that the
defendant acted with willful
disregard the rights or safety
of others.
Madam chair members of the
committee Representative Lane
your question is unclear so
would you maybe want to restate
that because the of the bill
itself describes what needs to
happen in order for that to be a
prosecution and of the funds the
negligence sorry to interrupt
you Madam I know you're good
I'll be happy to to rephrase
some just thinking thinking
through this you know if on the
whether a prosecutor American
defendant so when it comes time
for the judge to instruct the
jury the jury needs to have some
some meat around what does this
mean we say negligence right.
And so madam chair the what I
for see would happen with these
cases that the judge is going to
read the criminal jury
instruction.
And the criminal jury
instruction for criminal
negligence is found fourteen
dash one three three and what
the prosecution have to prove as
part of the elements of the
crime is that the defendant
acted with willful disregard of
the rights or safety of others
some just trying to confirm that
that's your understanding.
You want me to so of madam chair
members of the committee
Representative Lane if that's
that is the standard that's put
forth and that's also the
standard in the legislation.
Madam chair.
So my follow up question that is
what we given this this new
crime that we're looking at
creating what is the willful
disregard of the rights or
safety of others.
Madam chair members of the
committee Representative Eli if
a gun is left where a minor can
access it.
And the money uses it to cause
great bodily harm or injury.
That is the standard and it has
been with respect to willful
disregard to the rights of the
safety of others.
Madam chair
I I find that a little difficult
to believe in light of the fact
that.
Let's say that I have a you know
a call three fifty seven I leave
on my bedside table I have I
have children.
I think that's that's reckless
as a parent
but let's say that that's the
case.
If that act in and of itself
without any behavior on the part
of my children a violation of
the statute.
Madam chair representative
Of.
Floor leader lane.
The answer to that is again fax
fax Pacific as I answered
Representative McQueen is
earlier questions as the
prosecutor you're gonna be
looking at okay.
Where were you in proximity to
that economic
where were your kids exactly how
old are your kids was the was
the weapon loaded what what
basically what the what are the
facts surrounding that economic
and
that's.
That's hopefully how this
language would be interpreted.
Madam I think just my question
very well and try again.
Madam chair so in my son are you
I have if I have a three fifty
seven point seven laying on my
bedside table I've got more
children live in the home they
never touched a gun they never
do anything with it is that in
of itself in violation of the
statute.
Representative go ahead.
Madam chair representative.
I mean members of the committee
representative line the the
legislation states that the
Thomas access to a gun cause
great bodily harm or did the
death of someone if you gonna
charge him with a point to be
felony or if the you gonna
charge the person who was the
owner of the fire on with a
misdemeanor then the child would
impact apprentices for the child
within
have calls the mayhem and and.
And and.
And this is a just a
confusion within an area so if
the child never touches the gun.
Then you have not violated the
statute.
Madam chair and.
And I I confess this is a long
winded way of making a simple
point but.
Mmhm my point though is and I'm
trying this back your honor all
the back to the the criminal
jury instruction.
You have to show that the
defendant acted with willful
disregard the rights or safety
of the others.
And madam chair I would submit
you can't do that.
Because the more active leaving
a gun on the bedside table we
just said is not criminal in of
itself.
The only thing that transforms
it into a criminal act that
we're going to punish you for.
Is now your child is decided to
take the gun and do something
else but in terms of me
actually.
Disregarding the rights of
somebody else the safety of
somebody else it's not true.
You can only prove violation of
the statute when you have
another actor who who gets
involved so I chair I can see
that they would like to respond
it seems but.
Madam chair members of the
committee representative line.
I just think that you are
interpreting this legislation
incorrectly even in light of the
jury instruction so the jury
instruction would only come into
play and that charge would only
be in the applicable if one
great bodily harm was occurred
has occurred because the child
access the fire on or death
occurred.
So if you're looking at willful
disregard it's a jury
instruction so the jury is going
to look at whether not it was of
willful disregard for the safety
of others.
When someone was killed and
great bodily harm occurred but
if we go back and look at the
totality of what you just
present in terms of the gun
never been touched of the
firearm never been touched by
but the money this the this
legislation does not come into
play.
Sure the limit for the purchase
why what's so typically for
felony negligent negligence you
need to a predicate offence
something underlying it so for
example if you have involuntary
manslaughter using of a motor
vehicle.
The predicate offense is
careless driving for example so
what madam chair what is the
predicate fence under the
statute to to justify a felony
charge.
So madam chair members of the
committee Representative Eli the
predicate offense is you would
have to you or the firearms
owners would have to have left
it negligently stored in a
manner in which the child was
able to access something has to
happen and in the trial uses the
firearm to cause great bodily
harm or death if you're going to
access the fourth degree felony.
Madam chair and I.
I guess this is a different
concept for criminal law that
we're introducing so.
What you wrote what you really
are saying is that the predicate
offenses this is the offense
itself
there is no underlying unlawful
activities so I as we're talking
to previously madam chair the
more active leaving a gun on the
bad side is not a crime.
I think we understand that
it's it's what happens after
that that creates insurers to
crime it's when the minor.
Gets a hold of the firearm.
So.
I made a point of move on
The other thing I would ask a
question about his paragraph D.
on page three.
He explained sort of the
rationale behind this paragraph.
Madam madam chair members of the
committee representative Lente
yes Sir.
The purpose of paragraph do is
to recognize the fact that the
gun owner had taken a safety
class sometimes things go wrong
and in a particular situation
what we do want the court to
consider it doesn't say it has
to be admitted the state it
could be evidence I want to make
that clear madam chair members
of the committee Representative
line of mitigating circumstances
so we have never directed the
court to consider but it is
something that can be
considered.
Well madam chair and the reason
I ask about the purpose of that
paragraph is because it doesn't.
I mean it's nice but you've gone
through it course and you still
here your farm on the bedside
table so to speak I it doesn't
change the the ending behavior
of a child so I.
I don't know that how it it
changes from a syncing
standpoint
you took the course but she
didn't follow it so.
So madam chair members of the
committee Representative lane
the maximum penalty that would
be charged if the death of a
person occurred or that was
great bodily harm would be a
fourth degree felony a
mitigating circumstance could be
the safety class that a person
to indicating that the judgment
that charge them with the
maximum penalty the judge make
we quote may include something
smaller and this.
Madam chair last thing and I
think I just feel like we're
kind of skirting around what the
real issue here which is just
it's the act itself of leaving a
firearm out in a negligent
manner.
That's to me is the real thing
the first thing is a criminal
act.
but then we we kind of we back
off that a little bit the state
will know that in and of itself
is not enough
you have to then have the minor
who gets a hold of it and uses
it either in it and it doesn't
matter branches it.
and so it seems to me either
either we say it's criminal to
leave a firearm out negligently
when there's miners we don't.
but this concept of of making my
criminal liability tied into the
the actions of someone else I
submit is a dangerous road to go
down in criminal jurisprudence
thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative
Representative Rehm.
Thank you madam chair
madam chair and Representative
heard and so if.
A person runs a red light not
intentionally.
Is that a negligent or reckless
Act.
madam chair members of the
committee representative of
bring you presented a set of
facts in a vacuum so it's
difficult to respond to that.
Madam chair and representative
so what is the standard for
normal traffic violations is
that is that negligence or is
that reckless.
Madam chair representative
Representative rain you know
that one of the men's might read
you could be potentially like a
strict liability.
And actually wanted to censor
question that way.
Well madam chair I think we're
skirting that the issue but we
have a real problem with
negligent standard it needs to
be a higher standard anyway
let's go ahead and move on
If we go to page one we go to
one twenty five negligent
disregard a miner's ability to
access to firearms.
So what is the meaning of that.
Madam chair members of the
committee Representative Rehm
If I may it's in clarifying for
Representative McQueen he read
the.
the proposals from the for for
what I said what I said was I
think more artful way would be
to say the person keeps restores
a firearm in a negligent manner
which disregard to minors
ability to access.
And what that does is
establishes the.
The first of all the men's raha
requirement and then it is stab
wishes.
In in that in in those lines.
Who is at fault and then I'm
going on to the next page what
with the act as far as the
person at are the minor
accident.
Intent on this gets the fire.
Madam chair and Representative
let's go to page two one three
and
it talks about brandishing a
firearm in a threatening manner
so who determines that
threatening manner.
Mmhm.
Madam chair representative
Representative Rehm
You know law enforcement can
only investigate and police the
effort it's the prosecutor
actually charges so it would be
that DA's office who considers
the facts and actually charges.
Of madam chair and
Representative let me back you
up so of an officers dispatched
to a incident where.
A citizen says I felt it was in
a threatening manner so it's up
to the officer to write the
reporter that.
Madam chair Representative
Representative Rehm
This is where I it's hard to
argue with your past years as an
officer obviously the officer
writes the report and the
officer depending upon the
charge would actually right at
the complaint but it's the hope
that it would be the DA's office
who reviewed reviews that
complaint if there's any
questions yes.
Madam chair and
Representative let's go ahead
let's go over to.
Page three one five five or yes
in the course of self defense or
defense of another.
Can a minor.
Use the firearm that is accessed
and his self defense for self
defense of another.
Resulting in death of that
individual.
Of the offender.
Madam chair representative
Representative redeem
In no way does this Bill.
prohibit a minor from defending
him or herself or somebody else.
Madam chair and Representative
do you see that it's in
conflict.
He had access to the fire or.
That you bill says he shouldn't
have access to the farm.
Madam chair representative
Representative Representative
Representative Rehm
I don't believe there's a
conflict there the first
question is looking at the
elements who own the economic
and then did a more than and
then the subsequent element is
to the mind minor access access
it next negligently I'm sorry
I'm usually not this tongue tied
this time of day.
No problem and madam chair and
representative of what ages a
child responsible for their
criminal acts generally.
Madam chair I'm gonna ask of
members of the committee of than
just the the eighty to tell us
what needs the towers I spoke
with a criminal acts.
Children up to the age of
sixteen can be charged
under capital colonies as.
circular not following their
capital phone number eight
miners from the age of seventeen
and younger.
So a four year old co chair Mr
DA a four year old could be
charged with this.
No this this are pretty
particularly to the dole who
should be recently scoring far
I'm not the children okay so
madam chair and Mr DA of four
year old get so far are.
Violates this act okay he goes
out and shoots someone can be
charged.
If the gun was negligently
stored and resulting in great
bodily harm the adults who
should have recently sort of
would be talked yes.
Madam chair and Mr DA with the
child in that fact scenario be
charged.
Madam chair of Mr members of the
committee the eight we look at
this legislation and this
legislation focus on and act
involving an adult who then
negligently store their firearms
and that's all that this bill
relates to and a child access
the fire on Indian causes bodily
harm by the so that's what this
legislation refers to and it
really is important to look at
the piece of legislation before
you and that other scenarios
that you are trying to present.
Madam chair and representative I
think it's important to
understand the totality of the
situation and what I'm trying to
point out and I think he even
the DA notes that basically
Intel there about ten or twelve
years old they can't form
specific intent which I'm sure
Mr Martinez understands to be
charged with a criminal act.
Madam chairwoman Representative
Representative Rehm I think the
traditional of common law
analysis is you have
very stability is a different
agents and so depending upon the
crime that has occurred again I
get back to the prosecutor who's
gonna be deciding whether to try
rather to prosecute this or not
is going to be looking at that
now again getting back to the
elements of this bill the very
first thing is
who who who's responsible for
this weapon and so getting back
to your scenario the issue is
was if I understand your
scenario correctly which is was
it the four year old who place
that economic negligently for
somebody else for for minor to
obtain.
Because that's that's the
analysis that needs to occur
with the elements that the
waitress.
Madam chair and of Mr Martinez
what I'm trying to point out is
that even though a four year old
picked up a fire or.
And was soon it's in violation
of this act.
He discharged that firearm.
And it resulted in the death of
another that's the point that
I'm trying to make Madam chair
representative so Representative
Rehm thank you for clarifying
that because then the answer to
your question is very easy the
analysis doesn't look at the
four year old analysis looks at
who had who was responsible for
that economic and how did that
four year old get.
Madam chair and Mr Martinez what
I'm trying to point out is so
that this committee and the
public would understand is that
just because a four year old
takes a life of someone doesn't
mean that four year old could be
charged.
And that's what I'm trying to
point out.
Madam chair representative and
Representative Rehm.
I understand your point but the
counter point is that the
statute doesn't look at the four
year old the statue looks at how
did that for you'll get the
economic and from who.
Madam chair and Representative.
I've spoken to several friends
of mine who are on the
Albuquerque police department.
Their experiences that juveniles
with firearms don't obtain them
Should be here so I could ask
him that question.
But we have Mr marching no I'm
gonna answer here members of the
committee Representative bring.
So what we're looking at as we
look at this particular
legislation and what it
addresses so the dresses those
situations where an adult on the
firearm and then left it
negligently stored in a manner
in which a minor could access
and then that money to obtain
food and uses it to cause great
bodily harm or death R. with
respect to the fourth of the
phone that doesn't change so
even with the scenario that you
just described regardless of
anything else we're looking at
this piece of legislation and
what we're trying to look at and
how many children are affected
if that if if a if a gun or
firearm is not stored safely and
what does happen and so the
bigger issue is to make sure
that if you own madam chair
members of the committee
Representative rain if you
decide to own a firearm the two
stored safely so that they can
not be accessed by a minor and
that they cannot do the things
that are disruptive because they
have occurred far too often
because someone didn't store the
firearm safely.
Madam chair of save the rest of
my questions for later.
well Representative you more
questions there's not going to
be a leader so if for now or if
you are we won't be years
through asking questions for
this hearing is that what you're
telling me yes ma'am okay ma'am
for the floor okay thank you.
The court.
Representative I'm not over.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair representative of.
I to me going to start off with
the issue of negligence.
M. not for the same reasons that
many of my colleagues have
discussed but because you made a
statement early on that maybe I
didn't catch correctly but you
talk about.
That.
Or at least where I took it was
of the negligence may affect how
this is applied in rural areas.
Did I misunderstand that or or
when how the hell did your
comment regarding rural areas
fit in to the application of
this bill.
Madam chair of members of the
committee representative Nibert
thank you for that question and
the opportunity to explain so my
statement of was that this piece
of legislation in no way
prohibits individuals who are
participating in shooting
competitions or and other types
of competitions where they are
utilizing a fire.
Okay.
So so madam chair and and
Representative and then I would
like to explore the term
negligence Lopez.
It is it your intent Madam chair
representative to.
Have one standard across the
state or is each community.
Going to view this.
With different standards through
different lenses different eyes
if you will.
So madam chair members of the
committee Representative Nibert.
There is no difference in terms
of the way of the interpretation
it's the piece of legislation
that before before you right now
specifically refers to a at an
adult who negligently stores
their farm in a manner in which
a minor can access it in the end
of this call cause great bodily
harm of the death of a person so
I'm not sure that I understand
your question because the intent
and purpose of the statute would
be interpreted the same.
Across the state.
HM Madam chair representative.
That.
Is a real concern to me because.
Reasonable care.
Our failure to use reasonable
care which is what I want says
is judged by the standards of
reasonable people in.
That community.
And I would suggest to you that
this issue could be looked at
differently.
In different parts of the state.
Reasonable care and.
Rona with respect to creating
with respect storage may be
entirely different than in your
community.
Madam chair representative
members of the committee
Representative night bit I
totally agree in order that was
my opening statement the terms
in which a person may store
something and it be stored
securely maybe different for a
person who may live in and
Jarrell New Mexico as opposed to
a person who may live in Santa
Fe so that if indeed an
individual a minor had access to
a firearm and and was able to do
the or engage in the activities
this described in this piece of
legislation then it is
absolutely correct under the a
court would look at the totality
of the circumstances and how was
that weapons of all firearms
stored and was it stored in a
manner in which a a is a minor
could have access to it was it's
stored in a manner in which it
was negligently stored so that a
minute could access so we didn't
describe the method of storage
madam chair members of the
committee representative line
because we do understand that in
different neighborhoods in
different parts of the country
storage may be different but if
you look at the totality of the
circumstances would a reasonable
person have set that was stored
safely.
Madam chairman and
representative of.
In the rural parts of our state.
Firearms are readily accessible
to all household members.
For variety of reasons
including.
That's part of their the tools
that they use to to engage in
their activities on a daily
basis.
Children.
Are responsible for protecting
the the flock of sheep just like
the adults are.
And that oftentimes involves
children minors.
Utilizing firearms.
and so.
You know again I just as I see.
Different standards and and I
mean people want different
things and I want.
This thing to apply across the
board.
And we fail to recognize that we
have a lot of families.
And a lot of minors in this
state.
Who have a real need to have
ready access to firearms.
For constructive purposes for
lawful purposes for purposes
that that protect their family
their livelihood and their way
of life.
And that may not work in
Albuquerque.
But in corona in animus and in
other you know.
One stoplight town across the
state.
This this issue really affects.
Those communities this bill will
will absolutely affect those
communities and and and will.
Potentially calls law abiding
citizens to become felons
because of what happened so let
me let me
give you an example of how maybe
this could work.
madam chair and representative.
You have a the minor.
accesses.
The fire weather be a twenty two
rifle whether it be a hand gun
that says the the the weapon of
they're going out and and
doing some hunting.
they missed the the animal but
it ricochets off of off a rock
and lo and behold it the.
If somebody in a car that's
driving down the highway or
something causes the causes some
damage.
In that scenario under this
bill.
The parent of that child.
Could be.
And I think if you look at the
language.
should be charged for a felony
under this this act even though.
The child I mean accidents
happen with that that child it's
just part of.
Their routine day it's not
certainly in intentional crime
on their part it was a pure
accident on their part but yet
the parents.
Allowed that firearm to be
readily access but everyone in
that household.
Again this bill reaches into
that situation and it's.
Maybe one in a million or one in
two hundred million maybe but
but.
There's things that happen like
that and yet we would make the
parents felons under this
statute for the a terrible event
but but certainly no intention
on any part and and I don't know
how that that works and so what
what do we tell the folks in
rural New Mexico.
They're gonna have to lock up
all their guns and not have acts
provide access to their children
who who have.
A job to do.
Madam chairwoman representatives
representative Nibert may I ask
a question in your scenario sure
was that rifle store next
negligently.
I would say it's not stored at
all it's behind front tool for
you know works on the gun rack
you know the the issue of
storage and corona is probably
of you know.
How can you easily access that
to go shoot the coyotes that
are.
Causing harm to your sheet of.
Maybe in a gun rack in a pick up
truck
So you know the issue of storage
I think in Albuquerque it's a
sure that's negligent storage
but in corona.
Is that really what we're trying
to do I mean you you you're
saying we have to have the store
these things and then you have a
list of things that that are
definitely you know get you out
of it but all those things
procurement.
Excess of that farm to the minor
and I'm telling you minors in
certain parts of the state need
that access to have that.
Madam chairwoman representatives
of Representative Nibert I guess
I would ask another question
with your scenario is that minor
who access is that rifle behind
the door is that minor five
years old for seventeen years
old.
That minor could be either one.
When the or anyone in between
Madam chair representative so
Representative Nibert.
I would then I think the
question or the answer to your
question comes back to the facts
that the DA would consider in
that instance if that person who
gets hit with that ricocheted
able it dies or is injured.
Well I I it's it's a it's a
concern because I mean as you've
stated madam chair on
Representative Mr Martinez using
you stated that there are some
aspects of strict liability I
mean.
Madam chair representative
Representative Nibert I was
saying strict liability and
answered it Representative reams
question about it driving take.
So so didn't apply to to this no
not to this it it it does seem
like strict liability to me
because you meet the elements
and
the you're you're guilty but
anyway that's my concern with
the negligent standards and.
I would hope.
That the people Lincoln County
where Corona is located with
probably view this differently
than folks in in in Albuquerque
it in determining someone's
guilt or innocence under the
issue of storage
You mentioned there was a little
bit of questioning regarding
guns in a locked car and I'd
like to the flesh that out a
little bit of we're looking at
the issue of close proximity on
page three of the top of the
page.
If there's a.
A weapon in a locked car the you
are going into the federal
courthouse because they don't
allow such things in the
courthouse of.
And someone breaks in your car.
The.
I'm reading this as you would
not be charged with that even if
the minor breaks and causes all
sorts of problems with is that
an accurate read of this Bill.
Madam chairwoman representatives
representative Nibert you may
have been out of the room when
the in one of the discussions
earlier with Representative
McQueen
The it's my understanding that.
The better language for this
specific provision on lines one
through two would be while the
person has actual or
constructive possession of the
firearms so again getting back
to the analysis
it would depend with your in
okay so you're you're going into
the federal courthouse you can't
take the economic and there did
you leave the pistol on the
dashboard loaded for did you
lock away your glove compartment
box
it would be part of that would
be part analysis to were you
negligent and how you were
responsible for that with.
So madam chair and and Mr
Martinez.
Simply locking the gun in your
car may not be enough you have
to lock it in your.
Glove compartment within a lot
vehicle.
So what you're saying.
one of the.
Adam chairwoman representatives
Representative Nibert
I'm gonna page two lines twenty
two through twenty five that was
K. one of the exceptions is that
was kept in a locked container.
And I think a a district
attorney would consider whether
a glove compartment is a locked
container if as a lock on it or
and then there's other language
or or was either securely
stored so if you have it in the
glove compartment box but
there's no lock will did you
lock your car did you leave your
windows up did you leave them
down.
Things like that.
So if I hear you right madam
chairman Mr Martinez.
If.
I understand if you leave the
gun on your dash everybody can
see it that's one thing but if
you take reasonable steps to.
Keep the identity of that gun
within a locked car that could
be the large container could it
not.
Madam chairwoman Representative
representative Nibert my sense
is that that would be one of our
that should be one of the
factors that districts transient
look at considering whether
charging on and and that would
probably one of the main
factors.
The.
Again the idea of close
proximity
You know I'm up here my wife's
home alone.
We certainly have some.
Weapons in the house that she
may need easy access to if
something were to happen in the
house and.
This idea close proximity
Kind of weighs on my heart
because
You said the person as actual or
constructive possession.
And you may be changing the
language from close proximity to
to that other languages at what
I understand I believe that
there are madam chairman
representative Representative
Representative Nibert I'm not
sure if that would be a motion
before this committee today but
some future of and I I
understand that that's what's
gonna be moved.
And I'm not sure that gives me
more comfort but person as
actual or constructive
possession actual positions
pretty easy either have it or
you don't constructive
possession.
Kind of wonder what what that is
is that the night stand that
Representative from San Juan was
talking about or or you know
again does it have to be under
the pillow so to speak
and so I do a little little
concerned about some of that
but.
If.
If it's just.
Me and my wife in the house and
we have a firearm in the budget
stand.
And we're not expecting company
so that firearm remains in that
state.
Somebody rings a doorbell we
answer the doorbell I have ten
and really kids and low B. Hall
one of them takes a.
Takes their liberties through
our house and and finds Farm
goes out.
Hurt somebody causes great
bodily harm.
Am I now.
Am I now.
Subject to this act and and
guilty of its provisions.
Because of that of the.
Madam chair representative is
not Representative Nibert
If I could for center for
scenario because there wasn't
Miner involved obviously this
doesn't apply.
Now you have that person with
ten unruly kids show up.
Was that economic left on the
night stand for ten days while
those ten unruly kids were going
through your house.
Playing everywhere.
That may be a serious
consideration considering the
facts to your scenario.
The madam chair and and Mr
Martinez I'm thinking.
It's more media
we answer the door they come in
and.
You know they leave a an hour
and a half later while we hold
one of them has to go.
It was not locked it was not in
again storage safe if it was in
the top drawer of a budget
state.
That.
You know on my wife's Haider on
my side
And I'm concerned about whether
or not in that scenario I would
be guilty of this because.
They did not commit an illegal
entry we invited the man but we
never.
Anticipated that.
A minor would be number one
accessing our bedroom let alone
accessing our.
Private drawers you know but it
happened so does that this
number I.
Protect me.
Or does that provide no
protection in that particular
scenario.
Hello to the Mr madam chair
members of the committee
representative Nibert.
There would be a number of items
that you would be looking at
there with these children who
came into your house and you
even though you weren't
expecting them but you're
familiar with these children you
know they were in boxes they go
through everything they've been
to your house before and you had
that gun stored in a night stand
in the door and you know that
that's what they do they go
through your things maybe these
are your grandchildren and
that's what they do then you are
going to be responsible if you
have these children to come over
you don't know anything about
him you and I expecting the
children to go through your your
drawer and because that's not
you not familiar with these kids
and they shouldn't be in your
bedroom in the first place so
madam chair members of the
committee representative might
be you're not going to be
charged and so it again is the
totality of the circumstances
what happened what was the basis
for which the these items are
these things occurred and that
is the that's the good an
effective part of this piece of
legislation Representative man
you Madam chairwoman
representatives representative
Nibert also if I may you know
of.
The five exceptions are
exclusive I would also point you
to number one with your scenario
is or kept in a location the
reasonable person would believe
to be secure when obtained by a
minor so you talked about a
drawer and that children are
normally in that house that
would be something for the
district attorney to consider
where was that Tor and
now health how safe is it to so
I would say that in looking at
the exception not only looking
at one but any of those I could
apply
I would madam chair and were
Representative Mr Martinez I
would hope that the district
attorney's would would look at
some of that stuff but I see the
words on the paper and it scares
me frankly that.
We are looking to.
Criminalize law abiding citizens
and and I if there's the.
Concerns me there
We talked a little bit about
paragraph D. on page three of.
It strikes me that this
paragraph and I think the
testimony was with this
paragraph is applying to the.
Person being the adult and not
the miners that.
Correct.
Yes madam chair members of the
committee Representative Nibert
the answer is yes.
Madam chair representative I
would suggest to you that may
be.
It seems to me that.
Particularly with children at
home and this issue.
Seem to me that evidence that
the minor attended a firearm
safety course sure went to
hunter safety with with mom and
dad and and did those same
should be evidence that the
parents were properly
instructing this child is to the
safe use of weapons of that
would be more mitigating to me
that.
The adults attended those
courses so I I just throw that
out there
I would.
Over on the issue of displaying
and brandishing.
Seems to me that.
All displays of a firearm.
Well All brandishing would
include display.
But there could be displays
without brandishing is that
accurate.
Madam chair representative so
Representative Nibert
I think one of things that the I
think the reason you may have
two words there is with
brandish.
Brandishes more of wave as a
threat.
that that could be.
The way the way that you would
charge it it it would depend on
the circumstance of how that
weapon was used was a brand is
like you know the person lifted
or or stuck in somebody's face
it would depend on how the
weapon was manipulated.
Well.
Madam chair and Mr Martinez
Hello how should I read on page
two lines two through.
Through I the.
It is a minor access is a
firearm and this was.
For brandishes a firearm in a
threatening manner or causes
injury to a minor I do is is
display.
Related to in a threatening
manner or just display stand
alone.
Madam chair representative
Representative I'm not ever so
right there you're looking at.
At two things that you need to
satisfy for the for the element
the minor axis is the firearm.
And then the second thing is
either displace it four friended
renditions of one or the other.
So so.
You really don't need the words
in a threatening manner because
brandishes already includes
threatening right.
The thing is is that is and
things.
And so you would need.
Madam chair representative
representative Nibert
We believe that the language is
still relevant in that.
In that line line number three.
Madam chair Mister Martinez I I
would disagree I I seems to me
that you can get by with just
saying access is a firearm and
brandishes.
Brandishes a or call injury to
the minor another person
because rendition is going to
include.
A display in a threatening
manner.
And so I hope that the word
display is not.
A word that we're intending to
use in a of itself because the
display could be just simply
take it out of your pocket for
the on the on the table.
That's a display but there's no
threat to anyone.
And yet they would be charged
with that word that they could
be charged to the adult could be
charged with this offense even
though the minor just just took
the gun out and put it on the
table Hey look look at the gun
grant funded.
Not lotus not threatening anyone
but yet the adults are guilty of
this
This negligent at.
And yet
You know and I think that comes
about by the the word display it
would not come about if you had
just were brandishing because of
brand.
You see what I'm trying to
explain amendment and artfully
Madam chair representative
representative Nibert
The distinction I think again it
comes back to the person who's
going the the prosecutors going
to be making a decision I think
possibly where the we're display
could be be used.
thank you recently there was a
news article our news story
where you should word show this
child in diapers walking around
on this terrorism apartment
terrace with that with a pistol.
And the child not brandishing in
the child's not threatening
anybody but the person but the
child is displaying so the new
story was the wind woke up the
father I think it was the father
and that could be a potential
scenario so again depending upon
the facts the specific
the facts involved this may be
where you're giving that tool to
the prosecutor in certain
situations but not not
necessarily all the.
Madam chair representative a
statement was made that the I
thank the Attorney General
opined that the bill is
constitutional could you supply
us with that opinion.
Or maybe I misunderstood what
you said but I thought the
statement was made that the
Attorney General has opined that
this bill is constitutional so.
Madam chair Madam chairwoman
representatives Representative
nighter I'm the one is made that
statement and it was triggered
by actually one of the comments
during from the public and I
my memory was when this bill was
heard before the last committee
that was
to that effect that's what
Attorney General torrez said in
in opening statements about this
bill.
So it was a statement of what an
opinion of the Attorney General
what I reference was just a
statement made in the previous
committee
madam chair and and Mr Martinez
if if you're aware of a specific
Attorney General opinion I I
certainly would be interested
saying that if it's just a
statement them that's fine
because I I I do.
I do have some real
constitutional concerns
regarding this bill because I
don't know how all our system
can can.
Under this bill.
Keep them and their and our.
For security purposes.
Without having that.
Firearm available.
To minors.
I I I just don't know how that
that occurs because if you
requirement to be locked away
for requirement to be get out of
the top shelf stability could
reach whatever the case may be
I'm not sure that that.
Firearm is of much use in
protecting my household if.
Somebody came through the door
because the fact of the matter
is you need ready access to that
economic and out on these
ranches that are out in the
middle of nowhere.
The entire family needs access
to weapons for variety of
reasons rattle snake on the back
porch coyotes give me whatever
the case may be and and so I
have some some constitutional
concerns with that of the I
won't go into those at this
point.
My last question
Madam chair is really dealing
with the the shooting sports I
believe you made the statement
that there should not impact or
have a negative effect on
shooting sports.
So I would like to know how does
a minor.
Well.
How does a parent.
Who.
Hands over not just doesn't
store but hands to their minor
child.
A weapon to go engage in the
shooting sports how do they.
Keep themselves from the.
Violation of this if that child
in the course of that.
Again accidentally.
Shoot something and somebody is
hurt.
As a result of that action.
Madam chairwoman Representative
drivers Representative Nibert
I'm sorry for Mrs king and
you've heard me say this all
right I think you see it coming
is it depends because if it was
negligently stored.
Then the statute is looked at
but in your scenario possibly
not because there's no evidence
that was negligent negligently
stored that that weapon was
given to somebody else I'm sorry
to a child in your scenario and
so I don't think that the DA
would be looking at this not the
child took it in is negligently
store that's an issue but your
scenario I don't think it
applies.
So madam chair and and Mr
Martinez if the parent gives on
the gun and.
They no longer are subject to
this act.
The penalties Metcalfe Madam
chair representative
representative Nibert I go back
to the very first element is the
person keeps our stores a farm
in a negligent manner which
disregards that's that's the
first that's the first criteria
that you need to examine and
looking at this low for
proposal.
there may be some proponents of
this bill that might be a little
concerned about that that madam
chair that's all my questions
thank you.
Thank you representative
Representative Martinez.
Thank you I'm chairman of the to
pass.
We have.
For made by Representative.
I.
And
The motion said there I have a
couple comments to make and I
will I will be brief
So this is the way I see it.
Adults own firearms sometimes
teenagers on fire arms under the
supervision of their parents
parents are responsible for
their children.
This law to my way of thinking
says parent you are responsible
for evaluating your home where
you're storing the governor
maybe your car but let's say
home because I think that's the
most likely scenario.
For ensuring that children whom
you know will be in your home
and their friends do not have
access to them.
And you are going to be held
responsible if you act in our
own negligent way and make about
assessment so for example the
scenario that Representative
Nibert was making I store the
gun behind my door for in the
near the front door.
Well I would suggest to you that
if there's a five year old in
the house that is criminally
negligent it is I I don't think
it's hard to figure that out you
do not leave a loaded gun by the
door when you have a five year
old in the house I'm not sure
why we had a long debate about
that but it's pretty clear to me
that is evident if you have a
seventeen year old in the house
maybe that is a different
situation if that child has gone
is part of a gun club is a
shooter you know in a shooting
club has been trained about
handling a gun in a responsible
way that may be okay.
but what this law says is adult
you are responsible for a very
dangerous weapon that has shown
to be killing children on a
daily basis often in schools.
In state in grocery stores all
sorts of places that's what this
law says and I don't think it's
unreasonable for us to pass
legislation that make sure that
people who own guns and by the
way I own a firearm my husband
owns firearms and we store those
guns.
The way Ivey Hayes may be
different because we at this
point in time do not have
children in the home different
from somebody who does have a
home and we expect people to use
good judgment is it unfair to
expect people who own guns to
exercise good judgment I don't
think it is.
So a lot of talk about vagueness
and so on we had built where we
say you have to put him in a
safe and then we had objections
to that we had built it said you
had to put a lock on the bank we
had objections to that so we
make it in a way that people are
responsible for handling the
guns and I think that's a fair
way to go it will be evaluated
on a case by case basis so if
you're a rural owner of guns
maybe it will be the evaluated
differently than if you're in an
urban environment this gives
latitude to the prosecutor to
evaluate on a case by case basis
and it gives the jury who will
be evaluating whether or not you
vape behave propria leader
certain standards to go by and
it could be that different
communities will view these
things differently so I think
this is very reasonable and I
intend to vote in favor of this
bill.
The church is the question of
process the Sanchez head
reference a couple potential
language changes.
is that something we should take
care of in this committee or two
on the floor.
Madam chair members of the
committee representative claim
on the floor.
Thank you
you call the roll.
Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey yeah.
Representative lake.
No.
Mr speaker yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative night for no.
Representative right now.
Representative Rehm no ma'am.
Representative said us yes.
Madam vice chair yes.
Madam chair yes.
But do pass on house bill nine I
think that concludes our agenda
for today we will be meeting on
Wednesday at one thirty we're
going to have a conversation
about criminal justice issues
what works what doesn't you know
