We would have liked to have the
state defense force as another
part of the resources available
to us to have dealt with this
pandemic the last year you madam
chair
I think it's a good bill and I
stand for questions.
Thank you.
Let me check to be sure with
Georgia Evans our committee
assistant to make sure we're on
the webcast.
Madam chair yes just turned on
okay.
All right.
But we go to the audience we
first take up to ten seconds all
of those in attendance to see
how they're feeling about it if
they're in favor they say yes to
they're not favor they say now
and then we'll take public
comment in regards to committee
members of the ten second call
is open.
Well I'm happy to report a
hundred percent of the audience
is in agreement with your bill
and but there are only two
people so let's see if they
would like to comment anybody
there like to comment on this
bill.
Looks like we do not have public
comment so I will go next to the
committee members.
Representative McQueen.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair of the center I I
have two questions on the bill
in neither neither which I think
is really at the heart of the
bill but they were questions
that cured me the first is the
the title of the bill says
establishing The New Mexico
defense force.
But that's that's not accurate
is that mean that the missile
defense force already existed
we're just tweaking it will.
And and certainly will let you
all know the answer that the and
if if that's okay
Representative.
Please madam Madam chair
representative
get you that you're absolutely
correct the state defense force
already exist in statute the
problem is is that they can only
be called to duty when the
National Guard is is basically
out of capacity and as I've
testified in previous years
that's really not it's not
something that's currently
possible under the current
construct if the New Mexico
National Guard was out of
capacity we would look to our
state through an emergency
contact and we bring national
guards men and women from our
adjacent states in to assist us
if that was the case and they
were also unable to assist us in
our active duty counterparts we
would bring them up essentially
in that help resolve this so
basically the state defense
force exist in statute but it
exists under a Cold War
construct a scenario for total
mobilization which is very very
unlikely and so therefore
they've not been able to be used
Texas for example has five
thousand members in their state
defense force and they use them
regularly during domestic
response use them heavily during
this COVID nineteen response.
We have a very small cadre we
would love to have used them
this past year but were unable
to use them because they are not
authorized on the current law.
Okay thank you for that but I
think when I read the title of
the bill I thought oh my
goodness we're doing some big
new thing and then I read the
actual text of the bill it's
like now we're just refining
something we already.
My other question Madam chair
center was on the the
unauthorized insignia decoration
bedroom and by.
On that language
this appeared to me to be you
facing you all will wear ribbons
and medals that you did our
language what about a teen news
number times recently
Law enforcement or even military
personnel with you know Punisher
patches and even maga hatches
and stuff like that too many
rules regarding
wearing things like that on your
uniform.
Thank you madam chair and
representative if I may I'd like
to defer to the general for a
more clarifying answer.
Madam chair representative thank
you for that question no those
things are not authorized on our
uniforms there are only certain
devices that are in and badges
skill badges that sits with
their authorized on the uniform
of the United States military
and for example a Punisher logo
or wearing the mega hat while in
uniform is on authorized those
are those are not occupied we're
talking about is somebody
wearing an authorized revenue
that they have not earned or do
not have the the the proper
credentials to be able to wear
that is what we are trying to
address this again if it already
exists many these things exist
in the uniform code of military
justice on the federal side but
when my National Guard soldiers
and airmen or in the state
capacity as they are today.
We have a state of New Mexico
court of military justice we're
trying to just marry these
things up I hope that answers
your question Sir
thank you madam chair thank you
center thank you general.
Next I have Representative night
Burt.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair and senator on page
five wines eight through and.
May have been the.
The word Sir the the general was
talking about when addressing
Representative queens a question
first question but I noticed
that we've gone from a.
Standard that required some.
I guess findings by the governor
to basically a.
Situation where it's just
discretionary.
At the governor and and can you
comment on.
The
desire to make that change.
In the language
and again if you don't mind I
will certainly turn to the
general for clarification who's
had little more one on one
discussions with the
ministration.
Madam chair representative
Nibert yes so the the language
that you're referring to that
was stricken out that is exactly
what the we need to change total
stranger composition of the
National Guard within the state
is deemed by the governor to be
insufficient so again at as I
described if that were the case
and again there are four
thousand New Mexico national
guardsmen and women here in the
state of New Mexico
at any given time we probably
have a couple hundred that are
deployed overseas which is the
case right now today we have
three hundred fifty airmen and
soldiers are working on the
COVID nineteen response I sent
approximately two hundred
soldiers to support the
presidential inauguration but
what that meant is I still had
around three thousand airmen and
soldiers available in the state
of New Mexico to respond to
whatever natural disaster or
issues we had in the state so we
had plenty of capacity.
This type of scenario was really
written on a Cold War construct
where for example the entire New
Mexico National Guard was
mobilized to go to the European
and Pacific theaters of war
during World War two that type
of oil mobilization although it
could happen very unlikely and
so what's been the practical
application of this is the state
defense force has never been
called to duty these are doctors
these are lawyers their
professional folks with cyber
security expertise their peer
volunteers when they train they
are in a on page status they
don't get paid a penny for their
for their work they wear the
uniform it's a modified army
uniform that Representative
thirty representative or defines
them as state defense force
members.
If in the event that we had a of
a natural disaster or emergency.
It would be upon my
recommendation to the governor
that hate I have this capacity
that is resident in the state
defense force we should bring
them to do they can help us so
for example again during the
COVID nineteen pandemic
response there were doctors in
these are there are folks that
have a expertise logistics that
could have assisted us and they
did it to some extent but not to
the extent that they could
happen at any time somebody is
brought on state active duty
that's what we'd be talking
about there is a bill to be paid
for by the state and so it was
it's always we're never the
first course of action Madam
chair representative we're never
the first course of action
because a military solution to a
problem is always very expensive
and so we choose planning figure
about two hundred dollars per
day per individual that we bring
to state active duty and so it's
always very judicious in how
many people we bring up to do a
specific task in this case right
now the state defense forced the
only have a of maybe twenty four
to thirty individuals that are
in the state defense force I
have put them on a freeze to
stop them from a recruiting
additional people as you all
know as you work with volunteers
if you can't use of on tier
you'll lose the volunteer and so
in this case we have not
intentionally we've not
recruited individuals to do to
do this task
but really what we we needed was
an ability for the governor with
the recommendation of the
adjutant general to bring this
extra capacity to bear to the
problems that exist the
potential future problems or
emergencies that we might face.
Madam chair representative I
hope that answers your question.
Madam chair and general it it
answer my question of and that
certainly.
It as I.
Think about it it's basically to
give you some additional tools
that you would not have because
this requirement would be
unlikely to be met.
Because you have sufficient
members of the National Guard
members who would be available
but this allows you to call the
doctor.
from the the guard at the
garbage from the defense force
if the governor deems it
necessary to address the
disaster so I appreciate that
one.
One question that.
Maybe it Madam but.
I recall we're in the.
My sister graduated from high
school she attended Texas to act
in order to get the out of state
tuition waiver she had become a
member of the taxes Mr and so a
lot of the.
People one of my classmates from
Clovis and the Roswell Hobbs
except for that attended Texas
tech they were in the Texas
guard for the purpose of
securing in state tuition rates
are for their service and I
remember she had to go to
training you know occasionally
never got I think called up but
that was one way to
secure a a number of young
people to
To serve in that regard and so
there there may be some
interesting ways of
of getting some people to to
join the
All the.
It's force that that the maybe
maybe would allow you to get a
lot of a lot more people
involved in the program thank
you madam chair thank you
general thank you senator.
Thank you Representative I
turned off my camera because my
band with this bad right now so
I apologize for not.
What you're seeing you seeing
you on the usual way
Representative Alcon you're next
thank you madam chair and
well my questions are being
answered but at the time.
Advertisement to make a motion
for a new bass.
Representative you can do that
now because we can continue
discussion of necessary so well
I had we have a motion for
Representative all gone for two
passed.
Our second.
Thank you.
Second from the vice chair
Representative Kannada.
Okay okay I'm I was one question
that that what Representative
McQueen was asking you the
question about the insignias and
authorized
They're all.
Page eighteen and
Nine nine that's the section
where that is covered in section
eleven.
And
What what I I wondered about it
seems to me that you said that
they served without pay but on
line twenty three one of the
penalties for wrongful wearing
of such
thank yous would be of
forfeiture of all pay so I was
just a little confused about
that.
Thank you madam chair up for
clarification if I may turn to
general of course.
Madam chair you're you're
correct so there's two different
categories of people that are
being addressed by this law so
when I said the they perform
their duty without pay I was
referring to the state defense
force so the state defense
forced when they are what's in
called cadre duty track cadre
duty they are training and that
is voluntary they're
volunteering when they've been
activated for state active duty
again a scenario that has not
occurred ever one that we hope
to rectify by fixing this law
they would be paid they would be
at that point it would be paid
the the point that we're trying
to fix here with the the new
material wearing on authorized
insignia decoration bad trip and
deviced hello Tallman is
referring to the members of the
National Guard not the state
defense force although I guess
it would apply this members of
the state Defense Forces well
and so what it's saying is Madam
chair of the see if you can see
so all my uniform you see two
badges here one is for airborne
badging one is for aerosol these
are skill identifiers.
Indicating that I've gone to
jump school and I've gone to
salts.
and so if I were wearing those
badges those skill badges in on
authorized right which means I
didn't attend the school and I
was caught by somebody in the
chain of command I would be
subject to what's listed here US
some level of punished and so
that's really what we're trying
to fix again this is something
that that exists we're just
trying to get our statute in
line with the uniform code of
military justice.
Thank you for that explanation
are there for the questions from
the committee.
Okay we have a motion for a two
passed in a second let's call
the roll please.
Representative Alcon.
Yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Cook.
With Mr speaker.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Lewis yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert yes.
Representative Rehm yes.
Representative Townsend.
Yes.
Yes.
Madam chair yes.
Zero we have a due pass.
Thank you very much Senator you
have to do passed on Senate bill
one forty six and thank you
general for being with us for
this time.
Chair thank you so very much and
all of the members we appreciate
questions and madam chair up I
don't know what the new poll but
maybe we'll cross paths once
again look forward to that.
I hope so you're supposed to be
on an interim committee and if
you didn't have time to do.
Nice to see you Senator thank
you very much have a.
Next we should have Senator
Lopez.
Madam chair yes are you going to
cover that for her I am it was
origin only going to be
Representative Christine
Trujillo but she's on probation
and she was trying to get out
but I don't think she's
available.
Thank you go ahead
Representative Lewis okay great
and if I could have Lynda
Spiegel and when.
It is promoted to help.
That would be great but I can
began.
So madam chair and committee
SB ninety two amended is
regarding missing persons so
there was an original bill that
came about after the bodies of
missing women were found on the
west may set in Albuquerque in
the early two thousands I think
a lot of us all that in the news
the legislation created a
clearing house and the
department of public safety as a
central respiratory of
information on missing persons
and unidentified remains.
All law enforcement agencies
including tribal agencies are
required to report missing
persons when a missing person is
found information as reported to
the person that notified law and
current law enforcement that a
person was missing so this bill
provides an exemption.
To the requirement that the
reporting person be notified
that the missing person is found
so the missing person can notify
law enforcement and or the
clearing house that they request
confidentiality and that the
reporting person not be informed
that they were found or their
current location immersing if a
missing person has a guardian
custodian law enforcement shall
inform the current or of
jurisdiction that they have been
found so
this is really to protect those
folks women that don't want to
be found and for instance says
that there's a situations of
domestic abuse and just one
final thing as that the
exemption does not apply to
minors.
So with that madam chair
representative Linda Siegel
wants to add more I appreciate
that.
When I just go ahead miss.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee the single
representing the I'm excuse me
I'm Linda if you could get
closer it's hard to hear you.
I'm sorry I need to turn out.
Chair members of the committee
Linda Siegel representing the
New Mexico coalition against
domestic violence and and we we
started working on this bill
they here that the bill taxed
and.
We couldn't get this language
and at the time and so now we
certainly had situations that
have been reported to us and
this is why we're bringing this
forward now and and when K. may
have more to add to that.
Madam chair members of the
committee good morning close to
the afternoon bring Keita's I'm
the director Policy The New
Mexico coalition against
domestic violence we represent
over thirty domestic violence
victim and offender service
programs throughout the state
and I'm also vice chair of the
New Mexico intimate violence
partner review team multi
disciplinary finality review
team authorized hi New Mexico
statutes three one dash to to
dash four point one and I just
wanted to let you know about the
ramifications for abuse victims
under this Act there are
instances when an abusive
partner will report is missing a
law enforcement as a means of
attempting to locate that person
it's really common for a victim
of abuse to secretly leave their
home to provide a safe location
such as a shelter friend or
family member.
And these victims who flee abuse
are at heightened risk of severe
injury and that it and that at
time is separate from if fender
it is the most dangerous time in
a relationship
so victims
When we look at in the missing
persons act that the nation's
twenty nine dash fifteen dash
to.
Endangered persons include
someone who is in imminent
danger of being harmed by
another who has been harmed by
another
or is protected was protected by
an order of protection so we
know on the death review team
that forty one percent of the
homicide offenders.
We're parties in an order of
protection that doesn't always
help that doesn't always save
somebody's life it can be a
great to all but it's not it's
not an answer so these people
can be very and user can be the
person reporting them so we're
just looking to
It said that the victim is not
identified not located to bat in
progress person in any of these
situations it is critical that
these victims are protected by
the state through the provision
for confidentiality which is
proposed in Senate bill ninety
two I thank you so much madam
chair and members of the
committee for listening to my
comments.
Thank you are you ready for us
to go to the audience now
Representative Lewis yes thank
you madam chair okay let's take
a ten second called in by a show
of hands those in attendance if
you'll educate yes if you're in
favor of the bill
ninety two and now it's here in
opposition let's go ahead and
open up that Paul.
Okay we have four people in
support and not in opposition so
it was a hundred percent and let
me see if there are any of those
folks who would like to speak.
Yes we have some first we have
Karen what law.
Hi Karen.
Madam chair members of the
committee Karen rate lock with
the national association of
social workers New Mexico
chapter and we stand in strong
support of this legislation we
really appreciate the Sanchez
for bringing this for bringing
this piece of legislation it is
it is crucial as was stated that
victims of domestic violence are
able to maintain their anonymity
with there be used from their
abusers thank you.
Thank you next Ron Olson.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Ron Olson I am a civil legal
attorney for community against
violence up here in tiles New
Mexico and I would like to echo
the comments of the prior public
speaker but also add that I
myself have dealt with these two
individuals recently who had
fled from their abuser and ended
up in New Mexico and we're in a
position where they could not
really reports their concerns or
fears about the person that had
been following them these
individuals had crossed state
lines in order to make it to
safety where they had family but
really found that law
enforcement was more a party to
helping the other individual
that they were fleeing from
because as soon as they reached
out to law enforcement for help
that individual would know where
they were so I would like to
voice our support for this bill
as well.
Thank you very much Mr I have
anybody else.
No one else in the attendee
section you wish to speak I'm
gonna go back to the committee
now and I'm wondering if the
Representative loss if you want
to say anything before I take
questions from committee
members.
No that's fine we can take a
quick questions thank you madam
chair right first I have on my
list Representative green.
Madam chair thank you
Representative every.
Thank you madam chair and
representative I just want to
talk about the dynamics of how
this occurs because when I was
out in the field
I came across individuals who
did not wish to be found so.
What the officer would do is
notify the radio or radio room
who has since the icy and they
would.
Send what's termed a locate okay
the person has been found but
does not wish to be identified
where they are.
So that information we go back
to the agency that entered the
information.
So if the agency over there
divulge that yes it was the
Bernalillo county sheriff's
department in Albuquerque New
Mexico that they knew that was
so location.
Way this bill is written.
So if you obtain that
information then what you do
because in every missing person
report R. K. you have to write a
report.
So now that you know it's the
Bernalillo county sheriff's
department you now if for a the
report.
This bill doesn't stop the bring
up that rate of that report.
Now that I have that report I
can also if for a the radio room
records to tell me what color
the car is what the license
plate is.
So the beginnings of notifying
the clearing houses already you
know there and will continue as
such.
So I just want you to be aware.
That we're we're not getting to
exactly what you want to do.
Them madam chair and
Representative I have one
problem so if we look at on page
two about the consortium support
I'm an adult and I have a good
studio and I'm probably not
confident in saying.
That are I'm fine and I don't
want to be found I think that
it's problematic to miss and
madam chair Representative what
do you think of that.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative I'll defer to
the experts maybe just okay yes
can respond.
Yes if so in terms of
Reporting
My gosh I just lost my train of
thought and.
Okay thank you yes madam chair
members Linda Siegel so that
would that is a specific
amendment that was put on in
Senate Judiciary to address the
fact that a person might have a
custodian or guardian and so
then if you report it to the
court of jurisdiction the court
that declared that person that
they needed our our guardian so
that the court would now and the
court to make a determination
about what to do.
Madam chair New Mexico eight you
know I understand that.
But if this person has a
guardian.
Then if you will there we have
to treat them the law
enforcement has to treat them
like they're a juvenile.
Madam chair representative
Representative green.
We don't know well.
It will be reported by the guard
and one of the concerns was that
perhaps the guardian was the
abuser and that is why law
enforcement were required to
report to the court.
That was the thinking of the
Senate amendment.
Madam chair New Mexico we're
having a real hard time hearing
you but I heard what you said
but
what.
Let's assume for a moment that
this person.
R. is is mentally ill and
so we're we the police are
supposed to take that person
into custody and until that
because the the guardian gets
there or someone that can.
Care for that person.
But what you're saying is you
want us to release that person.
And just notify the court.
And I don't think that is the
process that that we should be
following.
Madam chair Representative Rehm
I think that that the state
recently they have rules that
actually address some of this
before we put it in statute but
we felt that that wasn't the
solution I think that you could
create the process rules of how
to do this now
How do you know someone is
mentally ill if they're behaving
in a manner that's threatening
to themselves or others you're
going to do whatever you would
do and in that situation.
So I don't know that that.
That that's really a problem but
you would know more.
Madam chair and miss Siegel so
the what we're when I ran this
person through NCIC the.
What we term the code the
notification to us would say
that the guardian has reported
this person are missing.
And so we would the the law
enforcement would have notice up
front so
you know I'm I'm not against
what you're doing I just want
you to understand the dynamics
of what's happening and I don't
think we're getting to the end
result.
You know I think you're gonna
have to go over the upper of
statute and go ahead and and
Bacon exclusion in there as
well.
Representative Rehm but I just
interject because I noticed our
committee analysis addressed
the.
Tension leave for an ever
exemption and this policy is
here and then I let her comment
on that at this time okay go
ahead with Kelly.
Yes madam chair and
Representative Rehm if you look
at section fourteen to one do.
And the age of it brought
fourteen to one the exams sports
since the launch of Force mint
records.
That retrieved via all I law
enforcement records pertaining
to investigations
of victims or non law
enforcement witnesses and also
so as otherwise provided by law
which would pertain to section
twenty nine fifteen to see what
which is a new sections and
Senate bill ninety two.
So.
You think they ever exemption is
actually contained in the
language here yes under section
H. as otherwise provided by law.
are you madam chair.
And
Miss Kelly I.
I I I saw that but I'm not sure
that it's.
Or not but you guys are the
lawyers and you know if you say
that's what it's going well.
But anyway we can we can see it
I'm not opposed to it I just
want everyone to understand the
dynamics.
I really appreciate your
bringing it up because you're in
a position to now how it
actually works for the office
this is the first.
And
nobody wants that to happen
where the person who's.
Was actually the threat can find
out through a whole.
Thank you madam chair and I came
across individuals not many of
thank goodness but that
requested that we just send a
notification they don't want to
be notified you know so okay
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative.
Next I have Representative look.
Thank you madam chair chair I
the technical question and I
figured it out all by myself so
I'm good thank you.
Representative Nibert did you
take your hand down you were up.
My question was regarding the
guardium and.
Answered verily they're not
doing anything about it so
that's okay.
Okay Okey I'm.
I don't see other hands in my I
do Representative Armstrong
thank you madam chair I just
wanted to move it to pass and
I'll second that.
We have a motion for two passed
representative Armstrong a
second for Representative all
Colin is there further
discussion.
Let's have a quick call the roll
please.
Representative Alcon yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Cook.
Mr speaker.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Lewis yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative night Burt.
Yes and I'd like to explain more
for.
Senator green yes.
Representative Townsend.
Yes.
Thank.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Yes Representative divert to
explain his phone.
Thank you madam chair.
I was going to vote no because I
am concerned about the
guardianship situation I would
encourage the Sanchez to really
look at that
language because.
We're put law enforcement in a
pretty awkward situation we're
dealing with the and incompetent
and I suppose the reason why we
exclude minors is because they
cannot make decisions and
neither can a person is subject
to a guardianship and and we are
basically of forcing.
Maybe some some bad results
survive but if that person
continue to Water Street Sir or
be let out and I'm concerned
about that but I think there
could be a fix for that thank
you madam chair.
Thank you very much and could
you tell me the vote please Sam
was intended zero we have to
pass.
You have N. two passed and I I
invite you to just look at that
attention all.
That was brought up.
Sorry.
It very much thank you all very
much thank you madam.
And committee members.
You.
If I have anybody else covering
for the next thanks so let's see
if senator Sanchez is with us.
Madam chair I'm presenting that
builds.
Yes I am our regular thanks for
letting me know right go ahead
of schedule one eighty one yup
madam chair I could.
I'd like to bring up Monica all
to try and Douglas carver.
Great.
Madam chair members of the
committee
First of all for those two just
so committee knows who they are
I called.
yes the New Mexico is the
director of the state
I'm sorry New Mexico but New
Mexico state director of the
pardons and fees justice center
I'm getting a slow start this
morning and Douglas carvers
deputy director the sentencing
commission and this bill before
I begin to describe it was
unanimously endorsed by the New
Mexico sentencing commission and
by the interim courts
corrections and justice
commission what this really does
yeah as yet.
Makes it realistic for people to
pay funds
so are that the court should be
considering when they're
assessing a convicted person's
ability to pay fines the ability
to pay where they can't pay they
would be permitted to make
installment payments every
thirty days it also expands
things like community services
order little finance their other
changes but and we're seeing
this our this is come up in
another context another bill
that I'm involved in where we're
actually child's work bill we're
actually spending more money
trying to collect fees that we
are actually
Are collecting the fees
themselves so if you look at the
I believe it's it's not the part
maybe the F. I. R. as I pulled
the second page you look at for
example they talk about the core
Santa Fe and Bernalillo county
often expand more money trying
to collect these in the plan
itself and if you look at the
example from Bernalillo county
they actually spent more money
are trying to collect of these
assessed and they actually
received showing a deficit of
two hundred seventy eight
thousand dollars so we need to
restore some sense to this
system our mission because this
is not my bill I'm not as
familiar with that is why should
be I have looked at carefully
but I know Monica is ready to
talk about this and I think our
Mr carburetors as well Dick
car repairs so madam chair with
the committee's indulgence I
want to turn it over on.
That's great I'm not sure who
would like to go first but
either of you may jump in.
Thank you so much madam chair
and representative Ely and
members of the committee so my
name is Michael all and as
Representative Eli stated I am
the C. director New Mexico C.
director for the fines of these
justice center and I'll just
briefly go into this bye huge
costs that it that are
associated with collection
practice.
Well both human and financial
not includes arrest
incarceration the extension of
probation terms and even the
suspension of driver's licenses
what just we one eighty one is
trying to do is improve the
overall efficiency of our
criminal legal system by
reducing the financial strain on
on our people the courts jails
and law enforcement officers
because I think these are so
costly there impact can be
absolutely devastating for
people and this impact is felt
very strongly here where nearly
one in five residents lives
below the at or below the
poverty level I twenty six
percent of children live in
poverty and thirty five percent
of parents lack secure
employment one of the strongest
indicators that fines and fees
are considered excessively
burdensome is that a large share
of New Mexicans would actually
rather go to jail and pay them
because they simply do not have
the money across district
magistrate and natural quartz
from two thousand twelve to two
thousand sixteen almost eighteen
million dollars and Joe credits
were issued
and engine when people because
they can't afford to pay it it
not only raises constitutional
concerns it's also a huge cost
to taxpayer taxpayers as
Representative Eli noted and
also generates absolutely no
revenue
some local research found that
finding fees are you know the
extremely unreliable source of
government income specifically
that New Mexico County spend
forty one cents to collect a
single dollar of finding the
revenue this is essentially a
hundred fifteen times more than
the higher expense to collect a
dollar of income tax and in our
largest county burn a Leo we
spend the and this is this is
the the the new
Sort of talking point that's
really really
it's it's quite shocking
actually but we spend a dollar
for exceeding a dollar seventeen
for every dollar of fines and
fees collected meaning that
they're actually losing money so
we drafted Senate bill one
eighty one to deal with a lot of
these concerns and also want to
ensure that the state is in
spending more money on
collection and collects and to
get a bit closer to your freedom
not being tied to your finances
and with that I will pass it
over to deputy director of the
New Mexico sensing Commission
Douglas Carter.
Thank you Monica thank you
representative Ely madam chair
members of the committee it's
good to be before you again I'm
Douglas carver deputy director
of the New Mexico sentencing
commission and Monica hit the
highlights and representative
Ely I would just remind the
committee of the membership of
the New Mexico sentencing
commission
this is a bill that was
unanimously endorsed in the
commission's reform committee so
it's another bill that's coming
out of the room our reform
committee to you
and then unanimously supported
at the full commission and the
commission includes as a
reminder I'm district attorneys
public defenders CYFD AOC
corrections department victims
advocates department of public
safety age the AG's office and
members appointed by the
governor and both
members of both parties from
both chambers so it is a wide
cross section of the criminal
justice system and this is the
first
crack at what we believe is
going to be an ongoing problem
of addressing the issues of
fines and fees and their use in
the criminal justice system as
the members are aware
particularly those of you who
are on the courts corrections
and justice committee and the
promo Justice Reform
subcommittee
addressing fines and fees and
how they are used in our
criminal justice system is a
pretty hot topic nationally in
criminal justice reform this is
our first shot at addressing
some of those inequities and as
I said it was unanimously
endorsed service for a few
compromises made on the way but
this concept has the full
support of both reform committee
and the full commission thank
you madam chair and madam chair
before we go to the public and
to members the committee as well
as a two quick things one I did
intend to mute and not trumpet
to my speakers.
I apologize for that the general
allergies that's number one and
number two it is interesting I
mean the national center for
state courts and I'm just
looking at the umpires done
extensive research on the
effects of these and project and
and no surprise has found that
it's created these perverse
incentives
you know when you're when you're
signing courts so you're
actually spending more
collecting fees than actually
are collecting the fees
themselves and as ms Altez are
talked about has a
disproportionate effect on the
indigent
you know for trying to get
people to be responsible we
should be responsible ourselves
so with that madam chair will
turn it all back over to the
committee for questions and for
public participation thank you
madam chair.
Thank you let me go to the
audience and state
first we're gonna have to call
if you're in favor on Senate
bill one eighty one please
indicate by saying estate here
in opposition based right now
and we'll have that pull up for
ten seconds.
So this is pretty similar to the
first bill only have nine in
favor and zero again so you're
your
At a hundred percent
Representative.
If I am let me invite those
anyone who would like to speak
in favor to do so please raise
your hand if you'd like to speak
in favor first I have to Chavez
Cook.
Thank you madam chair members of
the and thank you Representative
Ely for for helping to present
this bill today and thank you to
the advocates for bringing this
bill forward I stand in strong
support on behalf of the law
offices of the public defender
for two primary reasons one I
said on the sentencing
commissions criminal justice
reform committee and this bill
really is the fruit of our our
labor on that committee and of
consensus and stakeholder input
and in that way I think it's a
really strong bill and then that
the second reason is that what's
already been discussed which is
that the primary impact of these
fines and fees and the
consequences of failing to pay
falls on the backs of indigent
defendants which is of course
exactly our primary focus at the
public defender so the current
statutes result in a lot of
unnecessary incarceration and it
falls really on the backs of
people who then end up being
stuck in a cycle of poverty
incarceration please support
this bill thank you.
Thank you next I have Rikki Lee
Chavez.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee this is Rikki Lee
Chavez on behalf of the New
Mexico from a defense lawyers
association we to stand in
strong support there is also a
national movement that is
redressing the I just for impact
fines and fees have on our
communities and our communities
of color which is especially
significant here in New Mexico
we appreciate the work of the
sponsors and the advocates on
this bill we encourage the
committee to support thank you
so much for your time.
Next Fernando Trujillo.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is that
not looked we feel and what
policy associate with gold
futures we send a strong
supporter of this legislation
that will not just make life
easier for families that of them
people of color but also stop
the criminalization of the poor
in the black indigenous and the
New Mexico unities if assessed
fines and fees can quickly
calculate up to hundreds or even
thousands of dollars meaning
that in time the pandemic such
as this families an individual
can be forced to choose between
paying these fines and fees or
paying for them just as cities
of life such as food need gas to
get around or rent for them to
not be on the streets when
people are introduced to the
committee will system it becomes
higher rate get out of there of
the revolving door is increasing
the chances the for the
involvement with the criminal
legal system and incarceration
people of color I
overrepresented in New Mexico's
criminal legal system which
disproportionately affects
ladies who are black indigenous
or line acts and their families.
He's a boy SB one eighty one
thank you.
Thank you very much next I have
Bennett Baur.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Bennett
are in the chief public defender
I I won't we say what some of
the other folks to sit but I I
want to talk about yes specs
that you see in court as a
public defender on some Mondays
in the magistrates or municipal
court there could be a dozen or
in in Albuquerque you well over
that people who've been picked
up on warrants for failure to
pay fines or fees often these
people played without a lawyer
which meant they got two or
three sets of fines or fees are
imposed and the amount of credit
time served for those people who
could in no way you do it or
perhaps you transported
community service R. why is
previously calculated fifty six
dollars a day although it cost
much much more for the county to
incarcerate them for that period
of time so I would ask you to to
support this bill so there were
no longer having the county
basically the the are in perfect
debt collector for the courts
thank you madam chair.
Thank you next I have Maggie
sorry on all.
Madam chair and committee
members I Maggie study on on the
basis New Mexico we strongly
support SP one eighty one
because it's time to break the
cycle of condition and poverty
of a John people because they
cannot afford fines is
unconstitutional and we not this
bill would help well off
families to meet their basic
needs while holding people
accountable and also increasing
economic prosperity for everyone
we urge you to vote yes thank
you.
I yes we're all.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is have
you ever a whole number research
and policy analyst with New
Mexico voices for children I'm
also trying to con in this and
one of my as of expertise is tax
and budget policy and as has
already been mentioned of fines
and fees from a purely fiscal
perspective did use isn't worth
the squeeze fines and fees are
just simply not reliable source
of government revenue as a
significant portion of of
revenue goes on collected
uncollected fines and fees have
grown exponentially in New
Mexico through about two million
in two thousand twelve to nearly
twenty million in two thousand
sixteen overall fifty five
percent of fines and fees are
never paid and that's because
we're a poor state on it even
though the juices and what the
screens from the government's
perspective certain communities
in New Mexico are definitely
feeling the squeeze the rate of
uncollected debt in counties
throughout New Mexico correlates
with the poverty rate within
each county this relationship
underscores how fines and fees
tend to be a serious problem for
communities that can least
afford them in conclusion fines
and fees on all the precarious
rational mechanism to fund a
government but they also
function as a partisan
regressive tax that hurts our
economy and families
thank you.
Thank you Mr anywhere public
comment.
C. St then let's go back to the
committee.
And
Is there anything you would like
to stay Representative Ely
before I go to questions and
madam chair I don't think so
will stand for questions from
the committee okay first on my
list as Representative Townsend.
Thank you
Madam chair representative it's
just a couple of things that
side.
I agree to this there's nothing.
In this bill that will reduce
the fine.
It is more about extending the
payment terms to keep it in line
with their income is that
correct.
I don't I I don't I don't think
it's entirely correct but I'm
let me show all to answer that
question you madam chair.
Madam chair representative the
land Representative Townsend I'm
that's correct and there's
nothing that in this particular
bill that route would reduce
fines.
And
Madam chair and and
representative of the income a
self reporting correct.
Madam chair Mitchell go ahead.
Madam chair representative town
Townsend that's correct and that
follows current practices I was
a colonel defense of practicing
criminal defense attorney for
some years and was very calm and
that I'd be standing with my
client and the judge would ask
me what my clients
Financial circumstances were so
this just falls with Cort
practices.
And madam chair Representative
Ezzell is the determination of
net income only those of
ordinary taxes or would that
include child
Child care payments I mean there
are there any other reductions
to determining net income other
than tax.
Madam chair and representative
Thompson this inquiry that the
that occurs in front of the
court to in front of the judge
is generally pretty informal
it's really up to council to
present all of the we were their
clients finances and what sort
of financial responsibilities
they have it's the generally
speaking the prosecutor would
also be there if they see that
they they think that there are
some sort of issue which I had
never experienced in my practice
they could of course bring one
but generally speaking it's a
discussion with the judge it's
not that the client has their
tax paperwork there to present.
And madam chair and
Representative missile if the
judge ordered restitution with
the same reduction apply.
And madam chair Representative
Townsend no restitution is is
Is excluded from this particular
bill and seen as something
entirely separate it's not
defined as of court costs for
we're fine restitution separate.
Thank you ma'am thank you madam
chair Representative all.
Next I have Representative Rehm.
Thank you madam chair and
missile I want to try to clarify
the statement I just heard
this legislation doesn't reduce
fines but it would pre vent the
imposition of a fine or a fee if
you're indigent is that correct.
Madam chair representative I'm
I'm you cut out for me just
briefly during your question
could you repeat it I'm so sorry
no no problem that's part of
what we're having problems so
madam chair in this all are
going to make sure that I
understood what occurs but this
legislation.
Doesn't reduce the forums but it
prevents the assessment of a
fine or a fee if you're
indigent.
So madam chair and
Representative Rehm thank you
for that question eight it does
not it does not necessarily
reduce fines and fees it's more
about inability to pay I'm so
and and of course finding these
are different
so if if something were imposed
if the fines and fees were
imposed the judge would inquire
what that individual's ability
to pay would be and then would
set the payment amounts at two
percent of their monthly income
and and there would be a monthly
payment plan the way that the
loss functions now and this is
the a court rule is that the
court has could impose a payment
plan but also could just order
the individual to pay the full
amount within thirty days and
that's been seen as extremely
onerous for many criminal
defendants and people convicted
of traffic offenses
transgression.
Madam chairman of all you know I
play on the court the very
receptive working with
defendants if they had a thirty
day to go ahead with a and they
could a at the end of those
thirty days and they went back
to the court I know the court
would expand that.
and in the problem is the they
just seem to forget about it and
and until the unintended
consequence of them being
arrested occurs.
But are you and I agree that are
things that we need to do
something to streamline this
process.
And I'd like the
Basing the fees on on their
income so I like that portion of
it.
but I think that we need to sit
down with the court maybe on the
interim and figure out how they
either better the term and fines
and fees.
And how they end up getting paid
on those rather than if you will
and Bernalillo county going in
the hole.
One of the other areas that that
kind of isn't being discussed.
And it's being credited as the
non collection so we have a
person who has a speeding ticket
or whatever you know what
traffic violation and they've
been fine.
And they're in the system and
sentenced what say for armed
robbery.
Then that she is written off and
obviously if they're in jail
they can't.
What I want to do is I want to
go through some of the some of
these fees.
That we're removing or reducing
well
we're gonna we're gonna have a
population somewhere north of
thirty percent.
The FIR points out that thirty
percent of the people are
represented by the public
defender's office.
So there's a number that's not
Representative that's in here as
well.
And so
what we go through these these
Our fees that would be reduced
or eliminated.
So there is a criminal foreign
support of the school fund.
The judicial education fee for a
judicial education center at U.
N. M..
The magistrate magistrate
retirement fees support
magistrate retirement fund.
The DWI prevention feet
these are the community
programs.
The DWI laboratory fee and this
is to defray the cost of
chemical another test used.
To determine.
The DWI the D. W. I. substance
of free agency pays the cost of
the court ordered screening.
The controlled substance free
and this is the are used to
support the crime laboratory
fund the traffic safety the this
is used to support traffic
safety education and
enforcement.
We're correction fee is used to
support local government
correction fund.
The court automation V. is used
to support court automation Fund
the municipal court automation
fee is used to support municipal
court automation Fund.
Rain injury fee is used to
support the brain injury service
Fund the court facility fee is
used to support report so the
fund.
The jury and witness the.
I mean that one's already been
upside down forever the drug
court three which is used to
support drug court and I think
that's a really good program the
domestic violence free is used
to support divestiture violence
offender treatment and
intervention fund.
Juvenile duplication fee.
And the crimes victim reparation
fees used to support crime
victims reparation fund animal
just four years just that
funders had about five hundred
thousand sent to it.
When we add all the.
That this could have on all
these fees and and finances
somewhere between three and five
million.
And and I know that's different
than what we see in the FY are
but in my speaking with the work
person that's kind of where
they're seeing this year is
going to be.
R. madam chair and
Representative Ely how are we
going to replace this amount of
money.
And
has just gone to appropriations
or Senate finance.
So madam chair I'm gonna let ms
all the answers at first and I'm
gonna follow her with the FIR.
Madam chair and representative
Ramon and looks like Mr Carter
would like to jump in here too
the first thing I want to say is
that we agree that these
programs are important and that
is why eight and and
unfortunately part of their
budget comes from fees and the
key here is that both nationally
and locally we have research
that supports that funding these
programs through fees is
extremely unreliable for some of
the reasons stated which is that
the vast majority of people or
there's a huge amount of people
that actually can never pay fees
and they then convert it to jail
and community service so not
only do these programs never see
this money the state doubles
down right and the counties in
particular than pick up that
bill I've been paying for people
to also be incarcerated so we
actually paid twice as of
government so I'm we're
dedicated to ensuring that these
programs can be fully funded
through a more sustainable and
What double means
so so part of I believe what was
captured in the FY are was that
the cost of the overall cost of
the system is not it's it's huge
and that's the key to that
statistic in Bernalillo county
which is all of these collection
practices cost significantly
more money than is actually been
actually comes in to support
these programs so these programs
aren't really supported by this
money I believe the FIR noted
that rarely if ever do these
funds hold the amount of money
that was listed in the Agency FY
ours and they they noted that
actually that the costs to to
some of these state agencies
would be significantly less and
the purpose of this bill was to
correct that issue but I do see
that Mr Carter also wanted to
say something so I apologize.
if I may
Madam chair and representative
Green you actually see I've gone
to the heart of the issue that
the reform committee of the
sentencing commission wants to
look at next the reason it was
at the state relatively easy to
get unanimity on this bill at
the reform committee level of
the commission and that the full
commission and again to remind
you that includes the AOC who
was on from committee and of
course the full commission is a
magistrate judge who's on the
full commission I share some the
commission and
was be.
Because they realize that this
bill didn't tackle the harder
issue which you brought up how
do we fund these.
Great programs important purpose
for the state in a way that's
not through fines and fees
assessed in our criminal justice
system what this bill does is
essentially trying to get the
state or move the state away
from putting good money after
bad
chasing these fines and fees
from individual is a net loss to
the state.
There's a lot of question about
you saw it in the FIR and we to
address the question of fiscal
impacts of
the legislation and truth be
told this so much
shifting money there's what's
assessed verses what's collected
goes into different pots we work
with the LFC really closely and
on their point person on this
and it's hard to determine what
the
Overall fiscal impact might be
because the money is so
intermingled to answer one
specific question you had is it
did go to Senate finance
so it has had that review of one
of the finance committees.
One of one of the tasks that the
commission's hoping to undertake
the reform committee is hoping
to undertake next year aside
from what we hope is beginning
work on a criminal code reform
is to look at this broader and
somebody's harder questions
about fines and fees how do we
fund these very programs I've
listed which everyone
acknowledges are important in a
way that provides a more stable
sort stable source of revenue
for these funds with this bill
itself as best we can tell in
the FIR seems to agree is not
going to be hitting the various
projects to the various funds
that you addressed right it's
actually going to help
streamline the system is to
provide great efficiencies to
the courts and find consistency
across the state and how these
and how
dealing with indigent people and
their fines and fees how those
are dealt with in courts across
the state thank you madam chair
representative madam chair
members the reason I want to
close on this issue is because
Representative Rehm may not
remember this but I sure do one
of my first bills on the floor
was trying to find a program
through fines and fees and I
remember the Majority Leader
getting up and very very
passionately calling it a
horrible horrible horrible bill
and I she I remember that like
it was yesterday and it cost me
to go back and look to see if
there was indeed a horrible bill
and it was horrible bill because
it's a stupid way to run
government these this is a ball
under so volatile Fund it goes
up and down and it cost
government more money to collect
these fees the fees themselves
so this is something I have
worked at this is just a dumb
way to do it and what is causing
the courts to do is to go back
and look at how.
We going to fund the sustainably
going into the future when we
have the smaller funded you look
at the FIR you'll see that the
numbers are nowhere near three
million and that's even that's
well what even that's while
little and if you look at the
real numbers and you get behind
it your going to see we're
spending a lot more money to
collect the one point two
million that the FY are is
talking about so this is not the
way to do it and so first steps
first let's eliminate the
volatility investment stop being
stupid let's stop spending money
more money than we're taking in
let's stop that and then we can
solve the rest of the program
this is the first step I thank
you madam chair and thank you
Representative I just had to we
live that traumatic moment for
you.
Representative we all have
moments re read
session.
You know one of the things madam
chair and representative I know
the cord
You know what before the issue
the warrant they send a letter
to the defendant Hey you haven't
paid the fees and all bets and I
agree with you we need to do a
better business model on how to
do this and I think Douglas
carver brought it up right
they're gonna look at it in the
end trump and I agree that's
what we need to do I think jerk
in the money out from underneath
everybody is gonna hurt all
these programs
but madam chair and
representative I want to kind of
point of the committee members
to this we go to section seven
which is page thirteen we go
line twenty five.
Court costs and fees shall not
be imposed on an indigent person
convicted of a violation of the
motor vehicle.
And that's where most all these
fees that I have detailed come
from.
And that's the crossed a crux of
the the loss of the money.
But anyway madam chair
representative thank you and are
you I do agree we need to to do
business in a better manner I
just don't think this is a the
way to do it and I'm kind of
surprised at all these entities
are not over here saying Hey you
jerk this funding now we've got
a way somebody offer whatever
they have to do to make ends
meet thank you madam chair
Representative.
Representative Akan.
Thank you.
Chair
Yes.
I got a little confused
Representative removes
questioning and the way I I'm
reading the F. I. R. in the
years in basically what is that
that shows how much money is
collected.
If if the I that shows how much
money comes into those funds
when they are collected.
That doesn't mean that those
funds are going to go away if we
do this.
This legislation all it means is
that.
The people there funds are still
going to continue to pay their
fines and you're still living
pay for all these fees.
What is all honestly is all
honesty with legislation we
funding and not the people are
with their fees and fines so
that is one of the things if you
look at that the FIR correctly
I think you need to read it
right.
And it the one thing I I just
you know I just find this to be
a the impossible dream having
as a magistrate judge of.
You.
While these agreements to pay.
And we honestly.
People.
It goes to paying twenty dollars
a month.
At my age twenty dollars of milk
for your kids.
Or whatever you need.
The priorities in the different
and you actually.
The only dollar a month
agreement does one of the the
judge says in order to show
costs because you didn't pay and
then it sends another order to
show cause and then finally in
Mizoram decision and then
finally somebody's arrested
because they were arrested
because they didn't pay the
fines but.
We're ending cycle and even if
we go this way and we do ten
percent of their income and
still not going to solve the
problem I don't I I I just don't
see this as a problem solver
number one I think the best
problems our would be that we do
not assess fines and fees.
That's impossible but if you if
you do something wrong I guess
you got to.
I don't you got a day for at.
But the in this I I hate sending
money six million those speeding
tickets so we would just bugs me
that I know that the money's
been more than that that I got
caught more than that I got
flying.
But the.
The Daily Business and some
people make a mistake they got
it they if I knew that if the if
the.
And we had to go into it.
So I think the idea that we are
W..
The amount of the money that
goes into jail time served.
Is that really helps when I
started as a magistrate judge
you can only give them credit
for jail time served at that we
was like five or six dollars a
day.
That was all the credit that you
can give somebody for the under
findings because that's all that
was allowed by law by statute
and then so more along the lines
the legislature during the day
where we can do it the at
minimum wage.
Range so
James while door where
a little bit better community
service is another thing
as judge it's hard to find
people date people your
community service lot of people
just love these charities just
don't want to be supervised to
somebody unless it's a limited
really willing to work.
So I'll just leave that I will
support the bill but I just
don't think it's a solution I
just think it's just the and
treatment whole.
And that's all of this madam
chair because I don't see it
sovereign immunity I see is
somebody step passively let us
sitting down and looking at
what's going on in the real
world.
Seeing what's out there thank
you madam chair.
So I'm Representative Akan I
actually carry the bill.
I thank you
The Representative Akan during
the
Converting it to the minimum
wage and I remember it
distinctly.
Remember
trying to figure out how many
hours per day we were going to
give the individual credit for I
was caring bills for the
counties.
Because they were the ones
having to pay rate to
incarcerate these individuals.
It was a long time to get that
big is Joe Thompson was still in
the legislature needs sat right
behind me on the floor of the
house because I sat right down
the front are over and the the
side and data and Gary Johnson
was the governor and so that's
when we changed it to the hourly
rate and to give the counties
some relief so I'm I'm glad you
brought that point out.
Representative Akan and I think
your solution.
The ultimate ideal and this is
on the passes in nine years so I
let me see if I have any more
hands raised I don't think I do.
I'm sorry what is the pleasure
of the committee.
Representative.
Some.
All second that motion so we
have a much for two passed and I
will second I'm.
I guess what I want to say
before we vote is that I really
appreciate the herbal Justice
Reform.
Committee of the sentencing
committee because I think what
they can do really is.
So much of the work that we as
part time volunteer legislature
can get done and we have our
criminal justice reform
subcommittee.
We have
Our point corrections and
justice larger interim committee
and.
We have been able to achieve the
same kind of in depth discussion
and consensus that that you've
managed to do and I know agency
also has been a real leader in
this area but it is also
This whole issue is part of the
criminal justice reform efforts
that are.
Sweeping the nation really to
try to make make it
Easier for people to be re
integrated into society without
re offending and without
breaking the bank as far as
incarceration goes so I I really
appreciate it I thank you a lot
we Mr Douglas but you're in a
good place for us you know
you're helping us out and I know
this also was sent of animals
for for Senate judiciary and I
know Senator serve on tests
really misses her big.
But we're happy that you're
doing this work as well so we're
on a I do passed motion with the
court please call the roll.
Representative Alcon.
Representative Akan.
Yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Cook.
Mr speaker.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Lewis yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative night.
So.
Representative right.
Can you say that again.
Representative Rehm.
We didn't hear your
Representative Rehm.
Representative Rehm we did not
hear you.
No ma'am I'm voting no I'm sorry
Representative Townsend.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Yes.
About seven to three is that
right.
Seventy three we have to do
passed on Senate bill one eighty
one thank you very much
Douglas again and Representative
Eli.
Thank you madam chair.
I'm.
Representative I have Senator
Ivey Soto and let me just try to
figure this out.
Any called in on audio not sure
how that.
I think.
Madam chair he's a panelist.
Is muted.
Well.
I'm sorry what did you say
Georgia.
To talking the panelists section
Attendees
yes.
Attendees madam chair because
the senator is calling in on the
phone he has to dial pound
excuse me star six nine to admit
that online.
Thank all the amazing thank you
so much.
Senator.
Thank you very much of Madam
chair updates for the technical
assistant the
Representative Lewis and members
of the house Judiciary
Committee.
So.
We have today a bill that deals
with the special of the the
procedures the voting procedures
for the
Anticipated special election for
Congress and just by way of
quick recap.
This so as you will remember and
the first partial session in
June we have a set of bills for
page and that was introduced and
after the central part dealt
with the
procedures for the consider
procedures for the
November general election in the
midst of a pandemic.
There are a variety of things
including ballots to charity.
That we're enhanced in that.
Bill and we anticipated them
bringing that back in this
session through a regular policy
bills which in fact it is in a
in a bill that center Pat Woods
caring.
that would go into effect
sometime in July how we both did
not anticipate having an
election this cycle or Congress
at this time and so consequently
we have this built in or take
care of these issues as well as
the Congress now I want to
clarify a couple different
things first of all this bill.
The does not deal with the
nomination process.
For Congress it only deals with
the voting process for Congress
Representative delight and
Senator Moores have a bill
that is currently pending in
dentistry Committee while not
the chair that have that deals
with the nomination process for
Congress.
this bill with regard to the
voting process in that in this
election coming up.
Differs from Senate Bill for at
in a couple of important what
the first is instead of allowing
County courts the option of
sending an application for mail
ballots to voters all orders
will automatically get and our I
counted involved.
All voters will automatically
get a a notice of the election
the notice will give them that
you are all.
The website where they can go
request a mail ballot and the
phone number where they can
request the official application
that would like to.
As well as informing them where
they can vote in person so it is
neutral as to how the body would
like to vote but provides the
border with the instructional
commission the board will be as
what director having option out
of thank.
The second thing that is just
thank.
If we do find
along the lines about security.
We find two different hands went
in this bill.
That were not present and that a
bill for the first test
confessed with seven Senate bill
four would you return a mail
ballot we you have
of the voter provide the last
four digits of social number.
However we do find explicitly
the opportunities or challenges
to be present have the county
courts are qualified to the
disqualification of the ballots.
Subject to a leader in a
position of a challenge before
the election which is where you
do job to.
The second thing is if they are
on the voted ballots on election
night.
We we we can maintain the policy
which I think is a good one that
the election board should stop
counting at eleven PM we don't
want people to be ballot for
the.
when they are trying to jump out
however.
If they are on voted ballot but
then you'll have a county
sheriff that should be present.
Until the election borders or if
there is no county clerk are
there is no deputy sheriff
available then the county clerk
alerts the state police state
police all at home and can be
there.
If there's no state police
patrolman by that the personal
title of their position that
president we there thank you the
county clerk or that you W.
Representative main overnight
and challengers observers can
also remain overnight.
In order to make sure that the
underwater ballots are secured
on job actual border.
And then finally madam chair
members the committee and
credible for we did create
because we did not know what was
going to what was going to hell
in the pandemic over the next
five months after that June
special session we created the
electoral the legislative
electoral help of fifty task
force that task force was not
renewed.
All of the provision but for
automatically appealed on
December thirty one twenty
twenty.
and so there is no task force to
change election rules
after the fact that is one
hundred percent within the
purview of the legislature in
terms of the election with that
chair members if they have to
sample questions I will also
note in the to.
Outside is a
in the waiting room is a Kerry
process that election director
who is also available at their
tactical question but people
like.
What we go ahead and promote
mistrust as so that she can be
available to way and as we go.
Do you do that please Georgia.
Okay great.
Right hello.
Thanks for joining us.
Are you ready to go for public
comment Senator.
Yeah okay.
Our first for critical I'm sorry
so those in favor on Senate bill
two eighty six please say yes to
in those in opposition saying
now and then I'll your ten
minute quick ten minute call
here.
Madam chair I hope you mean ten
seconds I did say ten minutes
tonight.
What would have been horrible
okay all right we just have
three folks waiting and support
here with any of you like to
speak anyone in the attendees
like to speak in favor of the
bill.
Freeman.
Go ahead.
Treatment I'm just might make
sure there's not gonna be any
amendment to this bill because I
think it should pass it's very
simple bill it's temporary and
it shouldn't be used as a
vehicle to log roll anything
else I am very concerned that
there might be an attempt to so
just something this bill that is
the other bill about how to do
the nomination process and I'd
like to speak against that for
the forty minutes four seconds
I've got the nomination process
bill which is just be two five
four should not be put into this
bill because it's not an
emergency there's no need to
change the nomination by the
state central committees when is
there's no showing a threat to
public health the health or
safety or public peace also if
that bill is thrown into this
one it will possibly double the
time debt balance seat is vacant
and it would require two
different elections and off year
which usually hurts the
Democratic Party more than the
Republican Party which may be
why Representative senator
Morris doing.
So I just want to make sure that
nobody tries to mess with this
bill because it really should be
done.
Thank you next I have my
argument is.
Yes a good afternoon madam chair
and members of the committee
money medicine the upcoming
because as a sponsor stated with
great detail there is a strong
need for the changes within this
piece of legislation for the
upcoming special election to
fill the soon to be
congressional vacancy it's
important we continue to ensure
we do all we can to protect
Mexicans voting rights to expand
those rides where appropriate
and this bill does just that I
urge all committee members to
support Senate bill two eighty
six by granting this measure a
do pass thank you madam chair
members of the committee I also
like to set up bank the bill
sponsor for me for this piece of
legislation.
Thank you very much I don't see
any more hands and the attendee
list so let's go back to the
Senator.
You want to say anything before
we go to the committee members
Senator.
Right up to Mr Jimenez and
responsibilities that you're
welcome.
Senator anything any further
comments before I go to the
committee members.
Okay.
Estes Representative McQueen.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair center I had two
questions you've already
answered them all I'm gonna ask
them anyway because I think it's
important the first is this
doesn't apply to the nomination
process correct.
Madam chair and representative
between that is correct.
So I I hate
I'm cert looking forward to
reading your bill because I
thought that's what it was going
to be about and I think the
existing process.
Is lousy and should be fixed I
don't know that we can fix it
for the cycle but I do think we
need a better process.
Session is
you know we both are temporary
bill during the special session
or during a special session we
have another temporary bill is
there a reason if there is a
permanent fix we don't just add
an emergency clause to the
permanent fix.
Why why do we have yet another
temporary bill.
Madam chair and Representative
McQueen I would like to think
that the the more comprehensive
bill that has been worked out
between the secretary of state
and the county clerk's office
that about forty eight that is
being carried by Senator Pat
Woods will be voted upon in a in
a broad bipartisan fashion
however with the election
legislation one never knows what
is going to happen and so we
felt it more prudent to take
these procedures that we used in
the election in November apply
those measures that we have
learned something from where we
can improve.
And make sure that we have this
in place right now.
Madam chair and senator thank
you very much.
Next I have Representative Eli I
thank you madam chair I just
want to make a comment so I did
have a long conversation with on
our page very helpful I do think
and senator would split along on
a long conversation about it
these bills the the bill The I
had the amendment that I had the
committee analyze which is
excellent by the way I do think
are unrelated I mean I have to
be for about a state would be
log rolling so I'm not going to
propose the amendment I one
eight committee know that thank
you madam chair and thank you to
the annals.
Thank you raised a liar.
Next I have Representative
Nibert.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair and senator.
You made a statement that.
all voters get a notice of the
election and then you said the
voter cap request and and I did
not hear your the rest of that
sentence so what can the voter
request after they get the
notice of the election.
Certainly madam chair and
Representative right but so if
you this notices discussed on
page or off page three beginning
on line eight income section
the.
And so what you have there is
I'm happy to get credit card the
subsectors Daschle automatically
deliver to each male voter in
the district and notice now just
by with structured that New.
This is sent in the name of the
county clerk but it is sent by
the by the secretary state and
candidly about the practical
side of that is because there's
no expense to setting this that
that that the kind of course
would not get reimbursed for
until.
Three to five months down the
line and this way that they
don't have that outflow of money
waiting for to come back in.
it it goes on to say them and
forming the voter of the date of
the election but the out of I go
election that's important and
and Network address were brought
a request a mail ballot as well
as the telephone number where
voter make call to request a
paper mail ballot applications.
And a list of the days and times
that addresses were voters being
both in person.
So the the concept of this then
as so in power the voter to make
the best decision for that
Bulger as to how that but would
like to about.
Also recognizing that they're
going to request a mail ballot
it is much more efficient for
them to use the website you
don't have transcription
problems when you're trying to
input information but also
making the paper form available
to the and Representative and
chair representative Nibert one
of the things that I forgot to
mention is that we also have
excluded this action is a
conversation but you we've
excluded the use of third party.
applications in this election.
R. and and and and and chair
representative I would what I
say based on houses but you that
you you initially raised that
issue over the over the summer I
committed to you as I that thank
also the secretary of state's
office personal and are you
following up with you on that.
And that during the November
election.
We had a number of third party
groups that work consistently
mailing out applications for
mail ballots to voters and and
and the what practically what
almost every single County Cork
experience was great confusion
among the voters.
And frustration by the voters
especially those voters who had
already requested a mail ballot
and they kept getting
applications and a cost doubt
for them as to whether or not
those ballot those applications
were properly received about
that or as submitted were
properly received and processed.
And so and so
Madam chair representative
Nibert the radical issue that
you raised over the summer.
and and that we committed to
take a look at Borut
impracticality.
Over over the at general
election and if we're going to
be having a special election for
Congress out of cycle now.
Up.
Quite candidly a lot of these
national groups have no place
else to spend their money but
the flood New Mexico frustrate
and confuse the voters and would
like to keep that to a minimum.
thank you madam chair and thank
you senator
One one issue that the.
Has been raised.
It was locally is that.
The challengers.
Are allowed to look at the
ballot but.
They are specifically prohibited
from from looking at the social
security number M. when you're
have common names
It was a challenger to discern
that the individual.
The individual ballot is for the
individual who are requests
about that that it is proper in
all respects if they can drive
our view of maybe double check
that information.
Certainly madam chair and
representative Nibert so first
of all if you look at the
session execution begins on page
seven at line twenty two and
proceeds to page eight at line
I.
What you'll see is on like what
we had and Senate bill four we
do specifically provide that a
political party with Canada
ballot may appoint a challenger
to observe the determination
made by the county court.
I want to be very clear about
something that was not present
in the general election.
And most County clerk's.
A clear that challengers have
the right to be present when the
election board was working and
did not have the right to be
present when they were doing
that responsibilities and as a
matter of law they were correct
and as a matter of practicality
given
B. B. R..
Well yes I'm gonna use Senator
would agree with some might send
us the aggressiveness of certain
challengers.
a lot of the county courts by
candidly felt very intimidated
and did not want to have some of
these folks and their office of
when B. election what was not
present at the same time we
record
madam chair and representative I
alright that challenges have a
role in the process if they if
right let's say in this election
coming up Torrance County
processes
eighteen hundred mail ballots
and the and the County Board
certified through the election
board I have checked the.
The challenger no unless they
were allowed to be present when
they were being checked.
However let's also be very
clear.
That is not the challenges job
to do the actual qualifications
about it is the county clerk's
job to verify that those numbers
match.
And it is the election board's
responsibility to process any in
the challenges that are are
problems so the problem Madam
chair representative Nibert is
that the the last four
additional search sourceyour
number which by the way are
protected under federal law.
But in addition to them being
protected under federal lessons
that that I.
House work affected.
Password that the voter have.
And that the county court also
have their social security
number so they have then also
back past.
Frankly the challenger does not
have the past work so how will
that challenger you know.
Four six three five is that
correct last four digits.
If the challenger does not have
the password to verify the.
They would you know that anyone.
But the responsibility as a
challenger is to know that the
county clerk is doing their job.
I think they're removing the
prompted black not opening the
outer envelope we're moving up
the privacy flap.
Thank you Mr and then verifying
that pass for the last four
digits but guess what they have
in their database and looking at
that information.
So so that is that is
it's it's a it's a it's a tricky
balancing act that we're dealing
with here.
But it's one that on a
functional level we need to
maintain the integrity of that
password.
And and and out into the federal
law we need to make sure that we
don't violate the federal
privacy act of nineteen seventy
four for which we have an
exemption for being able to use
social security numbers end of
our registration process.
One of six states that have that
that.
We need to make sure we don't
violate that exemption by
allowing that information to be
utilized by by an authorized
person now what we did but I do
have them here in the in this
bill is that the the R. but and
this begins at the at the bottom
page seven about the challenger
shall not enter both of
challenges to the county clerk.
But may make notes to interpose
a challenge to the absent but
Alexion court provided that the
challenger shut my copy record
or transcribe any portion of our
social security number so in
other words if a challenger does
perceive that a County Cork is
not doing their job they can ask
I'm sorry what was the name on
that ballot.
They can record the name in
their notes so that they can
raise that issue before the
election for.
And that is the appropriate
place for them to raise any
issues or it was all.
And so madam chair and senator
with respect to individuals who
have.
Names that are.
Appear on the voter registration
rolls our site name appears
multiple times common name's.
What I'm hearing is that.
The challenger can write down
those names and then potential
what that ballot comes up.
Our waiter in the process they
can then challenge to make sure
that that John Doe is the same
job though that is registered at
X. Y. Z. address.
And not the John Doe the waves
at another address.
Work.
Yep you madam chair
representative that that is
exactly correct and actually I
let me point out also that that
while a lot of states.
Utilize what I what what is
really a very an actor process.
Of all going to come to at at
signature verification by
civilians who don't have law
enforcement training.
The fact that we use the last
four digits means that if you
have I John does registered an
account from counties do.
Four six three two and the
numbers there are nine point
seven eight.
Wipe away you know that's not
the correct what really the kind
of work with no that's not the
correct one.
And and would make sure most
cases what we what we found in
the investigations that we've
done not participate in the
manifestations where somebody
says all John Doe number two
somebody voted on John Doe
number two to half is that
actually was John Doe number
three about it and there was a
database error when they entered
at the actually entered it into
John Doe number two and senator
John Doe number three because we
use the last four digits and
actually structurally helps to
eliminate the possibility of
putting it of of giving broader
credit to the long John to.
Because the system won't allow
it when you do that
verification.
And madam chair and senator are
you saying that the county
clerks are actually utilizing
that data.
To to do the verification
process.
Course remains in on the
envelope that's not being looked
really looked at.
No madam chair and
representative Nibert this is
the whole point is that it does
no good to have the last four
digits of nobody verified.
And and the whole reason why we
were actually very conscientious
about ensuring that a challenger
had the right to be present.
So that somebody was able to see
even if they couldn't see the
last four digits and Phelps.
They're able to see that
somebody's actually doing the
work.
Somebody of that is that is is
that nothing else left me
completely cynical somebody is
if nothing else opening up an
envelope looking looking four
digits and looking at a screen
and and and the and verifying
portages and a looking back and
then putting a check mark that's
an awful lot of work at some
point to the theatrics on
eventually come back to go to
the work.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you senator for those answers
let's look at paragraph you know
and that's the.
eleven o'clock go home
provision.
I noticed that
The sheriff's deputy.
Is required to be present to
secure the room.
Where the uncounted ballots are
locked overnight so I'm
presuming that that the W. is
there to be outside of the room
the ballots are in a locked room
that are that is not accessible
through other passage weights
but there we go down the a
couple.
Couple lines or several lines.
And it talks about the county
clerk if the sheriff's deputies
not available then they cannot
clerk shall notify the secretary
of state we shall requests state
police who just signed up
patrolman to secure the ballots
not the room where the and valid
ballots are locked and I'm
wondering why there's a
difference in language with
respect to their share office
securing the room verses the
state police securing the
ballots.
Madam chair and representative I
worked
That is
frankly I think I was tired when
I was writing that.
And I should have done a better
job of cutting and pasting what
with the Bob and I would invite
you to do that right now.
Well let's see what we can do
Representative.
Looking at the amendments and
contacts versions have.
it so it's halfway down program
Madam chair if I may this is
invented Judiciary Committee.
Our amendments.
And that and so what I would
suggest.
Is that what would be done is of
on a technical basis is that we
would strike Senate Judiciary
Committee amendment number two.
And insert in the era of.
And then you would lay out the
and more.
Again except that you would use
the same language.
Where it says to secure the room
or facility where unaccounted
ballots are locked overnight.
That you would use that.
M. B. in place of the language
after patrolman works as to
secure the ballots right so you
would you would just a
prescribed are you in because
you're laying it out.
A new right is that instead of
the ballots it would simply it
would say need to
The balance of state room or
facility were unaccounted
ballots are locked overnight.
And I can and I can and I can
help your staff on on that I
think I think the intent is
clear that the parallel.
Transaction.
Yeah before we make it a member
of let's let's go further down
and I think it may be okay in
the next sentence it talks about
the county clerk shall provide
notice the to secure the hand
count of ballots over so so I
think that's an accurate
statement there.
His share of.
And then down below the the
county clerk or cheap deputy
shall remain on site.
Until the return of the absent
the voter Alexion for.
And so allowing a challenger or
observer to remain present
It is our intent to have them.
Inside the room where the
ballots are or what was your job
there to have them like their
share from the patrolman to be
outside of the room where the
ballots are located.
Madam chair representative
Nibert the the intent there so
it all depends on the county.
In terms of of of the physical
layout right so so for example
if you're talking about
Bernalillo county here at the
your body machine warehouse and
there is there is a large room
where the and what the income to
balance of the end of the shaft
of the that that would
effectively there's no door on
that room.
But you don't actually want
people to be outside of that
area you want people to be where
they can there's the there's a
reception area I like a lot
about that.
Area and and so then that's what
people would remain where they
would be able to do that
nobody's messing with about on
the inside of that really.
and the share W. would be in
between and that is actually
they're standard operating
procedure on the other hand if
you're dealing with.
State Torrance County.
Then there and at the at the
county courthouse in estancia
they would likely in this and
this will be the first selection
that of the branded product are
you one of that will be will be
of the county clerk operating
in a charge of but they will
likely be using the county
commission chambers so in that
particular case they would that
with them lock the county
commission chambers all together
and the sheriff deputy would be
sitting outside of that and the
and the and the and that whole
area them if there were no sharp
W. it would be in that whole
area where people the us out
we're not going to make them
that outside the door I've been
outside in the cold right but
you know are in that area so so
it all depends on the physical
layout
you know I can act also what
will happen Valencia in Santa Fe
and people out of each of them
would be slightly different just
because of of what their
physical layout happens to be
Secured it is really the main
operative word is that they be
secured in this in the sense
that nobody is touching are
messing with them until the
election work.
Well madam chair and and
Senator that leads me to the
question of.
Yes the county clerk or deputy
clerk are present then you allow
challengers to be present if
it's their show or the state
ways where challengers are not
present.
And.
I understand that there the.
It all the.
If I were the county clerk I'd
want the challenges present as
well so that you can't get you
know can't be accused of doing
something
there are but I'm I'm wondering
if the same criticism could be
levelled against the the share
our if the shop is on the ballot
and one of his deputies one of
his deputies were charged with
overseeing goes on count of
ballots and
Of so I'm I'm wondering if yes.
That option to the parties to or
by our reserves other groups
would be
available for.
All.
Areas where there would be the.
Ballots being secured overnight
from eleven PM till sometime in
the next morning
Certainly you all required to be
there but the you know if they
want to have people sign their
to do it.
I'm just wondering we've got it
for the county clerk in the and
the deputy county clerk but we
don't do it for the state police
or the.
They're not madam chair and
Representative Nibert so we get
out there is
Quite candidly we have
already when
when an election board leave the
polling place at the end of the
night.
And bay drive to turn things to
turn in the ballots often times
a challenge will get into their
own car and they will follow the
car to make sure that they they
do the most expeditious route we
have asked challengers we do
this
to please at least let them know
this is why a cars following the
election board so that they
don't get freaked out that
there's another car behind them
but you know I mean if founders
want to hang up the parking lot
there's a lot going to hang out
the parking lot make sure that
nobody goes in and out of the
building
again the idea behind this is
that people go home and get some
sleep.
And so and so if they want to
stand watch while the police
officers stand guard they're
certainly welcome to do that
but but in terms of having
without any election official
programs.
Having challenger the watchers.
In the and childhood but who are
but by the very nature partners
and actors.
Presents a without election
officials at in the building
that would be very problematic.
All right I see that problem I'm
just the.
You know we are.
It is probably more problematic
for the share and it is the
state board schools.
They're not elector officials
sheriff is a molecular official
we're sure could be on the
ballot and the whole process is
to.
Insure that.
A ballots are not tampered with.
And and you know if you're if
you're the chair of the
sheriff's deputy that's a sign
more of our I'm just wondering
if if they would undergo some
criticism for having one of
their deputies in the.
In the area where the Santa
Kalach balance that may not be
that important for the counties
where the ballots are locked in
a room and there's no other
access but in your situation you
said there's a warehouse that
you would want their share of W.
inside that warehouse where the
ballots are and the ballots are
excessive.
And and so I'm wondering if the
sheriff in that instance might
or might be criticized for.
Rightly or wrongly.
because there's no other eyes
looking at that
but yeah so Madam chair
representative member just a
couple of observations very
first one being.
In this bill this bill only
addresses any out of cycle
elections for Congress that
would take place in the year
twenty twenty.
So all this bill does not.
Our is not permanent law of this
bill is tempered provision that
will expire at the end of twenty
twenty one.
R. and and I think that's that's
probably more relevant
conversation with regard to the
provisions of Senate bill forty
eight which is what is
anticipated to be sure that
they'll be successful would be
codified.
In the election program
applicables all election.
Madam chair representative
member of the other the
situation I get that that you
know certainly I would invite
you to think about and for us to
have a conversation about how we
deal with that.
Is that is that.
So we in New Mexico.
We're blessed in New Mexico in
that and and and and the variety
of procedures we have on our
election code in terms of
accountability and also the
administration of elections.
And and and part of that that
allows us.
Actually part load from the
counting about.
And and and the but the about
the please of the mail ballots
right without without generating
all.
And and so so but the but the
problem comes in chair
representative member is that
when you have election day.
The election for the the Optum
validation board comes in at
seven AM.
By the time they're still there
at eleven o'clock at night.
That means that they've been on
duty for eighteen hours.
Historically we have them
continue to work until they
finish.
And what we know is that not
helping.
What we know is when you're
trying to resolve the ballots
where where there are
idiosyncrasy and questions about
what did the voter meeting.
Or how can this be resolved or
or can we properly read this
number or whatever it is when
people are fatigued that's what
mistakes happen.
So now in order to deal with the
fatigue issue which I is the
which is the frankly the more
problem for how many.
Issue that happened.
We said you know what I love
about we got a call.
For most County they're going to
be done.
However we're gonna end up with
some situations whether or not
going to be down by eleven
o'clock and we want people to go
home and get some rest bite bit
based on whatever's going on and
then we have we we we provided
the actual code that direction
but we'll come back at nine
thirty and and and frankly we're
specific about nine thirty
because we didn't want somebody
on the flight thing you'll be
back at six AM.
That's the kind of.
You know petite decision making
that the legislature that's the
last three days of the session
we should not have election
boards doing that it's bad
enough that we impose on
ourselves.
And so and so
having done that as a best
practice.
Okay but what about about what
we talk about.
Brought up about seven remember
we've got early voting early
voting got you got three weeks
of early voting Tuesday through
Saturday and income families
also click on their Monday where
every single that we lock up the
ballots we lock the the machines
we have procedures where we take
down the public counter number
and those have to be registered
under the secretary of state so
it's not providing what the
county court that night and the
next morning they they they
write down the the public
counter number so that people
know that nobody's aware that
New Mexico that machine we've
got all of these due diligence
procedures and wide Madam chair
representative but we've got all
of these due diligence
procedures when it comes to
having to go home get some sleep
and come back and make sure we
get it right on the counting of
the last ballot.
Those procedures are actually
already in place.
But understanding that
particularly coming out of this
last election.
That there is a heightened level
of distrust and a lot.
We
will make sure there's somebody
there watching.
And at that point eight can't be
there and quite candidly I mean
I I I hear what you're saying
about about local elected
officials but at the same time
if we simply thought state
police the outcry would be all I
do so you want the executive you
want somebody who actually works
for the executive for the
governor to be the one that all
my goodness out there we do that
okay right before that part for
the local elected official who
lives in that community.
And the fall back with the state
police of a call back from that
is going to be guess what
category you can't go home and
you're gonna have to sit around
playing cards with a bunch of
other people making sure that
nothing happened.
And so I understand the concerns
about the due diligence and yet
I also understand at that point.
With elections in the state for
over a hundred years.
And.
Certainly in the last.
Fifteen years.
Really about twenty five years.
We've been doing a pretty good
job.
We've been doing a pretty good
job at the election rob.
And so and so I important
because part of the due
diligence of our election is
having.
Part of the due diligence of our
election is the transparency.
Representative from what we get
to the point of absurdity on
that transparency to the point
of not being able to access.
Madam chair on.
Are you.
stabilised the.
Potential for.
That be taken to the extreme I
I'm just simply pointed out the
some things and I think the
thing that.
madam chair and senator that you
pointed out that this is a a
temporary bill really one
Alexion
Bill and we will need the
address some of that in the in
the bigger bills but I have a
question for the for madam chair
census was a Senate.
Senate.
Committee substitute when it
comes over to the house to we
just break amendments like we
would normal bills instead of
having to go through the a
redraft of the.
Committee so.
Because I think that I I can I
can make the.
A motion for an amendment to to
this bill I don't have the the
line director I can make the
motion.
And so.
We can have a Senate committee.
Sob.
Amended in the house and we
would never want to do House
committee some for a Senate bill
because it would have to go all
the way back to the Senate so we
never do that we just.
And as as appropriate and I
think probably maybe you saw the
amendment that Representative
Eli was going to propose.
Rather lengthy for and amended
it's in the Here file but he's
not proposing that now so yes I
think we would
I was going to see if that was
actually because you didn't have
the page online before at Ivey
Soto finds it
I think what we can do is
actually make sure everybody
hears it and understands that by
the way things are and we can
vote on it but the committee
report on house go up to the
council service and they prepare
the proper amendment that that
goes with that the committee
report so that's how we're doing
it did you want to take us
maybe the between the two of you
you can figure out because I
have both.
The amendments in context in the
bill and I'm not I'm not clear I
think you were in the part no.
Yeah.
I miss madam chair I may just
very quickly and and all of the
state will be certainly on the
issue that was that we've
already talked about would be
would be basically all on a
tactical level and then you to
follow along in the mouth and
contact would be two strikes and
Judiciary Committee amendment
number two.
And lay out subsection am brand
new and then if you look at the
amendment thanks contact.
on the line that where where it
says
where it says I find a patrolman
to secure the ballots.
Instead of the word ballots.
It would say rural or facility
were unaccounted ballots are
locked overnight.
And really on a substantive
basis that's what would be would
be straightforward ballots and
then start with what will market
so the uncounted ballots are
locked over.
The sentence if the sheriff
indicates that when it starts
with that those words no no
ma'am yeah yes indicates the
shorts W. is not available.
Yes
yeah all online.
Six on page nine of the
amendments and contacts version.
Stripe the word the struggle to
count our own lives yeah.
Start your ballots and then Sir
rural or facility where I
encountered a ballots are locked
over.
And I would make that motion
madam chair.
I'll second that motion and is
that.
Take care of it because now it's
parallel to another section.
Madam chair that picture because
those parallel to two lines up.
So the the the previous it is as
part of the percent.
Perfect I get it.
Okay is there is there
discussion of the amendment.
Representative you have your
hand up but I think it was.
Before the amendment issue.
It was okay all right I'm.
Is there any objection to that
amendment.
The parallel construction which
we will have drafted.
Let me ask you this though.
Is this now the Senate finance
committee sob.
Madam chair and members the
committee this is actually not a
committees out of this in the
bill and then it was amended so
that's why it would be Senate
tradition Committee amendment
number two.
Perfect okay.
Well it's our number one.
Representative Nibert.
The senator said that this would
be Judiciary Committee amendment
number two and I said well it
would be our amendment number
one oh he's talking about the
Senate Judiciary Committee.
All right strike Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
number two.
Forget about our numbers okay.
All right so is there any
objection to that amendment I
didn't see any.
Indication.
I'm not sure if I'm not sure if
we know exactly who is present
so let's go ahead and call the
roll and it documented and it.
Representative okay.
Yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Cook.
Mr speaker.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Lewis.
Representative Lewis.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative night.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Townsend yes.
Thank.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Madam chair.
Representative.
Representative Lewis yes.
I was needed when I was voting
I'm sorry
Yes.
So we have on the amendment okay
very good so that amendment is
adopted Representative are you
have the floor thank you madam
chair just one last question for
the senator of.
The the the five affected county
clerks then I think when you say
the five affected county clerks
will be the ones that.
Are involved with the our
Yeah.
My question madam chair and
senator was.
If I heard the if I heard the.
Senator earlier say that all I.
Affected County clerks were in
favor of this am I I presume in
the five affected county clerk
would be those that have.
Parts of their counties located
Only only are we back what's
happening.
Fifteen minute break because the
webcast was down its back we're.
Senator Ivey Soto while we are
On break here I've got a
question for you senator.
Yes Sir.
Thank you are we considering.
I know we discussed it briefly
with redistricting likely
starting in December.
With probably the quickest we
get past maps being a fifteenth
of December with a ninety day
effective date and maps this
soon as they can possibly be
done being effective on the
fifteenth of March
I'm assuming no litigation.
I'm.
Should we consider giving
authority to secretary state to
change the filing date for it
legislative races.
because we won't know what our
districts we will know what they
are but they will be in effect
until the middle of March and I
I feel like that you know there
could be a possibility to push
it back a couple weeks
but still out for pretty a
ballots and overseas ballots
without changing the primary
date is that is that a wise
thing to do or should we not
worry about it.
With Senator let me let me visit
with.
let me visit with jumble of what
that.
Okay this might be one of the
bills we can amended on I I
don't think we should do it now
this deeper if it's something
that is smart to do there that
we do as a foreman meant maybe.
So if something were to do a set
of bills for would be the bill
Department.
Where is that Sir.
It is in the queue partition.
Senator house.
Alright it's better for.
The house Judiciary you got it
okay.
Yeah so the only want to do it
if it's so I'm sending it I'm
setting a trend Senator risotto
for later today in which I say I
only want to consider amendments
if they are loved by the bill
sponsor friendly and smart to
do.
Well that is an optimistic view
of the legislative process.
But it gives you a task Senator
Ivey Soto yes yes I yeah I'm
just saying you know not sure
you do not the young girls to to
reciprocate later today on so
thank just just.
So I I believe we're ready to
resume and Representative rehab
Clark.
Thank you madam chair and
Senator so my question and you
were explaining how you use how
you verify tabulators so if you
have to go through that thank
you.
Absolutely so madam chair and
members the committee when the
webcast went down I just
finished explained the process
for RigCount when we have
voting in the normal course of
business however the way the
machines are are set up and
they're of programming has been
verified is that the machines
are before the first wide ballot
is based on the machine machines
are locked away run as they are.
However before we do we lock the
machine.
What we do is logic and accuracy
testing.
So what exactly accuracy testing
the LNA that is done is that
there is a yes that.
Better sense to every county
clerk.
For each machine.
And and and that staff that look
and so the so the credit card
doesn't generate that and the
voting machine vendor does not
generate.
So that is done on the office of
the secretary of state's office.
That that that staff in public.
Is run through each machine that
is going to be is well the fact
that it is wrong.
Through through that machine.
Before they locked before there
are diminishing and and run the
generals that.
And that verifies the program
you.
and and like that that's done in
public.
And in fact.
A couple years ago in Santa Fe.
There was a small glitch in the
programming of the machine I'm
trying to remember what the
issue was this this may have
been.
But we still have straight part
in it didn't register the state
party I'm not sure what it was
but there was a small collection
benefit years ago and it during
the last accuracy testing it was
picked up.
Is that okay stop everything
yet another test that we do the
programming make your call pull
up a chart but are back in what
the car then we
doing doing other elevates
acting it happened and I like
that all of this is done
he's going to go party with
someone on the ballot is
notified at least three days in
advance of already election of.
so that they can help you
present and really any members
of the public could shock of
this and and so that so they can
see this process happen in
advance of the election.
And then after that everybody
gets the that the the connection
of locked those articles run
that machine and then ready to
be deployed for the election
that the public counter that
cannot be messed with.
For that machine and and and all
of that is recorded with the
serial number.
After the election is over.
Then if it's a in a in a general
election we do post election
audits and the post election
audit this we have a ACPA.
Certified by the state auditor's
office so really need to be a
CPA per se but it's it
it verifies.
I did it but it's average of
that somebody independent of the
it had a quarter of the vendor
of the secretary of state's
office and that person in
public.
Randomly select.
Certain number precincts for
postelection audits.
And we have a lake the table and
are Alexion code and article
fourteen as to how many
precincts would be selected
based on the margin between
different.
Our candidates to get to a
ninety percent accuracy our
confidence level we were the
very first state in the country
to do a post election of A. A.
R. a post election audit
of our machines and and what we
do then is the secretary of
state them advised the each of
the county court.
For homemade precincts have been
collected and because the
language of the ocean of the
freezing.
And we have for example in
Bernalillo county we have books
that.
And now at at what we're trying
to do this you're going to both
genders in each county codified
in and everything County so what
actually happens is when you
pick a precinct randomly you
actually end up verifying the
programming not not just of your
very much and are a really fifty
or fifty machine Amberley county
because you have voters from
that precinct who showed up at a
variety of different early both
sides showed up at a variety of
different election day site used
machines they have there's a
bank which if they get the shape
which machine they go to they
don't know what the effect is
gonna be the same thing with the
with them about that are done by
mail and all of those ballots
are Hamm tell the.
They're they're segregated out
by pressing.
By machine.
And so that they so let's say
it's it's present number forty
three we're talking about
machine number one twenty six so
you have the ballots increasing
number forty three that were
machine number one twenty six
and those are hand tally them
and they verify that again the
results for those candidates on
that machine so in New Mexico
one of the procedures that we
have in New Mexico in addition
to the fact that with paper
ballots and we are able to
recreate and that the higher the
and election after the fact.
We also have well we have the
logic and accuracy testing prior
to any lie about being going
through at that map and
everything election and and
those directions we have the
post election audit that
involved a hand tally track
against the machine and I will
also note madam chair
Representative right in this
particular election with that in
twenty twenty.
Part of New Mexico decided to
impound ballots and I know
Bernalillo county Dona ana
county Grant County mistrust yes
are there any other kind of a
pattern three.
And I'm madam chair I believe
Sapporo county as well as coral
County they impounded ballots
under the name of a local
candidate.
And one billion pounds about
them but they have local
candidate they then proceeded
what their volunteers to hand
tally not only that but the
votes for that local candidate
but also for president even
though they did not impound
under the name of the president.
And that those categories that
called and asked me and I know
because they give them advice
and they do that our input let
them do it they've already
impact.
And everything okay they came
out with exactly the same number
and they were able to do that on
their own without depending upon
the system that we have that
that that happened regular.
So so so that is the process
that we have already in place
Madam chair representative Rick
if you would like to improve
upon that process I would be
very interested to hear how we
would.
Yes.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Lewis.
Representative Lewis.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert yes.
Representative Rehm yes ma'am.
Representative Townsend.
Okay.
Representative Thomson.
No.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Yes.
Nine two one we have a two
passed as amended.
Okay thank you very much Senator
and thanks madam chair members
of the committee.
And we will Senator if you would
check with our staff because
they have to send this up to
also and get that.
It would authorize that.
Madam chair are they in the
building or are they and
disposal K..
Well.
Our our analysts are not in the
building and they help with
those but both of the committee
assistance with almonds and this
one are are here and and I'll
come by the about section thank
you so much.
Our agenda folks for today.
So we'll see you on the floor
thank you everybody were injured
one minute.
