So, um,
Chairwoman Thompson, the floor
is yours. We're on House Bill
255. Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. So
this is a bill that's aimed at
um keeping useful offenders and
kids coming out of uh foster
care, etc. from getting involved
in our continuing to be involved
in the.
Prison pipeline. There's these
these are what we have in here
are ways to try and help.
get them on the right path.
get the youth on the right path
so that we don't see that
revolving door of them
recidivizing, I don't, is that
the right word.
So, um, with that, I'll just let
my experts say a few words and
then then we'll, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, my
name is Nick Costales, um, I was
a long time employee of Sea Wife
10 years and continued to just
kind of chairwoman, members of
the committee. My name is Megan
Dorsey, Speaker's office, and
happy.
be here to support the bill and
answer questions as needed.
Great, thank you. Um,
We don't have any amendments
that's we, we have, we have a
committee we have a committee
sub all right, um, will you pass
that out, please. Sorry about
that.
And I'm sure that was my first
thing to say and then.
went away.
Very good. I uh
Someone want to move the
committee sub for discussion.
So I'm sure. All right.
Does the sub, um did you speak
to the sub um chairwoman
Thompson, so that's, that's what
you were addressing when you
addressed us. I'm sure yes. OK,
so we'll hold off on further
discussion, um, you know, when
we get back to the committee. So
let's go to the audience, those
wishing to speak in opposition
to House Bill 255, keeping in
mind there is a committee sub,
please um break um.
Walked forward.
Up to one minute
Good afternoon. Thank you, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
Rickie Lee Chavez on behalf of
the Law Office of the Public
Defender, we do appreciate the
work and um, the work of the
advocates and sponsors, um, and
this bill certainly takes a more
modest punitive approach than
other proposals pending before
this body. However, we do oppose
adding any more offenses to
those that can incur adult
sentencing and have some concern
that extending supervision
periods increases the
possibility of increased
attention for even minor
violations.
While crimes committed by
juveniles cannot be condoned and
public safety must be addressed
are existing statutory scheme
balances that interest with a
powerful interest in
safeguarding children's
potential future and not giving
up on them. LOPD believes the
number one priority for
addressing juvenile crime should
be rehabilitating wayward youth
in the hope of granting them a
better future. Nevertheless, we
do appreciate the bill's
rehabilitative components. Thank
you for your time and
consideration.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Daniel
Williams. I'm a policy advocate
at the ACLU of New Mexico. All
people are worthy of
rehabilitation and redemption.
This is especially true for
young people who have a unique
capacity for change. Decades of
research and community wisdom
confirmed that youth in the
criminal legal system need care
and support, not
criminalization. The ACLU of New
Mexico and the 10 organizations
in the Public Safety Coalition
opposed the committee substitute
for HB 255 because
While it does contain some
provisions that move toward care
and support. It also contains
provisions that contradict these
principles. We are particularly
concerned about provisions
increasing exposure of children
to adult sentences by expanding
the definition of a youthful
offender.
Further criminalization will not
make communities safer. It will
do the opposite by deepening the
cycles of.
Harm and trauma in Mexico's
young people deserve real
solutions, and we are especially
saddened that this proposal
seems not to have been developed
with meaningful input from youth
serving organizations. Thank
you.
Thank you.
I think we have one more person.
Hello, um, chair, members of the
committee, my name is Adrian
Barboa. I am here tonight as
county commissioner for
Bernalillo County. I have um
been deeply involved in ways
that we can improve our criminal
justice system within the
county. We are responsible and
have to provide the kind of
facilities, the kind of
programming for the youths that
are detained in our care. I have
seen over my last 4 years that
it does not help anyone if we
are putting
increased penalties on youthful
offenders that are gonna only
incarcerate them. So we're doing
our job. I really hope that we
will not continue to increase
penalties for our young people.
Honestly, we are one of the
biggest facilities that holds
youthful offenders, and we don't
have the space, we don't have
the um capacity, and I think
what we really need to focus on,
we've spent, I've spent a lot of
my time saying how our previous
governor did, um, you know,
gutted the behavioral health
system. Well, this is the
First year and thank you to all
of you that have behavioral
health bills, um, but this is
the first time that we.
Thank you.
Um, let's go on that line. I'll
take up to 3 hands for those
wishing to speak in opposition.
Um, Diane McCash.
I am.
Good afternoon, chair and
committee. Um, before the
committee sub, I thought this
was a bill that was supposed to
be helpful to our youth, but it
looks now like it would be a lot
of further criminalizer use. Our
youth need care, not
criminalization, and I ask you
to now reject HB 255. Thank you.
Thank you.
Next is, um,
Um, Mr. Rodriguez.
Hello, uh, thank you,
chairwoman, members of the
committee. My name is Rodrigo
Rodriguez. I'm a community
organizer in Albuquerque with La
Placita Institute, and I'm the
director of the Albuquerque
Justice for Youth Community
Collaborative, uh, which is a
collaborative of 28
organizations working in
juvenile justice system, uh, our
collaborative serves about
30,000 people a month,
collectively, um, and we're here
to ask you to uh vote no on this
bill.
And specifically to remove the
provisions that would increase
penalties for young people, um,
the data and the studies show
over and over again that
increased penalties for young
people, uh, don't make our
communities more safe. Uh, what
we need is investments in jobs
and resources and opportunities
for young people, not for their
criminalization. So we urge you
to vote no on this today. Thank
you.
Thank you and last person.
Um, Robert Hobart.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, thank you for taking
my comments. I also work with
Justice for Youth Collaborative
as a social work student, and I
just want to reflect what we
know about uh this idea of tough
on crime in the ways that we've
um had in our recent history,
really not working.
And us needing to take the
different stance that does have
the results to back it in terms
of making our communities safer.
And although some aspects of
this bill we're heading in that
direction. Um, there seems to be
some, uh, I don't know, interest
or, or need to uh expand the
criminalization, so I just urge
you to vote no on this so that
we can continue to talk about
the rehabilitative measures and
the science backed approaches
that we know are needed for our
youth and echoing what Rodrigo
said as well.
Thank you. Thank you.
Um, back to the sponsor, would
you like to add anything before
we go to here. So, um, on page
7, line 21, I'm not a big fan of
adding voluntary manslaughter,
and I am mend that out, and I
think, you know, I think there
has been some misunderstanding.
So it, it, we are.
Um, extending the term the
The amount of time, but if you
notice in each of the places we,
we add time. It's, it's time
outside of the facility and it's
a time for, for to get these
youth ready to be in society,
there will be treatment, there
will be training that will be um
part of this bill is to allow
$500 a month to help them kind
of get on their way, so I think
there's been a little
misunderstanding about.
what this is, so it's not
I mean, I guess in the strictest
sense of the word, Madam Chair,
we are extending the sentence,
but we're extending the sentence
to provide treatment and
training. Thank you, I goofed,
and I forgot the 4.
Um, comment.
Sorry about that.
So let's did that this morning.
I had a lot of things going on
in my head right now. So, uh, if
we could do the 4.
Up to 5 people, please, up to
one minute each.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Douglas
Carver. I'm the acting director
of the New Mexican New Mexico
Sentencing Commission, the
original House Bill 255 was a
commission bill unanimously
supported in our juvenile
committee and by our commission.
Um, the commission definitely
supports those changes to the
juvenile community Corrections
Act and um everything that was
involved there.
The committee, the commission is
very split on the editions that
have been added with the sub,
and so the commission is neutral
on the changes that are
reflected in the tub. Thank you,
madam.
Thank you. Anyone else in the
audience wishing to speak?
Yeah, I don't see anyone, anyone
online wishing to speak in
support.
Please raise your hand up to 3.
I don't see any hands raised,
so.
Um, let's go to committee.
IAC Representative Reed.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um,
I'm a little frustrated with
this. I'm not gonna.
Like beat the bush on this. We
have a
A bill that went in front of um
CPAC, um, representative and
Had nothing to do with juvenile
changes in it, I think Bill's
title renamed Juvenile
Corrections Act. I think it
changed juvenile community
corrections to juvenile
community connections and had to
do with some programs and
everything. And then now we get
a sub.
That is basically going into um
the juvenile bill and different
changes that, as you know, I
propose making in 184, in front
of your committee where you had
all kinds of complaints about
it, uh, representative and um.
We talked about rolling it to
work with the stakeholders. I
know some of your experts or one
of them was one of those
stakeholders and now we're here
with basically what I feel is a
bill that jumped through CPAC
without getting any uh
discussion on the issues that
you all had at CPAC about
reforming juvenile delinquency
and the problems we're having
with crime and then coming into
judiciary now with
Well, what I think are 3 things
that really probably aren't
gonna change juvenile crime
much, but it still seemed like a
a a way that
Maybe it happens all the time,
but not a way I appreciate that
it happened, if I can say that,
um.
And so I guess my question is,
uh, representative, uh, you
asked me to work with
stakeholders and roll it and
change things, um, and I have
tried to do that, and now you
come in representative with a
bill that's adding some of the
things I wanted to do, um, is
there been a change of heart,
madam representative about how
serious juvenile crime is right
now, and I'm sure that I'll ask,
um, I'm not sure that's a fair
question. If you want.
As the sponsor about her bill,
you know, I, I appreciate where
you're coming from in terms of
your frustration, but I think we
should be talking about the
bill. All right, well, uh, Madam
Chair, you now add and
representative voluntary
manslaughter and um I got the
impression when I was in your
committee that that was not
something you liked, I'm sure I
did say I wasn't thrilled with
it. This has been a uh
process of many parties coming
together and that was put in
there, and I'm, I'm not in total
agreement with that, and as I
stated in my opening, and I'd be
willing to amend that out
because this is not about more
punishment, this is about
providing for more services,
more rehabilitation.
These
Youth, um
Over and over again.
OK, thank you. And Madam Chair
and
Representative and experts.
Uh, part of the bill that I
proposed did all the time for
absconding, um, and I didn't get
the impression that anyone on
that committee really liked
that, um,
is Ma chair had you changed your
mind on that issue.
If you want to speak to why it's
in the that's why it's in the
now why,
well, I think if you want to
speak to why you put it in the
bill. I think that's a fair
question,
thank you for the question. Um,
the provision that is added in
the committee sub tolling the
time on probation is an
important measure because under
current law, if a juvenile who's
subject to probation and the
time of their supervised release
period.
doesn't stop, which I, I know
you understand, but for
everybody else that's listening,
uh, which means that a juvenile
could abscond from probation,
failed to comply with the terms
of their probation and basically
run the clock out on their term
without receiving the supports
and services that we hope will
help to reduce recidivism, um,
this amendment changes that
provision, which puts it in line
with what happens in adult
settings so that if
Guns, the
Office can seek a warrant, the
warrant then when it issues,
tolls the time, which stops the
clock from running and the clock
doesn't start again until the
warrant is either quashed and
that provision was added
specifically to make sure that
the children that are in, that
are justice involved are
receiving the support and, and
supervision that they need to
join the community. All right,
thank you, Madam Chair and
expert, and then the other thing
you added was leave, um, was it
3 representative
so we did take 3 months.
Off of the the in in facility
time.
So it, it, it, if you look on
page 10B.
So a long term commitment for no
more than it used to say 22
years. Now it says 27 months,
but it does say no more than 21
months shall be served at the
facility, and no less than 6
months shall be served on
supervised release, which is the
time where they would be getting
services, getting training,
getting um uh their GED uh
whatever, whatever the, the
program thinks will help them
not. And thank you, and I think
Madam Chair.
and
Um
Representative that was one of
the.
Ideas, I think that.
Bregman had um
However,
Madam Chair representative, so I
understand you said you would,
wouldn't mind taking a voluntary
manslaughter out of this bill.
Is there any reason why you
would not
Dealing with a serious crime
problem that we're.
Juvenile offenders were hearing
all about in the news, we're
seeing every day.
Why or can you address why your
bill doesn't expand the crimes
for serious serious youthful
offenders and youthful offenders
to get our violent offenders,
um, off the streets to where we
can deal with the most dangerous
and dangerous of kids, not the
ones it looks like you're trying
to deal with, but the, the
really dangerous metal chair and
Representative Reeves that
locking kids up for longer isn't
going to it, I mean, it hasn't
worked for the past, actually,
madam.
chair was telling me just
yesterday that um
that she visited the original
prison in Australia.
From the 1600s and it's very
similar to what our prisoners.
tells me that
We, we haven't moved forward, so
we're trying to use science that
kids are much more, their brains
are much more plastic, they're
not.
Matured and trying to give them
a way to get back on the good
side of society.
And that representative.
Have you taken into account, I
understand you're trying to
follow the science, the reality
of what's happening in
Albuquerque and around the state
and pulled and stakeholders like
BA Brakeman and other district
attorneys, district attorneys on
this bill, Madam Chair.
And is there a reason
why, Madam Chair Representative,
you would not pull those such
important stakeholders who are
dealing with this every single
day. I believe we have a
detention center that has 33
youth youth murders in there.
Ranging from the age of 13 to
uh, is there a reason why you
would not pull in those
stakeholders for for something
where you're trying to adjust
the representative
not specifically, no. I mean, I,
I, I think they.
In my mind, they are more of a
looking at more of a hammer
approach and we're looking um
treat kids like kids and I
admittedly there are some, some
that um are, are dangerous and
need to be away, but the vast
majority of these kids are gonna
eventually join back into
society and and what I've seen
through the years is that
And jails and prisons are a good
place to learn how to be a
criminal, um, that, you know,
you may have done something.
Uh, you know, stupid or
accidental, and you end up
there, and you learn the tricks
to be a criminal, as opposed to
if we.
view them as youngsters who who
are amenable to treatment or
education, which we're trying to
set them on a path.
To be part of society. So I
think for me anyway, the
difference is I'm not looking
for a hammer.
I'm looking at you.
And Madam Chair um an expert. I
understand there are kids that
can fit in that realm and
youthful offenders do get an
amenability hearing and so they
will definitely get that. I'm
talking about the worst of the
worst, um, here. So I'll, I'll
just close with two statements.
Um, one,
I think that we have got to take
juvenile crimes seriously,
especially in this area, and
This bill
will do nothing to address that,
too.
I'm not very happy about how
this went through CPAC.
With a bill that seemed to
address programs and then a sub
came through addressing juvenile
crime that is now in the title
of a full page long from a title
that went 7 lines and I don't
feel that that was really the
proper way to vet this in CPAC
considering.
the, the
Considering the feedback you
gave me and what you wanted me
to do on my bill, and it seems
like
It was just avoided all through
CPAC and then
snuck in here to judiciary and a
sub.
And those are my problems, um,
and
I understand what you're trying
to do, but I will not support
this bill with the way this
thing was handled, and it does
nothing to address the juvenile
crime we have right now in the
state, and so I will not be
voting for this, Madam Chair,
represented.
Representative Romero and then
Representative Martinez.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. I'm
still getting through this sub a
little bit, but um I'm just
gonna start with asking some
questions on
Um
Page 7 on the voluntary
manslaughter, um, when we're,
when we did add that, and I know
that you're um
Potentially um interested in
striking it and I just want to
hear it perhaps from experts or
however to um.
Sort of talk through this, um,
when we're talking about
voluntary manslaughter, we're
talking about unintentional
crimes of passion. Um, we're
talking about and, and in this
case, we're talking about
juveniles in the sense of that
mindset, um, Madam Chair
representative.
Are these common, I mean, I can
imagine like the child, a child
brain acting irrationally, we do
see that happening. I'm, it is a
kind of alarming to see this,
but I'm wondering why we were
capturing it in this, and I, I,
I like the sponsor to be um just
student in just hearing more
about.
These types of crimes.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
thank you for the question. Uh,
I want to respond to a couple of
things that you raised in your
question. First, what voluntary
manslaughter is just so that
it's clear for the body, uh,
under 30-2-38 volunteering
manslaughter consists of
manslaughter committed upon
sudden quarrel or in the heat of
passion, and it is a 3rd degree
felony. Um, so I understand your
point, Representative, that in
those situations we're dealing
with
As relevant to this bill,
children who may have reacted
inappropriately to some
provocation. Um, however, adding
this particular crime to the
list of youthful offender
predicate crimes still allows uh
an amenability hearing. So under
the youthful offender provision,
and this is a really critical
reason it was placed here
instead of in the serious
offender provision. Under
youthful offender, what happens
is a child who's 14 to 18 and
charges.
One of a predicate list of
crimes can be subject to either
juvenile or adult sanctions. If
a prosecutor wants to pursue
adult sanctions, they file a
petition with the court, the
defense attorney gets to
respond. There is a lengthy list
of um.
Specific factors that the judge
is required to consider at that
hearing, uh, which also includes
the child's ability to be
treated, um, and their maturity,
their sociological background,
all kinds of details and if the
judge finds that the child is
not amenable to treatment, they
can subject them to adult
sanctions. If, however, the
judge finds that the child can
be treated, then they stay in
the juvenile system and they are
treated as a juvenile. So
although
this particular crime can be
committed in a way that is just
a kid acting like a kid in an
immature way, the due process
provisions of delinquency Act
already protect that child.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. I
think that, you know, wrestling
with do we keep it doing that
really that the judge is really
making that determined mindset
of, of that.
child, um.
So I'm not going to recommend
striking it out at this point.
Just continuing to listen in,
um.
Page 10.
Um, when we're looking at the
extension of the longer term
commitments on rehabilitation
after they've been, um,
Release for care.
Um
Can we talk about what these
programs are and why the
extension.
Madam Chair Representative, I'll
be happy to speak to the
extension and then perhaps Mr.
Costales can speak to the
programs that exist, um.
So we heard from.
folks at CYFD as well as other
stakeholders that right now the
rehabilitative process is often
cut short for certain kids and
that a extended jurisdiction for
these children would help
rehabilitate them and ensure
that they don't recidivate once
they are released from the
supervision of the department
into our communities. Um,
however, we also heard from the
body that many people are not
interested in extending the
length of time that children are
committed in detention
facilities.
Especially when we understand
that those underfunded and so
this provision, while it on its
face, it appears like it's
extending the duration of
commitment. It's not. It is
actually extending the amount of
time available for supervised
release, which is where the
programming is available to
those children.
Um, Madam Chair Representative
Romero, yeah, uh, I think Megan
hit it spot on, you know, we
were looking for more time to be
able to actually work with the
department out in the community,
not inside the facility. It's
the sound on a short term
commitment by statute, it's only
90 days that a child would be on
supervised release, which in the
adult world is parole and so
people don't understand what
that kind of concept is, um, so
the youth that come out of the
facility is a couple, uh,
programs that they participate
in um for the youth that come
out that maybe don't.
have a place that they can go,
the home environment's not a
good environment, we do have a
boys reintegration test where
youth can go when they get jobs
and they, you know, go through
counting and all the different
things and then hopefully get an
apartment or something on their
own after they spent some time,
um, there are youth that also
are assigned what's called the
transition coordinator. So if
any of you are familiar with
kind of what happens with
fostering connections on the on
the foster side, the abuse and
neglect side. It's a very
similar program, you have a
transition coordinator that
helps you get jobs, helps with
apartments.
helps with transportation, job
training, different things like
that, and, and they work with
them all the way up to almost
the age, I think 25 or 26, and
then what's actually part of
this bill is then the juvenile
community corrections as well.
So juvenile corrections was
really designed to be like a
case management program that's
very specific to the individual,
so it's not like, hey, every kid
that comes out of the facilities
is gonna get job training. Now,
if you already had a job lined
up, there's no reason to add
that services, but we were
trying to do under that section
of the bill.
low in current statute do not
commun corrections is only
available to you that are
adjudicated, mean you, you would
have to go through the formal or
you were committed to the
facility to be eligible, and I
just didn't make any sense to
have a program that could be
used for youth further upstream,
like why would we want to wait
for them to be placed, have
access to these services, so
that's the language that you see
within juvenile community
corrections is to leave the
language of, you know, still for
supervised release kids are
useful offenders, but it also
added or you.
preferred by the department
because the department was
unable to use this type of
funding and program for anybody,
those are some of the programs,
Madam Chair.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you for that response, um.
I know that in our community,
one of the greater needs that we
have is this handoff.
From that situation and.
From what I understand, the
longer term relationship,
whether it be mandated or it
actually folks just.
sort of read circulating through
that becoming your advisors and
other things is, is a great
opportunity, um, so I appreciate
the thoughtfulness for that and.
That makes sense, um.
Moving to page 15.
On the absconded sort of period
and tolling.
Um
I heard the the um experts, uh.
Response on
what that looks like. I guess
I'm just curious about the data
and where we're we're pulling
this um
con ion this was happening quite
often or how what are we?
What are we doing here? Madam
Chair Representative Romero,
yes, during the time that I was
with CYD and overseeing the
juvenile probation division on
average, probably 20 youth that
would come out on supervised
release would end up, um.
Uh, you said 25%. Uh, no, about
20 youths, so depending on
average of 20 a year would
probably abscond from their
supervision, and, and under
current statute that time in
probation. Um, so what this is
doing is really just aligning
the statute for supervised
release kids to mirror basically
what happens with roughly about
20 per year that would be coming
out on supervised release would
walk away from there, whether
that's the reintegration or just
where they were play warrant
would be issued and then
depending if they're
Uh, were picked up before their
time ran, then, you know, they
could possibly go back to the
facility, but what often
happened because it was only a
oftentimes they were gone past
that and when I hit that 90
days, the warrant had to be
quashed and, and there was no
further interaction with the
youth.
Madam Chair. Um.
Representative and expert.
I'm gonna move on to the um
grant fund created.
When we're talking about
referrals that are made into the
connections program first.
Um
How is this funded, I guess, is
it funded in House Bill 2 today,
I don't know. And then second
question is, um,
When we're looking at delinquent
children or youth were said to
age um.
25
Um
How does this sort of, how do,
how does one get referred, and
when do they sort of enter into
this, um, Madam Chair and
Representative Romero, yes,
great questions. Um, it is a uh
uh funding comes every year as
part of house bill too, um, this
program has been in effect for
more than 2 decades, so there's
a, there's, there's an amount
that comes to CYD and what CYD
is basically request proposals
from communities around the
state and, and they, they seek
funding to provide the services,
one of the bad things.
that have happened with the
language only being for
adjudicated, which is what we're
trying to change is.
There really weren't enough kids
on probation anymore for some of
these providers to stay open.
So we're hoping with the
language change that they'll
actually be more providers that
will come on board to serve
these kids because now it's not
gonna be limited to just and
actually with the language uh
representative and and Madam
Chair,
um, kids coming to the foster
care system with the new
language of Orego services as
well.
So, so, Madam Chair
representative under tailored to
you that are in these
situations. This is mostly about
community reintegration if we're
talking about foster youth and
folks that are in this juvenile
sanctions sort of for children
in that same place or you.
So they're all, um, I'm, I'm
assuming these are different
programs for different purposes,
but as far as just being able to
have the services, madam chair.
We also need to make sure that
there are folks that are and can
you just talk about so that I
understand the difference
between a foster youth being
referred to this program or uh
you referred to this program.
Um, as defined here in statue,
um, what the differences or the
similarities. Sure, madam over
now, so with the current process
is because of course until if
this bill passes, then foster
care youth will be eligible and
right now they're not, so we
don't really have that process.
It'd be very similar to what
happens with the kids now that
are coming to juvenile justice.
So for youth that are
appropriately in the facility on
the commitment, it's due to
their caseworker in the
facility, it would make that
referral to the community uh
corrections program, um, so they
would make.
that referral, but also kids
that are out in the community
that maybe just on probation,
they're supervising probation
officer can make that referral,
and one of the nice things about
community uh corrections and
we've actually expanded a little
bit in this bill, there's a
local selection panel, so we
really wanted to tailor this so
that the communities get to
decide whether or not this youth
is appropriate for the program
in that community. And so it's
not the state dictating and you
have to take this kid and serve
him really leave it up to the
local selection panel that's
made out.
made up of several different
stakeholders in each community
that decides that, but it's a
referral that comes from either
a casework in a facility or the
supervising probation officer in
the community, and as I said
before, representative uh Madam
Chair, there's really not
A specific process for foster
care because they're not part of
this yet, but I can't imagine it
would be any different than what
happens now.
Madam Chair representative, so.
Um, I, I guess I'm, I'm still
trying to understand what the
service exactly is with my if
I'm a foster youth versus uh 25
year olds referred to.
Um, this delinquent, um,
program
What, what is it that we're
subjecting both foster youth and
possible offenders or those that
may be referred to the same
program.
Sure, uh, Madam Chair
Representative Rome, I
apologize. I think you've asked
me that several times. I'm
giving you a very clear,
um, so the types of services
that community corrections does
is job training or job referral,
um, they can support housing, so
there's a monthly stipend that
would come to help you with
housing, uh, they can help with
transportation, you know, to
your appointments and actually
even just a direct financial um
statement, so to speak, every
month as well, so the same kind
of things that the juvenile
justice, um, kids would take
advantage of that are.
challenge would be the same kind
of programs and like I said,
it's very specific, it's not
just the broad program that
everybody goes through the same
things, they, they tighter the
kind of um plan of care specific
to the needs of the youth. Thank
you, that helps me understand.
OK, what, what we're helping
folks again with that handoff
would look like, um.
I think that's as far as I got
through the bill, madam chair,
um, I appreciate your responses.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um.
It's been uh an interesting
session, um, all of our juvenile
crime bills.
Beaten up in committee and then.
This one comes up.
gonna figure that out.
Um, let me get to the bill.
Can you tell me?
In your
title.
16 line 16 and 17 on page one.
Why did you change the name from
juvenile Corrections?
to juvenile community
connections.
Martinez, it's, it's.
In my mind, it's to kind of take
it away from the punitive,
making them trying to make them
a part of a community as opposed
to a a a convict.
Well, I don't think changing the
name of a
Programmers
to accomplish um getting these
people, these young people.
on the right path, but I was
just, I was curious about that.
Um
Earlier you talked about
stakeholders that you worked
with.
Can you give me a list of who
will stakeholders were.
Madam Chair Representative,
thank you for the question. Um,
in the court addressing this
bill, we heard from CYFD. We
heard this organizations right
now, his first name is John and
I can get it for you after the
committee hearing if you'd like,
um, and we also, of course, took
a very careful look at all of
the agency analyses on this bill
as well as some of the other do
have the session.
So, Madam Chair Representative.
called the
The stakeholders and it sounded
like there was a lot of
stakeholders that were
Brought into the discussion, so
the stakeholders are basically
CYFD and
Um, several of these juvenile
justice organizations.
Is that correct?
Uh, Madam chair and Represent
Martinez, uh, I think for a
large portion of the bill that
we've talked about, which is the
Community Connections Act, uh,
and perhaps Doug Carver can talk
about this a little more. This
was the sentencing commission,
um, proposal, the original
version of
Doha list all the different
people that are part of the
sentencing commission because he
would, he would.
Thank you Madam Chair, um.
Representative, so
District attorneys.
Um
Law enforcement
None of those were were brought
into the discussion.
Uh, as part of the sentencing
commission and I'm probably not
off the top of my head gonna
name all of the stakeholders
that are invested in that group.
But there are representatives
from the district attorney's
office, locks of the Public
Defender, the Department of
Corrections, probation and
parole private defense
attorneys, CYFD.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative so.
All those people were consulted
on this bill.
On the committee sub.
No, sir, on the original bill.
Mad,
Madam Cha Representative so.
Who are the stakeholders that
worked on this bill.
On the committee sub.
Ma I'm Chair representative as I
indicated earlier, CYFD as well
as the juices, uh, a few
juvenile justice commit.
Organizations and of course the
analyses from all of the state
agencies that waited on this.
And I'm sure representative
thank you that that's what I was
trying to get.
That's
To get an understanding of how
this, this sub developed.
Um
Earlier you talked about uh your
willingness to
Remove voluntary manslaughter.
Why was that included in the
first place if if
You didn't want it there.
Yeah, um,
Madam Chair Representative to
expand upon the chairwoman's
answer. Um, this
New substitute is intended to
strike a balance between the
members of the body.
that
More aggressive approach to
dealing with juvenile crime, and
members of the community and the
body that are focused on Cammert
model and rehabilitation
proposals that have been
described in public comment as
tough on crime, um, have been
added to this provision to
increase accountability for
juveniles and to ensure that
they need to reintegrate into
our communities.
Thank you, Madam Chair. um,
representative, so
Um
Earlier in um
Testimony used um the gentleman
I I forget your name, you said
that there are, there had been
20 runaways.
Was it, were they runaways from
a facility?
Um, Madam Chair, represent
Martinez, so it happens in a
couple different ways and the
the technical term is called
absconders, but it's, it's kind
of what you're talking about. So
if there was a youth that was at
one of our reintegrations and
they just didn't come back to
the facility because they're
they're part of the community,
so they're they're not behind
walls or bars or they're now
back in the community, and they
might just not come back from
work, they might take off from
work, they might just walk away
from the facilities because once
again it's not a locked
facility, um, that, but that
same situation.
also also happens if that youth
went directly home. We get a
call from the parents, they say,
you know, he, he hasn't come
back and I have no idea where he
was, so it could be either from
one of the reintegration centers
or it could be from a home.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative of an expert and
that's 20 out of
How many?
Average
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative
Martinez, so
The the number of kids placed on
probation and even in commitment
changes, so I was trying to use
a number of kind of giving an
average, so for example, just a
year ago, there was probably 80
kids in our commitment
facilities throughout the state
and I think current census is
probably about 125.
So you can see where there's a
wide range now of where we were
a year ago and then how many
more kids are in a commitment
right now. And so the number of
20, I was just trying to average
it out. I'm, I'm happy to get
those exact numbers for you over
the past couple of years after
the the uh.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative and expert. I, I
was just trying to get
Kind of a general idea.
Um
Oh.
I might understand that.
25%.
Of these juveniles have
Scott
Um
0.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative
Martinez, once again I was just
trying to give an average based
on, you know, the number of kids
that were in commitment, but
can't be such a strong
commitment because um
Like I said, that's changed over
time, so, you know, the next.
couple of months, maybe it was
90 kids in, but I, but I
understand what you're trying to
get so that's what I was trying
to use just an average of what
it is and and it's hard for the
staff as well. I want to be very
honest, which is why we were
trying to look at an increase in
the time that staff could work
with them because you've worked
with this kid for months and the
kid that really had no interest
in wanting to do this, and he
knew he only had 90 days. It was
very simple for him to be gone
for 90 days, and they also knew
that their clock continued to
run, uh, whether or not they
were gone or not, so that's why
part of this bill.
Not only to increase the time
out in the community, but that
the time would toll or stop if
they happen to abscond. So it's
kind of a combination of.
You know what I've learned over
the years, Madam Chair
representative working with with
juvenile justice or at this kid,
it's a combination of incentive
and rewards as well as
accountability. So by extending
the time that they're on
supervised release, there's now
an incentive for them to work
the program, get a job, stay,
you know, clean, do all the
things, you know, not commit any
more crimes, because then you're
gonna get off that supervised
release early, the
accountability piece that's
proposed in this is, if you
choose not to do any of those
things and just walk away,
you're not gonna get.
Rewarded that your time
continues to run, that time's
gonna stop. I was trying to do
that balances as some of the.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative and expert, so.
I didn't see anything in here
about good time.
Um, but it sounded like that's
what you're referring to.
Or do they accrue good time
while they're in the program?
Um, Madam Chair Martinez, no
good time does not exist in the
Children's code for the juvenile
system so when I talked about
rewards, um, in statute, the
department being CYFD and
probation has the exclusive
authority and jurisdiction to
release the kid if they've met
the terms and kind of
rehabilitation goals. So, you
know, if, if this kid was on
supervised release for 6 months,
but he's working and he's
staying clean and reporting and
doing all the things that we had
wanted to see him do we
integrated back to the
community, um.
he could actually be taken off
soon.
that I'm sure.
Representative an expert so.
That's kind of like good time.
Um, and that's Madam Chair
Representative, that's up to
person working with the
juvenile.
Uh, you know, I, I feel like
This guy's meeting all his
targets.
I'm gonna cut him loose.
and just keep an eye on him, is
it then unsupervised probation,
Madam Chair.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative
Martinez, no, once, once the a
probation officer who feels like
the, the youth has met his
conditions, and there's a risk
and needs assessment tool that
you know, the department uses,
so it's not just, oh, I think
this guy's doing great. There's
actually a scoring instrument
that's use that helps determine,
you know, kind of where they're
at what their goal tooth is
responsible for so that we have
things that we can measure and
see whether or not they've
they've complied with those
things. And then if that
supervising officer felt that it
was appropriate to then
discharge her from.
Provision, they would then meet
with their supervisor, and then
submit the appropriate paperwork
back to the juvenile Public
Safety Advisory Board to
officially um.
Uh, and, and their commitment
period, even though it's the
term that we're talking about
that's in the community.
Madam Chair Representative, but,
you know.
That, that should always be to
get them.
back into society.
out of trouble.
Um, Madam Chair.
Representative um expert.
Give an idea of what the
recidivism rate is.
the juvenile, Madam Chair
Representative Martinez, um, I
had looked at that number back,
it's part of the LSC report card
that CYD does every quarter, I
don't have that right in front
of me, um, to give a comparison
or or maybe you might be able to
find it just to give you a quick
comparison for kids that are end
up on supervised probation, they
don't end up a commitment coming
out, uh, that's 86% of the youth
that are placed on super, and
out of that 86%, 90% of those
kids don't recidivate within the
next 2 years.
So it's showing that those kinds
of services are getting to the
point that you're talking about
or working and getting the kids,
I think if if Megan can pull it
up and she can give you that.
The two, Madam Chair,
representative, the two numbers
that I have in my notes, uh,
which is not the full report
card, but the two that I have
readily available reflect that
90% of youth placed on
supervised probation
successfully complete their
term, and that 86% of youth
discharged from supervision do
not recidivate in the following.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative, uh
An expert so
We're talking about
14% that might.
Madam Chair.
Interesting. Madam Chair
representative to clarify that
may recidivate.
Yeah, yes, I'm sorry.
Madam Chair, um.
So
Oh yeah
Not an expert, but I think that.
Getting to the point where you
are.
less people we have.
Through the system a 2nd, 3rd
and 4th time is.
is always a win, sometimes we
just
We have to take a win when we
can get it.
Thank you, madam chair. I
appreciate the time.
Thank you, Representative Chavez
and then home.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, representative, um.
I guess I share the same
frustration and I know I'm a
freshman.
Uh
it.
we went through in house Bill
134.
And
representative
that charge and working hard
with so many different entities,
um.
And it sounds like for this bill
you worked with juvenile justice
organization CYFD Defense
attorneys, did you meet with any
victims or prosecutors.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
thank you for the question since
Representative Martinez
affirmation, um, so sentencing
commission, prosecutors are
involved in that discussion on
the original bill.
Which I understand is different
than the subject for you.
Um, however,
those individuals that weighed
in on the sub, include the
children's code Task Force and
the Supreme Court commission on
juvenile Justice and the
Albuquerque Youth for Justice
Group.
And I'm not aware of who's on
those boards, so I, I can't say.
Um, I think
Um, I really loved the original
bill, I'll say I'm, I'm all for
rehabilitation. I know I've
worked with some your experts um
throughout the years, and I will
state that even um.
One of my son's murderers. We
had conversations and he said
that he did not see any other
way till he was incarcerated at
CYFD and met some of the
supervisors, he ended up getting
his GED. He ended up going to
college, and there are certain
things that we want to see
reintegration because they are
gonna rejoin society, and we
want them.
to succeed.
Because we want less people
sitting in the shoes that I hope
to fill today, um.
So
Regarding that, I love that part
of the bill. I think.
The
part where we're looking at, you
know, adding sentencing and, and
punishments and
Adding voluntary manslaughter
and, and you hesitating adding
that. I, I think that that's a
good thing, I mean, we have to
show that accountability doesn't
have an age limit.
I believe, um, but for you when
you started to say that we have
to follow the science. I think
we have to follow reality.
They're 33 individuals that are
juveniles right now facing
homicide charges. That's
reality, and I think that's the
science in this state. And so
that really disturbs me as a
victim and somebody that's lost
a child to juvenile crime. It's,
it's my reality and it's now 33
new parents reality.
Um, so,
My question, I guess on this
bill regarding this charge of
voluntary manslaughter is, do
you have the intentions of
removing this before we vote on
this today.
Madam Chair and Representative,
um.
It depends on and in terms of um
it just went out of my brain.
So what we're hoping for is that
before kids get to the point, I
mean, general, well, I don't
know if this is true. To me,
probably there were some red
flags in the kids' background
before they shoot somebody.
Um, and so what we're trying to
do as, as Nick said, is go
upstream and treat them and get
them on the straight and narrow
before it comes to violence,
when, you know, maybe they were
stealing cars or, you know,
whatever the case may be, but
intervened early as opposed to,
you know, lock them up and throw
them throw away the key after
we've missed our window to.
To change their trajectory.
Um, and Madam Chair
Representative, I, I agree with
that and I think.
I don't know which meeting it
was in the committee where um
Speaker Martinez said we don't
want, you know, juveniles locked
up for marijuana charges. Nobody
wants that. We don't want them
locked up for anything that's
nonviolent.
But unfortunately our state and
the juveniles in our state are
getting more and more violent,
and we have to face that
reality, so, you know, I'll be
watching this with that question
on what the committee wants to
do with with adding at least the
voluntary.
Um, manslaughter charge, um, but
let's go back to the original
bill. I did have some questions
on, on the funding and the
stipend, so you mentioned um
some of the young men can go
into the boy's re.
Voluntary or is that mandated?
Um, Madam Chair Representative
Chavez. It's a kind of a
combination of the two in
conversations with the youth
when the very first enter the
the YDDC if that's, if that's
where you go, the conversations
of release are already starting
within that first month, so
they're trying to build the plan
and where it's gonna be the best
environment for this youth to
go. Um, there is a juvenile
public safety advisory board
that's part of the juvenile
justice system that meets with
the kids and makes makes
recommendations as well as
placing conditions on the youth
when they come out.
Some youth want to go there
because they know they're not
going back to an environment,
you know, that was helpful to
them, are the ones the board is
saying this is where you're
gonna go because success. So
it's a combination some kids
want to be there because they
know going it's a juvenile
public safety advisory Board,
that's saying we think this is
worth success.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative expert, um,
When they get the stipend, is
that after they leave a
reintegration center or were
they, when they're released, and
can they get that stipend
monthly for living expenses
between the ages of 18 and 25,
once they're released, or is it
just under a certain period of
years, and how is that
determined?
So Madam Chair and
representative, I just want to
make sure, are you talking about
the, the section of the original
part of the bill? Yes, OK, um,
so, so what they get as part of
juvenile community connections
looks or corrections as it
currently stands looks very
different for each kid. Some of
the kids don't need kind of that
financial assistance, um, kids
that come out to the
reintegration centers are
required to work or go to
school, so they don't get to
come out and just spend 3 months
in a reintegration center doing
nothing, it's.
so many of those kids are
already saving money for the
ones that do. That's one of the
services that uh transition
services program, which is one
of the juvenile probation
programs can help with. So it,
it's really specific to the
youth at that's something that
they actually need, but it can
start from the time that they're
actually in a reintegration
center or at home um through
transition services all the way
up to the age of 25, as long as
they follow the program and are
going to school and going to
work, right?
Uh, manager Representative
Chavez, yes, absolutely
transition services can and
often do those youth that go
through transition services,
tend to stay with that program
for many years.
Madam Chair Representative,
thank you. And I think that's
great because a lot of times we
don't want them going home to go
back to, you know, generational
violence or what it is that
they're trying to get away from,
so that's good. So that was my
question. So it could last up
until the age of 25. OK. Um, I
think those are all the
questions I have.
Thank you. Um, representative.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative expert witnesses.
On page 16 section G.
is
Would you explain this youth
means a person is 18 years or
older, but less than 26.
Years old, can you explain and
you may have touched on it
earlier, but just explain.
the purpose behind that up to
26.
Our manager chair Representative
Hall, yeah, that that's part of
the new language that we've put
under the juvenile community
Connections program, what we're
trying to do with that is is
match it with kind of the the
same process that fostering
connection does for kids that go
through the abuse and neglect
system. So we wanted to define
very.
and if I can direct you to.
Um
Um, page 15.
Um
16 basically when we're talking
about that definition is
specific to just juvenile
community corrections, so it's
not that a youth can be placed
on probation up to the age of
26, that definition um is
specific to um community
corrections. So if that's
helpful to you and it's just to
get to that point where we can
provide services.
Past the age that they're even
on supervision, so under
juvenile community corrections,
even if you've completed your
supervision period, Madam Chair
Representative, you can continue
to be a part of um the community
corrections program, it's not
specific to being on probation.
The only part that's specific to
being on probation is the
referral that you can't be
referred to the program unless
you've been adjudicated.
Uh, Madam Chair, sir, uh
Representative, so.
In anyone's book, a 26 year
old's an adult.
Are they at any time coming in
contact.
With
Youth because
This is an act relating to
children, and then we get in
there and we redefine useful
offender, but
When you have a 26, 25, 24 year
old, they are.
They can be hardened or well on
their way.
Um
To
Being criminals.
And that that would be a concern
of mine that if we have any
adult.
Who's been any kind of trouble
to, are they going to be near
the, the juveniles under the age
of 18, sir, ma'am.
So, Madam Chair Representative
Hall, so, so this is specific to
the provision of services, so
it's not like they will be in
the probation offices with, and
I'll give you a couple of
examples why we looked at this
language. The relationship that
happens between a probation
officer and work together for 1
year, 2 years, whatever it might
be.
Oftentimes that probation
officer is is look is looked
upon as a support for these
youths, so we do get kids to
remain, they might be 23, 24
years of age that will reach out
to their probation office and
say, I'm really struggling with
this. Can you connect me to
this? Can you help me with this?
So we wanted to match up the
language of community
connections because since it is
a service related function we
didn't want people that are have
Went past the age of services,
which is why we increased the
language up to 26, so it's
community corrections program is
very specific as I, as I
mentioned to that youth's needs,
but we do have people um that
come back years after they've
been on supervision because they
know that the probation officer
in the department can be a
resource.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Expert
witness representative, I
noticed on page 30 of the FIR.
It says CYFD reported without
this statute, the juvenile
community Corrections providers
may need to.
Insufficient numbers of
referrals.
Is this bill.
Actually designed to help keep
those, I understand it wants to
help young people. I'm not
disparaging that.
But is it also in part to keep
these open.
So, uh, Madam Chair.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative
Hall, and it was kind of part of
one of the questions that
Representative Romero had asked
me and over the years we used to
have a juvenile community
corrections program in almost
every county in New Mexico and
those slowly closed over the
years because there wasn't
enough kids in the program
because there weren't that many
kids on probation, um, because
you had to be adjudicated to be
eligible for that program, and
so many providers closed over
the years, so what we're hoping
is that because these youth are
going back to those communities
that might.
encouraged some of these
providers to want to start
providing these services again
because it won't be limited to
just kids that have been
adjudicated, it would be
eligible for any kid that was at
risk. So it's not to, you know,
get somebody to be able to
functioning business, but it
isn't to encourage these
communities to create a program
because those youth are living
back in those communities, Madam
Chair and as part of the
stakeholders representative
experts, excuse me, part of the,
the stakeholders in these.
Have these communities been part
of this stakeholder process, not
just.
Within Albuquerque or Santa Fe,
but given that we're such a
large state.
I would want to make sure that
that's part of this.
The stakeholder process, Madam
Chair.
Uh, Madam Chairman
Representative Hall, great
question, and yes, we've, we've
heard from providers for years
that they wish that there was a
change in the language so they
could serve more kids, I mean,
that's, that's why they're
there, they're here to serve, um
these kids in these communities
and because of the language that
existed in statute, they could
only do it if a kid was
adjudicated, so we've heard from
from providers and and community
corrections, um.
Uh, organizations throughout the
state that this would be a
benefit to them because they
would like to serve more kids
and like I said over the years
they've had to close because
there weren't enough of them
and, and if you look as part of
the bill, I don't have the
exact, it talks a little bit
about who the election panels,
and if
It's, it's a pretty extensive
list who's who's a part of that,
so it's not just the provider,
page 22, thank you, mate, uh, 22
representative, um, Madam Chair,
um,
Yeah, moving over to 23, that's
all under selection panels. It
lists um
The panel shall include
representatives from the
judiciary, the Public Defender
department, uh, the designated
district attorney or designee
schools department, sheriff,
police departments, so it's a
wide group of stakeholders that
make up those local selection
panels, uh, Madam Chair
Representative, and that's,
that's really what we want,
right? We want the communities
making the decisions of which
youth are appropriate for these.
And Madam Chair and expert
witness representative. So on,
on page 23 line um.
going on 5 when it says
individuals representing local
programs and private citizens.
Going back to what uh what
Representative Chavez said.
With that
Including specifically victims
advocacy groups.
People are gonna be having, you
know,
When you have a crime committed
against you, it's a very
personal issue.
And it's one thing to sit back
and talk about fixing things and
making
People feel good
There are people who have been
hurt.
And damage
And I think they need to have
some say in the process. Is that
what this means here, madam
chair.
Our manager Representative Hall,
that's exactly what that means.
It is not exclusive to just, you
know, any one group or any
individuals, that's why the
language of local programs and
private citizens is listed in
there because anybody that is,
as you said, impacted by things
that have happened or just
people in the community that
want to be a part of that panel.
And Madam chair and expert
witness representative is the,
was the the sentencing
commission that's mentioned in
the early part of it.
Are they
Um, included.
In this as well.
And if not, why not?
Uh, madam, Madam Chair, um,
Representative Hall, I mean,
If there's a member of the
sentencing commission that
happens to live in that
community, they certainly could
be part of that local selection
panel, but this isn't anything
that's governed by the state,
not anything that any one
organization controls, it really
is made out of stakeholders that
live in that specific community,
so it's not that a member of the
Senate commission couldn't be
part of it if they lived in that
community, but there's not
representatives of this, so when
it says DA's office, they're
talking about a representative
for the district attorney's
office from that community. All
right, I think that's all I
have.
Uh, Speaker Martinez. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you, sponsor
and experts, um, a couple of
questions that I have, um, I
wanna go to the section on um
Sunders.
So bad chair and experts and
representatives.
Um
Currently, you can run out the
clock.
is not showing up.
It is in my opinion that
sometimes a a young person may
not show up because life
happens, right?
Um, however,
It seems to me that simply
running out the clock.
not having access to services to
supports is also not.
OK, Madam Chair.
Uh, so not only is the youth
offender no longer accountable
for whatever they did.
But they're also not receiving
the services and the supports
that they need. Is that
accurate?
Up, madam chair Speaker
Martinez, that that's exactly
right, and we've talked about
that for years, you know, if a
kid abscon from their
supervision and walks away. I'm
not going out and getting a job,
they're not going out and, you
know, going back to school,
they're trying to stay on the
ones so they don't get caught on
the warrant. So yeah, they're
not taking advantage of those
kinds of services, which is one
of the things that we were
really hoping that this bill
would do, and, and you brought
up another good point that I do
want to highlight in that
section, and it's on page 15,
line 8.
Um
This this tolling of time is a
is a.
piece of legislation that that I
has been presented in front of
the legislature way back from
2017 and 2018. Representative
Rehm, who used to be part of
this committee, had carried this
tolling of time legislation for
many years, and the work that we
did not only with Representative
Ream but also with the Public
Defender's office, one of the
the things that we really all
agreed on is in line 8 where it
says willfully absconded from
supervi, you know, a lot of the
things that happen pre-covid and
during COVID was, families would
get up and move, right? They
couldn't live.
they lived anymore, maybe you
lost your, we didn't want to
have a consequence for the youth
where it was the parents that
Laurie picked up and moved the
family somewhere else. So the
language of Willy Lee was very
specific to adding to the bill
because we once again, we wanted
the judge to make that
determination after hearing all
the all the testimony in a
hearing, um, and make the
decision where it really was the
decision of that played a part
of them at Scotty, and that puts
me at ease, Madam Chair, and
Miss Dorsey because
Uh, you know, you could be 14
and you may not have control
over your life and your parent
or parents or whoever is taking
care of you may make decisions
that you have zero control over,
and this is where a children's
judge.
would be able to make the
determination that in fact you
willfully.
absconded, which is very
different than throwing the book
at the kid, if in fact
Life happened and they didn't
show up. That's very important
to me. Uh, let me go back to um,
Voluntary manslaughter.
Um
And I just lost my page, but I
think it's page 7.
Little birdie told me that it's
page 7, line 21, voluntary
manslaughter as provided in
subsection A of Section 30-2-3.
What is the definition of
voluntary manslaughter?
Madam, thank you for the
question. Voluntary as a
manslaughter consisting
committed upon a sudden quarrel
or heat of passion, and it is a
3rd degree felony.
OK.
So
this is not gonna be.
An accident
Madam Chair and Miss Dorsey,
it should not be.
OK.
That's important.
Because I think we just heard
here is
You know, as, as, as this line
is written, volunteer
manslaughter is provided in
subsection A of Section 30-23.
gives you a very specific
Set of circumstances for this
kind of charge to be brought
forth.
So we are not going to
criminalize a child.
Like just a car accident.
Granted, there are a lot of
factors involved, but if it's
just a car accident. You didn't
see him coming. That's not gonna
qualify likely.
As voluntary manslaughter,
again, other factors involved,
maybe you're on your cell phone,
maybe you're drunk or whatever,
right, notwithstan.
Um
Let me go to the
I think it's section 12. I think
this was brought up already,
but.
Uh
temporary provision pilot
monetary stipends.
Uh
This is a 3-year pilot.
That provides monthly
assistance, Madam Chair.
Uh, to eligible adults.
Um, and then it has some.
Deliverables, some, some
outcomes.
And then I 9, the purpose of the
monetary stipend project is to
demonstrate that a monetary
stipend for basic cost of living
expense, improves educational
employment and healthcare
outcomes for adults who are
former, foster, or delinquent
children.
I'm wondering why this is
included in this bill, Madam
Chair, Representative and
experts.
Uh, Madam Chair, Mr. Speaker,
thank you so much for this
question. This is a piece of
this bill that um and they
To give a shout out because um
this provision was actually his
brainchild. Uh, it was created
and modeled on a similar um but
basically what this does is for
eligible kids that, well, I
guess when it hall's earlier
point, um, but I'm gonna still
think of them as kids for the
purpose of this discussion for
people who have aged out of the
system, um, whether aging out of
the delinquency Act provision in
incarceration or as former
foster children, this.
provides a continuity of least
from supervision, which is
something that they desperately
need.
Um
For those types of individuals
who are enrolled in school,
participating in work or in
another program designed, the
state can now or the higher
education department can award
them stipends and amounts not to
exceed $2000 a month.
Um, and then you go towards cost
of living and and other, and the
really exciting part about this
is that there is plenty of
funding there is associated with
house Bill 225 and the juvenile
community connections Act, as we
hope it will be renamed if this
bill passes this committee, um,
the community connections grant
fund ended FY 24 with a $6.1
million dollar balance.
And additionally, the
legislature has appropriated $4
million this year in house
built, and many of the
organizations that do the type
of work outlined in this bill
with the RFP process.
Thank you, Madam Chair and, and
Ms. Dorsey and, and I'm looking
at page 17 here, line 7, money
in the fund which shall be used
by the department to make grants
to counties, municipalities or
private organizations.
Um, and I'm paraphrasing here to
provide community programs for
diversion.
Of delinquent children or
youthful offenders subject to
juvenile sanctions or children
or youth referred by the
department, that's also part of
this.
Uh, this, this grant fund, uh,
also very important because here
we are yet again, uh, Madam
Chair and, and experts and
representative, uh, embedded in
this bill are more supports for
these young people. Now, you
know, I, I, I said it, I, I said
it over the weekend, uh, when we
passed, um, I think 3 or 4 CYFD
reform bills out of here, out of
this committee.
When it comes to juvenile
justice, uh,
This is something that I think
is near and dear all of our
hearts. Um, I think all of our
communities have been impacted
at one point or another.
Uh, by crime
by crime committed by juveniles.
And we've got to ask ourselves
the question.
There's
What is normal about a 14 year
old shooting a gun.
Having access to a gun.
Thinking they might need a gun
to protect themselves. That is a
reflection of society and it's a
reflection of the failure of uh
of all of us, quite frankly,
myself included, um, it is not
normal for youth.
To
Uh, be engaged.
And those kinds of activities,
it just, it's it's not normal.
Um, and I think in bipartisan
fashion, this committee and this
legislature has shown, um.
some real leadership in
Working toward fixing.
The one agency that is
predominantly tasked.
With
Supporting and helping these
children and their families, um,
and we, we took a big step
forward, um.
Over the last week or so in in
this chamber.
Um
Now when it comes to holding
these young people accountable.
I think we've got to strike the
balance.
And part of that balance is as
has been mentioned in this
committee, um,
Holding them accountable.
For the things that they do.
At the same time understanding.
That we've got to find
Ways to rehabilitate these young
people.
Um
To the extent that we can.
Right? Understanding the
limitations of resources and and
whatever else.
Um, you know, last Saturday.
Um, there was a story on, on the
TV, you know, local news that
the.
Juvenile detention center in
Albuquerque was full.
They they literally could not
take another kid.
Um, and so I do wonder, the more
young people that you.
Capture in this net, right, this
sort of tough on crime net,
where are they going to go? And
I think we heard from RDA, um,
at a press conference recently
that in fact.
There is no room for
You know, these, these young
people.
I've also, I'm also aware, um,
And this is more, you know,
anecdotal, but I am aware.
Based on conversations I've had
sidebar conversations I've had
with providers.
Uh, or, or organizations that
used to provide services at the
juvenile detention center in my
community.
That some of the basic needs,
most basic needs of these
children are not being met,
whether it's education.
Uh, whether it's underwear.
Whether it's being subjected
over and over and over again to
traumatizing.
Experiences while they are
incarcerated.
Uh,
I see this.
Committee substitute.
As in fact striking that
balance.
Between holding.
Youthful offenders, or I
shouldn't use that word because
it's a legal term, uh, of, of
holding young people accountable
for the crimes they commit.
While also doubling
Down
On the supports that those young
people and their families will
need.
to
be rehabilitated.
Um, and you know,
With
The power that is vested in us.
As a legislative body.
Um, I know that this is not the
end all be all of this
conversation.
We've got 20 plus days left and
there's still several other
bills that deal not only with
public safety in general, but
with
uh, juvenile crime as well, that
will continue to move through
this process. And so this is
one.
Set of tools for the toolbox.
Uh, I will gladly support this.
Thank you for bringing this
forward and thank you for your
hard work.
Uh, over the last few months,
I'm putting all these things
together and actually the last
few years because I know Mr.
Gosale has been at this for a
long time. Uh, and I will gladly
support this. Um, and I also
look forward to the other
concepts that are out there, and
I look forward to those debates
and those conversations as well.
Thank you for the time, Madam
Chair. Thank you, representative
and thank you experts.
Thank you, Speaker, uh,
Representative McQueen.
Thank you, ma'am chair. Um,
Meters um.
I, you know, I got my
My folders today, my packet, my
agenda, I pulled out the bills
and I read the short title and I
thought oh no problem.
And I
that the committee said and it
wasn't what I expected.
Um, I
think there's lots of good
things in the committee sub. I'm
I'm fine with. I am concerned
about the um
Inclusion of voluntary
manslaughter that we're
expanding that.
Um, and men chair given.
Uh, my, my concern and given um
uh the representative's
comments, uh, I would like to
take out section one of the
bill.
And I would so move.
Let me, um, we reference the
page.
Representative, page 7. I looked
at the bill. I believe it's all,
I think, I believe the only
change in section one is that
language on page 7, that's what
I was about to say. Um, it's
lines 21 and 22.
So I, I think if we're, if we're
taking that out, we simply take
out the entire section.
Because we're not
changing anything else, I see
what you're saying.
Um
So that means you would say page
6
of striking 11 lines 11 all the
way to the bottom of the page
and then on the 2nd page all the
way till 9:22.
strike the starting page 2,
So that means you would say page
6 of striking 11 lines 11 all
the way to the bottom of the
page and then on the 2nd page
all the way till 9:22.
strike the starting page 20.
OK.
Yeah
And then there's also a
reference to it in the title
that we would have to do.
So the motion would be to strike
um
Some in the title.
It's
OK.
Lines 11 and 12. OK, um,
amending definition of youthful
offender to include um.
That's correct. OK. Um,
all of section one.
That's correct. OK. Um, I have
emotion. Do we have a second?
Um
Am I doing something wrong? No,
I'm trying to somebody looking
me I'm crazy.
I'm beta.
Chair McQueen, Madam Cha Chair
McQueen, please, uh,
My fan is so loud, um.
Good
McQueen, just please explain the
amendments so I can understand
it before voting. Thank you.
So the, the impact of the
amendment that the bill, the
substitute has um
Uh, the additional language
which expands.
Um, this section, uh, adding
voluntary manslaughter to the
definition of youthful offender.
Um
In the, in the effect of the
amendment would be to remove
that. It, it appears to be a
lengthy amendment simply because
we're
You were basically only taking
out two lines, but once we take
out those two lines, the rest of
section 1 becomes unnecessary
because there are no other
changes in section one.
But it's really just those two
lines removing that.
Um
From the definition of youthful
offender.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair, uh,
and I wondered if we could ask
the sponsor. I'm, and I
apologize, I missed part of the
discussion on this item, if, if
this is
I'm not sure what the intention
of including voluntary
manslaughter was and, and if
this is friendly or unfriendly.
I think that I mean.
Give and take, uh, I, I am, I'm
fine with removing it, um, some
of the stakeholders may or may
not be, but
I don't get to hear from him
right now, so, um, so I, I, I,
and, and I personally don't want
this to look like it's a
It's a
Hammer Bill.
Because I want this to be viewed
more as a rehabilitation going
upstream and stopping that you,
it comes to the point of a gun
or something like that. So, so,
um.
Like I said, it was part of the
Back and forth.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and um.
Madam chair and amendment
sponsor, I think you might want
to add sections accordingly
underneath.
Thank you.
I appreciate the intent, madam
chair of the amendment. I do
think that they're uh.
is a good reason for why this is
added. And uh if I may ask a
question of the sponsor of the
amendment, I'd like to
understand his logic or striking
that section of the bill.
Um
Me chair Speaker Martinez, the,
my understanding is by adding
this into the definition of
youthful offender were in effect
uh expanding.
Uh, the scope or nature of
punishment for that offense.
Madam Chair, that is correct.
And I think the fact that this
bill strikes in its current form
of balance between uh holding um
folks accountable, but also
making big investments in
rehabilitation is precisely the
balance that the sponsor just
spoke of, so, uh, I will, uh, I
will not be supporting.
Just a
A comment or maybe a question to
the experts on this. My
understanding is, it does not
necessarily to this.
Uh, Madam Chair, that is
correct, uh, by adding this
crime to the definition of
youthful offender. What happens
is if a child 14 to voluntary
manslaughter, they may be
treated like a juvenile. They
may be treated like an adult.
That's in the discretion of the
judge after an amenability
hearing that evaluates.
Where the judge is required to
evaluate the seriousness of the
alleged offense, the manner of
the alleged offense, whether it
was aggressive, violent,
premeditated or willful, whether
a firearm is used, whether the
alleged offense would be and
whether injury resulted.
The maturity of the child
considering the child's home and
emotional health, pattern of
living, brain development,
trauma, history, and disability,
record in previous history of
the child prospects for adequate
protection of the public, the
likelihood of reasonable
rehabilitation of the child I
think I get it. I think we get
it we get it,
um, I appreciate your
thoroughness, but I think we get
the gist of it and so the
purpose of my question is to
clarify for um me and everyone
else here that this is.
not necessarily an enhancement
on um the penalty against a
young person. It gives the court
the ability to evaluate whether
as some of my colleagues
referred to the young person as
a garden.
You know, and or really it was,
it was voluntary, but there are
mitigating circumstances that
would justify not treating that
person as an adult, and for that
reason, I, I feel comfortable
supporting the opposing the
proposed amendment and the
addition of voluntary and, and I
point out this is not
involuntary man, this is
voluntary, so there's a level of
intention and
misconduct involved that's
different from involuntary
manslaughter on this amendment.
proposed amendment. Does
everyone understand that we're
basically taking that whole
section out that included this
one additional.
roll, please. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Representative Abeta.
Representative Chavez, no on the
amendment.
Representative Hall.
No.
Representative Homan B. Hill.
No.
Representative Martinez. No.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen.
Representative Reed, no.
Leader Sapansky.
Madam Vice Chair, yes.
Madam Chair, no.
Madam Chair Amendment was not
adopted.
All right,
back to represent McQueen on the
bill.
Anyone else?
Oh, speaker around I'm not on
Bill 255 do pass on how
substitute for House Bill 255.
Is there a second?
Um, we have a motion for a do
not pass on House Bill 255, but
a due pass on House Judiciary
Committee substitute.
For House Bill 255 and by
Speaker Martinez and seconded by
leader Sapansky, which he called
the roll, please.
Representative of Beta, yes.
Representative Chavez, yes.
Representative Hull. No.
Representativeachman B. Hill,
yes.
Representative Martinez.
fast.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen.
Representative Reed.
No.
Peter Sapansky, yes.
Madam Vice Chair, yes.
Madame Cho, yes.
Representative Martinez. No.
Madam Chair, you have a do not
pass on House Bill 255, and they
do pass on House Judiciary
Committee substitute House Bill
255.
Thank you very much, um,
Representative and experts.
Thank you. All right, um.
Next on our agenda is.
Um
House Bill 352.
It's gonna, I'll talk to you.
OK.
How's House Bill 352 and I
believe Representative Romero
will present for representative
who is um um today.
OK, um,
Thank you, Representative Romera
for taking this on. We're on
House Bill 352, close and
relocate certain magistrate
courts.
Man chair um members of the
committee as it states in the
title, this is about making our
magistrate uh courts more
efficiently located, um, so that
we're pulling resources and
improving access to justice for
the communities, um, where the,
where they're currently located
makes it really challenging, um,
for the folks that need to have
these located in communities
that are more populated, um, and
there's no reduction in the
number of judges or court staff
with this, madam.
um, with me is Cynthia Pacheco,
the director of the Court
Operations Division technical
questions with the bill, and
again, go easy on me, I'm
standing in for representative
editor on this bill, um.
But we've had great support so
far.
to the audience.
Madam, no.
Thank you, um, those in the
audience wishing to oppose this
bill, please line up by one of
the attendants who has a mic.
Anyone in opposition.
I don't see anyone.
Anyone online in opposition,
please raise your hand.
Those in the audience wishing to
support the bill,
I'm pleased approach and limit
your comments to up to one
minute.
Um, those online wishing to
support the bill, please raise
your hand.
And I don't see anyone with
hands raised.
Anything else before I go to
the.
Representative Hall.
Madam chair, Representative
expert, um, on the San Juan
County.
Posing
That's gonna be taken off.
They're not gonna do that, that,
that's my understanding.
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair Representative Hall,
yes, we were expecting an
amendment.
fly if that's really on the fly,
but and we'll listen to it.
Madam Chad pass the mic here.
OK, very good, um,
Representative Reeb.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, uh,
Representative.
I had received notification
there might be a friendly move
to strike sections 2 and Section
6 for the reason.
Um
I believe
Section 2 and Section 6.
To take a closer look at the
impact to the reservations, and
so um that was.
The amendment that I was given
that might be friendly,
madam chair.
Um, to Section 2 and 62 and 6,
so
2 starts on page 1, right at the
very bottom, and it goes page
one.
Yup.
right, and then it goes to um
take a line 8 on page 2. Is that
what we're talking about,
OK.
Very good.
Is that the only, uh, and then
you said another section 6,
Madam Chair. OK, section.
6, which is on page 4.
Um, and the entire section. So
that would go on to page 5.
About 5 stopping online 14.
Right? And then renumbering
accordingly and renumbering
accordingly, yes, ands or
anything in the title.
It looks like uh with my
colleague's health, um, the
relocating magistrate District
courts in the race truck. OK,
that's correct.
So we'd strike.
In the end, starting with.
I'm 1313, so start with then go
to the end of the line and then
14 striking.
Um
Districts in that semicolon,
correct? Yes, OK. And that was
the only thing I would raise my
hand for madam chair, so um.
back to um.
Representative Paul, do you want
to take the floor back after
getting all that that's the only
question I had. Thank you,
ma'am.
OK. Um,
So we have, is there a question
or discussion on the motion to
amend, and was there a second?
Did I get a 2nd on that motion.
All right, motion made by
represent a seconded by
Representative Hall is there
discussion on the amendment.
I don't see any discussion.
I tried to keep up as fast as I
could, um, you, did you do
anything to sexual?
clarifying questions or
otherwise.
So on the motion. Is there any
opposition to the motion to
amend the bill according to that
motion.
OK, I don't see any opposition.
We have amended bill.
Back to you, representative,
seeing to us, our authorities.
OK, any members wishing to
question or comment on the
amended. I did public, I think.
It's been one of those days
where I can't keep track. You
can't keep track, but we'll do
our best, um, Representative
Obeda.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative, or excuse
me, vice chair. I have a
question for your expert for the
real location that's part of my
district. I'm curious, it says
that it's been closed for years.
Um, can you tell me why it was
closed for why it's been closed
for years.
Chapresentative Avita.
That
The the through circuit court
has been closed. I've been with
AOC for 19 years, um, spoke to
my foes before her tenure, so no
one really knows that.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
Vice Chair and expert. Can you
tell me, um, for those
individuals who live in that
area.
Madam Chair Representative
Abita, that would.
Probably be
Gallop, but um one of the things
that we learned during COVID is
that not every person has to
appear in court at remote
hearings. So what
We do, um, and particularly in
the 11th throughout that
district, and people appear
remotely.
Anyone else, um, wishing to
comment on the past.
Oh,
I can do that. OK, OK.
Yeah, you just can't wait, can
you? All right, we have a motion
by Representative Ramiro. She
wants to get off the hot seat,
Representative Romero, seconded
by Representative.
Ha, and let me get people here,
OK, um, would you call the roll,
please?
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Abeta, yes.
Representative Chavez, yes.
Representative Paul.
Representative Hochman B. Hill.
Representative Martinez.
Speaker Martinez.
Presented McQueen.
Representative Reed, yes.
Leader Sapansy, yes, Madam Vice
Chair, yes.
Madam Chair, yes.
Madam Chair, you have a do pass
on House Bill 352. OK.
Now have
Um, House Bill 413.
Physician assistant licensure
compact leader Armstrong and
expert.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
thank you committee, um, hold
on, don't be dropping like
flies. Thank you for staying,
staying tight. think some are
coming back once they found out
you were here.
I'm just that special, Madam
Chair. Thank you. um, thank you,
Madam Chair. House Bill 413 is
relating to an intergovernmental
agreements enacting physicians'
assistants, uh, licensure
interstate compact. We've seen
many of these this session, and
I'd like to introduce my expert
witness, Christina with Think
New Mexico and um with that man,
we're gonna stand for questions.
And if Christina would like to
add anything.
Just have to answer any
questions, Madam Chair. Thank
you. OK, OK, thank you. Let's go
to the audience, those wishing
to speak in opposition.
Opposition to the bill, please
line up here.
I don't see anyone in the
audience in opposition. Anyone
online wishing to speak in
opposition, please raise your
hand.
I don't see any hands raised.
Those in the audience wishing to
speak in support, please
approach the um.
Uh, our attendant with the even
to one minute.
I'll try my best, Madam Chair.
Uh, unfortunately, uh,
Representative Hall is in here
so I can make fun of his singing
on the floor today, but
Uh, my name is Mark Swan. I work
with think New Mexico. We just
stand in strong support of these
bills, and I just want to
mention a few people that might
not be in the meeting who are
also in support, uh, the AARP of
New Mexico, the Department of
Defense, the Kirtland
Partnership and uh the Catholic
bishops Conference of Catholic
bishops.
Thank you very much. Thank you.
Um, anyone else wishing to speak
and support?
All right, I'll go online now,
um, those wishing to speak and
support, raise your hand.
I'm gonna take up to 3.
I see two hands, Adrian Gomez.
Good afternoon committee members
and Madam Chair, Adrian Gomez
from the Greater Albuquerque
Chambers of Commerce. I'm here
to show support for House Bill
413, uh, the compact is an
avenue that helps the state move
forward.
And the chamber is pleased to
support this bill as it aims to
bring more care to New Mexicans,
and we ask you to vote to pass
it. Thank you so much for your
time.
Let's see one more person, Carl
Simms.
Thank you chair and members of
the committee. My name is Carl
Sims. I'm a deputy program
director with the Council of
State governments, CSG provided
um technical assistance and help
facilitate the support um of the
PAture compact, so I just want
to be here to provide
informational um support and
answer questions that might
assist the committee. Thank you.
Sponsor, anything else before I
go to the committee?
No, madam chair, we stand for
questions. OK.
Anyone um wishing to ask
questions that you may wish to
cause I only see 5 people here
and we need a couple more. I
think they just stepped out for
a quick little break, um, so.
Yeah, let's
Obviously
we don't.
OK, go ahead, ask away. Thank
you, Madam Chair and
Representative. Can you tell me
about the um impact on states
that have joined the compact.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. Um, so states
that have joined these compacts
tend to see an increase in
licensure, and you see that some
in the fiscal impact report
where the New Mexico Medical
Board anticipates that it will
see an increase in licensure.
The nice thing is, um, it allows
folks to practice either in
person or via telehealth, and so
even if you have a physician
that's located or physician
assistant in this case, it's
located in another state. They
could provide, um, for example,
uh, some consultation via
telehealth if that would be
helpful. And again, it just
opens up more access to
providers for New Mexico.
Thank you, Madam Chair, that
concludes my question.
I wished to make them uh oh.
Um, Representative Reed, do you
want to make it?
Oh, you don't have to if you
don't want to. OK.
OK, I moved to, uh, I moved to
Du Pas.
OK, we have a motion for a due
pass. He's there a second.
Second.
Uh, we have a motion for a due
pass on House Bill.
352, no, yeah, no, 4:13, sorry,
that was the previous one.
Made by Representative Reeve,
seconded by Representative Hall,
would you call the role?
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Abeta yes.
Representative Chavez.
Representative Hall.
Representative Pachman B. Hill,
yes.
Representative Martinez.
Yes.
Speaker Martinez, Representative
McQueen.
Representative Reed, yes.
Leader Sapansky, yes, Madam Vice
Chair.
Madame Che.
Yes, Madam Chair, you have a due
pass Speaker Martinez just
walked. Oh, Speaker Martinez.
Yes. OK.
They do
13. Thank you. You're welcome.
Um, we have representative
cakes.
Representative Royal Caballero,
um,
And we are on House Bill 120.
accessibility of state agencies.
I thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you members. Uh, I'm here
to present uh House Bill 120,
the primary sponsor on this is
uh Representative Lujan just
three years ago,
um, this bill is a couple of
simple things, but let's go back
to why we need this bill, so we
need a centralized area that if
you are a member of AARP, your
vision impaired, you are using a
wheel.
And you were having difficulty
with accessibility with our
government buildings, who do you
report to? And um many times
there's much confusion about
that is that in AG's office is
at GSD is that developmental
disability, so we would like to
create an office of
accessibility that would be
housed in the governor's
commission on disability. Um,
this will ensure that all the
ADA coordinators that are
already in place.
throughout all the government
buildings have a centralized
place to provide that
information, and they can
provide technical assistance and
sight verification and then also
um reports that would help
advise on how we can stay um
with our federal compliance. As
you can see, I have many uh
representatives, um, uh,
supporting this bill, but I'd
like to introduce my expert
witness first, and thank you.
Good evening, madam chair
members of the committee. My
name is Eli Fresca. I'm a civil
rights attorney, disability
rights advocate. I've spent my
career in New York City as
counsel at the New York City
Mayor's Office, people with
disability. It's a real honor to
be here today. Thank you.
So we have
Say about the
sub um give the number
0.230945.6.
And we had just we did very
small minute, uh, amendments and
dates and then it became too
messy, so we just rolled it all
into a sub, and that's what you
need to. That's right, and we
really appreciate you doing
that. It makes it a much cleaner
bill to work on. All right, any
other brief comments cause you
know, we have lots going on.
Madam Chair and and uh members
of the committee, I'm, I'm
really honored to be able to
join this, as you all know, past
4 years I've been in a
wheelchair.
and a walker, and as you all
know, I'm hearing impaired, but
being in the wheelchair and the
walker have really demonstrated
the need for um this.
Committee substitute this bill
and for this office to be
established, there are a lot of
agencies that are unaware of
recent rule changes with the ADA
and uh this office will help
navigate persons in in a much um
more accessible way for lack of
another word. Thank you. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
So, um,
Are we ready to go to the
audience, is there anyone in the
room wishing to speak in
opposition to this bill.
I don't see anyone, anyone
online wishing to speak in
opposition.
Um
Nat
Nat Dean
Madam Vice Chair, members of the
committee, I am speaking on
House Bill 120. The majority of
responses contained in the
fiscal impact reports and agency
analyses related to this bill
indicated significant concerns.
I will use an example of how to
indicate measurable objectives
in examining performance
measures, for instance, the GCD
did not state an actual number
of site visits or architectural
plan reviews for ADA
accessibility performed in the
executive budget, the reported
number is known.
100%, which is not an actual
number of sites or plans. GCD
responses to calls, emails, or
mailed inquiries are frequently
delayed or do not occur. The
website often lacks forums,
crucial information appears
outdated, inaccurate and
frequently lacks a mechanism to
connect to a robust list of
other external resources or
programs. Cross pollination is
essential to harness and improve
all access for all persons, for
many months, even after the
pandemic ended, the website was
corrupted and linked to a
gaming.
website, Important calendars for
GCD council and commission
meetings more often than not
lacates. Program application
forms are either unavailable or
stalled in a perpetual coming
soon status, the ultimate goal
is to improve programs and
services, pushing more program
funding in larger performance
burdens to an entity that
appears to be struggling with
current performance measures may
not be the most effective plan.
I support improving access, but
such efforts can only be
achieved with measurable quality
implementation. Thank you.
Thank you now.
Anyone else online wishing to
speak in opposition.
I don't see anyone, anyone in
the audience wishing to speak in
support.
Um, please, um, line up.
Behind this gentleman, and up to
5, please. No more than 5.
One minute. Thank you, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee, Ellen Pine's
representing the disability
coalition, and we do stand and
support. I'm sorry, Madam Chair,
am I doing something, I'm just
counting, that's all.
Sorry about that. We stand in
support of this measure, um,
this summer will mark the
thirty-fifth anniversary of the
Americans with Disabilities Act,
and um uh compliance with that
act throughout society, but
specifically in state government
operations for purposes of this
bill has been pretty slack.
And we think that um this bill
will really help the creation of
this office will really help
move the state forward in this
regard, so thank you very much.
Thank you, Ellen.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Jason Clark. I'm the general
counsel for the Department of
Information Technology, and uh
we stand in strong support of
this committee substitute for
House Bill 120.
Thank you.
They think I'm commissioned for
Dey. This time to strong support
of this bill will help with uh
getting access across board.
Dan Ross, the director of the
Governor's Commission on
Disability. I'm very much in
favor of this bill.
Um, I know that, um, it will.
be a great opportunity.
To reach around the whole state,
state agencies and and work
together on improving
accessibility for everyone,
employees and Thank you. Anyone
online wishing to speak in
support.
Um, please raise your hand up to
3 people, OK? Trish Lopez.
Hi, sir. Can you hear me? Yes,
no.
All right.
Um, hi, everyone, I'm Trish
Lopez. I run an organization
called Teen years, where tech
savvy teens and young adults
empower older adults to learn
technology through one on one
coaching. I support this bill
because I've seen firsthand how
in our increasingly digital
world. It's very challenging for
many people to access what they
need from websites and other
software for people who have
disabilities, that challenge is
far, far greater, um, and they
need us to make things more
accessible for them. So even
when business owners and others
want
To make their websites more
accessible, and other items
online, they don't always know
how. So having this now
established in our state
government will, I think, be a
great watershed moment for
everyone. So I support this
bill. Thank you. Thank you. Um.
Michael Murphy. Hi, my name is
Michael Murphy, and I'm in
Albuquerque resident. I'm in
favor of this bill, and I'm a
full-time wheelchair user, and
even though I have significant
mobility impairments, I have
personally benefited a great
deal from uh being able to
access government services
through access to buildings and
other accessible uh features.
This bill will help strengthen
this accessibility for me, but
especially for
it al content for people with
other types of impairments. Um,
thank you very much.
Thank you. Um, that concludes
our public comment period.
Anything else representative
before I go to the committee.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
and thank you, um,
representatives. I just wanted
to clarify some of the
statements here, so they are
talking a lot about uh access
technology and government sites,
so that is gonna be requirement
at the federal level through ADA
in April of 2026. Do it and our
governor's office are well on
the way of making sure that we
hit that compliance.
is excellent. But once again,
it's fragmented to it is doing
the technology, who is doing uh
accessibility for physical or
sight or hearing, and that's why
we need a centralized area. I do
appreciate this time. Our
primary sponsor walked in the
door and I want for her.
To me, I just wanted to thank
you all for hearing this bill
today, and I think all this,
the, the co-sponsors and all the
work that we've done on this and
getting and trying to get this
to the best place it can
possibly be, and we're here to
work with you to make sure that
all your questions are answered.
Thank you for the time.
Thank you, Representative. All
right, committee, uh questions.
Representative poem.
Madam Chair, Representatives.
Maybe I shouldn't ask any
questions.
Why does this need to be created
in and could it have been rolled
into existing program.
Uh, Madam Chair representative
tips
and thank you for that question.
So as I was earlier stated in
public comment, uh, we've had
ADA requirements for almost 35
years now. And so if, if you had
a chair user in your life and
couldn't get access to a
building. Who would you report
that to? I think there's some
clarity of whether or not it's
site or a chair or a technology
or physical access or auditory.
And we need a centralized
reporting place. I also wanted
to take this moment to say,
we've strongly disagree with the
fur. This office of
accessibility is not creating
any requirements that are not
already federally there. It is
just a way to be able to manage
so much information, making sure
that we are able to document it
in a recorded fashion and make
sure that people all know what
um is expected. Thank you.
Madam chair and I will add that
when I had my situation, I had
no place to go to report my
in-law requirements that I would
need with wheelchair, and found
that um there was a lot of
inaccessible locations, not just
in this building, but in the
associated uh buildings that I
had to visit. So that's a I'm a
perfect example of why we need.
Thank you.
Madam Chair representatives, I
also in doing in uh doing this
and you'll be the central or you
guys won't with this, this act
will create the central.
Committee or group, will they
work with?
Does it start out with working
with facilities.
Um, wherever the violation may
occur.
Just
So that there's a, and then is
there a time frame for dealing
with, uh, dealing with those
should I own a business.
y'all can't get into it or
there's a problem with even my
website is not up to date. You
come to me or do I get a letter
in the mail, that kind of thing,
um.
Madam Chair representatives.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you very much for that
question. I think it's a great
question. Um, so,
What is currently, so what is in
a law is that every governmental
uh agency or building has an ADA
coordinator. You may not know
who it is, it might be also the
receptionist. I, everyone gets
to pick whoever it is, but they
have an ADA coordinator, but who
do they report to and what do
they, and obviously GSD oversees
a lot of our maintenance in our
buildings, but who's reporting
to them?
We're looking for, that's why we
want to make this simple, um,
underneath the government, uh,
uh, commission on disability,
simple, that's already
commission that's already in
place, simple office in there so
that our ADA coordinators who
are already in place, have a
place to report to, and then
also get technical support, like
I don't know if it's
or do we need, uh, do we have to
have 4 ramps in in this building
or only one ramp, right? And I
would know so that this this
office could provide that advice
to the coordinators and create
that report that would end up
going to GST Manager.
Um
Representative Hall, um, on
opening day, I brought my mother
to, um, and she's quite elderly,
um, it was really difficult
getting her in the building. Uh,
we dropped her off right here at
the handicap ramp and those big
doors, you know, coming into
this building, they were really
hard even for me to open and um
so we got her in to the building
it.
Managing through the the
Sort of, well, you've seen our
chambers and you've seen some of
the flooring is very uneven, um,
almost fell, um, and
I, as a legislator, didn't even
know who to talk to, myself, and
it's like, how do I report this
information back to someone in
this building that, you know,
can do something about it.
Because
And and that's, she came here
with help. I see people on a
regular basis coming here that
don't have help, and they're
handicapped, and oftentimes and
just, just FYI as baby boomers
get older, Madam Chair and
representative, you know, we
oftentimes you can't see the
disability. I mean, you don't
know what their disability is
and people aren't gonna come up
and tell you, hey, I have a
disability. I pulled my shoulder
or I have a rotator cuff injury.
I have a knee, uh, you know, I
have two new knees or whatever
the case may be, this would help
to centralize that
communication.
And
Try to keep up. I appreciate we
have 4 sponsors sitting here,
but we can't have everyone
answering every question. We
have 2 more bills on the agenda,
so go ahead. I just want to get
to the point of representative's
question is I think he's
concerned is is um.
What, what this, who this bill
uh affects and it would just be
our state government.
Thank you.
Madam chair last question or
observation. I noticed in the
original bill in section 6, you
had a private right of action.
And that's been removed, which
I, I applaud.
Um
Could you just explain some of
the reasons behind that and
hopefully goodwill, but Madam
Chair, Madam Chair
Representative, I'd like to have
our expert witness explain.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, representative, uh,
the rationale behind that is
because there's already federal
obligations. So you can bring a
complaint, uh, both with the
Department of Justice or the
civil litigation. So those
mechanisms already exist.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Other questions.
Um, Representative Martinez.
put up my little finger cause I
just have
A little question, OK.
That's a good signal from now
on. I'll remember.
So, um
How, how many people
You're creating a new division.
Madam Chair Representative, no,
it is an office of
accessibility, the office is
held in a commission uh of the
Arts commission on disability.
It's just
one person
Uh
manage here represented
currently ourvision is to have
one FTE, yes.
Madam Chair, representative, um,
As a former um
Agency guy.
Dealing with disabled veterans,
we did find that state.
Of state government offices were
very difficult to access.
Um, what happens?
If the current administration.
they undo the federal
regulation.
If we don't pass this bill,
what's gonna happen?
Me
I'll have our so we can, Madam
Chair, representative, we
considered that absolutely in
the bill. Um, we were more
concerned about the digital
accessibility piece of that and
that's actually why we amended
the bill to not be locked in
with the federal obligations,
but instead to give the
promulgation process over to our
uh information and technology to
give them that authority so that
they could amend the digital
accessibility requirements as
needed.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, that's uh all I
needed to.
point out.
All right. Anyone else with a
pinky size question.
That's, that's gonna be my
preference, but I was thinking I
do not want to see any middle
fingers in this committee
going forward
that's right for the big
question. OK. Anyone else with
any questions? Um, I'm happy to
entertain a emotion.
has been 120 as amended.
Um, we have a motion for do pass
a second by representative, OK.
Madam Chair, was in a committee
sum.
Let me see. Oh, our bad, yes.
Sorry, Madam Chair, we do not
pass on
games
and if you pass on House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill 120.
OK. Thank you for catching that.
So when we have a second on
that, so we have a do not pass
in House Bill 120, I do pass on
house judiciary Committee
substitute for House called the
Roll, please. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Representative Abeta.
Yes. Representative Chavez,
yeah.
Representative Hall. Yes.
Representative Hoffman B. Hill.
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
Yes.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative Reed, yes.
Leader Sapansky, yes.
Madam Vice Chair.
Madam Chair, yes.
Madam Chair, you have a do not
pass on Hell School 120 and a do
pass on House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 120.
OK, Madam chair, you're welcome.
All right, we have House Bill
132 repeal of deposit.
Oh, OK. All right.
Um, representative Revis having
Yeah, I'll say.
Represented the floor is yours.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, uh, how about
132, uh, basically repeals the
section 45-2515 deposit of wills
with the court, um, and I'm
passing that out and my expert
Katina Watson, um,
Um, good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Katina Watson. I am the
CEO for the 2nd Judicial
District Court in my role as CEO
I also served as the clerk of
court.
And I serve in Burnley and Madam
Chair, I'll just have her
briefly explain what this does.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, so this, the
statute.
Was written, we believe
somewhere in the mid 70s and it
allows somebody to come into a
clerk's office anywhere in the
state and deposit their will.
A clerk's offices in the state,
we are official record keepers
for court cases, and this is uh
this is now requiring us to be a
storage facility for um anyone
regardless of whether they live
in our judicial district, or
county, the state.
Or even the country. There's no
requirements for
Um, citizenship, um,
And and it's procedurally
impossible for the clerk's
offices to comply with
requirements if somebody comes
in and deposits the will, um,
We don't receive information
since we don't even know if
they're a resident of the
county, of the state, or even a
citizen of the country, um,
we're not able to notify um the
depositor or their designee.
If we think we received what we
believe to be a um a notice of
death.
Um, I can give you an example.
We don't, we don't track these
independently, um.
In the second, I have 4 separate
wills on file for Paul Chavez. I
have 7 separate rules on file
for um Richard Chavez. We don't
know, um, how many other wills
there are in the state and other
judicial districts with those
same names, and so there'd be no
way for us to differentiate um
these particular individuals, if
somebody were to come in and
claim that they have.
The uh needing that particular
will, um,
I will say there are at least 16
other states that um do not have
flaws.
That allow for a deposit of will
in recent years, 7 other states
have moved to repeal or send
such laws, those states are
Kansas, Kentucky, Maine, New
Hampshire, Rhode Island, Texas,
and Utah. Last year, um, the New
Mexico Supreme Court, um, formed
a um a work group. I was part of
that along with other uh CEOs
who also serve as the clerk of
court, District court judges and
probate judges, and the
consensus.
was that this statute simply did
not make sense at this time, and
the recommendation that was made
was to seek a er.
Let's go to the audience, those
wishing to speak in opposition,
please approach the gentleman
with the microphone and please
limit your remarks.
Excuse me,
Uh, Madam Chair, movement with
the committee. My name is Jack
Burton.
I have a probate lawyer for
50 years
And a uniform law commissioner.
30 years
Uh, regrettably, I have to speak
in opposition to this uh bill.
It would repeal a section of the
uniform.
Probate Code.
Uh, this section has been the
law in New Mexico since.
1993.
Uh, it serves a purpose of
allowing someone.
To deposit their will.
The clerk's office of the
district court.
It
Imposes middle school duties on
work.
Uh, it doesn't require them to
do very much.
The FIR says.
It would say little or no money.
Uh
Yeah
So
Uh
I speak in opposition. Thank
you. Thank you.
Um, anyone else in the audience
wishing to speak in opposition.
one. Anyone online wishing to
speak in opposition, please
raise your hand.
I don't see anyone online, um,
those in the audience wishing to
speak in support.
approach.
I don't see anyone, anyone
online wishing to speak in
support, please.
I don't see anyone.
back to the sponsor sure don't
think I would add that I think
uh my expert status is is uh
proved this uh has been
supported and approved by the
state court, and in addition,
it's uh has to also do with the
lack of infrastructure of
storage of all these wells that
are just like leave them on.
But that was a different
question. Questions or comments,
representative uh Hockman Bha.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair. Thank you, uh,
interesting bill. So my question
is, um,
For those folks who may not have
family or, you know, I don't
have
An attorney or any other place
but still have a will and have
wishes to um take place after
they are deceased.
What are they supposed to do if
we get rid of, of the ability
for the courts to store.
Um, Madam Chair, Representative
Houckman V. Hill, um,
People have, you know, safes
within their homes, little
locking boxes, so somebody can
find it, the family member can
find it. Family members aren't
finding these.
In our courts. They don't even
know that they.
People have deposited them. I
have.
Thousands upon thousands of
these in our court and
I'm just one quart, one judicial
district, um, there's also
safety deposit boxes. Um, I
don't think it's working work.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative and experts. So,
I mean, it sounds like there is
no triggering mechanism once,
you know, someone files a will
with your court that once
they're, let's say deceased and,
and uh uh death certificate is
issued. There's not some like
trigger that someone in your
court has to go dig through your
files and find Will somewhere it
just.
days they're gathering dust.
Madame Chair Representative
Hoffman the Hill, that is, that
is correct, um, for example, if
somebody
Actually lived in our in
Bernalillo County and they
deposited the will and they
moved.
Um, to another county out of
state.
We wouldn't, we wouldn't
We don't track.
Like obituary notices or things
like that, it's just not
feasible. Um, likewise, if
somebody um deposited a will,
um, and then, you know, for
example, in
Santa Fe County and moved to
Bernalligo County again, they'd
have no way of knowing, um, we,
we just don't cross reference in
that way, and um there's not
like a
A trigger for us to to follow.
And last question, uh, Madam
Chair Representative, um, how
many people would you say in the
last year have come to looking
for access to these wells.
Um
Madame Chair Representative
Hoffman V. Hill, there are a
handful that, that, that deposit
him and then come back and give
them if they update them. We
don't have that exact number.
It's, I think, fairly small and
and
In the scope of what we see.
Thank you, man.
Representative of beta. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative, uh, and I
apologize, can you please tell
me your name? Katina Watson, um,
so I have a few questions. I
understand you said it's not
working the way it's supposed to
work.
Um, Madam Chair representative
Abeta, so we the the work group
did did look at that, and like I
said, it consisted of um other
CEOs that also serve as clerk of
courts, probate judges, one
probate judge, uh, Christie
Garbingal, who is a probate
lawyer in Albuquerque, um,
former, uh,
I'm not sure of his exact title,
but he was the head of the
Probate Association.
And the mechanics of this, I
mean, they would actually have
to be some sort of substantial
appropriation um to build some
sort of database that could be
shared um within the state.
And then we don't even know how
to make it work for
Individuals that have moved out
of state or how to make it work
with other state governments.
It's, it's really, it would be
very difficult and challenging.
Thank you, ma'am. Thank you,
Representative Ms. Watts, um.
Long ago I used to be a court
clerk, and so I recall searching
for files for individuals and
this was a a court system that
was paper based, no electronic,
and it was trying to switch over
to an electronic system, so, um,
I'm a little concerned because I
see, uh, room 2 that what if
they don't have a place to take
it, and I also think about
individuals who um
wanted safeguarded. I've thought
about this myself like I have, I
recently, uh.
My husband and I got a will and
it's in our home, but I always
worry like what if the wrong
person finds it?
Or does not bring it to the
surface it's filed somewhere. So
my question or comment is,
Going back to revising it
instead of um just repealing the
law.
What if it was?
Amended to say that because I
see here in the analysis too
that you say that there's a lot
of work that the clerk has to do
to notify.
But what if
Are you open to anything like
that where that burning back on
the public to say you would do a
public search.
In the New Mexico's court
systems because we do have
We have other um
Databases like that.
Thank you
Um, Madam Chair, Representative
Abeta.
Again, I'm not really sure how
that could work. So number one,
These are confidential,
essentially. So
They don't appear in Odyssey,
they're not gonna be in a public
record search for somebody to
even know, and they would have
to then be able to search the
entire state, not just one
judicial district, because
again, there's no requirement
for anybody to live within my
judicial district, the state.
for the country that comes in
and deposits these well. Thank
you, Madam Chair and
Representative and um Miss
Watson my final comment is gonna
be that when I was in high
school.
When I was in law school, I
remember um.
There were grants provided to
law students to come to smaller
communities to educate them
about them and help them create
them, and I don't remember this
being a part of the education
that you could file your will
with the state and I just think
that was so important that our
community members name sure.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative,
anyone else, um.
OK, Representative Martinez
Madam Chair, I move with Du
pass. OK.
We have a motion for a due pass.
Made by Representative Martinez,
seconded by Representative Hall.
You call the role, please. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Representative
Obeta.
No.
Representative Chavez. Yes.
Representative Hall. Yes.
Representative Hoffman B. Hill,
and I'd like to explore explain
my vote.
Representative Martinez.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen.
Representative Reed.
Yes.
Leader Sapansky.
Madam Vice Chair.
Madam Chair, yes.
and be.
Thank you, I'm sure. I don't
know. I, I just, I feel like.
Representative Abe's suggestion
that we could amend this to make
it work.
Um, it's a better solution than
just eliminating this whole
wholesale. I mean, again, we
have people that don't have
family, don't have friends, who
don't have any system or process
available to them, you know, who
may want still be able to have a
will and so perhaps use a way to
make this workable, just the
same way we have, you know,
birth, birth certificates and
records of births, paper graphs,
we create a process for deaths
as well, so thank you. OK, I
think.
You, um, you have a DuP pass.
get to our last bill.
Which is house Bill 61, which is
my bill, and I don't have a vice
chair.
So, um, representative McQueen
who.
Chair perhaps could.
go.
my purse.
and
Do I, do I need a, uh, a second
on the motion to adjourn, or can
I just do that
I'm feeling the power right now
you still have bills on the list
there on the list but not on the
agenda.
Uh, our next bill is House Bill
61, unfair Practices Act changes
Chandler whenever you're ready.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, this
bill
Ads some additional bases or
definitions to trade or
commerce, and it also increases
the penalty from $5000 to 10,000
practices, but it also um
Um,
Has it beyond that for to
$25,000 per violation if it is a
practice that arises out of a
disaster or state emergency and,
and now some issues arising from
the various fires and floods and
things that these last few
years, and with that I'll hand
it over to my expert who made
illuminate us a little bit more.
Mature members of the committee,
um, I don't have much to add and
my name is Mead. I'm OK, um, is
there anyone in the audience who
would like to speak in support
of this bill, please support.
Uh, Madam Chair and the
committee. My name is Michael
Hart. I'm a trial lawyer.
Albuquerque, um, I'm here in
support of this bill.
It helps protect families from
getting ripped off, especially
in times of crisis.
Um
Potentially, it's a good bill.
Thank you.
Anyone else in the room and
support uh if there's anyone
online who'd like to speak in
support, please raise your hand.
Nicholas Matin.
Medicine.
Nicholas, are you with us?
Nicholas
OK. Is there anyone in the room
who'd like to speak in
opposition, is there anyone
online who'd like to speak in
opposition, please raise your
hand.
Uh, uh, anything for the sponsor
to add before we go to the
committee.
Members of the committee.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Madam
Chair, um, I'm just wondering
and
Why? Is it time to
Are the
Current fees under the unfair
trade practices Act, um, not
working? Do we feel like, um,
there, there's still so many
violations that we need to up
the penalty. Why, why, why this
amount, why now?
I'll ask Ms Meta. Mr. Chair
Representative, we looked at
this, we looked across the
nation to see what fees were in
other states. These fees have
not been increased since the
1970s.
And we felt it was time to
increase it, especially for uh
price gouging and unfair
practices to emergencies. Uh, we
felt it was appropriate to
enhance penalties for practices
during those.
Periods of time.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chamaer. So
I'm, I'm sorry, I may, I may
have missed it. Is it, are you
only adding these penalty
enhancements for those
particular instances, or are we
doing it across the board
increase.
Mr. Chair Representative, we're
doing both, we're increasing
general penalties from 5000 to
10,000, and then we're in we're
uh instituting an enhancement of
fees during times of disaster
urgency.
That's what I thought. Thank
you, Mr. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Further questions from the
committee.
What's the pleasure of the
committee?
Manager, I would
Mr. Chair.
I.
I remember a do pass on house
commerce and Economic
Development Committee.
Uh, we have a motion. Is there a
second?
Hold a second. Um.
You take?
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Representative Abeta.
Yeah.
Representative Chavez. No.
Representative Paul.
Representative Hochman B. Hill.
Yes.
Representative Martinez. No.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative Greeb.
Leader Sapinsky, yes.
Madam Vice Chair, yes.
Madam Chair,
Taylor, would you like to vote?
Yes.
Representative Hall.
No.
Representative Reed.
Yes.
You have to pass.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam
Chair, would you like to come
back to adjourn, or should I do
that for you if you wish. OK, I
think we're done for the day.
So we are a journey.
So
you do the
