What is that you guys hear me.
I just got on so I don't I don't
hear anything about what.
The chairs having some technical
problems she's getting help now
so I think people heard me did
you hear me Madam I did thank
you okay great.
Hello everyone.
Some sorry.
What it's like not to be a
panelist because what what I
ended up with is a screen where
I could see nothing.
My
need our expert to stop the
echo.
Is Danielle out there are.
Okay.
Trying to figure out why there's
an echo okay thank you.
What
happens to that you can't find
your you are audio or your video
you're not a Weston that had
happened in the port FY on.
So let's go ahead and begin
welcome everyone
yes.
There in the outer office.
We don't have an echo anymore
yeah but you need to mute it.
Okay good.
All right.
It looks like we're.
Gathering numbers to have one.
To.
Three.
Wait just a couple of minutes to
have the other ones join us.
my apologies for.
The delay.
Let me just tell you all who are
here and we really wish we were
in person.
I'm I'm longing for the good old
days.
Okay the vice chair is coming on
that's going to be really
helpful.
Hello madam vice chair.
Madam chair.
Representative dot com you know
you're really backlit right.
Is that how you like it I'm just
in my capitol office and I have
is one whose boundless purpose I
want to just know that I'm here
but not a lot of my expressions
look like.
I think we'll probably be able
to get us.
I believe we have room but so
what what we're gonna do is
let's go ahead and have the
clerk called the roll and then
and then we'll proceed everyone
will get it an opportunity to
introduce himself or herself but
not at this time would just.
Which is to grow at this current
so what the court please call
the roll.
Representative.
I'm here Representative
Chandler.
Representative.
Mr speaker.
Representative Eli here.
Representative Lewis here.
McQueen.
Representative Nibert.
I'm here.
Representative Townsend I'm
here.
Mr
chair.
Madam chair.
It wasn't
I'm.
Still go out there folks.
Madam chair I don't think you
called me I just got on
Representative Chandler here I'm
present right very good thank
you for calling it to our
attention.
We're glad to have you back
Representative Chandler L. thank
you I'm I'm really thrilled to
be back I love this committee a
level with members working thank
you and congratulations on
becoming the chair of the tax
committee thank you so much
okay.
I would like to do is give each
member an opportunity I do know
that members of the public are
checking us out because I have a
couple of inquiries from the
press say when you're going to
do
tomorrow and I want to get each
of you an opportunity to
introduce yourself and tell you
right say whatever you like
about your background or
interest in the committee or
your.
No frustrations no I'm only
kidding.
But
I think we'll do that
alphabetically as well because
and then we'll let folks as as
they join introduce themselves
so Representative local start
with you.
Need to start with me that is
awesome thank you madam chair I
am on Representative in the
state of the art well under and
I represent district six with
this privacy will add McKinley
County I.
Served eight years as a
municipal judge would really the
Milan and eighty years as
magistrate judge.
And then now on my mind my
fourteen year in the legislature
and the every year at I have
been on this committee since I
got on and they've never let me
take a break so thank you madam
chair thank you everybody and
looking forward to working with
everyone again.
And I mean everyone.
Good.
Next would be Representative
Thank you for thanks to the
Mr chair so Representative
Chandler.
thank you madam chair I am
Representative Chris Chandler
I'm from Los Alamos hi
have practiced law since
nineteen eighty four I'm very
interested in a whole array of
legal issues you know soup to
nuts and that's what I really
like about this committee we see
such a large variety of issues
many of them are very
challenging and so many of them
have direct impact on people's
lives and I think it's a very
important committee in the
issues we take are very serious
and I'm very pleased to be able
to work with the team to come up
with solutions to serve the
citizens of New Mexico in the
best way that we can thank you
madam chair.
Thank you very much
Representative Eli.
You madam chair thank you so
much yeah I've been on this
committee for a while it is a
pleasure I really as I'm like
Representative Chandler I really
love the issues that
the committee works on this
session I think particularly
because of the focus on criminal
justice
I represent house district
twenty three which is the south
part across bunch of northwest
Albuquerque in a tiny bit of Rio
Rancho.
To be a pleasure serving with
all of thank you.
And I still don't to the speaker
is here that Representative
Lewis.
Thank you madam chair hi
everyone I'm Georgene Louis I
represent house district twenty
six located in Bernalillo county
southwest Albuquerque I am
serving my tend to care on this
committee and have learned a lot
from madam chair and I think we
have a great committee and
looking forward to the rest of
the session thank you.
Thank you Representative Lewis
Representative we.
Thank you madam chair I am
percent Matthew McQueen has to
treat fifty questions the Santa
Fe Torrance Valencia and
brilliant counties
Given my six year this
committee.
Did you enjoy this committee so
I'm happy to be here thank you
madam chair.
Thank you Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair Greg
Nibert Representative district
fifty nine which is Chavis and
Lincoln counties so kind of the
southeast central part of the
state
again are that on the committee
for the duration of my tenure in
the house which is then
What March third term now.
And it's certainly a challenge
by by we go practices a very
narrow one.
And this committee certainly
takes me back to the days of Law
School where I have to go a
little bit about a lot of things
and and it certainly gets me out
of my by rate of
Oil and gas title examinations
so that it's a challenge and it
certainly of the pleasure
working with all my colleagues
on the committee and have
enjoyed I I now six years of
working with you all thank you
madam chair.
Representative right.
Madam chair thank you I'm in my
sixteenth year of representing
house district thirty one it's
the far north these types of
Albuquerque
I am retired
from the Bernalillo county
sheriff's department and worked
there and numerous different
divisions from narcotics all the
way to
auto theft in investigations to
traffic crash reconstruction.
This committee is very
interesting I love everything
that we do with that thank you
madam chair.
Thank you and Representative
Townsend.
Yes thank you madam chair I'm
Jim towns and I represent
district fifty four which is
questions of any Otero and
Travis county
I'm not an attorney I
had a career in the oil and gas
business specifically lands and
Saxo I
I always learn on this committee
it is interesting and and one
that I usually enjoy so I
appreciate that.
Thank you Sir
Representative madam vice chair.
Thank you madam chair my name is
Micaela Lara Cadena they wanted
to serve in New Mexico district
thirty three
central New Mexico in the napa
county
I am excited to be serving with
the on my second term here in
the legislature I think chairman
House Judiciary Committee.
My background is in health care
policy and criminal legal reform
and among other things I served
under the previous
administration at the bureau
chief of the production of the
New Mexico corrections
department
in my capacity as a lot of my
life's work has been working to
better understand what's
happening and family for their.
Thank you though I care a lot
about understanding the impact
of trump in New Mexico kids and
family and I look forward to.
In my current functionality for
the for this thirty day session
again and always appreciate the
big the vigorous debate that we
have and and the respectful
dialogue we're able to build you
a house Judiciary thank you
madam chair.
Thank you so much.
Chasey I am the co chair of
House Judiciary my district is
in the heart of Albuquerque it
includes new that interest in
New Mexico and then also the
Knob hill area I.
More of these downtown that my
new district will go with
western we'll go west of I
twenty five.
I have a great district and what
was reminded some of the things
that some of you said I wasn't
an internet with distorted in
the legislature in nineteen
ninety seven but I.
The main thing I tried to work
on back then was the rand report
had put out a huge study on
diverting use from a life of
crime.
And they had found that there
were four
types of interventions are
actually preventions what there
were three that were prevention
measures and one was
intervention to keep kids from
getting into a life of crime it
seems like I've kind of been on
that stage ever since
Although with somewhat limited
success.
As far as really changing the
policy one of the
The
The findings of that study was
to promote early childhood home
visiting and you know we have
actually as a state begun to get
that done and so
Very happy about that but we
have a long way to go with
regard to making our communities
safer by some of the things that
we put in has prevention
measures.
It
Look forward to a lively and is
the thirty day session and as I
said earlier when there were
just a few of the sun I really
miss being in our committee room
and being able to interact in
that way this is somebody said
recently a little like Hollywood
squares or something
that's not as satisfying but we
will try to continue in the
tradition that we established
last year during the sixty day
session.
As you know in the house
Judiciary Committee.
We don't
when we want to make people who
are speaking feel safe in front
of the committee whether they
are members of the public
whether they're experts
presenting on a bill if their
sponsors of a bill.
If there are committee members
so I don't allow people to
attack you I don't allow anyone
to attack the presenter or the
presenters expert witnesses or
people public comment.
We did have an interesting
situation last year where there
was a gentleman doing public
comment who.
Started to attack the Sanchez
motives and I gave them an
opportunity I told them no you
can't do that you can talk about
the bill.
He continued to do it so I put
it on the you now is a little
bit easier to do that on virtual
meeting otherwise you have to
get the sergeant are the
security and ask the person to
leave the room which I've done
that before too but what I
really appreciate it from our
members is the respectful
exchange we do have with one
another
even if we are vigorously
opposed to what the other is
very and as many of you have
said.
We have really serious issues to
discuss and we'd like to get
built in.
Four where they will be ready
for final passage and actually
being enrolled in a row if they
were to be enacted
we have a pretty
Have the responsibility I think.
We will be doing public
comments.
By zoom and.
We discussed this in.
The judiciary subcommittee of
government elections and indeed
if it is the fact that people
can sit in the committee room.
You have to figure out how to
participate by zoom in we we
believe that there will be L. a
laptop in the room and there
will never be a chat function we
one thing we may want to put
into the golden mind and I'm I'm
saying this to our one of our
Canadian assistance is here
today Barbara J. we want to add
to the golden rod that is
translation is going to be
required special translation
other than state election
Spanish to please give us twenty
four hours notice.
And then we will we will always
accommodate that.
And I know that.
Well to remember all of the
procedures that the translation
does appear on the bottom of
your screen.
So that your city that I found
that distracted intimate so I
can't comment on because then I
can't can't attention to what's
being said but you can
When I have to ask our experts
how to be sure that we do what
we we will have
time to public comment based on.
Massive numbers of people who
are present to testify on on.
On a chair the
whoever's running the meeting at
that time whether it's the
whether it's from the vice chair
we'll look and see if the other
twenty people.
And we've got a long agenda we
may limit the time on that we
try to give equal time to both
sides if at all possible.
The other thing that
Representative Lewis in her
committee she.
You started doing her committee
and then we didn't Judiciary.
We always do it if this somebody
asked me not to do it I didn't
but we did a poll in function
because generally in the
committee room State all those
in favor of this bill are here
to support this bill please
raise your hands and you know we
would see hands go up in the
committee room all those in
opposition so we'll do the
calling function that runs for
like twenty seconds and people
will get an idea of how many
people are here for and against.
And
I think that.
We are going to I what I don't
remember and leases not here to
remind us today.
What we did about supporting
documents for the
But I'm going to I think our
chief analyst may have some
recollection and I really want
you all to hear from the
analysts we have a couple of new
people this year.
Likely to be reminded of their
background as you know we have
for Committee analysts and their
analysis of the bills go to
every number.
And then we have major analysts
and minority analysts and the
majority analyses go to the
Democrats and minority and now
sees go to the Republican
members down.
So I'm going to turn this over
to Ellen because steel is our
chief analyst and she's the one
who works with me on on the
schedule.
You know we we try to
Be responsive to Sanchez who
asked us not to hear a bill to a
certain time so we don't
necessarily here at just because
it's the next in line.
We do also try to group topics
that we are.
What I I find it a little bit
easier for the analyst and for.
To be honest.
A general topic area for.
For certain really large and
important measures so I'd like
you to talk a little bit about
the analysts and and give them
an opportunity to answer to
introduce.
Great thank you so much
madam chair yes there are four
committee analyst
the most important thing you
didn't say about me is that I
spent twenty years in the same
offices Representative Chandler
we were.
Anyway yes we will talk but
anyway therefore analyst maybe
in my column is not here today
so let me tell you a little bit
about her and then Christina a
child is Kelly and dad Kendall
Gallagher can introduce
themselves and then the majority
and hopefully the minority
analysts as well and then maybe
you wanted just to say a little
bit about the analysis and how
we work so can we go back to
that after the introductions
okay great thanks and I I think
maybe there's some other
committee meetings and things so
I don't know how much time we
really have but we'll keep that
in mind is still in the column
is our newest
Committee analyst she is she her
background was and education she
was a school counselor went to
you and them for law school she
now has a solo practice in Law
and consulting she does
A personal injury and recreation
law and most importantly for us
which will be doing for us thank
god is criminal work shows she
practices her criminal practice
is primarily as I understand it
in federal court.
And she and I were working
together the other day just on
some procedural stuff and she
had to interrupt and take a call
from one of our clients who is a
female inmate in some federal
prisons somewhere and they were
working on a motion so I was
like well I'm really impressed
and thank god she's with us so
I'm looking forward to meeting
her as well.
let's see Christina wanted to
go.
And my name is Christina Jarvis
Kelly and I'm honored to serve
on this committee.
R. it this is my fourth year as
an analyst my background is
first and foremost I am from Las
truces and I'm very grateful
that the chair and vice chair
have agreed to allow me to work
remotely at due to the pandemic
I missed being there and the
round house when things are
normal.
I have all your cell phone
numbers.
So and hope that you have money
and feel free to call me
I went to law school and
graduated in nineteen seventy
eight I've been active in the
practice since then my and this
is is an employment law higher
education and civil rights I was
also in real property
it has been a pleasure to be a
civil servant and I look forward
to working closely with the
committee.
Thank you Mr.
Hi I'm dead Kendall Gallagher
this is my fourth year with the
the H. Chasey my educational
background is in health care and
law but primarily in health care
I have a PhD in nursing with the
focus on health systems and
policy and I received my masters
of public health from New Mexico
State University in twenty
twenty and currently I am
adjunct faculty and an academic
Medical Center where I teach
health policy and I think this
is a fantastic committee with
great discussions.
Who was present for us during
the redistricting session so
thanks for that job.
You're welcome thanks to you
all.
Ellen you're mute.
Yes so much for technical skills
the major analyst Priscilla
Garcia and P. Larmer very.
I am disorder Sierra I have
worked with the house judiciary
committees for four years now I
was two years as a committee
analyst
two years with of the major
office and my background I have
dual professions that I've
worked concurrently I'm a speech
language pathologist and an
attorney and I work with
children and adults guardian
ad light items wells I kind of
had a smattering of legal a
little bit of criminal little
personal injury so it's kind of
a broad stroke and worked with
hospitals rehab centers.
Eighty waiver and that's my
background.
Thanks.
Thanks Alan hello everyone that
it's my honor to serve this
committee I'm really excited
about this session and glad to
be here
I am a lawyer by training and
also meet here I practice law
I'm here in New Mexico for about
sixteen years and also in New
York and Washington state my
background is civil litigation
this includes elder law and you
can use internet CYFD work
employment litigation so rights
lost contracts
and also criminal law
And and and I am a first year
maturity analyst.
Thanks.
And there are two major analyst
side no one is with us Robert
Maas and the other is John
Gordon may and I don't see as
name here but Robert maybe you
can start off finish John is
here he can jump in these are
two gentlemen that we've just
met and we're really looking
forward to working with you we
have I think a good history in
this
in this committee of the the
committee the majority and the
minority analysts all working
very cooperatively together
which is really very very nice
so Robert welcome thank you yes
my name's R. mas on my first
year analyst my background is in
tax and corporate law I did a
lot of in a restructuring since
I moved back to New Mexico and
it I'm dabbling a little bit and
criminal law and just excited to
help out our state analyzing
some of these bills
unfortunately John won't be able
to be on you gonna make it back
this house by the time the
meeting started so thank you for
your time.
We look forward to meeting him
and another time.
Hello and I'm mailing can steal
this is my eighth year in
Judiciary practically one is.
Some of the members here my
early career was in education
I'm a speech language
pathologist also and did that
and was the deputy director of
special education for the Santa
Fe public schools and then my
entire legal career was at
Landel in the office of
laboratory council again with
Representative Chandler where we
did kind of typical legal work
and some very not so typical
legal work but it was always fun
and challenging and energizing
and I think that's also what's
so great about house judiciary
many of you mentioned that.
The diversity of
works that that you get is
amazing and I thank the chair
and vice chair run such a great
ship and we are just all the
analysts really enjoy each other
and we enjoyed working with each
of the members so much that this
is a real pleasure so thank you
so much.
Did you want chair to
say something about the analysis
things now or later.
On let me go ahead and and and
just say
What were you going to Senator
my point is that.
What what what should we say.
What were you thinking we help
are we going to be using the
same system that we have last
year where the analyses show up
on some kind of a share file yes
yes
yes absolutely so can I go back
a couple of steps because
there's something that would
that we were doing last year
what we were doing it even
before but it was so important
last year when we were totally
remote this year were mostly
remote but
It it just.
cut to the chase here the the
analyses that we do you've got
the the bills and the FIR is and
of course we use those as our
primary documents but we also
try to give you whatever we can
from our background and our
reserves and put all that
together for you what are.
Our sole purpose in being here
is to try to make or help you be
successful in your jobs so
whatever we can do to help you
be successful that's great this
is Judiciary or all lawyers so
you're going to get our analyses
obviously from a legal
perspective and that's good you
know that we always have
questions we sometimes have
concerns we really like to
discuss those with you whenever
we can we never ever want to
blindside you so if we have
questions or we have concerns
we're really gonna try to
contact you and I think what we
did last year worked out pretty
well but if you've got other
ideas please let us know and
that is we tried to contact you
primarily through your committee
assistance.
I know you get hundreds of
emails and texts and whatever
and you can't be going through
all that stuff to see if one of
us is trying to get a hold of
you but if we can work with your
committee assistance that I
think was successful last year
and we would like to try it
again if if if that's acceptable
to you and I think our Canadian
assistance are putting together
the contact information for your
assistance as well.
So if that works that's great
and what I would like to say to
each of you and to the sponsors
that other sponsors also bills
that we work with thank you so
much you are.
Amazingly responsive to our
our call center taxed are or
whatever to you you're just such
a tremendous help and that's
just absolutely appreciated.
So then cherry we're talking
about what happens to the
analyses when they're done they
go into share file show in share
file each of you should have I
believe the bill any amendments
substitution.
The committee and Alice's we'll
go to each of you.
And then in the share file
folders there's a major file and
minority file so depending on
which category you fall into you
will have a folder to access the
analyses of your respective
analysts.
And and that's absolutely true
for the majority I don't know
really how the major works but
you I'm sure you'll get that all
figured out.
So what another thing that we do
which is our practice and that
is when we send our analyses to
share file we will also send a
copy to the Sanchez show that
each sponsor will have a copy of
our analyses prior to when they
show up for a hearing or they
don't have to worry about
getting them from share file
whatever so they'll have that.
And I guess one last thing I'd
like to mention some of you last
year kind wanted an advance copy
or your own copy of our analyses
so you asked us to email them to
you separately from share file
and we're glad to do that so if
you would let us know who of you
would like us to do that so let
us know and we'll do it and if
you could also give us an email
address or some way to send
those to you that would be
really a big help.
So chair can you think of
anything else right now I think
that's kind of high level again
thank you so much for this just
one quick thing that is on I
know I learned last time and I
will have to be re educated
about the best way to download
each day so that you can hit
them up and and I don't want to
know that right now I'd rather
have it a demonstration by by
some would when we have our you
know on Monday I think we've
only got one bill.
Well to what we have to perfect
so maybe we can do that we need
to start the rules because the
rules committee is.
Representative nine point
texting me rules committee is
starting but there are a lot of
us on rules who are in on this
committee I wanted to just get
the speaker an opportunity to
introduce himself where did you
go.
Maybe he went to the rules
committee I'll give him an
opportunity to do.
On Monday and
I I think.
Are there any questions.
Today.
One I want to emphasize that.
We're always open to suggestions
so keep that in mind and let's
go ahead and insurance for the
day because of the other
committee that seems to be
starting on time which is really
nice and thank you all for being
here and welcome to all of the
new folks happy to have you.
Hi everybody.
