Representative Rehm.
Representative Sapan ski.
Madam vice chair here.
Madam chair here madam chair you
do have a quorum thank you so we
have three items on our agenda
today we're gonna be hearing
house bill four first the voting
rights protection act and before
we get started I'd like to just
talk to a little bit about our
what protocols are going to be
following we will have a brief
presentation by each by the
presenters on each bill will
then go to the audience I have
receive some names of pro you
know in favor of the bill in
opposition to the bill I will
call on those individuals you'll
get up to two minutes you don't
have to take the full ten
minutes and we will do so for
about twenty minutes on each
side so maximum twenty minutes
on each side we have some pre
some names have been presented
to us on the side and I want to
underscore this we will be
observing all proper decorum in
the room we are not going to be
insulting anyone you can either
in the audience or any of the
presenters any of the elected
officials and if that happens
I'm I'm going to have to ask you
to leave so please recognize
that we are here to have a
policy discussion we want to
have a very full and robust
policy discussion and let's
focus on that what's best for
the state of New Mexico so with
that Mr speaker the floor is
yours thank you madam chair
thank you members of the
committee all barrel right
through here and get right to
the point first and foremost
thanks to my big big thanks
Michael Sanchez Representative
Chasey Senator Duhigg
Representative Wonda Johnson
right Lara on this bill.
The central components of house
bill four
include the native American
forty Rights Act that would be
section thirteen to three twenty
three this the the sections help
address inequities between water
accessing New Mexico's tribal
areas as well as raise the rest
state by ensuring that precinct
boundaries are aligned with the
political boundaries of nations
tribes or pueblos it requires
tribal language translation of
the polls it expands and
enhances early voting
opportunities in and your tribal
communities it allows the use of
official buildings on tribal
lands as mailing addresses for
tribal members for the purpose
of election mail it allows for
the appointment of tribal ballot
assistance to help tribal
members submit their absentee
ballots in the provides the
necessary resources to clerks in
counties across the state to
comply with all aspects of the
native American voting rights
act in addition to this act
house before also includes
provisions that allow voters to
the option to automatically
receive mail in ballots by
signing up for a voluntary
permanent absentee list that a
medically restores voting rights
for individuals who have been
convicted of a felony but are no
longer incarcerated it ensures
access to comprehensive same day
voter registration which
streamlines the process of
updating voter information to
clean up voter rolls the faces
in automatic voter registration
select systems adopted in other
states like Alaska and Colorado
it secures and protects border
data any mandates the available
availability of monitored
secured containers also known as
drop boxes in every county with
me today are are it seems like
they're state Maggie Toulouse
Oliver in one Michael Sanchez
Senator Katie do he to to take
any and all our questions thank
you madam chair thank you.
Madam secretary.
Thank you madam chair of the
speaker cover all the high
points I'm here to answer
questions from the committee but
otherwise now sees
Senator.
Madam chair I just a and happy
to be here in support of this
particular piece of legislation
and as well to answer any
questions the committee may
have.
So what is.
Those wishing to express their
opposition by raising their hand
because remember I have a list
of some people who wish to speak
but just want to express
yourself in opposition by
raising your hand someone else
committees.
We.
Okay all right.
So this point I'd like to.
Of the four to those wishing to
those.
Four have online this.
All right so.
More than.
So.
Job.
On the left.
Do I do it here yes okay thank
you.
Good afternoon representatives
and
Chair Janet I appreciate being
here I am John go free from
Santa Fe County also represent
New Mexico election transparency
network on the chair I have
about six or seven folks here
three which will be on soon for
that are here representing other
organizations such as better
together New Mexico and also the
New Mexico out of force I am
opposed to HB for for some of
the following reasons that would
promote legislation of ballot
harvesting allowing anyone to
deliver absentee ballots on a
voter's behalf it would promote
legislation a permanent drop
boxes by changing one key word
and that would be the work from
may to show where all counties
would not have a choice such as
they do today to no longer make
a decision H. before also
promote legislation of limiting
the use and the position of
order information which as a
taxpayer citizen I'm entitled to
request by law.
Currently today passing this
bill today out of committee
would in my opinion paid for a
more division among the New
Mexico
Folks that live in New Mexico I
would I want just a fair
election with integrity this
bill H. before would make
folders.
Probably have manipulation
easier to achieve so I would
just situate do the right thing
and vote no and I'd like to
thank you for your time thank
you John I have a Terry Merkley.
Terry.
You're welcome.
I am against HB for.
The bill's name is in this where
does not protect voters.
I want to speak up a little bit
thank you.
I am against each before the
bill's name is a misnomer for
does nothing to protect voters
rights but it does intentionally
it was the second century
designed to mislead the voters
very people all of your charge
to serve.
It automatically reinstate the
felons right to vote without any
probationary period.
Increases the use of illegal
permanent drop boxes how do we
ever have an election prior to
twenty twenty without from.
The most egregious part of the
bill allows all state agencies
in HSD.
Contractors full access to voter
registration.
But not citizens of the state.
So the secretary of state.
We have access to voter rolls
would give access to voter rolls
third party vendors corporations
such as Eric.
But not her assistance she gives
the voter rolls out to the
Republican Democrat independent
libertarian parties to
corporations but not in the past
years like myself.
Decline to state to have trouble
with that.
Anyway this violates New Mexico
constitution article four
section twenty six grant a
franchise a privilege with which
states the legislature shall not
grant to incorporation.
Like care for two thousand four
percent right.
We shall not the pharmacy intern
under what conditions in our
interview fully.
To all.
The person.
So all this is very concerning
to me and I urge no in closing I
would like to know if any of the
authors or sponsors of this bill
have accepted for the county's
accepted.
Many third party entities will
benefit from the passage of this
bill.
Such as but not specifically
limited to CTCL a center for
technology and supply you with
alliance for election excellence
new venture I accept.
Thank you to and I don't think
you Terry your time is up thank
you your your time is up thank
you thank you investigative
reporter third due diligence
thank you.
The time.
Laura the death death church
drive to deter.
House committee members HB four
or voting rights protection is
another Democrat only sponsored
bills to again do the opposite
of what the title suggests.
Common sense alone would have
this question the contents of
the bill from the title.
To the authors of this bill me
to suggest that the citizens of
New Mexico have not had their
voting rights protected over the
last hundred years I think not
of course our voting rights are
already protected.
I think you should with age
before because it attempts to
stop election canvassing.
Election canvassing allows
regular citizens the opportunity
to physically check seven number
of registered voters per
household is correct example if
I use voter data supplied by the
state to verify that seven
people voted at two to four
sycamore street then when I
actually helpful I find that
only two people live there and
voted.
That's a big problem and one
that points to inaccuracy FS or
blatant brought forth.
We must protect and encourage
election canvassing this is a
greatly important issue to
ensure that our elections are
fair and accurate therefore I
strongly urge you to vote no.
Thank you Cynthia Conner.
You madam chair and committee
members many thank you can I
have a confession New Mexico
stated and and they are to take
up that I would like to bring
that New Mexico constitution
states that provided can be
found a place photo another can
the secretary of state this
unfunded mandate which finally
New Mexico constitution article
four section twenty four page
thank the legislators shall not
have local first special law any
of the following cases
regulating County.
Right.
Opening.
For a conducting any election or
detonated that placed the
boating also declaring any H. F.
the
feet feel awful here to make
actually privileges to those on
tribal lands the changes in long
also make it easier for mothers
to take advantage of an already
vulnerable populations they will
allow voter registration at a
place other than their legal
that no longer valid practicing
on the verification this opened
the floodgates for bad actors
for you though if you need more
help all of the the provision in
this act violates New Mexico
constitution.
These boxes are considered
polling places thank you the New
Mexico constitution hard for
sixteen twenty four in every
other case where it general law
can be made after after no
federal law healthy and active
we already have laws that
govern.
They can be milk it's it's in
and do further on the clerks and
families thank you for your
time.
Thank you Ramona school she
goushi Ramona.
Sir person name remote out in
the audience I'm sorry madam
chair I think she's over
speaking at one eighty okay
thank you thank you Larry
haraam.
Madam chairman.
And with this process.
into the San Juan county
commission adopted a resolution
urging the legislature to make
changes to the election the
total five changes from
consolidated to four for the
first with voter ID forward in
person voting and also photo ID
verification for absentee that's
the one I can combine in this
and to to for a that's and
that's not continue this
legislation the second piece was
sufficient rule of inactive
voters so after voters failed to
act in two consecutive general
elections they can be removed
from the voter rolls so the
county can use up with a
solution for.
The more efficient and removed
more inactive voters from the
voter rolls and also.
West would be for those on the
ballot drop boxes the be
supervised and and the the
county commission recognized or
poor has the position that
supervised by electronic means
not supervisory request actual
supervision of those about drop
boxes in the also urges
the legislature to legislation
and wires attendees to ten
percent on it all the precincts
involved in action chair with
the of the election and madam
chair I believe those are
provisions are contained in this
legislation county commissions
us to oppose this legislation
thank you.
Thank you all right we're ready
to go to online and
so I see for people with their
hands raised and I would like to
confirm that all of those
individuals have are in
opposition so if you are not in
opposition please take your
hands down on the zoom length
please okay very good okay so
we have Aaron Clements could you
unmute yourself and.
You have two minutes up to two
minutes.
Yes thank you.
multiple national polls have
confirmed that between sixty and
seventy percent of the
population to not trust our
election system this is been
confirmed over and over again
throughout the last two and half
years this is a national crisis
and you cannot ignore it and
make it worse by passing this
bill which would only make our
elections more vulnerable as has
been stated by the other people
in opposition this is a large
majority of Americans and New
Mexicans support common sense
reforms as was noted by the
Jonathan Sandoval County that
would decrease the vulnerability
to the election system and
decrease election and voter
fraud for example we would like
to see voter ID we would like to
see meaningful cleaning up the
voter rolls not not not being
handed off to Eric we would like
to see all of the lecture
election equipment disconnected
from the voter from the internet
including electronic poll books
we do not support an automatic
absentee list for automatic
voter registration or
criminalization of investigation
into the accuracy of the rules
or other things in this radical
bill I have personally been
investigating election integrity
New Mexico since twenty twenty
I'm a professional engineer and
I spent hundreds of hours
analyzing the data from our
elections going back to you know
the early two thousands and I
can tell you there are serious
problems in the data indicating
that there are problems with the
security and accuracy of our
elections as they are right now
as it is evidence from the
comments in the previous
committee where this bill was
heard the only people who
support this bill are rather
profit for politicians but
people are not behind this again
sixty to seventy percent of your
constituency do not support this
bill there's ample evidence that
our elections are not secure as
it is if you choose to vote for
this bill anyway you're
betraying your oath to represent
the people in your districts if
you choose to vote for this bill
anyway you'll PPE proving that
you've sold yourself to radical
ideology which is dedicated to
the corruption of our elections
Erin please do please cease with
the personal attacks please.
Not for the people of the state
against this bill.
Thank you Carla.
Carla.
Yes thank you madam chair
members of the committee across
on tech with the New Mexico
business coalition and better
together New Mexico.
We're very much opposed to this
bill I appreciate the sponsor
wanting to make voting easier in
the state but this bill creates
a lot of problems you've got a
mandate for state agencies to
automatically register voters
without their consent and these
new voters that have to opt out
after the fact if they don't
want to vote.
That opens up for a lot of
problems but it's also a
violation of their rights and
with the automatic registration
mandate in New Mexico residents
who may not be here legally
which increases the likelihood
of non US citizens and non New
Mexicans voting in our elections
and nobody wants that and it's
not necessary.
By creating a permanent absentee
voter list you're you wrote in
the secure and verifiable
absentee voting practices you
know our voter rolls have not
been adequately.
Cleared of of people that should
be off the rules in decades and
so we're just going to add to
that problem when we have
someone that dies or moves away
and they don't have the ability
or take the time or interest to
get their names removed from the
polls and if they're dead they
can't do that anyway so
regarding the rights of felons
to vote we're we very strongly
supports someone second chance
and we've seen a lot of people
turn their lives around but I
believe that they need to first
finish their entire sentence
including probation.
And then voluntarily go register
to vote not make this mandatory
as soon as they step out of
prison that they're voting
against that too is just not
right for the system or for the
people.
I know that you have received
several thousand letters in
opposition to this bill and I
urge you to please listen to
your constituents people don't
want this in New Mexico thank
you for your time and your
consideration.
Thank you Carla we have two more
people Charlie Marcus.
This next Charlie.
Yes madam chair of can you hear
me yes.
Chair of members the committee
Charlie more because of I was
also going to speak on behalf
New Mexico business coalition I
think Miss on take adequately
covered of their issues and so I
thank you for your time.
Okay thank you Charlie lastly we
have a person name P. Martinez.
Yes I'm sorry I need to use up
my name is Pablo Martinez out of
cal New Mexico McKinley County
member of the Zuni pueblo
a lot of the sentence that we're
I want to address were literally
state are you dressed but a lot
of speakers also go through a
few of not waste much time here
so.
The fact that you want to make
voter data.
Which is a very vague term and I
don't know if that includes the
the castle records the CPR's
which is about a series of zeros
and ones they really don't have
that do not contain anybody's
personal information whatsoever
names addresses nothing is there
was once
is that that is so
This data is produced on
electronic equipment software
and
conduct but let's officials
they're all paid by the citizens
of New Mexico this equipment the
software the data produced it's
ours it's it should be public
data we pay for everything we
pay for salaries and we pay for
your time to produce data should
be publicly available
And this.
This bill also make citizens in
Mexico for degree Fallon's find
one hundred dollars each for
each line of voter information
that was quote unlawfully used I
think that is also very vague
and you are.
Wanting.
True felons more rights than you
want to give non sounds and make
themselves so I I totally
disagree with this delicious
cram school so much crap that I
can go through it all but thank
you for your time and sees the
staff.
Thank you Mr Martinez so now
we'll go to those in favor of
the bill first let's do a show
of hands of those wish in favor
of the bill.
okay all right so I do also have
a list of people wishing to
speak in favor and I will go
down that list
chairman mark Mitchell or to
wrongly Cerro are you in the
audience hello chairman good to
see you.
Good afternoon.
Share.
My name is mark Mitchell and
chairman of the all kinds of
owners which represents nineteen
point in the state of New Mexico
and one in taxes this little
bill sort of this bill your
quick history lesson in nineteen
forty eight go.
to.
So I propose to the state.
The denied the right to vote and
so think about it which one and
have to help the the the.
Pueblos to one have a need for
protection part of it also to
restore those the voting rights
That's into this to prove to
secure the.
The automatic voter registration
and hands voter data privacy.
So you know hope that you all
could see our point of view and
make sure that both.
For thank you thank you
chairman.
We now have from is letter
Pueblo Joe little with so Mr
little hello.
Oh I'm sorry okay many shows a
little member the Mescalero
Apache tribe
here Representative New Mexico
native vote and as pointed out
since we're new to the lecture
says not to since nineteen forty
eight we've made huge strides in
tribal communities as well as
those maintenance and live in
the urban areas and we continue
to raise our numbers of coding
and as was pointed out by
Sanchez Bill and the change in
the.
Chair of.
Speaker of the house that the
I'm sorry.
That the the point to point out
the with tribes I think that to
our advantage I just try to
maintenance and general and of
course we have a long way to go
in all of these are helping to
enhance our rights to vote and
which we want to continue to
there on a regular basis so yes
we strongly stand behind the
provisions of this bill thank
you Mr little thank you so much
Kathryn Clark.
Madam chair members of the
committee I am that Santa Fe
county clerk speaking on behalf
of just my County at the point
of delivery Santa Fe County is
the third largest county we have
a hundred and ten thousand
registered voters we have the
second highest turnout in the
state and the four tribes who
probably have the highest
turnout in the state my voters
love their drop boxes we have
eight of them in the county they
are highly used and four of them
are ADA compliant meaning voters
don't have to get out of their
car in order to be able to drop
their balance is something that
I get constant emails about how
much they love them
we love the idea of an absentee
list voters constantly asked why
do have to keep on applying when
I know I'm going to always be
voting absentee so we love this
feature and it has been
guardrails to make sure that
people who should be on the list
can be taken off felons we have
a lot of felons who have
finished their terms and are
trying to register to vote but
an old connection from twenty
years ago which you know
perfectly well no longer counts
prevents them from registering
and this just streamlines the
process makes it less
administratively challenging for
me to register voters
And finally the tribal the rules
are excellent as well because it
creates a formalized process
where there is an appeal process
that creates equity and also
recognize that I in particular
deal with postal challenges so I
hope you support this bill thank
you very much have a significant
thank you
Justin Allen.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the miners Justice.
Because of the boxes with the
word.
This committee to pass possible
for to guarantee or services on
behalf of.
Of course.
Returns from.
Office.
Probation or parole as an
alternative alternative to.
This signifies we're
working these taxes as members
of the community.
The dinosaur table is taxation
without representation one
Bros should be part of the
provision appropriates
aggression rehabilitation.
For most.
Still continue to decide.
Without the ability.
Every citizenship award.
Point.
Regardless of social geographic
or economic status.
Some connection to the
community.
Public safety six.
For.
Very few of services but I have
seen before.
Thank you
Mario Jimenez Maria.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee.
My name is Mattis executive
director of common cause New
Mexico first I'd like to thank
the sponsors will bring for this
important piece of legislation
as a former election street or
myself strong support of HB for
which will in franchise groups
of kids who currently experience
changes when registering to vote
as well as obtaining about.
H. before will simplify returned
from chasing qualified electors
were formerly incarcerated.
Excuse me for formerly
incarcerated making
administering elections easier
for chemical additionally H.
before will assist Mexicans
residing in rural New Mexico in
our native American communities
often must travel in our one way
to either register to vote for
simply check the mail.
Eighty four will help members of
our community who are homebound
as challenging disabilities or
elderly communities by
implementing a permanent
absentee register New Mexico has
been lucky to have so many great
promoter laws in place and H.
before is exactly that a probe
over piece of legislation New
Mexico County courts have proven
year after year to be good
stewards of our electoral
process would be implemented
Provo changes I'd like to point
to the successful implementation
of owning community centers and
more recently same day
registration for all the reasons
mentioned I urge this committee
to strongly passed H. before
thank you.
Thank you a lista Kenny Dyer hi
thank you madam chair members of
the committee and the second
care urging your support I'm a
resident of Santa Fe thank you
to my own Representative here I
serve in the Oregon legislature
for ten years and we do not
certainly do everything
perfectly and arguing we have
our own share problems but we
are rated the number one easiest
state to vote we we passed
permanent absentee voting in
nineteen ninety five in the
legislature a few years later
because of the success because
of the convenience to voters
don't have to ask things out of
the over.
Because of the cost savings to
county officials County election
officials who don't have to
process the same request over.
Voters actually voted by two to
one this is been very bipartisan
in Oregon in part because the
rural areas realized with a huge
community services we also past.
And as a result of that the most
important thing is that our
participation is gone way up we
have the highest participation
followed by Washington and
Vermont with similar system so I
urge your support this bill
thank you so much thank you on
jun Lipshutz.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee John Hughes I am
not here Representative like the
facial not here Representative
nonprofit I'm here representing
the New Mexico state federation
of labor AFL-CIO we have thirty
four thousand members statewide
we also yourself representing
all workers The New Mexico we
represent workers on fundamental
rights like the right to a
decent wage the right to equal
and good access to healthcare
and the right to vote we view
the right to vote every bit as
important as all the other rates
of five four for workers this is
a fundamental right one that we
have enjoyed internally within
our own organization and we
believe that every citizen and
the state should have the
easiest access as possible we
very much thank the sponsor the
secretary to foster and
secretary for fighting so hard
for that the strongly stand
behind us like thank you thank
you and one last person in the
audience either Marshall
Martinez or Victor Fernandes I
want which one of you okay hi
this afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Victor American in this I'm
with the quality New Mexico the
state's LGBTQ advocacy
organization representing over
ten thousand members statewide
So all of the actions are vital
for the entrance people last
year more than a hundred anti
LGBTQ pieces of legislation were
introduced in the country you
must ensure that New Mexico
protects access to the ballot
box so that we can elect leaders
will represent and fight for us
for us all secure automatic
voter registration is especially
vital for trans and non binary
community members and members of
our community change that change
their names and genders they are
faced with traumatic
conversations an explanation as
to people who often times don't
understand secure automatic
voter registration reduces the
number of these traumatic
conversations they have to have
which is a crucial piece of
liberation for all of us and so
for this reason I urge you all
to support thank.
Thank you now we're gonna go
online we have to more people
who wish to speak in favor
online I believe Amanda us are
here on online.
Hi good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Amanda Lopez us and I am the
county clerk in doing a County
we are a vibrant unity New
Mexico to serve we are the
second largest county New Mexico
and serve approximately a
hundred and thirty five thousand
registered voters I am here in
my role as an elected official
from my County in support of age
before and to be clear my
position is not a political
position but rather a position
based on my role as an election
administrator and my
responsibility to support robust
participation from qualified
voters in my County when so many
states across the nation are
rolling back voting rights and
access for their communities I'm
so proud that our legislature is
looking at ways that they can
expand access to the ballot box
thank you for your support today
of age before thank you thank
you and one last person I
thought Naomi my us this was
going to be online but I don't
see her yes there you are namely
The floor is yours.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Naomi Maestas I am the county
clerk for Los Alamos County and
the comments I made today
reflect my position as such to
be clear I am not speaking on
behalf of the Courts affiliate.
As a clerk to Los Alamos I would
like to express my support
because the for.
It as it contains many aspects
that positively affect
administrative processes within
my office for instance it
improves processes for voters
who have had the right voting
rights taken away I personally
seen how difficult it can be for
the citizens who are in these
situations to make their voice
heard do the paperwork not
getting processed appropriately
upon the release it is
heartbreaking to turn them away
they've done everything they
needed to on their end but that
the the paperwork never gets
processed it can be an
administrative nightmare for
them and for us it also provides
an Avenue for voters to opt in
to get an absentee by mail
ballot every election through an
automatic process this is a
request a receipt every election
from my voters who tend to stay
in warmer locations during the
winter months travel for long
periods of time or put on works
I'm with the laboratory was a
primary employer my County or
simply prefer to vote from the
convenience of their own home
for medical or personal reasons.
This will have a lot of what a
great aspects ultimately it
helps streamline and improve the
efficiency of administrative
processes leading to better
outcomes for all involved.
Thank you for your valuable
time.
Thank you
Very much that concludes the
public comment portion of our
agenda so we'll be no going
first back to the Sanchez the
wish and experts you wish to add
anything before we go to the
committee the server question
manager okay thank you very much
all right first on my list is
Representative lane.
You madam chair.
there's there's four sections on
ask questions about not try to
be concise because another my
colleague subplots questions to.
A manager first question.
Is found in the language on page
ten.
Madam minor Senator current law
is once you're convicted of
felony.
There's an automatic
cancellation.
Of your of.
Your voter registration is that
correct.
Yep his madam chair
representative.
You madam chair my understanding
is this would do away with that
automatic cancellation for
someone that is convicted of a
felony is that right.
That is correct Madam chair
representative and madam chair
can I maybe get some explanation
for the rationale behind doing
away with that automatic
cancellation.
Madam chair representative
So there's two ways to approach
reinstatement of.
After phone compact and and
we've opted for this.
So one way would be if you
cancel the registration when the
contract and I and then when
they're
being released you would they
would have to re register
how we're doing it here if they
are incarcerated on a felony
they cannot vote so if you're
hearing custody you can't vote
if have custody you can't that
and the reason for taking the
simpler approach is for a couple
of reasons one history has
proven that as a state we're not
great at handling that
transition for folks who are
coming out of incarceration and
getting.
I back into being active
participants participants are
more safe it also makes it
easier for election
administrators if we simplify it
this way there's just there's a
list of folks who are in custody
can't vote if you're there stand
in front of them you can't vote
so this simplifies the entire
issue while also making sure
that a lot of the roadblocks
that folks run into previously
don't happen again.
Madam chair I can.
I understand when you have
someone that has.
To fulfill the terms of their
sentence.
They've been released.
I understand at that point why
would want to allow people to
reenter society and and be
productive members in in the
full extent of what that means
and I think that that means that
includes.
Of being able to participate in
the democratic process.
but.
Madam chair over describing
various you haven't even.
Come close to finishing your
sentence
additional fat fella maybe well
maybe one complete your
sentence.
and I think there's something
about the nature of a felony
that we as Americans recognize
it's inherently different that
type of behavior.
you know maybe we can disagree
about that but Madam chair of
have you considered a process
where.
upon completion of a sentence
that maybe there's a an
automatic.
Registration at that point.
As opposed to an automatic
cancellation on the front and
before that since it's even been
completed.
Madam chair and representative
hold to thirty secretary of
state I'm thank you madam chair
representative Mr minority
leader eight to your point that
as.
Exactly what current state laws
supposed to be and I think we at
the time that that became the
law of the land it was very
forward thinking and I think the
right concept in many ways
unfortunately madam chair and
representative that is not how
it works in practice and due to
the fact that.
you know and I am not here to
speak negatively toward the
department of corrections which
has an incredibly important and
difficult job the nature of the
data and the information that
come to our office and
henceforth down to county clerks
from the department of
corrections has has proven over
the years as as our at.
Madam senator pointed out.
To not function in that regard
and and this's a streamlining of
the administrative process madam
chair.
Chair I can understand the the
need for.
For issues that arise because of
practical concerns which is what
I'm hearing expressed but what
we're really talking about what
this bill would changes it's
more of a philosophical change.
so it seems to me typically when
we address these problems as a
legislative body.
Madam when we come across an
issue that's that's a problem in
practice we typically look at
well maybe we need to fund that
department better maybe they
move need more fees.
maybe we need to invest more in
in information technology and
programming to make it more
streamlined remove some of the
human donor.
but this is of this is a
philosophical change.
and I I guess I I don't
understand.
Why we're okay with someone
being registered to vote.
That's committed a felony and I
think as a nation we all agree
early so we have historically.
That there are certain
consequences that come with that
type of behavior.
that can be restored but you
have to prove that you have
fulfilled the terms their
sentence or for that to to be
restored and here we're we're
moving that entirely and so I I
have some real concerns about
that.
I think a better approach is.
what we what I heard the
secretary describes current law
and we need to maybe be more
aggressive about how we fund
that.
I do think we need to take
seriously that when people have.
The bill the terms of their
sentence that we do everything
within our power to to make sure
that these folks are integrated
in New Mexico on the live good
and productive lives and so if
that means making sure that
they're able to register to vote
and I understand that.
Madam chair the second section
ask just the next page over into
similar themes.
So madam chair my understanding
current law is if you've been
convicted of a felony.
And you have been released.
And for fulfill the terms of
your sentence then you are then
eligible to vote is that
correct.
Chair representative yes Madam
chair can you explain how this
change will we'll change our
current law.
Chair representative hold for
the secretary of state for I'm
Madam chair representative so
again I mean I think and and
forgive the duplication sort of
tier previous questions but
the.
What's going to happen with
these individuals as is if they
are already registered to vote
and they come in to
custody is of state prison by
conviction of a felony their
existing registration will be
suspended until such time as
they're released if they are not
already registered but they just
won't be able to register to
vote while they are in custody
upon release and and I think the
section that starting on page
eleven that you were referring
to talks about the process that
currently exists for individuals
that are exiting custody of the
state corrections department
they are.
There's a mobile unit that comes
to the prison and gives them an
ID and things like that so that
when they when they leave prison
they have that handy so this is
just giving them the opportunity
to on either update their voter
registration or or conducted a
registrational anybody else as
an entity
currently Madam chair
representative.
Madam chair of.
Maybe it just question very well
the way I read this new
paragraph a.
The reserve voters in eligible
vote while in prison in a
correctional facility.
I take that to mean upon release
even if they are released under
conditions of release they're
now eligible to vote even with
them for fulfill the terms that
condition of release is that
correct that's correct Madam
chair representative so again
madam chair.
This is another philosophical
change so what what we're saying
than.
As a legislative body is again
you've created a felony you've
you've you've committed a felony
and there are certain
implications that come with
that.
And now we're saying is yes you
have a sentence but we don't
really have to fill all the
terms of that sentence before
going to reinstitute your right
to vote.
And so Madam I guess I'm I'm
just thinking through.
And you know the the rationale
behind it if why don't we just
let people vote if they're
behind bars what's the
difference here.
Chair representative I think I
think the difference is as we
try to re integrate people into
society I mean you get draw a
line somewhere I think for me at
least as you exit.
Actual custody.
Even if you've got another year
two of.
We.
I'm sorry.
If we if we even if we have
another year or two of you know
any conditions that we need to
be met
I believe this is part of the
reintegration process right and
I think bringing people back
into the fold we heard during
public testimony today
from folks advocating on this
particular section of the bill
and I think what we heard was
that in fact this is part of
that process so yes it is a
philosophical shift and we drew
the line at.
Whether or not you're.
In Mexico City physically in
Mexico City or you are.
Out even though the terms of
your sentence may not yet been
completed.
And madam chair I guess I've to
me the.
The issue is if you violate the
terms the release.
Be right back on the inside and
you haven't fulfilled the terms
of your sentence.
and so I don't know.
Why this right out of all the
rights that we take away from
folks.
That gets sent to prison for
committing a felony I mean do we
do we do this with any other
rights that we strip before
they.
Of to fill the terms their
sentence.
madam chair percent of I don't
think so but it would be what
what can you give an example of
what those others the rates
might be.
Madam chair so whether it's
right to bear arms whether it's
actually if you look in this
bill itself there were leaving
intact the prohibition of felons
from holding public office
that to me I think.
If we're gonna discussion about
reintegrating people society I
I'm curious as to why why don't
we eliminate that prohibition as
well but those are a couple that
come to mind.
Madam chair representative of
house floor amendment number
one.
Committees of the two groups.
John are you filming as well yes
I I it requires I just.
I'm new to this.
Yes.
Representative Chasey.
Thank you very much.
What chair what I'm sorry.
There is maybe a point orders
all don't know my apologies.
I know my questions for you
madam chairman.
The need for three that morning
for.
It'll repetitive but not boring.
All right.
Feel the love in this committee
thank you madam chair.
No and I do I think I actually
have a question that was
pending.
Senator member of sorry.
Yes I mean I think that's a
that's a that's a great point
chair representative a I mean
sure I mean I don't know that
this is the bill for that but I
think if somebody is out and.
If anyone of us hundred twelve
in this building felt compelled
to run that bill I think that
would be worth it right.
Madam chair for.
So I.
My law school professor intro FC
Tom Evans in port lesson that
when the forces day get off so
we'll move on to the next
section.
I think I made my point about
concerns about for the
philosophical shift this is
taking New Mexico the next one
madam chair is section eight
pages.
Thirteen of fourteen the bill on
this is a new new concept also
manager can can the sponsor
explain what what we're doing
here with this automatic voter
registration when you when you
do NMED transaction.
Yemen chair all all start and
then I'll defer to my experts
what we're trying to accomplish
here is and an opt out.
Automatic voter registration
system currently I believe it
what we have is considered an
opt in for example when you go
to the NBC free transaction you
are asked at the point of.
Purchase if you will if you if
you'd like to register to vote
this would automatically
register you to vote it would
also give the secretary of
state's office discretion to add
other types of government.
Offices that people come in and
have a
of sort of customer service
Front facing piece to it you
would then be able to opt out if
you for whatever reason chose
not to be registered to vote so
this this really is I think
an attempt to streamline the
voter registration process we've
all been as elected some sure
we've all been part of border
registration drives up the
county fairs and whatever else
which is a wonderful civic
engagement process and tool this
would simplify that process and
make it so that when any New
Mexican that otherwise qualifies
is is a qualified elector can
can opt in once and then be opt
in to the choose not to be part
of it if my experts want to try
I mean that's that's great.
Madam chair representative so
what we but this often system
that we have right now the vast
majority of people who after
they they finish their ability
whatever they're doing at the
NMED and then they get the
question do you want to register
to vote my understanding is
closed eighty percent of people
say no because they want to get
out of the MVD.
No one was any longer than they
have to so well well I think
that this legislation system
similar to to with the secretary
was saying about the system we
have around our returning
citizens when when it was
originated it was a forward
thinking idea that that was a
good idea but it turns out it's
one that that doesn't work for
most Mexicans and isn't giving
us the the engagement and
results that that we really
wanted to have with putting that
making this a function of of
folks going to the NMED in the
first place so this respects
voters time R. by allowing them
to to just get that transaction
done without having to continue
to hang out in the MBT and it
gives them every opportunity if
they don't want to be registered
to not be they are they're
informed at the time that there
be registered they're given the
opportunity to pick a party if
they want to at that time and
they're told you're going to get
the stock no this card in the
mail from your county clerk it's
going to tell you if you don't
want to be registered here's
what you sent this back and you
won't be registered
so the voters are getting all
the information at the time of
the transaction and then follow
up as well after that with
information so that the none of
this isn't taking anyone by
surprise but it's also just
respecting their time and giving
them the opportunity to be
engage more process that a lot
of folks right now.
Don't have.
Madam chair so I wanna make sure
understood with eighty percent
success statistic was in
reference to so is currently the
process and I've been reserve
for a long time so and I try to
avoid the DMV like to place of
forgive me but
Is the current process that if
I'm not registered I go and
let's say I was getting the real
ID driver's license at the end
of that that do they ask me if
I'm not registered I would like
to be registers at the current
practice to understand that
right.
Madam chair representative yes
and eighty percent of people
decline at Madam chair
representative I don't think
it's quite eighty I think I've
heard that it was seventy nine
percent.
So.
Madam chair.
Frankly that really concerns me.
That's an extremely high number
of people that are declining to
be registered who otherwise
could be registered.
And I I think that those the
right to vote is fundamental to
our system.
and inherent in in that is also
the right to to choose not to
participate in the system to
vote.
this I've.
I believe in voting I would be
sitting in this chair.
but I I don't know that it's
fair to New Mexico to to draw
the conclusion that the reason
why.
People are choosing not to.
The registered.
When they have a transaction
with the DMV.
Is just because of inconvenience
I think that might be part of it
but I don't think it's fair to
assume that's the case and so.
Madam chair can you explain to
me the process for opting out.
So madam chair sectors you
wanted or can Madam chair
representative
Yep that process will be so and
and it's outlined in the the
context of this legislation
Madam chair representative that
notice will be sent again as
the.
Senator noted they'll be
informed at the time of the
transaction what's going on that
your data will be sent to the
secretary of state's office and
subsequently
After that process saying if you
don't want to be registered
would just send this postcard
back this prepaid
postage free postcard right back
and you will be Madam chair
representative so madam chair if
I'm again and they're getting my
my rely the.
I'm in for that point that I'm
going to be registered to vote
if I say no I do not want to
register vote do not register me
what happens chair.
Madam chair representative I
then you would wait until you
get that postcard and send it in
and continued did not wish to be
registered.
Yeah Madam I think that's sort
of the crux of this whole issue
is you have a citizen has been
informed.
They are clearly stating they do
not want to be registered so and
work making them go through that
process and on top of that we're
going to say well we're gonna
send you a postcard in the mail
I hope it gets there and add
that to the list of things you
have going on in your life.
that you have to now take care
of it make sure it gets to the
right.
Office and all of those details
to make sure that you're not
registered to vote.
Madam chair the other thing as
to why would sit submit this
concerns me is there are there
are a fair number of people that
don't want to be register vote
not because they don't want to
spend part process.
There are people out there that
are fleeing.
Then when we found.
And I'm worried about a process
like this that at the time a
transaction.
They.
Want to not be registered
they're forced to be registered.
They wait for a card in the
mail.
and in a life that maybe in
disarray or other things going
on they have to juggle that.
And hope they do it correctly
and then worry about their name
and their address being on these
voter lists.
so I have concerns about that.
As far as the.
So I I guess I just don't
understand.
Maybe something like you where
we were we're going to
automatically register you
unless you tell us right now.
That should only registered some
some.
Maybe work around like that but
and then chair last sectional to
ask questions on.
Is on page fifteen.
So this is this is all still new
material.
So page fifteen lines eight
through twelve.
So what we have here is.
And I believe this is in the
context of receiving the card
that comes a month later is that
right madam chair.
Madam chair I don't know that
it's a month later but yes Sir
but I think that Madam I think
that's just what.
That that type income for me I
think that's come under
discussion but whatever the time
frame is this is in the context
of the card that sent you after
automatically registers that
right.
Yes yes chair.
Okay and so we have this
statement here about a statement
of the penalties for registering
to vote when a person is not
eligible.
It seems like with there's this
strange loop that we've created
where.
net due to no fault of your own
we've automatically registered
you.
Maybe you're someone who
shouldn't be registered but the
system registered registered
you.
And then if you don't fill out.
The opt out card then we're
going to penalize you for being
automatically register to vote
did I miss something there.
Madam chair representative
that's actually addressed in
this this but the language of
the bill unless you are
knowingly and willfully seeking
to to violate the are provisions
that save what would make you
ineligible voter hi you will not
be held responsible for and
madam chair can I I miss you
just pointed to that situation
where's that Bill.
I believe it is madam chair
representative of on page
nineteen starting at line I
a person who is not the
qualified elector for who is
eligible but becomes register to
vote under the section and
that's our level
it only commits false voting if
the person knowingly and
willfully took voluntary action
to register to vote with the
knowledge that the person is not
a qualified elector or is
ineligible to register knowingly
and willfully voted with
knowledge of the person is not a
qualified elector or is
ineligible to vote.
So madam chair and I I can pull
the statute I guess but is one
dash twenty dash eight is that.
The after voting or the act of
registering to vote but not
voting.
Madam chair representative so
yes under current law both
So voting or offering to vote as
stated and false voting is the
act of attempting to both.
Specifically so madam chair it's
back to my just my.
Real concern.
Is there.
Is there any kind of penalty in
law currently if I register to
vote and I'm not eligible to
register to vote.
Miss madam chair representative
yeah we just talked about that
and the under the table setting
section and there there are
penalties for committing
offenses of the election code
Madam I think what we went over
is the active voting itself.
Madam chair representative I I
look up look up on page nineteen
it addresses one dash twenty
dash three which deals with
registration offenses.
Please I think is that the same
kind of language about you have
to knowingly and willfully
Register our knowing that you
you should not in order for the
registration offenses to pick
at.
Okay.
Adventure I guess that at that
point it.
Would become a question of
whether you failing to.
Fill out the card.
Constance knowingly willfully
that fits my point so madam
chair I think for reasons
expressed I have concerns about
the legislation.
I've concerns about infringing
on.
On certain members of our
public's celebrities.
and again I think voting is is
vital but I think also choosing
not to participate in the
process is also.
I don't so thank you Madam thank
you Representative
Representative Chasey.
Thank you very much madam chair
and thank you Mr speakers
Senator do it madam secretary.
I appreciate the discussion.
I'm I wanted to.
Address the number of issues
Let me start with the franchise.
The birth rate in this country.
This isn't a privilege.
It's not so we're.
People say you have to show an
ID to fly the plane after
showing IT to
use your credit card those are
not your birthright.
But the franchise is your
birthright.
We did not deny.
The franchise to felons until
after the civil war.
Eighteen sixty three afternoons
a patient act.
Is when we started.
Restricting the right to vote
because there was fear that
freed slaves would vote.
So you know it may be an
accepted practice bill although
there couple states that don't
we move the franchise.
The history of.
Two nine felons convicted felons
right to vote is civil war era.
No.
I agree because I was here to
voted for it in two thousand and
one.
Senator Richard Romero how the
bill to restore voting rights to
former felons and
Gary Johnson signed that into
law.
What we realized fairly early on
I would say within the first
three to five years we started
talking about what to do the
corrections department tried.
The secretary of state tried the
county parks tried so what
happens is that the completion
of the full conditions very with
the individual so the venue
varies with the individual so we
have thousands of people right
now who literally cannot vote
because.
Somewhere in that either.
Their paperwork didn't get to
the county clerk and I I already
knew this is a problem we have
tried to work on this before but
had not been successful.
I think largely because some how
people think these folks haven't
paid their debt to society.
Well.
The leaders made a good point
because I think it's one we
should be talking about which is
this is now a shift in
philosophy but it's a shift
that's being made in red states
and blue states it's a shift
that's being made by the coke
brothers by the right leaning
right on crime organization
which says.
The lesson is we need to be
smart on crime.
As opposed to let's say tough on
crime but there are certain
people who need to be
incarcerated I'm not suggesting
that there are any of that
anybody should have help.
But what you want to do is look
at the evidence of how you get
people engaged.
While they're incarcerated and
when they're out with their
community so that they will
become more readily
rehabilitated and less likely to
re offend and that there's the
state is there the evidence is
there so what you want to do is
get people.
Looking forward to participating
in society and then getting to
do it as soon as possible
because they're less likely to
create a burden to society and
to lead a
a life that makes a community
unsafe.
Okay so there's that so it is a
shift in philosophy but we were
finding and I really wasn't sure
I knew how bad it was until I
was practicing law in the abuse
and neglect building would I
this is just one example but I
have a lot of them I was
representing a baby as guardian
Adlai item and
Parents were working hard they
were not together but they were
working hard to call parents and
rehabilitate themselves her dad
had a really good job and he
told me that he was incarcerated
just after I mean he he
committed a crime after the age
of eighteen and he was
incarcerated for several years
and he said I learned my lesson
and I am never going to do that
again thank you gone to the
county clerk in Valencia County
and was told he couldn't vote.
So.
I knew that he could.
Because he said he'd finished
everything that I believe is he
thought he had finished
everything.
Because I helped him and
probably the secretary state
health and we managed to get him
registered but he had been
really heartbroken that he
couldn't vote in the last
election and he's somebody we
want to he was the one with whom
has little girl who was a
toddler by the time of the
family was reunited.
He was the one the stable one in
the family and he wanted to
vote.
And and now he's voting so I I
think that
What we have learned is that as
a minority leader pointed out
first of all it's just hasn't
been working and senator doing
pointed this out as well it just
hasn't been working.
Because there are literally
thousands of people like my
little girls my little clients
father.
And I had other clients who are
looking at the same situation
so.
This is a change in velocity but
it's based on evidence it's
based on what we know to be true
of people who are
who are coming back into society
and you want to be contributing
members.
My expert on this case already
spoke
in favor of this bill and he
he's testified in front of this
legislature before that it was
the first how much he did as a
free citizen returning citizen
that restored his dignity.
So that's why we want to do it
we want to make a change in the
philosophy we really to and
there's evidence to back that
up.
So
with regard to the that's
brought that will occur with all
with fun.
A permanent absentee voting
list.
There are
Nine states.
That we're all Alexion's are
allowed to be conducted by mail.
They're not all blue states.
They include Utah.
That is purple.
Vermont is somewhat purple
Oregon so all.
All elections can be conducted
by mail and there two of them
permit counties to opt into
conducting elections finance.
So they're nine states that
allow specific small elections
to be conducted by mail for
states permit all mail elections
for certain small jurisdictions
and we're one of those but those
include Idaho Minnesota New
Jersey.
And I think we had testimony
regarding Oregon and I had on my
list that Oregon started at
nineteen ninety eight but I
think the former representative
from Oregon mentioned that it's
nineteen ninety five where they
did the permanent absentee
voting lists the California
connected in twenty twenty one
Colorado's been doing it for ten
years.
Hawaii twenty nineteen about at
twenty twenty one Oregon we've
just talked about the to do with
his Utah since twenty twelve per
month twenty twenty one
Washington since twenty eleven.
So I guess I don't firstly the
lease.
That there's fraud in those
elections and I'm I'm going to
say I don't believe anyone who
says that that would create
fraud here.
You.
I want to mention that I serve
for number of years on our
courts corrections and justice
interim committee and we've had
periodic.
Claims long before twenty
sixteen of
voting fraud and the need for
voter ID so
Back when senator Sanchez was
chair
and and then he was again this
last interim co chair of this
committee and when
Representative L. park was co
chair we tried to have hearings
on let's let's have a
legislative hearing on what's
happening that our people are so
worried about so we went to Las
Cruces because we had all of
these voters in Dona ana county
telling us that there was fraud
and.
We had a hearing and nobody
came.
The county clerk came.
And answer questions but there
was nobody who came.
The people who'd been telling us
about the fraud didn't come.
So I also want to say that I was
told by somebody here that my
district wants me to vote
against this bill.
My district doesn't want me to
vote against this bill I know my
district and so you may think
that we have thousands of
letters.
In opposition they aren't
necessarily from our
constituents I bet I could right
now count on one hand the number
of emails I have from folks in
my district who want me to vote
against this bill.
So I just would like to advise
you that probably the members
who've gotten so selected do
know what they're districts
believe.
And without madam chair I yes.
Thank you representative
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair and representative
Mr speaker Senator.
Madam secretary.
Working on election bills are
always tough and
My my initial questions concern
the process how we got to House
Bill for.
was there significant
interaction with other than the
secretary of state the county
clerk's that also administer the
election laws.
Madam chair representative I yes
I mean I I think I believe there
was an all all you allow my.
Experts here to to give you
details on that up you know they
this process started last year
And.
I think my quote to the paper on
this bill public school was that
in fact we learned a lot from
that process last year we heard
a lot of the concerns as well a
lot of those things are not in
this bill my assumption is that
over the interim work was done
with county clerks but I'll
defer to my experts my co
sponsoring my experts.
Madam chair representative I can
tell you that
as soon as I had a draft of this
I sent it to I believe the vice
chair of the clerks affiliate
and asked him to share it with
the entire course affiliate and
amassed multiple times since
then for for feedback and and to
talk about various issues I I
have had some conversations with
the clerks particularly
particularly around the
monitored secure containers
portion of this bill so I've
been I've been talking to them I
I can't speak for anyone else.
And into the clerk's affiliate
the.
Are are they behind this survey
not behind it the.
If you have those discussions
where are we with the county
clerk's on on house bill four.
Madam chair representative we
heard from Google county clerks
here today we're speaking
support on their own behalf I
think I can't tell you that I
know what the course affiliate
if they have an official
position on this or or what it
is I know that there are some
players who who don't support us
and some who do
and frankly the more I work with
the clerks I find that that is
true on almost everything.
That's probably very true so so
we don't know where the clerk's
affiliate.
Is on this particular piece of
legislation what back to my
initial question was significant
discussions with them in
involved in coming up with the
language that's in this bill or
did you just send them the draft
and asked for comment.
Madam chair representative I
something the draft and and just
for comments and
have received their constants
then and I think I actually even
have will probably be offering
an amendment once this get heads
over to the Senate to to address
some of the concerns.
The.
There's several concerns and
I'll try not to repeat the some
of the concerns raised by the
representative from San Juan but
On page three.
One twenty
In this issue.
Permeates throughout other
questions but
we get to this automatic voter
registration and and so I spoke
qualified elector how does the
department of motor vehicles of
the motor vehicle division of
taxed Rav determined that the
person that they're dealing
with.
That's renewing their licenses
getting a license is a qualified
elector.
Madam chair representative on
behalf of the sponsor and so the
current process as you know
Representative because you have
been involved in a lot of the
selection legislation over the
years
with the at the for the the
opting in at the time of the
transaction process that
currently exists
when my understanding from
working closely with them media
over the years I'm getting the
current process right.
Is that when an individual
presents themselves at MBT to
procure a driver's license or an
ID
that there are certain sets of
documentation that you can find
to prove your identity
as we all know as we've all had
to do particularly we all had to
go through getting a real ID
recently those of us that got
one right you have to find
certain things so if you have a
document that is on a list of
documents.
That proved citizenship I. E. a
birth certificate or passport
and you find that as your proof
of identity you're not required
to necessarily in all cases but
if you're documentation that you
are providing proves your
identity and it also confirms
that you're citizen you are put
into that queue madam chair and
representative to go through the
automatic automated voter
registration transaction that's
current practice if you are not
automatically if you are not
providing a document that.
Proves that you are citizen
tangentially then you're not put
through that put through that
cue and so this is basically the
same process
the same process madam chair and
representative will be
following.
So madam chair and and madam
secretary I understand you right
the only automatic registrations
that will occur.
Will be people who are.
Renewing for are securing.
A real ID and having to come up
with in my case my entire last
year's tax return and all this
other stuff Senate take about an
hour to find the correct piece
of paper to prove that I was was
have a social security card
so how.
Those.
This bill.
And the automatic registration
provisions is limited to that
type of driver that's how I
understand the testimony Madam
chair representative just to
clarify it's not the specific
type of driver's license it's
the documentation you are
providing to MVD to get a real
ID or a provisional license or
just a state ID card or what
have you and if that
documentation your providing
also happens to fall under the
category of proving citizenship
then yes Madam chair
representative.
Well as I understand it the
documentation required to just
simply get a driver's license or
an ID card.
Very significantly from getting
a real ID at and.
Most people are going to have.
All of the documentation that I
recently found out one has to
have to get the real ID and and
so I just want to make sure that
the public knows that were
either dealing with that set of
documentation or we're dealing
with some other stuff that may
be in this
extensive in the issue of proof
of citizenship.
It is the.
It is your.
Is a testimony that it's the
same or is can somebody submit
something different and still
get automatically register thing
to clarify madam chair and
representative of what I'm
saying is that despite the type
of ID that you are seeking to
get and we do know there are
people that come to just get a
state ID or that come just to
get
a driver's license not
necessarily really do and you
can still find that proof of
citizenship as part of that
process so I think the
distinction I'm trying to make
and and I'm sorry to get
pedantic madam chair
representative is just that it's
it's regardless of the type of
ID you are seeking to acquire
and it is about the
documentation you are providing
in order to obtain that ID okay
internetom Senator madam
secretary and the information
regardless of the type of I do.
It's the same standard that is
required to get the realized he
would not be Madam chair
representative so you know
there's like the series of
documents that you know it's
something from call maybe
something County column a to the
best of my recollection it's
been a few years since I've done
this is all of its documentation
that also not only proves
identity but prove citizenship
if you find documentation that
falls into that column that also
happens to prove citizenship
then yes madam chair and
representative then you are in
the queue for automatic voter
registration.
And madam chair and madam
secretary the repetitive nature
because.
The department of motor
vehicles.
I literally took my tax returns
and with my passport my all the
other stuff versus to get so we
have this we have this we have
this I have
the
Recent electric bill and I was
still deficient and in one thing
I did not have my social
security card I had the back up
that have the number of my name
but I didn't have the actual red
white and blue card they needed
that and I'm going.
Well I don't know works at and
they were telling me I had to go
to social security office and
then she said for.
If you have an official state
document that has your full
social security number on it
that will work.
So I literally went through my
tax return about three quarters
of the way through I found a
state document that had it on
there and and they accepted that
but I mean it was arduous and
and the complaints I've gotten
from constituents about the
process whose it's arduous for
them to not just wanting to make
sure that that arduous process
is one that would be utilized
for this automatic voter
registration process yes Madam
chair representative okay.
I'll move on.
Over on page of.
Bottom of page six and and then
it goes on page seven.
Eight nine.
To the top of the well eight
nine toward the bottom how does
section five of this House Bill
differ from existing law.
And this is registration of the
voting location prior to voting
we have automatic.
Voting registration on election
day today so I just want to know
what the differences are between
this bill and what our current
practices you madam chair and
madam secretary.
Representative Madam chair
representative excuse me madam
chair
this is just conforming language
my understanding because when I
actually read through the bill
the first time before the
session I had the same question
and we're just making sure it's
in the right section and I think
the only difference madam chair
representative from existing law
is that in the in the previous
law there was a you know
implementation delay we're we're
past that and there was a
process that we had to go
through with the voting system
certification committee before
it could begin to be implemented
and and those processes have
already passed Madam chair
representative.
And ultimately same day voter
registration and voting prior to
Featuring the ballot to that
person the clerk's office still
verify social security number
and and citizenship is that
correct Madam chair
representative they they follow
the same process a tip to
processing that a registration
with somebody that present
themselves to the at the polling
location with the exception
being there additional in person
identification requirements for
that better to to register but
at the same time
so would you characterize that
as no significant differences
from the current law correct
Madam chair representative.
Over on page ten
This gets back to the line of
questioning.
That the gentleman from San Juan
had
I'd like to focus in on a couple
things number one is on page
eleven line to in.
Nine and ten.
It says the voters ineligible to
vote well imprisoned in a
correctional facility and my
question is with that include
detention centers in the
counties.
Being.
Madam chair center I don't think
detention centers in the
counties hold folks for fat for
ballot who when someone's in
prison for a felony there that
doesn't happen at a county
detention facility.
Well maybe maybe maybe not yeah
and and I might be if I'm wrong
about that someone someone
please correct me yes it it's
madam chair and and center it's
possible for someone who has
been convicted of a felony to be
located in a detention.
Facility for a period of time
could be over the election day
and and so I I just it says
while in prison in a
correctional facility I'm I'm
trying to find out what what you
intended the scope of that to
be.
Madam chair representative I
think it's anytime someone is
being held in custody on a
because of a felony conviction.
Then that they would not be
eligible to vote
you madam chair and senator I I
would suggest that if that's
your intention that we may need
a definition or something to
accomplish that intention
because on I'm concerned that
people would read it as only the
department of corrections
jurisdiction which would cut
out.
The county detention center so
what have you.
Getting back to some of the
debate that's occurred on online
fifteen.
Says during the reentry phase
and have and basically what I
heard you state is with the.
It's the intent to allow
Individuals who have been
released from the correctional
facility for now detention
center to be able to participate
in the voting process regardless
of whether they are still having
to fulfill conditions of release
and I would assume that that
would mean even if they're
released to undergo what I'd say
house arrest were you know have
to but.
To fill the rest of their term
in their home
and am I correct in that
assumption that you would still
allow the person who is for
filling their car serration in
their home to still be able to
vote is that a correct
understanding.
And so and so if if that's true
and and the center was shaking
her head yes on one fifteen it
talks about the re entry phase
and and so.
As I see this this conflict
because somebody still serving
their sentence.
Albeit not in the facility.
They're really not in the
reentry fates and so I'm just
trying to trying to.
Measure those two up with one
another make sure that we're
being consistent here.
And madam chaps are
Representative Victoria.
I just point that out I I I I
see some inconsistency I've I've
I don't know I think you can
correct it but I see some
inconsistency that that you may
want to to visit about the.
Senator it's snowing outside.
Well it seems pretty obvious to.
Want to weather delay now.
The madam chair and and the
Representative Senator on page
eighteen and nineteen which
share your refer to earlier.
Paragraph I.
That is a difficult turnaround
that one's arms around
There's so many unless those and
not some and and things
I think I understand what you're
trying to save with this review
to see if it makes sense unless
a person who's not a qualified
elector or is ineligible to
register to vote knowingly and
willfully takes voluntary action
to register to vote knowing that
the person is not a qualified
elector or is ineligible to
register to vote the transfer of
an electronic record for failure
of a person to decline voter
registration pursuant to this
section shall not be considered
a violation of section one dash
twenty dash three so.
Could you in simple terms.
Tell me what the intention is
with respect to this paragraph.
Madam chair Senator Madam chair
representative of.
This is this is exactly what
what Representative Lane was was
talking about earlier on if
someone is automatically
registered and their of the
transaction
but turns out they are not not
someone who should be registered
unless they are actively making
efforts to be registered knowing
that they're not supposed to be
it's not gonna be registration
offense so so just not setting
that part back isn't going to be
registration offense just of the
MVD transferring that
information to the secretary of
state the guest and register
isn't going to be in a
registration of funds they have
to take some voluntary action
knowingly and willfully trying
to violate our registration
offense statute in order for
that and have the offense by
letting that statute.
And then the second point the
next paragraph and that's when
they actually cast a ballot is
and not.
Madam chair representative yes
so if a person knows that
they're not a citizen of the
United States.
I would think most people know
whether they're citizens or not.
If they actually cast a ballot.
At I don't I I I wonder what
we're trying to get out there
because I've actually taken
affirmative action.
But yet we put in the standard
for for prosecution.
And I'm a bit confused by that
the is there can can you explain
paragraph J. maybe Assistant
clears paragraph by.
So madam chair representative so
taking your your example they
will have gotten in the mail
this chart that says here's who
can't registered about are not
if you're not a citizen you
can't Richard about so they know
if they then go ahead state
registered and go first go see
to vote knowing they are not a
citizen they've had notice of
the fact that they have to be a
citizen to vote that would be a
violation of of the of the one
twenty eight the the voting
offenses one
but trying to think of a
different situation where.
Let's say they've been
automatically registered.
Gosh I don't know I'm I'm I'm
hesitant start making a
hypothetical.
Mmhm but but again you have to
you have to be aware of what
you're doing and be trying to do
something wrong in order to be
be found to violate the statutes
under this because we don't want
folks who just haven't have gone
to their mail or or just didn't
you know that they they didn't
see the post car something we we
don't we're not trying to.
To to tech felonies on to folks
when they shouldn't have unit
you have to take an affirmative
action and know what you're
doing.
But madam chair and senator
isn't the very active voting
when you know you're not
eligible isn't that the
affirmative act.
So yes madam chair
representative in that case yes
I think that would be the about
of a knowing affirmative act
that would violate.
That would be be a violation of
our statutes yes so why doesn't
paragraph J. simply state that.
Madam chair representative I
think paragraph J. is is trying
to catch it's trying to cast a
wide net to catch situations
where someone is not is not
knowingly taking that
affirmative steps so let's say
for some reason they are not an
eligible elect or and it but and
they but they don't know that
necessarily it's it's not
something that we they've gotten
notice of on the Carter or
something like that and they go
vote and they're not trying
they're not knowingly violating
that then we don't want we don't
want to have that be a violation
of the statute.
so this isn't J. isn't just
addressing those knowing
situations which really sticking
to dresses the times where
something is not done knowingly
or willfully.
That makes sense.
I I I guess I'm having trouble.
Madam chair trying to figure out
how.
Someone who is not who.
Is not eligible to vote.
And usually it's going to be
citizenship.
How a noncitizen.
Who actually votes.
Why we need to have this.
Very difficult paragraph we're
and they're very action of
voting when they're not a
citizen should be the violation
and it should be very clear that
that is a violation of our
election laws and make it easy
for that person to be prosecuted
under the election law office
even though they're never
prosecuted that that's another
issue.
Madam chair representative I
think in this example that
you're given the citizenship
example I think it's probably
always going to be a violation
of our statutes because they'll
no they'll have gotten the card
and they'll know that they're
not assistance so I don't think
there's a situation where
noncitizen would not be found to
have violated our statutes if
they are voting under this.
Well ones eight.
And following really bother me
because it says that that
person.
commits false voting under one
dash twenty dash eight only if.
The person knowingly and
willfully took voluntarily
action to register to vote with
the knowledge of the person is
not a qualified elector for is
ineligible to register or
knowingly and willfully voted
with knowledge of the person is
not a qualified elector I just
can't for the life of me think
of a situation where a non
citizen.
The very action of that person
voting.
Why we need to complicate this
paragraph but
that that's your intention to
capture those fine I I just hope
that the court see it that way
as well because it's a difficult
paragraph to get one's arms.
I think we can do a do everyone
a little bit of justice by hand
picking that say what we mean
and and produces Center.
Madam chair representative real
briefly I think this language is
actually in current statute I
get it's been refusing language
here but but this is some kind
of language we have in current
statutes if that helps each year
your concerns at all well.
That's the current statute I
would I would encourage you to
try to the little.
Will of course we have more to
the point of.
With the automatic
absentee voter list of is
created and.
I guess what I want to
understand is what actually goes
to the voter if they're on that
list as is a very hard to ask
them to receive a ballot for is
at the ballot itself.
Madam chair representative Madam
chair representative so under
the provisions of this
particular piece of legislation
if you sign up you sign up
points and therefore you receive
a ballot in the mail like you do
now except you submitted a new
card every time there will be an
notice madam chair
representative prior to your
ballots being mailed to you
before each election that you'll
be getting a ballot in the mail
okay and and madam chair and
madam secretary.
Representative from Bernalillo
talked about other states that
have automatic mail in voting
Colorado B. one of.
And so much my question would be
do do we have the same
technology that Colorado
utilizes to determine the
genuineness of the signatures of
those ballots that are returned
for County.
Madam chair representative we
don't currently use that process
here in fact there's another
piece of legislation that this
committee is hopefully going to
look at soon that will reaffirm
enhanced security provisions
that we had temporarily in
twenty twenty requiring the last
for the social and the signature
as I have said many times to
this committee and and to your
colleagues you know if if the
state would like to go the
direction of signature
verification that is something
you know that I certainly
support our policy wise but we
would have to implement that
technology here Madam chair
representative and madam chair
and madam secretary you know
I've had a number of discussions
in that regard and and I think
that's one of the ballot
security measures the.
Is needed if this is the
direction that we're heading we
need you know we we want to make
it easy for the
citizens of New Mexico to the.
We want to devote we want to
make it easy for them to vote
but we also need to make sure
that their vote is equal to
every other qualified electors
vote and not something less and
the only way we do that is by
having some security measures in
place and and so if we're
heading in this direction.
Seems to me that we need to have
some some ability to make sure
that those ballots that are
being returned are from the
qualified elector and not from.
Someone else and that we have
measures that can be
easily verified through
technology or otherwise because
as you've seen madam secretary
If you're.
Looking at each thing against
the card.
Our election process to take
months if not a year we we don't
want that but but we certainly
need some measures in place to
do that and I would encourage
you to make sure that there are.
Ballot security measures in
place if we're going to have
this automatic ballot
mail out to people that have
requested or frankly the people
in those precincts to get
automatic mail out ballots
anyway because of of the current
law and I assume that will still
be in place even if this bill
passes.
So I would certainly encourage
that
Page twenty seven.
Winds sixteen.
Talk about monitored secured
containers and I'd like a madam
chair and maybe madam secretary
to explain.
What do you mean by monitor how
how how are they monitored and
and what the what are we looking
for to make sure that the those
secure containers are being
utilized properly by the proper
people and and go into some of
those details if you would
please madam secretary madam
chair representative and and
just so you know most of these
provisions our current law with
the monitored secured containers
that are in current existence in
fact I personally believe we
have a gold standard and New
Mexico for how we
Monitor and secure how are of
ballot receptacle containers so
first of foremost there twenty
four seven video monitor during
the course of a time when
ballots are being returned so
that twenty eight daily up to
election day secondly there also
there tamper proof on and they
have sensors on the content
built into the containers
themselves so if they are you
know.
If someone's trying to temper
them of someone's trying to get
into it beat it with a baseball
bat
runs into it with the car what
have you there's an automatic
alert that goes out from the
container to the county clerks
office it's it's monitored
around the clock and so we are
able to our county clerks are
eight are notified in our
offices also notified in in the
case of any situation where.
The in something nefarious is
happening around the container
Madam chair representative the
does madam chair and and madam
secretary does the monitoring
include video or photographic
evidence of who's dropping it
off and is it capable of
connecting of the ballots in
stacks of the if you see two
ballots go in you know this
person brought the first two
ballots second person brought
one third person brought forth
person brought I are you able to
do that or or is it just you
drop a man however many ballot
you have and and we just have
who happen to drop them off that
day Madam chair representative
yeah there's not an internal
tracking system within the
container but certainly that
video captures individuals and I
will say that you know they're
they're more highly secure than
the the blue at US PS box on the
corner Madam chair
representative and madam chair
and madam secretary.
Does anything in this bill to
change the requirements as to
who is capable of dropping off
ballots for a person who has
requested a a mail in ballot
Madam chair representative there
are a couple of minor changes to
that one is sort of a
clarification on the definition
of you know sort of immediate
family member caregiver just
because we know in our modern
society you know sort of the
traditional you know spouse
child parent of you know was a
little bit limiting and then and
the native American voting
rights act section there's also
provision that allows for and.
Designated tribal government
designated community health care
liaisons and that was a specific
request going to actual
circumstances that occurred
particularly in twenty twenty
with regard to comment and
people who are physically second
home or couldn't leave their
homes in order to get their
ballots returned madam chair.
So madam chair and madam
secretary specifically with
respect to the family off the
tribal portion but risk
respective family members had
how is it expanded in in this
bill who who else will be able
to bring.
And
ballots for the elector.
Madam chair representative I
stand corrected I was reading at
the other bill that we have in
the other committee today
earlier and I got stuck in my
head those provisions are in SB
one eighty that we will be
bringing up before you all the
expanded definition and so my
apologies madam chair under this
under this bill there's no
change in the.
Individuals who are capable of
properly delivering the ballots
to the secure containers report
to the county clerk's office
Madam chair representative my
apologies okay and that will be
under I guess another bill we're
going to hear the dispatcher's
okay.
And madam chair representative
just just to clarify the tribal
part they still will be able to
turn them into the county clerk
online not to honor monitor to
secure containers.
That the tribal appointed
balance systems.
Madam chair and senator
You say that but house to house
of secure container gonna know.
What the Madam chair
representative they can't turn
the meant there there there's a
whole set up where they have a
log that is turned in with with
the ballots to the county clerk
Senator yes.
So as so if they were dropping
them into to just that monarch
secured and containers they
would be violating that statute
That would be on camera doing
so.
My.
Next the on page forty one.
I
think this may be moved maybe
it's all of.
You.
Under current law do we have.
Holidays for election day in
schools no matter services move
Representative that and that is
the only piece of the section
that is the new languages
required school holiday.
As and so my my question madam
chair and madam secretary is.
What why would we make election
day a holiday.
Madam chair representative will
tell you from my point of view
as a a former county election
officials
one of the the biggest issues
that used to pop up in.
That probably still does is
concerns around having an influx
of you know non school non
parents non.
Child.
Person in the school as as most
of our polling locations our our
schools madam chair
representative.
The madam chair madam secretary
I think that's why some counties
of.
Opted to have the voting centres
not beyond schools so that you
don't have the security issues
that the are are faced when you
have school going on at the same
time MFA for voting and so this
would be of.
Basically statewide even though
in my community I'm not sure
that there are any voting
locations are in schools so I
was I just wondering but that's
that's the reason why is because
there's still a lot of voting
centers that are housed in in
the public schools.
The chairman madam secretary
Representative Senator
these campaign built as I
started out or or are difficult
and.
It's a.
It.
Same so maybe that
Number one it's always good to
have.
All the.
People that deal with this issue
in the room trying to craft some
of these and I am truly
concerned that well we heard
from a few county clerks I hear
from a lot of other county
clerk said that the are
concerned about it
the the monitored storage boxes
were were telling each county to
have to even though we have some
counties that have less than
seven hundred fifty people on
and yet they're going to have to
be responsible for to these
containers
and the costs associated with it
so you know I think there's some
things that that if if there was
more of an effort to work with
some of those peculiarities in
our state that maybe we can iron
those things out but
hi.
I'm afraid with the automatic
mail out provisions and the lack
of technology that were employed
in New Mexico the current time
I have some real concerns with
the security measures that that
we have in place and and so I
would just throw those things
out of you all have a few things
to think about I think you can
clean up some language in here
and I hope you'll take the
opportunity to do so thank you
madam chair thank you were
Representative you thank you
Representative Nibert and I'll
be looking forward to hearing
about your uniform commercial
code bills and all the
complexities of language so
Representative
reeve.
Thank you madam chair and
senator Mr speaker madam
secretary I'll be brief because
most of my questions were
answered no everyone's really
tired I just had a couple follow
up areas all questions in the
areas so for the Fallon area
I think it was pointed out the
concern with the language in the
jails or the department of
corrections and and I would I
guess I would just point out
also with the person serving
house arrest or on an ankle
monitor there's quite a bit case
law out there that says that is
you are serving a sentence and
it it's considered pre sentence
confinement and so I would just
ask you to look at that language
I I still am of the belief that
you're really when you are out
of prison or you're serving a
sentence on probation is
generally just sentence where
you were sentenced to the
department of corrections and
assess banded in favor of
appropriations so you really
haven't completed all your
requirements and we are on
probation or parole you do have
pretty strict conditions of you
know reporting and no drugs and
all those different things but I
just wanted to to point that out
when you are on house arrest and
you are in an ankle monitoring
conditions are stricter that
under the law that is considered
a sentence in that you're
incarcerated so it's just
something for you to consider in
your language and secondly
talking about the automatic
voter registration madam chair
Mr speaker madam secretary and
Senator I guess I I didn't feel
like I followed up completely on
it what minority lane was saying
minority leader lane was saying
when you go to the DMV and you
say you don't want to vote are
you going to register to vote
and then they send you that card
back.
What happens if you don't send
the card back that was some I
guess I never got answered and
are you registered to vote
thundery not registered about.
And Madam chair representative
so if you if you don't take a
proactive action to say you
don't want to be registered
you're going to be registered
about now that doesn't mean
you're voting I means you're
registered in fact percent of
federal law if if you do get
registered to this process and
you take absolutely no action
whatsoever to either inform the
county clerk that you don't want
to be registered or to both then
you will go through the national
voter registration act
cancellation process and will
ultimately be removed from the
rules percent of federal and
state law but if you don't
return the card there other
proactive steps you can take to
take yourself off the voting
rolls we have a form on the
secretary of state's site for
example that any better can fill
out and send to their county
clerk to say please remove me
from the voter rolls for any
reason at any time including now
Madam chair representative madam
chair and madam secretary I I
appreciate that answer to I just
and thinking about it too and it
just seems like it when you're
telling someone you don't want
to vote and and what came to
mind sitting here was I if I'm a
Jehovah's witness and I don't
vote
I will feel racially
discriminated against if all the
sudden you're registered me to
vote and I don't turn that chart
and so I just have a concern
with that and the possible at
religious discrimination like I
said racial issues of religious
discrimination that they could
possibly feel and I would ask
that you kind of take that into
consideration also
And then on the absentee
permanent list
Madam secretary Mr speaker
senator just so I understand
kind of what we're talking about
when we do an absentee vote my
daughters are in college I
generally call my clerk in state
get them their absentee ballots
they said in the the certificate
thing to sign that they're
living there send that back to
them and then they send the
ballot is that that's how that
works right under current law
madam chair and representative
yes okay and madam chair and
madam secretary so under this
permanent a list basically these
are going to be people in New
Mexico only and you'll send a
reminder card to them but they
don't have to certify that they
live there anything of that
nature anymore.
Madam chair representative so
it's been a single point of sign
up
you know find for example to use
myself as an example because I
never by absentee you know and I
will and I'm going to I intend
to sign up for this list all
fill out the form if I don't
move if I continue to receive my
mail at my address and I'll get
a notice prior to every election
saying Hey just a reminder that
you're getting about in the mail
this time and that's how that's
going to go if I if I do move
and I don't update my voter
registration well I let me put
it this way if I do move
regardless I'm going to be taken
off that list after re sign up
if I move and change my address
Madam chair representative at
madam chair madam secretary okay
that that explains it in so what
I'm understanding is when I it
that very willing to do that
certification which I feel is
extremely important but you
don't have the system in place
to actually do that at this
point the electronic I guess
like we were talking with the
voter system to keep track of
all these like other states have
you said something to the effect
of you don't have that you're
trying to get the monies for
that is that the system we're
talking about for my missing
that yet now madam chair
representative what we were
talking about with
representative Nibert was
signature verification this is
you know I think what I hear you
talking about is sort of knowing
when people of native and being
able to update addresses and we
already do have a lot of data
that you know both Fuhrman B. D.
as well as from our membership
in an interstate data consortium
that we're able to track that
the bill that's going to be
coming over from the Senate side
hopefully soon for you all to
look at that I referenced also
even further strengthens our
ability to make sure we're
keeping track of people when
they move in keeping their
dresses updated so we do Madam
chair representative to have the
technology we need a little bit
of provided permission for some
more okay so madam chair and
madam secretary I guess I just
feel that setting up that
certificate is a it is verifies
more.
Or that you know we're getting
the right person voting I mean
if it's good enough for absentee
why would it be good enough to
send within the state and so I
don't know that's a concern I
have I just wanted to make sure
I was understanding that
properly and then just lastly on
these drop secured boxes Madam
chair madam secretary
so how do you get these boxes to
the does the county have to ask
for emerges every every little
town Gadam.
So Madam chair representative
there you know there there are
current provisions that are you
know require a minimum number
they are provided for by the
state we have already provided
what we called the first wave
that's there funding that the
legislature has given us we work
together with the county clerk's
to determine locations and doing
all of that stuff we have a
second wave that's coming up and
then I think the only piece and
this particular piece of
legislation
is you know will pertain to you
know when we have a tribal areas
that are looking for additional
boxes and madam chair madam
secretary so I guess I'm I'm
considering these rural areas
that in my area I've got greedy
and all these little little
places and I know my clerk's
office isn't staffed with but
maybe for people and I'm
assuming you want to people to
go out to these boxes every
It's what's so there's the
statutory requirements there's
the administrative that rule
that we wrote pursuant to the
statutory requirements just to
establish uniformity in minimums
and then madam chair of course
you know if someone approaches
the county clerk and says you
know we really like a drop box
in this community can we work
with you to get one here and and
we will happily provide in terms
of funding or in terms of a box
and all of the other things that
have to a company that madam
chair representative what what
is being asked for okay and and
madam chair madam secretary also
staff I guess you would have to
that supply the staff for the
smaller areas Madam chair
representative we we would not
supply staff I think this would
get a lot more lakes but madam
secretary madam chair and madam
secretary let's go to page
thirteen and it's really
troublesome to be that seventy
nine percent of people decline
to register at the of the.
And I would rather say that
they're probably already
registered to find one and DMV
and I wouldn't registered I go I
can kill two birds with one
stone I've Register so I think
that's it I think the Jehovah's
witness that was another point I
was going to bring up I think
that's a real problem because
we're going to get in a
separation of state church and.
Registering them I think's gonna
be problematic but madam chair
and madam secretary.
If are you force somebody to
register to vote and they don't
want to they don't want to be
registered have I committed a
felony.
Madam chair representative a I
feel like this is a familiar
line of of discussion we talked
about it in the previous
committee and yes under current
state law yes that is the case.
C. and madam chair and madam
secretary I think one twenty
dash three is very clear that
that's it whether you I don't
want to vote for whatever reason
I don't want to be registered
and I think you need to change
it to opting in rather than
opting out but let's go ahead
we'll move on to.
Page sixteen when madam chair
and madam secretary when we're
talking about okay now I'm gonna
get the card in the mail I don't
have to sign for the card.
So we've we have no proof that I
received at.
We don't know that
Maybe the person that it appears
like junk mail is thrown away.
If if I'm not legally in the US
hi may not understand what the
card says and I think that's a
problem about them returning
that card to opt out.
This.
Madam chair and of madam
secretary when we go to page
twenty four and we're talking
about
One seven eight hi share the
real concern that you know
you've taken an effort and we're
not going to make that a crime I
just that is really problematic
it but madam chair and madam
secretary was go to page twenty
seven.
And so the drop boxes.
I understand have you explained
how secure there are.
But there are we we give first
class return postage so all we
have to do is throw it in a
mailbox I understand there's
individuals who right towards
the end and it may not get there
in time whatever all you have to
do is go to the polling station
and deliver it there and it's
counted so I I think the drop
boxes are somewhat problematic I
think the post offices got most
of them that madam chair and
madam secretary.
Can be video of the drop box the
it brit.
Madam chair representative I
believe so.
Okay madam chair the I'm I'm
gonna stop there I think a lot
of the grounds already been
plowed so we move on thank you
Representative separate
Representative some pants.
Madam chair Mr speaker senator
madam secretary I'll be brief so
that my colleagues don't bring
up the giant here it's been a
long hearing
but first of.
But first of all
Madam chair I just wanted to
thank our tribal leaders for
being here and I really
appreciate the effort that they
have put into bringing for the
policies that will really
support native voters as well as
the efforts of the sponsors to
really make sure that those come
to the forefront I think it's
really critical as we do
anything with elections policy
that
Sovereign nations have a seat at
the table and I I will gladly
support this bill because I
think it is that a set of common
sense reforms that are really
designed to.
maker.
Voting and our elections process
you're more inclusive more
secure more streamlined
and I think whenever we can do
that that that that really
strengthens the foundation of
our democracy in our state
my final point that I just
wanted to make was on the issue
of restoring the right to vote
to people who have been
incarcerated
That the help of the policy and
the process has been worked on
as our Majority Leader noted
since back in two thousand one
but you know that we have gone
through many iterations of how
to make this process work the
first version of the policy
stated that you needed to
present a certificate of
completion to the county clerk
in order to be able to re
register to vote well it turns
out you don't get a certificate
of completion when you
probation and parole with a.
Right I mean maybe we we should
do something like that but that
does not occur so that process
led to a lot of frustration I
personally worked with many
people who were trying to get
their right to vote reinstated
and just for Matt with it
impossible lab of paperwork and
bureaucracy and no one really
understanding what they needed
or why we made similar revisions
we put in funding for databases
we asked databases to
communicate with each other
but you know for me I think it
comes down to not just changing
the policy for convenience but
changing the policy to benefit
our communities
I was reminded just today of our
round table I attended with a
whole set of women who were on
probation for all.
Could not vote
that were interested in learning
about policy and the legislature
and voti and
as I said I as I sat there I was
just struck by the incredible
breadth of these policy ideas
they were bringing forward
the.
In a lot of the policies
actually were ideas they had so
that other women didn't end up
in the circumstances that have
led them to be incarcerated that
had led them to be separated
from their kids and I've you
know for me I thought well how
that's
I thought I was going to be
giving a very boring lecture and
instead I did a lot of listening
and so the and I have been
invited there by social worker
who had
Who who was working with them as
they re enter society and so I
think when we think about the
policy change itself.
It's obvious that the system has
not worked in that the
bureaucratic processes just
cannot manage this transaction
but also the impact on people
who reenter to really think
about the role as policy makers
for the spaces that they have
been to provide their input to
cast their vote I think it's a
really powerful way to make sure
that people are welcomed back
into our community that state
get back on their feet and that
they feel like they have a vote
so to me I think we need to
address both in this bill does
that thank you madam chair.
To representable con.
Thank you madam chair you know
in my area.
Hi Representative not have to
houses and they're far far far
away from each other.
I'm just wondering what would be
the chances of getting a drop
box in every one of cap Advsrs I
would have.
And and so madam chair
representative part of this the
provisions that under the new
native American portion of this
particular bill gives those
tribal introduce the ability to
reach out on and and request
those and work together the
county clerk and my office to
make sure those are provided
madam chair and representative
so.
Madam chair of the speaker and
and secretary but it would be up
to the Navajo Nation to ask for
a.
Or not or would the local
chapter be able to request of
Madam chair representative at I
get I get the specificity of
your question to be a little bit
more general there's nothing
that prevents the county clerk
right now from from working
together with any community but
I think you know we could work
on where does the request have
to come from does it have to
come from window rock or can it
come from the chapter
representatives and my current
interpretation is that it could
come from the chapter but
certainly about some specificity
that we need to work on either
in the bill or an administrative
role we can do that Madam chair
representative.
Okay thank you I.
Really working on that.
the other question I have is
doing today's world.
In order to send a mail ballot
back back to the county clerk
unit for the postage on it is
that right madam chair Fichter
you madam chair representative
this post debate so therefore
madam chair you know what I hear
this questions about the ballot
boxes security and for the
other.
The wonder I mean those what to
the mailbox.
I mean I could go to my mailbox
and I can drop fifty ballots
there's nobody keeping an eye on
me.
So in order we're gonna keep on
hearing the question about that
security and I don't know who's
who's rapid in the in in in the
drop box but there's no security
for anybody anybody can just go
in and drop as many as they want
whenever they want into a
mailbox so I think the concern
about the drop boxes is.
Hello I just I'm not worried
about it because honestly.
The committee done annually one.
that's all I have been to.
What else can so I want to thank
the sponsors for this bill I
think it's a really solid step
forward in improving access to
the electoral system for as many
people as possible
is it a philosophical shift.
it's not for me I've held that
view you know really since I've
voting and if that's not shared
by everyone disappointed by that
because I think that it is in
very important that we be as
accessible and
You know encouraging of voting
as absolutely possible and I
know that these views are very
much in line with my
constituents I've been getting
emails from my constituents
saying you know right on and
last last election they were
complaining we didn't have
enough drop boxes so and we're
the drop boxes we need those
drop boxes so they're not
concerned because I did speak to
our county clerk about the
security around job drop boxes
and satisfied myself that they
were secure and they would say
it's very difficult very very
difficult to tamper with the
with those boxes so that's one
point I wanted to make the other
one is
this issue of felons and their
release from prison.
And I maybe they're on some
conditions of parole and what we
want for those folks.
We want them integrated in our
society that's what we want and
we want them to feel like they
can move forward and that they
are going to be accepted and
that they are with us and well
how do you make them feel with
this well one way to make them
feel with us is it knowledge
sharing that they have an
investment in our society and
that they want to be able to
participate in on the left or
process that what guess what
those folks that affect them
just like it affects us who we
elect affects those folks down I
think this is all part of a
system that I hope will improve
integration of people who've
made mistakes in their lives
served in prison and can now
become active participants in
our society and some of them
come here and we see how great
they what wonderful
contributions they make and
share their experiences so I
think this is right on in terms
of helping people move forward
with their lives and reform so
hundred percent behind that I'm
really proud of the measures we
as a state have been engaged in
and and you have really
spearheaded secretary so thank
you for that as well Senator is
here so with that no further
comment and we're.
Listen Representative thank you
madam chair I move a do pass on
our bill for government four of
the house bill four.
By Representative.
Would you call the roll yes
thank you madam chair calling
role.
Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane.
Representative Mr speaker yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert.
Representative read go to the.
Representative Rehm no ma'am.
Representative Sapan skate yes.
Madam vice chair yes.
Madam chair.
Yes.
Madam chair with seven yeses in
forty knows you have a do pass
on page before thank you Sanchez
thank you.
All right we now are on.
House joint resolution two
legislative session changes
Representative Figueroa and or
Serrato.
So if we could exit quietly and
then I'm you can also in the
fall.
Eighty.
This is all we.
K..
Arsenal.
Representative Figueroa are you
stuff that they're proud of.
Your.
We're ready to start our next
bill excuse me sure.
Hello Representative hello madam
chair hello Committee you all
have impressive endurance.
And this room is really one.
I'm very sorry about that we do
have a window open I just.
Yeah we've we're trying to get
the AC on as well.
But yours are the most we were
in here.
The floor is yours were on house
joint resolution two yes ma'am
madam chair committee I would
ask that you recognized K. van
Gorder he will be the expert.
Regarding drafting issues
language and he should be in
there somewhere I see his name
excellent.
I am here to present house joint
resolution to on behalf of
myself and the house working
group on modernization which
includes my co sponsors
Representative Ortez set out to
Garrett and Sarinana as well as
reps and have a good Rubio Susan
added on Meredith Dixon and
Marian Matthews.
This resolution would put before
the voters of New Mexico the
option to change or let it
legislative sessions to sixty
days per year consistently so we
would no longer have the short
thirty day session in the second
year of by and him and it would
remove the germane limitations
on the second year the biennial
so there would no longer be
restrictions two budget items or
items on the governor's call.
The other two changes in this
resolution include a carryover
option from the first to the
second year of the biennium.
And eighty five the.
No committee meetings it's
called a recess in the
resolution.
But now committee meetings no
four sessions at the thirtieth
day when all the bills have been
dropped.
So that legislators can read the
bills reach out to their
constituents get feedback reach
out to advocates in all parties
on controversial bills and
negotiate good policy.
Why is this needed.
Our current structure as it
stands right now was created in
nineteen sixty four.
Chair did not even exist.
think about the changes we have
seen in our health care in the
science of health care in the
insurance of health care in
access and that is one area of
the many we are supposed to
regulate supervise make sure our
constituents and New Mexicans
have access to.
Think about how angry culture
has changed since nineteen sixty
four.
Both the science of it and the
distribution of it.
We can go on and on but you are
well aware of the complexity of
the issues facing us eighty
years later.
That's sixty years later.
and and we needed to update our
legislative structure so that we
can deal with that complexity
New Mexicans deserve legislators
who are well informed and who
doesn't deliberately and
thoughtfully debate policy to
create good legislation for the
state.
You have fiscal impact report in
front of you that would talk
about the cost
but I think that's sufficient
overview and we could go right
to.
Questions madam chair of stand
for questions with that.
Thank.
thank you Representative I'd
like to go to the audience first
to see.
Like to speak in opposition to
this joint resolution you're
proposing anyone in the audience
please raise your hand.
I see no worries let's go to the
zoom is there anyone in this.
list that wishes to speak in
opposition please raise your
hand.
I don't see any hands raised
okay
let's go to the audience those
wishing to speak.
Thank you for raise your hand
great and on the where you know
I.
limiting comments to two minutes
so let's start over here.
Share committee members news
twenty thirties.
Public legislative staff of.
matter fact I
Staff of the Courts productions
and Justice Committee for
fourteen years
for front row seats to help
difficult how challenging how
much time
to do this work.
And will be commended that you
raise your hand side of the.
For that matter is that this
measure in conjunction with the
G. R. eight.
The probation and house bill one
provides for additional staff
the staff helpful service at
first the possibility district
offices will remain important
measures that we're pretty sure
capacity.
For research for.
Right and also we were decision
makers will move our state
forward.
Yes Representative stated
working with the system that's
is sixty years old and it just
won't get the job done in this
day and age when you are looking
at a long list of difficult so
that the address on behalf
services.
So I I strongly urge your
support I appreciate.
Thank you who else if.
Thank you madam chair of the
on the Senator residents have
paid developed everything just
said we have five and a half
with sessions every other year
plus a short session and it
really took off on time.
But
you know I want to
last house people stayed on
weekends related right what
doctors are being turned into
what they have to do with the
first doctors specialists.
Legislation that cities.
The public but I I urge you to
support this year which is a.
Session.
Thank you.
Meredith.
Madam chair members of the
committee on more information
speaking on behalf of AAUW New
Mexico and we have been around
for hundreds of forty one years
I believe it is and we've been
urging voters to make sure that
their legislators are you have
the time to deliberate we saw
how long HB for his truck
there loads of love the bills
every single session that you
ever get to never get heard of
for many many years we've been
discussing how Graham beach
session is and we definitely
believe in expanding and I don't
want to repeat what Tony just
said but
if we extend the sessions and
don't raise the.
To to have a salary commission
look at the salaries that would
be a terrible injustice so
anyway we urge you to yes this
measure and get it up to the
voters as well as H. J. R.
eight.
Thank you thank you who else
death.
Mason co chair the act committee
and we.
The relationship from support
the.
Which would increase the length
of sessions and make other
operational changes I'd like to
carry over
what happened government is
complex and the issues are more
complex.
Legislators need more time to
study and vote on medical
maintenance.
For some free legal.
For more.
It would also promote efficiency
transparency public
accessibility one bank
Representative Figueroa and the
other sponsors for four minutes
forward your need to pass it
over.
Capacity and.
Thank thank you who will see yes
Sir.
Yes.
Thank you madam chair.
I'm here today on behalf of the
Lucerne advocacy ministries.
And we support this bill we
support anything that will
modernize the legislature in the
will make your job easier.
Thank you.
But.
Michael for all of your wi fi
take our democracy a statewide
says that the network we support
this bill for the reasons the
first.
Of the tires of what the
Brookville have major support
and creating the problem all and
could improve the situation in
New Mexico fail at the end of
the session because the game of
chutes and ladders we landed on
the ship.
Frankly I think sixty days
probably not enough this is a
step in the right.
Thank you yes Sir.
Thank you madam chair members of
Canadian Mason Graham policy
director for common cause New
Mexico yes we did a poll on this
issue.
Across the state eight hundred
voters seventy
Yes seventy percent answer they
are support of expanding.
days of the legislature actually
just checking online today this
nearly almost nine hundred bills
that are being heard in the
session there's no conceivable
way this all those bills to be
just one sixty day session and
actually would benefit the
legislators themselves will be
able to move over instead of
having to restart we definitely
think that
The issue with the the
legislature remain the same for
the last sixty years is issue
that does need to be updated and
modernized as a group on the
bill people like myself we're
standing in this room six years
ago people like myself ring up
issues like this six years ago
so funds that from supporters.
The audience questions.
Okay so let's go.
The.
Please raise your hand if you
wish to speak in favor Claudia
prisoner.
This.
Yes good afternoon madam chair
and members of the committee I'm
Claudio Risner many veterans I'm
sure the veterans and military
families costs with our caucus
has more than four hundred fifty
members statewide many of whom
depend on services and other
resources that are provided by
the state the state agencies to
provide healthcare
transportation education housing
assistance and constituent
services the one hundred and
forty two thousand veterans in
New Mexico play a critical role
and our well being and that of
our families state legislation
provides resources to these
agencies and they require
adequate funding to make them
feel make them be able to
fulfill their missions the needs
of our aging population of
veterans are increasing and the
new budget like the pact Act are
now available it's even more
important now for legislators to
have enough time to determine
how state agencies and best meet
their needs so extending the
length of the session including
out of halftime recess and
allowing pending legislation to
be continued between regular
sessions with make the
legislature more efficient and
more effective and for all these
reasons and the ones that
Representative Figueroa stated
we ask you to vote yes on joint
resolution to and let the voters
decide thanks to the sponsors of
this bill and thank you for the
opportunity to speak in support
today.
You
the.
Full sent
in I self please.
Indivisible sent.
Mute hi hi yes thank you madam
chair and thank you committee
members my name is RigCount Bach
I live in Santa Fe and I'm in
New Mexico in a constituent of
voter and the tax payer as
president of indivisible sos I'm
an activist a student of
government and civics and I'm a
volunteer.
I so appreciate all that you do
is legislators here at the
roundhouse and from their own
homes for the rest of the year I
want you and our government to
have the best possible
opportunity to succeed our state
and we're not alone has many big
issues to grapple with education
the environment equity justice.
Not to mention the complex mix
of blessings and curses the oil
and gas industry gives our state
the pollution the immense tax
revenue the jobs and the health
issues it's for these reasons I
feel compelled to speak up to
ask that you vote now to give
New Mexicans the opportunity to
pay our representatives and to
link concessions all this to
give you the grace and time you
need to study understand and
deliberate the great issues of
our time and attempt to solve
them for us thank you very much
fully support H. J. R. two and
eight.
What we are.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee I Monet
archer back here on behalf of
the New Mexico Black central
organizing committee we stand in
strong support of H. J. R. two
because we deserve a modernized
legislature in New Mexico a
modernized legislature will not
only encourage more people to
run for office but it will also
make the legislature more
accessible to everyday people we
highly encourage you all to vote
for this measure thank you.
Thank you
J. E. Matthews.
Hi madam chair and members of
the committee my names Judy
Matthews I'm with New Mexico
working families party
enjoy the debate on age before
maybe into word is the better
word thank you for passing that
we stand in strong support of
these joint resolutions coming
before you today in modernizing
the legislature a lot of good
reasons have already been talked
about and I want to get your
floor session on time so please
support thank you.
What.
Madam chair monies will Gardner
General training with the New
Mexico Center online poverty we
think the spots for reducing
this important resolution we
stand in support of HR to New
Mexicans deserve a legislative
session that gives our
legislators as much time and
free.
To consider legislative
solutions to the vast number of
issues affecting us and our
communities.
Every year we limit our
legislators to budget bills we
give them a mere thirty days for
us all relevant matters
affecting New Mexicans.
No need in the setting that was
ordered the prior legislation
would prove the legislature's
efficiency.
Whether legislation comes lost
be passed on the merits of
legislation rather than just a
clock running out of opposing
this commonsense minotaur
constitution New Mexico improve
the legislature's ability to
properly respond issues
important to Mexicans for these
reasons we spoke to a resolution
and urged the committee to pass
and thank you.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Tom
Solomon and I am co coordinator
with the climate focused
environmental organization three
fifty New Mexico on behalf of
our nearly seven thousand
members we strongly support HDR
to this legislation is part of a
system change that we need to
enable it just and equitable
transition to a clean
sustainable economy we have so
much work to do to reach that
goal and extending the length
and scope of the session and
I've years with recessed and
with bills that carry over to
the next year is a prudent and
important step in modernizing
our legislative system so we
have a chance to achieve that
goal.
To be clear a sheer to should be
paired with passing H. here
eight on legislative salaries
because we already asked too
much of our unpaid volunteer
legislators so please let's do
them together we stand in full
support of this bill and ask for
your support thank you so much.
Where we.
Thank.
Rich yes thank you madam chair
members of the committee I
strongly support house joint
resolution number two and I
agree with every reason has been
given so far want to add
something is that in other
states their sessions run long
enough is that when they want to
schedule a hearing for two
o'clock on Wednesday they do
that and people knowing that
hearing is going to be a kind of
ten and here in New Mexico
things go so fast and things
move around it's very hard for
citizens to participate
including myself often and I
think up this at extending the
sessions well I would say also
longer than sixty days but but
this is a step in the right
direction of extending the
session so that will make it
more manageable for people who
want to participate among
citizen right and of course I
agree with House right
resolution eight that you should
all be paid for your hard work I
thank you very much.
Thank you Justin Rogers.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I support it's J.
R. two as well as its C. R.
eight which would make not only
help you all of your hard work
legislature's parts of school to
every The New Mexicans
a big reason why sport is here
to is that as a something of a
citizen lobbyist who attended
many of these hearings virtually
or in person here to speak about
things they care about I've seen
any bills I do care about
fill to move on not because they
have what's the committee or the
health of support but because
the clock was run out one of
time in the session to to get
through recovery committee every
for both.
so I really appreciate
Department not only about
extending session above all
allowing bills be carried over
from one stage to the next so
that those bills pass or fail
based on their actual supports
and not just on whether once I
was able to on that on
democratically.
Stalled and run out the clock.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Lastly label us so we.
Thank you madam chair committee
are based here too and some
points make this legislation
more affected all too often we
see legislation dying just
because it ran out of time I
will volunteer number of a lady
Mexico and last year I was so
excited to see the voting rights
act get through and all of those
communities and and thank you
for that for passing it earlier
today it was so frustrating last
year to see it die in the last
moments of the session and like
the person before we sat on I
think it's it's it's very
frustrating plan it's just the
clock running out that is the
reason why some of these bills
fail and have to wait to be here
and to see them come forward
again I find it amazing that you
all get anything done it's
incredible sure and I I think
your staffers R. alts remained
at back here and so I think
modernization something I'd love
to see more I think the same
sessions
our our another rates thank you
and I really appreciate that
this is one way in which it made
it more accessible thank you
adding more time and giving.
I'm here another opportunity for
that is one way to.
Make we are make this process
easier rates thank you.
That concludes our
public participation part of our
Hearing so sponsor is there
anything you'd like to stay in
concluded before we go back to
committee.
Madam chair New Mexicans deserve
more informed legislators.
More thoughtfully vetted and
more deliberately debated
policy.
And they have the full scope of
their needs addressed in both
legislative session without
restrictions to a governor's
message New Mexicans deserve a
more balanced government.
Thank you Representative I have
Representative Romero and then
Representative McQueen.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative thank you for
this house joint resolution I am
very much in support hi
Just wanted to clarify a couple
bits about it mostly as the
rules chair when we think
through page two items the on
the idea of rolling over all
business that we're doing
How in practice are we going to
be able to do that because it
definitely conflicts with our
current house rules definitely
conflicts with the process that
we go through today when we talk
about bill introduction pre
introduction
and so my concern is that the
all business pending including
that those things that we table
those things that we perhaps
don't want to talk about her
again
you know the the the how does
this work and I think from the
voters perspective how can we
find clarity my concern is that
the statute as written right now
if we're going to put it into
our constitution doesn't
necessarily reflect some of
those values that we have both
in our rules that we've adopted
for for many many years now
So please help enlighten me
about how we're going to do that
madam chair representative madam
chair and committee all of our
rules that we use for all the
processes you described we're
created based on the
constitution as it was created
in sixty four and at that time
it was a major change because
prior to that the legislature
only met on alternate years in
New Mexico so all of the rules
had to be written and this will
demand the same we will have to
rethink all of those process
sees but they are rules that can
be changed and we will need to
how we number bills for example
will have to change all our
dates and deadlines we'll have
to change the thirty thirty day
session had the.
Fifteen day mark for introducing
new builds all of that can and
will be changed and it is
absolutely appropriate to think
about that ahead of time that's
going to be a massive piece of
work but that is part of
modernizing our legislature and
part of the work that has to be
done.
Madam chair representative is
there I guess in contemplation
of this and since you've been
working through it through the
interim is there.
Like I I mean we talk about
commissions all the time and I
know this went through part of
the contemplation for this went
through a body of folks helping
to craft this is that how we're
looking at re crafting the rules
and order of business in the
future as well.
Madam chair and committee it
would be incumbent upon this
body to make that decision just
like we do with any
constitutional change when
enabling legislation is required
this is going to be this is
going to require enabling rules
to be made
but we are capable of doing so.
So madam chair representative as
far as the process goes for
that.
We're so and and just please
help me with this when we do
it's should this pass this year
it goes on to the ballot in the
November time frame during the
election year is that correct
yes so should it pass and in
anticipation of it getting on to
that ballot we as a legislature
may want to.
Convene a commission in that
time frame to re craft all of
these rules but we don't have a
proposal today madam chair in
anticipation of that getting on
to the ballot in November's Act
madam chair and committee is
that a creation of the
commission would not be
something that we would want to
put in a joint resolution or in
the constitution so that is not
part of this particular document
should this move will have to
take steps to make that happen.
And madam chair representative
with that sort of takes like a
special session of the
legislature and emergency
planning to make sure that we
have a process in place of the
voters pass this madam chair and
committee I sincerely hope to.
I'm Madam chair representative
this is the only part that
really gives me serve pauses to
how we grapple with that process
and ensure that the clerks the
staff and the and the
legislature's prepared for how
it is we go through that at
because it is such a massive
change I I think we can
definitely figure out how to be
here longer and all the other
issues that I think the bill or
that the joint resolution raises
my concern is just on process
having all of that where with
all and I don't know anything
about nineteen sixty five thank
you and maybe legislative
history might be able to be
built into the process but
ensuring that we can.
Make make the process known
prior to inventing it after the
fact so madam chair
Representative I look forward to
sort of clarifying that and
perhaps putting something in
place at this again I'm
supportive but I'm.
Shaky on the on the process
thank you madam chair.
Representative.
David K. E. and then I.
Thank you madam chair of mentors
and Figueroa for salt thank you
for the this bill of it against
your last bill on this committee
and I'll be please vote for this
bill and I thank you for your
efforts to make our legislature
a better place.
I just want to make two quick
points first off a couple years
ago I think was actually it was
Representative Montoya who has a
similar proposal although this
proposal
change that there it is session
to forty five day session and I
actually voted against that on
the floor because I think forty
five days is a long.
Madam chair representative I
think there's a pretty good
argument to be made to sixty
days isn't long enough but you
know one step at a time and I
didn't want to support the forty
five days because I know it has
to go to the voters I think we
can go to the voters every
couple years and keep extending
it so I think giving to sixty
day sessions
the it is worth a try you know
and it's something we should do
and madam chair register the
other thing I want to note and I
I know I believe in the last
committee this this passed on
party line votes which which I
think is unfortunate
I've been here
I'm in my ninth year.
I spent four years under
governor governor Martinez and
I've been here for four years
and our governor Lujan Grisham
and I will tell you when you're
here and the governor's office
is held by the other party you
don't have a lot to do in the
thirty day session.
Because you're not can get a
message in your bill's probably
are germane and you're just kind
the the you know scenario
And I think that's unfortunate
so I appreciate extending it to
sixty days I expropriate
removing that germane.
Restriction I think that.
Strengthens the legislature.
Regardless of parties.
It allows us to do more as a
legislature and I honestly
believe that one of the reasons
why New Mexico struggles in so
many ways is because our
legislature is not fully engaged
so Madam chair representative
thank you.
Thank you representative
Representative Chasey.
Right we have a motion for do
passes are second.
Second okay but we have a
pending motion for to pass but
we have further discussion did
you wish to address the bill
Representative I you can't do
that so Representative Nibert
thank you madam chair
Madam chair representative.
We've had some discussions on on
My my.
Desire not to pass this type of
legislation or or this
constitutional moment but I do
have one suggestion like you to
think about on page ten.
One twenty four.
Of the
bill.
I'm probably a little bit.
Well then I have no suggestions.
The other bills.
Are you through.
Anyone else wish to COVID room
speaker of the very brief madam
chair I just I I appreciate this
representative madam chair this
is great sixty days I think
would be better at I love the
five day break for mental health
and other reasons I don't I
don't like section C. I just
don't think it's necessary I
think that the process is set up
as such.
Depending on your perspective
you may not want that bill to
come back next time although
we'll have the ability to bring
back the bill because all you
have to do is filed get the
bills drafted and introduces so
I just think it's redundant and
I think it could create an
unintended backlog if you've got
a bunch of bills and then pass a
session and over the over over
the course of a few years you
might have a lot of bills better
in the hopper so if you a lot
more comfortable if you would if
you if you would consider
pulling that section out I think
if you pull it out as completely
it doesn't do anything for the
rest of the bill
and I don't think would
necessarily have to roll and
bring it back if the sponsor
agrees to do that here on the
spot and and and then show up
with the committee sub on floor
madam chair that's all I have.
Madam chair and speaker let me
give you the reasons why it's
there may be endorsed so we can
talk that through first to be
absolutely clear bills only roll
over once in the by Indian they
can not roll over on an even
number here to an odd numbered
year so that limits the backlog.
We do have that option as a body
to make rules about how many
bills could be considered if we
wanted to if if quantity of
bills is the concern but please
be aware they can only roll one
here and the reason that is
there madam chair and speaker is
to get at Representative McQueen
issue.
Sixty days really isn't long
enough for the complexity of
what we have to deal with and
this gives us room on bills that
need more time that need more
debate that need more input from
stakeholders that we need to
reach out to our constituents
about that might need some hard
work over interim so thank it
radically changed the whole bill
can be let go by sponsor the way
we do renewable could be a
committee substitute or could be
a new drop but it keeps the
conversation focused and moving
and allows us to get more work
done and yes I'll agree madam
chair donor built we don't want
to see it come back.
It's going to change the way we
talk about bills the way we
think about bills and the way we
just let him rest out there
because we know the clock will
take care of it for us we're
gonna have to.
Debate amendment and vote them
down on their merits I move them
forward on their merits but that
roll over was the compromise to
not add more time.
Then the sixty days.
Madam chair representative of I
I can appreciate that I I just I
I don't know.
I think you can accomplish
everything you said.
Without that section so you
could have a bill.
you know that doesn't make it
out.
You know last year.
And you can take it to the
interim.
You can get more people on board
you can get in front of more
interim committees you can bring
the exact same thing back.
If the issue is that it has to
be re hurting Committee.
I think that's a separate issue
I mean I I think and and I'm not
even sure how it would work if
you've just rolled over in it
already went through the house
featured Committee you simply
roll it over.
And then at the next annual
session you come back and not
have to come to Judiciary again
I guess I guess that's maybe
part of what is being attempted
here Madam chair representative
that is exactly correct and
that's where the limit is the
biennium the Judiciary Committee
would be the same committee to
that but that but that's that's
really the crux of my problem is
you're gonna ask you could have
different members read and who
who made.
Would you madam chair and
representative Noel because the
committee.
Is made for the two year
biennium span and that is the
only span in which a bill can be
carried over so it couldn't be
carried over when the
committee's composition is
changed.
But I think the conserve
Committee can still change given
a bunch of different dynamics
right you can make changes
halfway through or some of us
may you know resigned OR or
getting PTA who knows what I I I
get I get when you try to do
that.
Madam chair representative
attended I appreciated I just I
don't think you needed in the
constitution I think you could
probably do it potentially just
rule to house.
So I'll leave it at that but but
thanks for this is long overdue
and I appreciate I know I know
you guys you all put a bunch
working to this over the last
eighteen months or more so thank
you madam chair so you know I
want to get back to what we're
talking about in terms of
process I've heard suggestion by
the speaker and actually
suggestion that I agree with
that we eliminate the roll over
and we have a motion on the
floor two four do pass I think
we will not need to withdraw the
motion for two passed to
consider the amendment.
We still talk.
Well but we're going to be happy
we have a strong withdraw the
pass and if you wish to talk
about of the conversation around
that what I guess was loosely
called the proposed amendment
amendment
happy to hear from you
Representative case if you give
up before I apologize I want to
I have an idea of I before we we
jump into anything it I think
I'd like to first understand if
it's I mean the representative
otherwise and we can not do it
okay.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you speaker for giving me enough
time to confirm hello Sanchez
and if.
We would take it as a friendly
amendment.
Hi so sure.
Right yes what speaker are you
sure you want to sorry about
that I think although on
Representative Chasey is it so
here's my question madam chair
and.
Representative Figueroa Mr
speaker.
Where the fifty six legislature.
With the fifty six legislature
now with the fifty six
legislature in the next thirty
days the same is going to be
true even if the voters adopt
this so I really think that's
where the genesis of it is.
And I think that in Congress to
fund less I'm wrong.
That is true so that
legislation in the whatever
Congress it is is is there for
the two years.
So I think that's the
rationale for this and I also
think and I was exchanging text
with the rules chair.
If the voters were to adopt
if they would have passed house
joint resolution to.
We would have to change the
rules.
And in internally so I don't I
don't see a problem because I
think what this does is it
memorializes the truth which is
a two year term.
Is everything that starts at
that two years can extend for
the two years it doesn't bring
things off the table or prohibit
introduction of the new measures
but it's.
It's a recognition that is a two
year term that's what I think it
does so
I I would suggest not taking it
out madam chair.
Madam chair I get that there
twenty twenty seven state
legislatures have this carry
over for the two year biennium
it's not a new thing.
I hear you I also heard juice
Representative say it was a
friendly amendment so
Yeah.
Is.
so is there someone wishes to
make a motion on the.
The one thousand.
And it would seem to strike
session CMH to.
And remember yeah.
Thank.
This
is the second second
of a motion to amend to
eliminate on page two lines
thirteen through eighteen and re
re number are read letter
actually
The subsequent paragraphs has
been made by speaker Martinez
and seconded by Representative
night Burt is there discussion
about the motion to amend.
Representative yes Sir so madam
chair Representative Figueroa if
we take this out.
It doesn't preclude us from
doing that at a later time it's
just not in what is before the
voters okay thank you madam
chair.
I don't see anyone else wishing
to discuss the motion to amend
let's call the roll on the
motion to amend so we're
eliminating essentially.
Hello and we'll have to amend
the title thank you for having
great us great having great
staff so let's look at the title
The New Mexico alone.
Okay so if you look at line
thirteen on page one and the
title allowing the consideration
of all subjects that would be
okay
it's nine sixteen after the semi
colon change the semi colon to a
period
Yes you need to so will the
amendment.
Okay before we.
When we step back and redo the
motion to amend.
Presentation of men and one to
house resolution to.
A lot of page two.
Page two.
Line thirteen through eighteen
strike that section re letter
accordingly.
That I'm page one.
Period online sixteen period
after session.
Strike the semi colon.
And then all the language
through sessions period.
Okay so
so we have a motion is our
second second second by made by
speaker Martinez second by
Representative line for for
eliminating essentially
paragraph see on page two and
we're eliminating that relate to
the language in the title that
relates to that so that's the
words are removing are allowing
all the waste on line sixteen
all the way through online
seventeen.
sessions.
Discussion point okay we are
missing the amendment
Representative Romero I think
madam chair even with this
ammendment
we can actually amend the rules
because of the sixty day
germane ness of bills we can
amend the rules to actually roll
everything over despite this
change.
I thank you madam chair that's
great thank you for that
clarification thank you to staff
being us that's something and
Any further discussion on the
amendment.
Let's call the roll on the
amendment.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey yes.
Representative Lane yes.
Mr speaker yes.
Representative McQueen go.
Representative Nibert.
Representative read.
Representative Rehm yes ma'am
Representative semansky yes.
Madam vice chair.
Yes.
Madam chair yes.
Madam chair ten yess one no for
past amendment.
So you have an amended bill
Representative.
I cemented.
It was amended before I came to
so thank you thank you
appreciate that.
we're now back on the amended
bill there had to do pass a
motion for two passed by
Representative and so by
Representative Chasey and
seconded by Representative
McQueen any further discussion
of the amended bill.
Resolution.
I see no further discussion when
you call the roll please.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey yes.
Representative Lane nope.
Mr speaker yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert no.
Representative rebirth.
Representative Rehm no ma'am.
Representative Penske.
Yes.
Madam vice chair.
Yes.
Madam chair yes.
Madam chair seven yess Ford
knows for a do pass on amended
H. J. R. two.
You have a do not pass twice
amended Representative Eli thank
you madam for thank you
committee.
All right so we have a four
sessions starting at five
thirty.
What we could do is get a brief
overview of
health check resolution eight
and then bring it back first
thing Wednesday and finish that
up is that okay we like brief
presentations anyway
Representative perfect I mean
unless everybody was gonna vote
unanimously.
That's what I well in there and
I think
and I usually have no questions
so it would have just rolled
right off yes very.
All right Representative the
floor is yours the house
resolution eight great thank you
madam chair thank you
representatives health
resolution eight as amended
would ask the voters to amend
section four of the New Mexico
constitution to allow
legislators to receive a salary
and to create a citizens
commission on legislative
salaries to set those salaries
there's some additional details
within the bill itself
discussing the citizen
commission providing some
criteria on the appointments of
the commission
but ultimately if the majority
of the legislators from each of
the houses past this joint
resolution will go on to be a
constitutional amendment to
voters in twenty twenty four or
if there's a special election
prior to that and then
and then and then everything if
once the voters pass that in
November then we would deal with
that in the twenty twenty six
legislative session so with that
madam chair I'll open it up for
questions.
Well given that we were just you
know just I don't know seven
minutes from the floor I would
suggest representative that we
hold our question will start
question questions and really
discussing the bill if that's
okay with you on Wednesday first
up on our agenda.
when we sure we could do the
Recognizing that will be the
support opposition we're not
gonna reject public comment so
those wishing to speak in
opposition to the bill please
raise your hand in the audience.
I see no hands those wishing to
speak and
Opposition to the bill online
please raise your hands.
I see no hands those wishing to
speak in support of the bill in
the audience please raise your
hand.
Okay we'll start over here Tony
New Mexico across.
He's very quickly Mexico City
the state of fifty spaces not
pay slips.
The right thing to do.
Thank you thank you.
Thank you Meredith.
Madam chair members of the
committee did a speaking on
behalf of a U. W. New Mexico and
Santa Fe now thank you thank you
did take Mason
and many miss Mason and co chair
of the action committee the one
Mexico and we stand strong
support HR at H. E. R. right.
The government we believe the
costs will paid by the taxpayers
of New Mexico this would reduce
the influence of lobbyists it
would also increases adversity
in candidates and officeholders
the legislative Representative
Rubio and you have a sponsor for
bringing this forward but one
thing I do wanna mention
personal level my first career
as a corporate plan I did
executive compensation.
And looking at the amount of
responsibilities of legislators
have as far as capital outlay
the teacher junior and
everything that would right the
pretty high on salaries see if
if you were looking at executive
compensation so I think when
they're looking at compensation
they should consider the
responsibility that legislators
have.
Thank you anyone else in the
audience wishing to speak in
support of the bill.
Let's go online I see three
hands raised online keep in mind
we have about five minutes to we
have to be on the floor so if
you if you all online to keep it
to about one minute that be
super helpful so Claudia.
Yes ma'am thanks again so I'm
representing the veterans and
military families caucus
we have eight point eight
percent of our population New
Mexico or veterans but we are
under represented in the
legislature for the second
lowest in the nation I think
that having a rate legislative
body would increase the
diversity of Canada's with
different experiences to run for
office including war veterans
which would approve our
constituencies representation in
the legislature our experiences
are not the same as many and I
think they add a valuable voice
to the conversation I want to
make a note I heard to
legislators at a previous
hearing who oppose this change
saying that they cannot in good
conscious after constituents to
be paid in respect of their
position I'd like to suggest
that a salary be optional and
that those who wish to decline
to be paid.
But representing the caucus we
ask that you vote yes I'm joined
on this joint resolution
legislators to decide thanks so
much.
Thank thank you miles.
Good afternoon chairman members
of the committee my name is
miles to open with les
representing match newly
naturalized citizens workers and
and concerned citizens all
throughout the state and we
stand in full support of this
this now we see it as a racial
economic and gender justice
issue thank you so very much.
Thank you JV Matthews.
Hello you madam chair members of
the committee G. Matthews with
Mexico working families party we
stand in strong support of this
joint resolution thank you to
Representative Rubio for
bringing it forward and all the
other co sponsors and I hope
everyone travels safely today
with the weather so thank you
please support.
Both Gardner fall fund
governance.
Madam chair monies will Gardner
image from the New Mexico some
online poverty we students board
H. J. R. eight New Mexico is the
only state in the country that's
not a base salary to that state
legislatures unfortunately this
makes it extremely difficult for
anyone without significant
financial resources to be able
and willing to run for the
legislature finally by allowing
New Mexicans to annual salaries
the joint resolution trust that
and New Mexican alternately
decides how to provided will be
compensated for those reasons
for the joint resolution and
urged committee thank you thank
you
Rich winner rich.
Yes thank you again madam chair
members the committee I strongly
support house joint resolution
eight you all worked really hard
and deserve to get paid after is
not going to be huge amount of
money but we certainly deserve
to paid a reasonable salary and
a lot of people simply can't
afford to take off two months
every year based on the concept
whatever it is the work that
they do so yes I agree this
would open it up to a lot more
people and I think it's
appropriate I thank you.
Thank you Tom Solomon.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee of money to some
Solomon I spoke earlier but I'll
just repeat that I'm co
coordinator with the climate
focus environmental
organizations three fifty New
Mexico and we have over seven
thousand members we strongly
support this region resolution
two of.
They are provided and
legislators and put together a
nine member citizens commission
it is long past time that we
acknowledge that the the work
that our legislators do is
vitally important and they
deserve a salary and in fairness
of the work they do and
Know that there is a very robust
coalition of US citizens groups
including as many we've heard
common causes year club
indivisible ethics watch league
of women voters and on and on
supporting this bill and we will
carry the support through the
process of bringing it before
the voters please support this
bill thank you so much thank
you.
Sorry.
What are to them.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee again I'm on a
arch back here on behalf of the
New Mexico Black central
organizing committee we stand in
strong support of H. J. H. J. R.
eight because having it
economically and professionally
diverse Legislature matters
policy making sure that our
policy making sure that multiple
perspectives addition only
include those who have the
ability to take time off in the
absence of working class
perspectives policy making fails
to take into account the new
wants and needs of an entire
population a study conducted by
new American leaders and
nonprofit that focuses on
electing Americans with it make
it immigrant backgrounds to
political office found that
states with legislators salaries
generally have more diverse
representation thank you for
your time happy black history
month.
Thank you.
Sarah manning.
Sarah.
You need a new.
Thank you madam chair and get
and
all of the members of the
committee.
There is a direct speaking for
myself I am a member of the
alliance for local economic
prosperity and I think if there
is a real correlation between a
salaried legislature and local
prosperity because when we give
local people the option to
participate in their legislature
that means that there is a more
considered and very much diverse
Act understanding of the effects
of any laws that are being
considered and hopefully passed
thank you very much for
considering this and please do
tax H. R. J. R. age thank you
thank you Kurt.
Kurt.
Yes the madam chair members of
the committee this is Kurt
regular director pollution
advocacy Mr of New Mexico we
also express position of New
Mexico churches and the press
three of Santa Fe on this matter
and also be stated we strongly
support a charity and I wish you
all a good evening thank you
thank you.
All right well that concludes
our public comment and.
I'd like to thank the sponsor
for presenting what we'll do is
we'll pick up the bill first
thing on Wednesday and look
forward to having on really
thorough discussion of this
important piece of legislation
