Speaker martinez
representative mcqueen here
representative reap
representative ring.
Representative sapansky here
face chair care
madam chair here
we have a chorum great so in
terms of order i'm proposing
senate bill one fifty two then
we'll do senate bill one then
will do house bill to two six if
the sponsor gets here and then
we'll do senate bill one thirty
seven senator welcome senator
hemphone happy to see you thank
you madame chair thank you
members of the committee good
morning
for senate bill one fifty two
once amended as a technical fix
it's required by the fbi to
allow eccd and see why after you
to continue conducting
background checks on individuals
who provide care to new mexico's
most vulnerable children the fba
determined that the language is
passed as
let's see fbi has determined
that if the language has passed
as it's drafted and sent it bell
when fifty two once amended they
will current their requested
approvals then so right now both
of the departments are under a
grace period until september of
twenty twenty four
waiting for this technical facts
so for the ecd the small fix is
for easy cd's authority it'll
allow the eccd to conduct
background checks on eccd
department employees and
volunteers it does not affect
the already approved background
authority for the eccd program
or the authority for which was
already approved in twenty
twenty three after passing house
spell three seventy seven and
for c y fd the changes will
allow see where to conduct to
continue to conduct background
clearances on faster adoptive
parents and adults
residing and foster adopted
parents households or employees
or volunteers.
Places like duvin out attention
or credit correction facilities
for residential child treatment
facilities behavior management
scule development case
management and programs like
that so it's just to make sure
that we are abiding by the f b
i's rules and regulations thank
you senator did you want to
introduce your expert in see if
she has anything to share her
madam charle that my expert
witnessed interdues or stuff
thank you madam chair of
committee members
shelly strong general council
for the early childhood
education per department and as
senator him pulls already said
this is a technical fixed that
requested by the fba um and
hopefully this will be the last
one for these departments and we
can go.
For any questions great
so before we go to the committee
i'll go to the audience those
wishing to speak in opposition
to the bill please raise your
hand.
Those online wishing to speak an
opposition to the bill please
raise your hand.
They don't see anyone
those in in opposition in
support of the bill please raise
your hand I believe represent
the vice chairs out talking to a
member of those in wishing to
speak and support of the bill
please raise your hand.
Those online wishing to speak
and support the bill please
raise your hand I don't see any
hands rates so let's go to the
committee
represent of chassis
thank you very much senator and
and shelly was a law school with
me so good to see
I appreciate this and I also
know that having practiced in
this area for a long time the
stress that the um investigators
are under in see why there
aren't enough of them and
we have to be doing the best
possible background checks on
everybody who's in c.
The ecd as well because the
children do herself honorable so
thank you manager thank you
representative chase anyone else
wishing to ask questions yes of
course representative of course
thank you managed here I am just
curious why
do we need this behind it is
this happening.
Okay so I do believe slice thank
you madame chair and think you
representative alcohol so the
reason the bills necessarily is
just too
this last summer the fbi
conducted a review of
the see why fd statue and it
they found that it was not
sufficient to comply with their
requirements because the
definitions were too vague and
so see why fd was provided a
grease period and the same thing
happened for eccd there was a
review that happened this last
summer and they were given a
grease period until september
twenty twenty four because the
eccd employees the category of
individuals to be cleared wasn't
in the proper section so it's
just a small technical fixed to
make sure we're complying with
what the fbi is requiring.
In the statute.
And and madame chair i'll just
also out that it does include an
emergency class and it would be
affective immediately on the
signature of the governor
i'm glad you pointed that out.
The.
Okay
hopeful for emotion.
Yes
so we have a motion for a do
pass on senate bill one fifty
two as amended and with them and
emergency clause and it's been
made by that motions been made
by represent a chasing seconded
by representative sapansky would
you call the role please.
Representative alcohol
representative chassis.
Representative hemry
representative lane
speaker martinez
representative mcqueen yes
representative rep
representative ring
representative sapansky yes
madam vice chair yes madame
chair yes
we have a due past six to zero
very good thinking madam chair
thank you members at the
committee here very welcome all
right we have overbelieve
representative luham is in the
experience
I I can't hear you can you turn
your my connect.
So
while we're waiting to see a
from representative lukan is
going to come back we have I
know that representative are
error is in consenate
conservation could someone go
over I just texted her.
Could someone go over there and
see where she's out i'm actually
the department would be the most
helpful since it's your bill I
think are you related to it okay
okay good
you're timing as perfect.
All right welcome i'll give you
a minute to catch your breath.
The.
No we are on senate bill one
thirty seven.
Uh welcome representative thank
you madame chair this bill is
really about transparency that's
what really talking about with
his bill and just to be a go
over it very quickly
this bill includes mandatory
training for all school board
members and that's uh and that
spelled out and the legislation
exactly what the training will
be
each school has to provide a
dashboard telling telling their
I am their appearance really and
teachers and other people what's
happening in their school they
also have to report training on
these stashboards so they are
people know so that considerance
now that they have attended the
mandatory training
provided by the ped and number
three
it also mandates webcasting
these schools have we're set up
during covered so that they all
have webcasting ability but they
now have to make sure that there
there are schoolboard meanings
our webcasted and archive so
that people can really listen
into local.
Um local policy if if that's
what they so desire number four
it expands campaign financing.
Uh before a school board members
reading for office really didn't
have to report very much this
extense camping report financing
to all school ford members if
they spend more than a thousand
dollars on their campaign in a
small rural community where
really people put out one sign
and everybody knows everybody
they probably wouldn't have to
do that but in your in your
other school districts they now
have to report and
oh it introduces a new section
for the termination of a local
school superintendent so that it
goes into effect once the
elections take place until sixty
days after they after they're
convened as a sitting school
board member and with that
madame cherry stanford questions
and my expert witnesses john
senate from the lesc
high
good morning john is there
anything like to add
okay I see his head shaking no
good very mad
members again i'm john said i'm
definitely director elic don't
have anything that thank you
thanks for coming this morning
alright those in the audience
wishing to speak an opposition
to the bill please raise your
hand
those online wishing to speak
and opposition to the bill
please raise your hand.
Don't see any hands raised those
in the audience wishing to speak
and support of the bill please
raise your hand we'll start over
here and go around the room.
You don't yeah that's fine
we have mikes in the ceiling
good morning adam chair thank
you i'm great prospect from the
public education department and
we stand at support of this
build think the sponsored for
bringing forward and working
with the let's see to make it a
good bill thank you thank you
yes ma'am.
Members of the committee living
there teacher.
Yeah.
A couple years to get this
informed that we can move
forward hopefully for right to
move it to our school produce
off the same pieces to the
training training is on a new
addition association for decades
open twenty school.
Yeah.
So it's not
we hope this increase management
five hours to ten hours well
encouraged those the important
that are not
take between each other by ways
to take that train right now the
majority.
Yeah.
Including the definition
of allowing your quite all
school
for prime minister initially.
In the roll of policies.
Yeah.
Been on zoom online brought.
Yeah.
May not help the funds
between doing this for the long
also we hope to support the.
School board.
That will provide successful
transition.
Working with us.
Thank you
miss fisher thank you madame
chair members of the committee
for seen a bit.
Appreciate this.
The one thirty seven will make
sure every school border charter
statement member receives
essential training and school
work finance and budgeting in
best practices for retaining a
superintendent and in how they
the school work student outcomes
it will also bring new mexico
and line with the forty four
states the require every school
or candidate to rep.
Districts of twelve thousand or
above only fi.
Every voter deserves.
School board and charter board
meetings be webcast that allows
parents and family members to be
more engaged in the work of the
school for to see what's going
on and to be better informed
voters just want to highlight
that think the mexico commission
to poor last november found that
eighty eight percent of new
mexico voters support the
training aspect of this bill
eighty seven percent support the
webcasting and seve.
Thank you matt chairman is the
committee my name is jady
bollington speaking on behalf of
greater album chamber commerce
are the support set of bill one
thirty seven our local school
boards set the tone for our
district administrators and our
principles who lead scores of
hundreds sometimes thousands of
kids this bill will help them
attain the skills they need to
be successful leaders and this
bill is also going to improve
transparency to make sure
families can hold their board
members accountable for their
actions are students and
families have a right to expect
their district leaders to give
them their best effort and this
bill creates a new structure to
help board members deliver thank
you.
Thank you madame chair dan jar
representing person education we
run the connections academy
you're in town at charter school
happily we are already meeting
all of the requirements of this
bill with the exception of
camping closures which want to
play and we strongly support it.
Madam chairman members of the
committee just registered
lobbyists with the new mexican
foundation for open government
standard strong support.
The committee I married made
some speaking on behalf of the
legal voters of new mexico and
the american association of the
university women and we love
this legislation it's long
overdue I know it had the long
time to get
in the final shape but everyone
that's already said the comment
that I would have made
the transparency of the
accountability and I would like
to just add that the civics
aspect of this is also very
important for students to be
able to watch and the public be
able to watch a webcast and
learn you know what is going on
in their schools I think
education is the key to
democracy and I think you know
by having these webcasts there
for people to understand what's
going on when there's a
contractual issue being
discussed
in a for instance of the
established and santa fe it's
the absolutely critical for you
know as to be able to go back in
the view what's happened in the
school board meeting so thank
you so much for the sponsors and
everything which worked on this
think new mexico I appreciate
your support of this built thank
you.
Thank you madame chaired members
of committee john lipsheets with
the new mexico federation of
labor
we stand in strong support of
this legislation we stand with
our brothers in sisters who are
educators and our schools who
will be most directly impacted
by a better training school
board and a more a transparent
school board into for those
reasons we think the sponsors
senator stewart and senator
soles as well for bringing up
this legislation we urge your
support.
The.
Good morning madame chair women
and members of the committee my
name is gabriel begay and i'm
survey my second year as an
elected school board member
incorporate consolidated scores
as a newer board member I need
access to training that
specifically aligns with my
duties as a board member such as
improving studio academic
performance and outcomes public
finance and budgeting and
strategies for supporting and
supervising the local
superintendent because these
topics will help prepare me to
make informed votes from my
district.
Although these.
That all board members across
participate in these essential
sessions giving communities
assurance that we have been
trained on these issues this
legislation provides the
expectation for support
transparency and accountability
for school words across the
state I also support the
campaign funding report and
webcasting of school board
medians I want to be as
transparent as possible this
bill outlined simple things that
will guide and help me in my
role as a school board member my
experience has been rewarding
and I look forward to improving
has a school board member thank
you for your time.
Good morning madame chair
members of the committee my name
is amy part i'm the teacher
network coordinator at teach
plus new mexico I stand in
strong support of sp one thirty
seven.
Our educators have educated for
offering increased support
through training transparency
and accountability for local
school board members who play a
crucial role in impacting
student outcomes through their
decisions this legislation aims
to establish a system in line
with charter board requirements
providing training relevant or
duties and enable community
members to assess their
representatives compliance it
marks a significant stepped
towards a dressing a critical
need across all new mexico
districts thank you.
Morning madam chairwoman and
committee my name is chrissie
saturdays I am from slover city
new mexico I am currently a
teacher plus fellow and a
structured literacy coach i'm
here today to express my support
for senate bill one thirty seven
at the classroom teacher for the
last twenty four years I have
seen how vital is that are
districts have well trained
school boards that understand
budgets finances and student
achievement are school boards
play a huge role in the success
of reschools and students this
bill provides the opportunity to
strengthen the learning
opportunities for the students
and new mexico by insuring our
school boards are well trained
and prepared I thank you for
your time and consideration.
The.
Thank you very much that
concludes our public comment
portion anything else
representative errator before we
go to the committee now that I
think everybody's summed it up
very well very good thank you
any oh a represent of chasing
chair thank you representative
that ever I appreciate that and
mister sannon said it was sent
it right okay
I can't tell you how relieved I
am to see this bill and that
everywhere is now agreed upon.
When I was a freshman I was on
the aliase and interim and we
were in a remote town very very
small town I won't say which
but the superintendent have been
fired after a year but he talked
to the elian c
and he told us that the
schoolboard president and
another
somebody else
went to a room to do the budget
every year and then presented it
to him not every year because he
was only there one year but he
assumed that was a direct and I
know that all school board don't
do that because I I believe
joking is the executive director
now and he was on the board of
this school board in a spinella
when the company I work forget
some business with them and I
really trust joe and I know that
he cares about how school boards
around but scorport elections
are really important I
I mean we're we're certainly
seeing that in in a my large
school district and I just don't
think there is anything more
important than getting good
school board member selected
it's a hard job it's it's kind
of thinkless under a lot of
expectations of the members
as if they have some power about
hiring and an interfering and so
forth but
this particular superintendent
did say to us he had been a
superintendent in rural areas
owner and that his shortest
tenure had been fourteen years
he said but this this is not
uncommon here so the networks a
long time ago and I think it
sounds like a lot of things have
improved but
I think this will help a lot
thank you very much thank you
represent a velcon thank you
just curious who is going to
provide the curriculum for the
strange.
Whose good do the that part of
madame chair and representative
i'll connect bped
and then then madame the other
question I have was going to
make sure that the suit that the
members of the board attendees
courses and what happens if they
don't
manage share and represent a
rock
really
really the only the only
solution we have for that is
that they have to put on the
dashboard whether or not they
have a tended all these
trainings I am may have to
report them the public at large
we'll have a chance to see what
they're whether or not their
school board members have done
they required training if they
continue to do that and really
that's that's the only thing we
have right now to honestly
matter to there's no hammer the
member of the screwboy decided
to
like to do who like with the
republicans did today there's
nothing to to hold them back
madame chair and and represent
an involved con.
I think I think it's if you're a
member of that community and you
see that your schoolboard member
isn't it an alignment with the
training they need I think I
think there will be a some
retribution and I think people
will come back and look at that
and take that seriously so I
were hoping for the best
and
before we had nothing we had
absolutely and I think no one
had to do any training and they
and I think we had over a
hundred members that had an
absolutely no training
to date and and it's been
offered by the new mexico school
board so I think we've all just
tried to make this legislation
as as safe as we could and uh I
looked at a lot of things but we
we backed up from them and this
is the best we could do right
now thank you I don't recommend
they have let him choose not a
communist but if you didn't
india and you'll seminar like
you were supposed to.
They would not let you get your
pay check from the municipality
that you got
is your favorite so that was the
the basically the the handle of
the head over the lisable judge
and I don't know the school
board members get paid so
therefore if they don't get paid
over there to get paid like they
got wonderful
there's nothing to hold
I think
you're welcome represent anyone
else wishing to speak on this
bill madame charle mover due
power sign senate bill.
Senate bill one thirty seven as
amended.
Sir second
we have a due pass motion for
senate bill one thirty seven as
amended made by representative
seconded by representative
sapanski would you call the
rule.
Representative of con
representative chasing
representative of himbry
representative lane
speaker martinez.
Representative mcqueen yes.
Representative reap
representative ream
representative is the pansky yes
madam vice chair yes madam chair
yes the japan six to zero okay
so asked thank you very much
thank you
so before we get to the next
bill I think what we need to do
is
roll it I had put this on at the
request of the ranking member
and there appears to be some
disconnect between this bill and
the cannibers bill that we
passed a few days ago so
I think it would be good if the
two sponsors could talk and
there's some coordination is
that okay representative.
Well we could we could hear it
on monday and I just wanna and I
apologize that he hadn't
realized there was this
confusion between the two bills
and
my concern is this this is the
house bill we only have three
year four days left that would
mean you'd have we'd have to get
it out of this committee which
could be an issue and then
getting it to the floor after
the house bill that is already
encompasses this topic could be
could be a problem you can see
where we're going with this
representative so
am I able to respond yes of
course you
just.
With all due respect in parties
being here I think that.
I'd like at least the committee
to hear it today maybe we can
move it till monday after you
hear it III would ask the
consideration of this committee
to hear me out today and to help
through the this conversation
management okay so but what's
your response to my point about
timing we're getting very late
in the session this was done at
the request to the ranking
member who frankly isn't here
today.
You can see how the likelihood
that this couldn't get to a
place where it could and then
getting it to the senate in past
through so this is impossible.
So I would suggest if some
changes are needed in the
previous bill that conversation
could be had because that is
being set up for the floor
manager and that's why I think
it's it's pertinent that we have
the discussion today so that we
can move into that place where
we can have that there are
compromiser a better discussion
with perhaps more input from
your committee yeah I I think it
that's not a good use of our
time at this point so i'd like
to suggest that we roll the bill
and we'll have a conversation
further if.
Did you want to say something
madam chair if I could just ask
the sponsor is that your
intention to
amend
or work with the sponsor of the
other bill to to create an
amendment for the floor because
that the other bill is on the
floor calendar is that correct
that's right ma'am sure that
that bill the house bill version
is on the floor and the senate
bill will be heard in this
committee on monday.
I have not had a conversation
with a senate sponsor
but
the way that I read the current
bill from it coming from the
senate where the lot of the er
adjustments and amendments have
been made upon that bill
regarding this section of the
bill of the f b I background
checks in and upon for the
review of of those amendments
and changes and the consistency
of
the house bill not being amended
in this section
I have concerns about how that
section will be reflected in law
and not being able to continue
with the f b I background checks
manager so we're going to be
hearing the senate bill and
that's an opportunity to have
this conversation I will say
that when we heard the bills
there were no issues raised
about the particular section
at the time and so it's we're
getting in a little late and it
would have I I see there's some
stay called in the audience you
apparently have an interest in
this and I could have been
raised much earlier so my
suggestion and we have sent a
bill coming up if there is an
appropriate conversation to be
had i'm understanding from my
vice chair that these section
issue was like the senate bill
is identical to the house bill
that we passed out so there will
be an opportunity to have that
conversation but we need to hear
it in public comment and so on
if that's going to happen and it
wasn't in public comment when we
heard the house bill version of
their so
I I don't mean to be discourted
anyone and i'm happy to talk
with folks after this the
conclusion of this meaning to
try to sort it out but
I think we should roll it and I
think without we you're in a
position to adjourn.
Very good we're german
thank you.
The.
