and call the roll to begin with.
Representative Akan.
Yes
Armstrong.
I'm here.
Representative Cook your.
Mr speaker.
S. I'm here.
Representative Ely is excuse.
Representative Lewis more.
Representative McQueen.
Here.
Representative Nibert.
Your.
Representative Rehm is excused
Representative Townsend.
Madam chair cheer.
I'm present.
We have a quorum.
Okay we have.
Several of the Sanchez and their
witnesses in the attendee list
are we have Representative have
you had a Martinez share of
taxes.
And we have.
Click Emily Kaltenbach.
With the Trujillo who's the
superintendent of regulation
licensing.
Who else do we have and madam
chair just so you know our bill
remain are working on a bill
together and we are here
together with masks on I'm I
just.
Well very good very good we've
got the whole committee
German Martinez would you like
to make sure that we have
everyone you need.
Thank you madam chair is is miss
Megan Dorsey
available on the list.
I don't see her I don't.
Madam chair Megan is
doing double duty she's also the
expert witness on the
expungement bill okay and that
is being presented right now in
the for the Senate.
And she's very much needed for
that.
if things come up I can send her
a text message and she might be
able to step off the Senate
floor but I'm she gave.
Quite a bit of extra testimony
today in committee and so I
think you'll will need to model
through for a little bit I will
she wraps up over there that's
alright madam chair that's
that's my chair.
And representative and madam
chair and members of the
committee I will send her a link
so she can join when she's able
to okay that sounds perfect all
right
let's go ahead and begin.
Representative Martinez you're
you're you're a cadre.
Thank you madam chair and and
thank you members of the
committee for your time I'm here
with the with one of our co
sponsors representative
Armstrong as well as our expert
witnesses the superintendent of
licensing and regulation
licensing Linda Trujillo former
colleague of arts and the
executive director of the drug
policy alliance miss Emily
Kaltenbach
today in front of you madam
chair members the committee is
house bill two which is the
cannabis regulation Act.
The cannabis regulation act
regulates the use production and
sale of cannabis and cannabis
products in New Mexico.
This bill creates a responsible
tightly regulated system approve
licensees with a strict set of
rules and regulations that are
developed by the state
regulation and licensing
department.
Madam chair of the committee.
as I said in the previous
committee and apologies to those
of you who were in that previous
committee as much of this
information is repetitive.
A majority of New Mexicans
supports the concept of
legalizing taxing and regulating
cannabis madam chair in a recent
poll seventy four percent of
those polled stated to be
supported this system of sales
to adults twenty one and over
with opposition only at about
twenty five percent just by way
of referenced a similar poll
conducted in two thousand seven
showed.
Only thirty four percent
supporting legalization at the
time and fifty one percent
showing opposition so you know
its it's it's we've seen a sea
change not only in the state of
New Mexico but also in other
parts of the country
managers a committee to date
there about fourteen or fifteen
different states that have
legalized adult use cannabis I
will say most of those states
have done so through a ballot
initiative.
and because those states have
legalized three ballot
initiative it's created a.
Serious headaches for many of
those states our neighbors
Colorado included Colorado as
many of you know was the first
to legalize.
New Mexico if we are successful
this go around will become only
the fourth state I believe
unless New York state legalized
I'm not sure I I think they did
okay so so New York state
legalized today make a few hours
ago so we would become the fifth
state to regulate through the
legislative process and I must
say that over the course of the
many years that we've been doing
this work.
As difficult as it's been
sometimes I'm proud that our
legislature continues to pursue
legalization through the
legislative process it is
extremely important to do so
because it's allowed us really
vet the entire framework to vet
the issue to really think of all
the different angles that we
need to think up and when you
lead went when you legislative
ballot initiative quite frankly
you end up with a bunch of
problems we've seen that in
California I mentioned Colorado
we've seen that in our again
we've seen in Washington state.
madam chairman of the committee
of the bill in front of you has
been written and re written a
number of different sites this
is not for many of you this is
not the first time you see this
this bill was has been introduce
or iterations of it have been
introduced in the past based on
my own memory I know that resent
bill mccamley was one of the
first to introduce what he then
called the cannabis freedom act
back in twenty fifteen
a year which you can even get a
hearing in committee.
Fast forward to twenty nineteen
of we successfully carried this
bill through the house and on to
the Senate where it died in its
last committee assignment after
that session the governor pool
put together a working group of
experts from across the state
to to really study that
particular version of the bill
and to build upon it that's how
we end up with Senate bill one
fifteen in the twenty twenty
session that bill got the one
Senate committee that in the
Senate in the second second
Senate committee and out of that
bill emerges house bill twelve
which is the bill that are
chamber passed I'm here three or
four weeks ago out of the house
a bill that made it all the way
to the Senate floor and then
quite frankly just ran out of
hours in the day before we have
to adjourns sini DA.
we are here now with
an improved version of that
house bill twelve which is house
bill two.
Any number of different ways
madam chair and members of the
committee.
Main among those ways is how we
ensure that there is proper
amounts of
of supply for for medical
patients and so with the help of
the the superintendent
regulation licensing we've come
up with what I believe is a good
compromise on that front our
bill as it passed the house did
not have any type of plant count
he was open ended you know you
can grow as much as you can sell
right the same way we do other
and cultural commodities
but after hearing concerns from
from members of this body
members of this legislature
members of the Senate the
executive members of law
enforcement you know patients
and other groups the
superintendent licensing and and
and regulation I think came up
with a really good compromises
so now the state will be able to
manage our plant count over the
course of the first three years
as this industry develops and
matures and then after those
three years that particular
provision will will will sunset
and then we'll let the open
market can dictate you know what
what what what plants you know
number of plants and whatnot can
can be brought
let me let me double little bit
into
into the
The the nuts and bolts of of the
bill in and again that's one of
the bigger changes from house
bill twelve to house bill two
there are others that we're
happy to talk about but that's
probably the most substantive
change that will be dealing with
you today
what is the age legal amount to
process under bill a person must
be twenty one years of age or
older to process grow and
cultivate cannabis for adult use
adults twenty one and older more
may purchase up to two thousand
of cannabis flower and up to
sixteen grams of extracts and
eight hundred milligrams of
edibles
under this bill we allow for
whole role of no more than six
mature plants per person and
assuming there are two adults in
the household a maximum of
twelve plans so if you have five
people I would built within the
household you can't have thirty
plans you're you're you're
you're you're you're you're
you're set up to the twelve
mature plants.
And of course personal
production continues the way
we've had it for a long time for
those that are medical cannabis
patients.
Madam chairman of the committee
house bill two also provides
force for local control it does
not provide for a full out opt
out mechanism and we debated
this extensively on the floor a
few weeks ago part of the reason
or rather the main reason why we
don't have flopped out is at the
request of law enforcement we
heard from law enforcement
professionals back in twenty
nineteen when when we had a
local opt out that it would be
an enforcement nightmare for
them if they've got a pick and
choose to see which counties
don't allow cannabis activities
and therefore they have to go in
and force you know perhaps
somebody driving from county to
county and and and you know
driving across the county that
that does not allow it so we got
rid of the full out opt out
provision and what we said have
is we allow local jurisdiction
to have some level of control
including reasonable zoning land
use and business licensing
requirements so that you can
regulate the the way the hours
the times the location where
these with these industries can
can can take place
And you know for for me I think
as it was somebody who
represents
a a you know a large city you
know I think that it's important
to allow our communities our
local governments to enact
reasonable policies to ensure
that whatever cannabis activity
is taking place in your
community really reflects the
values of your community I'm
again you know without really
being able to completely opt out
in terms of the tax structure we
have
the building its regional form
had a twelve percent excise tax
plus the applicable gross
receipts tax in the previous
committee others an amendment
made to the bill that will
actually increase the excise tax
to eighteen percent over the
course of six years beginning in
in your twenty twenty four I
believe and that's the that's at
the request of of folks in this
legislature who really feel like
if we're building this industry
from scratch we really need to
tax at a rate where we can
actually maximize revenues for
the state because in fact this
is not an industry that that is
cost free I mean there will be
costs associated with it and I'm
sure we'll talk about those here
later tonight and so we made
that amendment in our in house
taxes now the tax rate is
ultimately will be eighteen
percent excise plus a
applicables Mr T. at this point
for the first few years it'll be
twelve percent excise plus the
applicable G. R. T..
Revenues in this bill one
hundred percent of those
revenues will go to the general
fund this was another area of
compromise over the last couple
years if you remember my billing
twenty nineteen created eight or
nine different funds including a
law enforcement fund including a
community reinvestment fund and
others
as we've moved this bill along
the last couple years it's
become clear that the
legislature does not really
support your marking at that
level of of tax revenues and so
out of out of respect for you
know for for our very diverse
views on these things we decided
to pull those your marks and
to instead send the the revenues
to the general fund with the
understanding that there are
some funds that will be created
and that I personally will be
working on should this bill pass
you know during the special
session to create funds to
ensure that that we're
reinvesting in communities
particularly communities that
have been most impacted by the
war on drugs rural communities
communities in northern and
southern New Mexico communities
in urban settings you know what
whatever the case might be.
Madam chairman of the committee.
All the licensing structure is
as follows house bill to create
ten licensed that including
cannabis testing laboratories
cannabis producers can as many
factors cannabis retailers
in integrated cannabis micro
business cannabis producer micro
businesses cannabis careers
cannabis research laboratories
vertically integrated cannabis
establishments in cannabis
consumption spaces the best way
to make sense of this last
instructors think of it this way
if you are going to be one of
the big producers in the state.
you are probably going to go
after a vertically integrated
cannabis establishment license
which will allow you to do
everything from CD all the way
to retail sale with the
exception of testing testing has
to be independent for for
obvious reasons.
From micro businesses this is
really important this is a way
to get New Mexicans we now have
access to a whole lot of capital
but they have land they have
water they've got know how and
they've got entrepreneurship on
their side they will be able to
enter this industry through
either a micro business producer
Lysons or in integrated micro
business license the integrated
micro business license would
allow you to do the same things
that the vertically integrated
cannabis cannabis establishment
license allows you to do except
that you are limited to the
number of plants right so for a
cannabis producer or cannabis
integrated license you're capped
at two hundred plans in terms of
your your your growth ability
I'm again the idea is to create
something similar to like a
micro brewery right out where
you can get your foot in the
door you're really could grow or
you got some good recipes to
create some really cool you know
oils and and edibles and
whatever not but you don't have
the capital to go big.
You've got capital to go small
bill this will allow you to do
that.
Thank you madam is the committee
I'm sure you all have a ton of
questions so at this point what
I'm gonna do you know having
covered those high level angles
of the bill I want to pass it on
to my co sponsor representative
Armstrong and then to either of
our two X. for witnesses in case
you want to add anything and
then we'll be open for questions
thank you madam chair.
Thank you.
Thank you Armstrong thank you
madam chair and Representative
Martinez members of the
committee I just wanted to
emphasize what Representative
Martinez said that
this is been worked on for a
number of years and even before
the workgroup that he spoke of
after the last iteration of this
it span
discussed in LHS over multiple
years and recommendations for
how they should be done have
done
Discussed in the interim and has
said in to what's now
before us and I want to
The state that you know my
interest in this is not
necessarily for the revenue for
the state.
But to protect the public health
and to protect the integrity and
maintenance of access to medical
cannabis and to and so within
the bill there is public health
advisory committee oversight if
there's
testing of of products there is
the state the public health
advisory committee overseeing a
lot of aspects and of and
implications and and the effects
of implementation of this
there's also reference to and in
our the claim in the D. Johnson
clean indoor air act to make
sure that we manage
exposure to smoke and secondhand
smoke and importantly I think is
our to remember up people are
using cannabis now.
our kids are accessing it adults
are accessing it but we're
they're accessing it and how
they're accessing it is off the
street and then underground
market black market where we
have no idea what it's been
laced with and we're seeing more
fat and all mixed in with
cannabis of there's no our
ability and to know what kind of
toxins and contaminants might be
in it and so I think for the
public health that we need to
licenses are
legalize it so that we can
regulated and license it control
marketing control packaging
control the quality and control
the the integrity of what is
available taxes and also it it
doesn't
continue to incentivize a black
market but I think that's the
only way from a health
perspective that we really get a
handle on it and and can try to
keep it out of the hands of kids
and appropriately use for adults
so
with that madam chair I do want
to let you know whenever you're
ready I I do have an amendment
that are clarifies
the issues around the clean
indoor.
Air act and the
Of consumption sites in on in
regards to secondhand smoke
and the man also has a couple of
technical of corrections but
it's whenever you're ready for
that Representative Armstrong I
think it might be a good idea if
you could summarize it briefly
because I think it may affect
public comment I listened in on
that tax committee and I mean
without going through word for
word.
Thank you could summarize what
your intent and your purposes.
Yes thank you madam chair the
intent is that
smoking in Arkansas cannabis
consumption area a license press
purposes is only allowed in a
designated smoking area in the
store in a standalone building
from which smoke doesn't
infiltrate indoor workplace or
other indoor public places where
smoking is otherwise prohibited
pursuant to the D. Johnson clean
indoor air act.
So very much yes so in licensing
those consumption areas of those
parameters have to be taken into
consideration for a licensing
and consumption area.
Okay so who would you like to go
next the superintendent or
Your posts you might madam chair
let's go with the superintendent
of of regulation licensing okay.
You madam chair thank you thank
you members of the committee so
I the only thing a couple.
It's good to see you too thank
you I this is really been an
intense process and I just want
to continue to thank the
sponsors for bringing us to the
table to try to look at this
from the perspective of how it
gets regulated look into the
nuts and bolts of that
regulation we feel that's before
you right now today has enough
requirements define what the
legislative intent for health
and safety yes but enough
flexibility for the department
to try to encourage the growth
of small businesses so
specifically identified as micro
businesses we did of I really
stressed about the start date of
adult use of commercial sales
because I've seen help other
states have run out the first
day I call it kind of the Krispy
Kreme phenomenon in which
everything sells out within
hours and it makes me nervous
about what would be left for the
medical of patients throughout
the state and so it's it's
really been us R. O. D. pushing
for that start date to be
delayed I we did come to
negotiated agreement this
weekend that I can live with the
fact that.
The department can decide when
we get started so that if we're
in a good position we get
started early but it would be
absolutely no later than April
first.
And with that I I think that's
everybody else is not said
enough about the bill.
Okay.
This call back.
Madam chair members of the
committee Emily Kaltenbach with
drug policy alliance I just want
to.
I just heard about New York and
I was hoping that we would beat
them but I want to
share that a lot of the
provisions in our bills are also
mirrored in the New York Bill
and so I really believe that New
Mexico New York will be models
for the rest the country as new
states come online especially
from a legislative process I
also just want to share that the
bill in front of you as the
sponsors noted has have have a
lot of input for many many years
at drug policy alliance we
hosted town halls and focus
groups from Roswell to Gallup to
Farmington and so the voices of
a lot of our committee members
are reflected in the the bill
you see before you especially
around.
The social justice and equity
provisions from making sure that
people are protected for the use
of cannabis that public benefits
or healthcare can't be denied
for that just solely using
cannabis child welfare
making sure that their actual
procedures in the regulation and
licensing department to promote
encourage diversity in the
license applicants and that
includes communities that are
economically disadvantaged that
have been disproportionately
harmed from right to rest from
cannabis prohibition to
agricultural producers in parts
of our state so I'm I'm very
proud of this work and at drug
policy alliance is committed to
help with implementation and
advocate for additional equity
and social justice provisions as
the program roll out thank you
so much.
Thank you very much I'm.
Representative Martinez did I
don't think anybody covered the.
The criminal penalties and I'm
wondering if you want to just
really briefly addressed those
because that was there was some
misunderstanding of attacks
Committee pretty early on did
you want to just say something
about that briefly.
Yes chair and and and and
members of the committee one of
the questions I was asked which
to fantastic question was you
know now that we're legalizing
cannabis and employees of kind
of is what are the penalties if
if an adult provides cannabis to
to a young person and after
doing some research and talking
to some of our experts
it was the the answer is very
obvious but obviously not not
being
having a criminal lawyer it took
a little bit to get to it but
the answer basically is you
would be charged for a
contributing to the delinquency
of a minor right which is of a
fourth degree felony I believe
and that is in a separate
statute that continues to be the
case so even if cannabis is
legalized under house bill two
the fact remains that if you
find cannabis to a minor you can
be charged with a fourth degree
felony.
Okay are you ready for me to
take public comment at this time
yes ma'am thank you.
As you may just make one brief
comment about.
contributing to the delinquency
of a minor
that there was some thought it
might just it's my understanding
there is some thought given to.
The idea of keeping sanctions
and penalties for cannabis
similar to this penalties for
alcohol and we do not have a
crime of giving alcohol to a
minor it's as the chairman said
madam chair that it's
contributing to the delinquency
of a minor so by not creating a
new crime outside of the
criminal code we are in fact
keeping this aligned with
alcohol which was the intent
from the beginning so I just
want to make that point.
We go to the public thank you
thank you very much I'd like to
give the those in the audience
an opportunity just big and let
me I first I have somebody who
wants to make a comment I
believe on technical issues and
that is I'm Tony Roybal mac.
Did you wish to speak must
Roybal mac.
We're going to go it will make
it ninety seconds on the time
because we don't have a lot of
attendees here.
And then I will ask for those in
opposition after.
I don't okay.
Okay.
Let's go we're going to go with
opposition and first I have
Evelyn.
She went away Richard.
Stata.
Please go ahead.
You madam chair economic yes we
can yes madam chair members of
the committee I think up the the
only concern we have I think
that you know Representative
up on strong try to address you
know the standalone building I
think it still creates
a new set of.
You know exemptions in the clean
indoor air act and you know
standalone structures could be a
restaurant a cafe you know they
they can you know you know by a
license but twenty five hundred
a year and you know and and
establish a cannabis consumption
area and so we are creating you
know a new of.
Set of rules you know where
employees and workers are
exposed to the second hand you
know marijuana smoke which is as
dangerous and deadly as as a
separate small so we we will be
creating a lot of these you know
that was consumption is
consumption areas throughout the
state and so it's it's a big
issue for us we would like that
to be taken out of this
legislation and also in the
local control act you know it's
only three hundred feet from a
school and you know I I I can
establish an open outdoor you
know consumption cannabis
consumption area no three
hundred free from a school where
kids are walking by and you know
smelling the the small so I
think the these are some of the
major issues so that you know
critical issues that needs to be
addressed and and we like you
know for this committee and and
and the sponsors of this
legislation to to remove the
cannabis consumption areas on
this legislation and not create
a new a health hazard for you
know thousands of employees will
be working in this industry
workers and employees exposed to
secondhand marijuana smoke.
So thank you madam chair and we
appreciate the time.
Thank you.
Save access New Mexico.
Go ahead.
Chair I'm getting a message that
they are using an older version
of zero seven of promote quickly
to panelists for their okay.
You should be able to talk now
with safe access New Mexico
thank you madam chair and
committee members.
A few moments ago the New York
law was discussed want to point.
What happened here are for
rescheduling cannabis.
Have all considered putting
forth.
A recreational cannabis law like
this.
Without any comprehensive social
justice and equity provisions to
be a discriminatory practice in
that has been a huge problem in
Illinois.
And work.
You need to stay very close to
the microphone because we're
losing L..
The medical cannabis patient
community.
The bill actually says a
producer only has to keep ten
percent of their cannabis stock
for the medical cannabis
program.
That's not a good bill for the
medical cannabis community.
This bill is not ready the
special session should not have
been called.
Thank you.
Thank you Linda Siegel.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee when the state are
representing the American cancer
society cancer action network
and we really appreciate the
amendment that representative
Armstrong is done it still
doesn't quite meet our needs
because we don't believe that
cannabis consumption area should
be exempt from the clean indoor
air act there are still
employees and in the cannabis
construction consumption areas
secondhand marijuana smoke is is
also a health hazard for both
smokers and non smokers there is
evidence to work to confirm that
it's a serious health risk.
Can have marijuana smoke affects
cardiovascular function and
contains thousands of chemicals
at least thirty three
carcinogens so it's.
We don't really want to create
another unprotected class of
workers that have to give up
their health for a job we worked
really hard over the years to to
get to pass the clean indoor air
act and we're allowing an
exception to that which will put
workers at risk thank you.
Sen.
Thank you Joanna Strother.
Yes.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Joanna
Strother and I represent the
American lung association and I
don't want to repeat what some
of my colleagues have said with
the American heart association
and the American cancer society
cancer action network the long
association also still does
remain concerned we appreciate
Armstrong
Amendment to to this but again
we still have significant
concerns with the D. Johnson
clean indoor air act and don't
believe that cannabis
consumption areas should have
this exemption we're very
concerned about the people who
work in these establishments and
will be exposed to secondhand
marijuana smoke that only
exacerbates health problems
especially bureau who have
respiratory conditions thank you
no thank you to.
Amanda Thomas and your partner
get internet in the morning.
Okay.
This is the unmuted at.
Thank you madam chair.
Go ahead Amanda.
Thank you madam chair that was
on me I was trying to meet the
other person and couldn't I mean
Amanda right away but she should
be allowed she should have room
to speak now.
Hello can you hear us.
We can.
Hi I was just looking over the
law here for the state of New
Mexico and I'm seeing that
smoking is allowed.
In designated outdoor smoking
areas private clubs in the
museum's under private hire it's
allowed in some hotel and motel
rooms it's also permitted in
enclosed areas within
restaurants bars hotels
and other places being used for
private functions I'm just I'm
wondering how that's any
different than cannabis if it's
allowed under the clean air the
clean indoor air act then how
can it be any different for
cannabis being allowed in a
private place.
You.
Thank you and I don't see
anymore in opposition may I see
those who would like to speak in
favor of the bill.
First I have Evelyn.
I'm everyone I'm gonna let you
pronounce your last name for us
sorry go ahead.
Hi can you hear me we can.
Hi thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Evelyn been across.
I Representative two night the
Democratic Party of New Mexicos
rural caucus I'm the vice chair
there we are in support of HB to
but as usual we have some equity
concerns that we respectfully
ask you to consider this evening
I learned this afternoon I
learned about the micro business
licensing and that sounds as
though this may address some of
our concerns so thank you for
that.
In the past legislation is often
favored urban areas over rural
that's nothing new we see that
all the time liquor licenses are
an example this legislation this
year the legislation was passed
that address this issue and that
finally provided equity but it
took decades and we don't want
that to happen with cannabis we
ask that you consider rural
communities when carefully
crafting legislation another
issue is water of course it's up
precious here as we all as we
all know we fear that once adult
use cannabis is approved there
may be unforeseen consequences
to the water supply there have
been several studies in other
states regarding this impacted
we ask that the legislature
advocate for sustainable
practices including energy and
water efficient cannabis farms
so thank you very much.
Thank you.
Thank you so much I will be long
out I spoke earlier
I just wanted to reiterate that
I do support this bill on
passage and you know everything
in the state I do however share
since some of the concerns Jason
Barker said about the ten
percent threshold for the
patients I do feel like that
will cost some issues we may be
a little bit more remember you
guys are supposed to be about
the patients and helping us and
worried about us at the same
time I kind of feel like you
guys are doing enough for us
with this bill I do supported
though I kind of feel that maybe
with
Talking to more patients instead
of producers we can get a better
understanding of what the
patients really need versus what
you guys think
with that being said thank you
so much and I hope to see this
past.
Thank you I'm Tony Roybal mac.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I'm I
am a family law lawyer and I
practice children's log using
the collector Care in New Mexico
and I am concerned with I I like
this bill but page fifty three
paragraphs State where you make
the standard clear and
convincing evidence that a child
has been placed in risk as
opposed to having the standard
as the best interest of the
child as what what is the
current standard under section
forty dash four dash nine and by
creating this and and
specifically saying that no
government entity shall
remove the child you're
preventing police from having a
forty eight hour hold and your
really it sidestepping the abuse
and neglect code that would
prevent judges from really being
able to step in when a child is
in danger even if it is solely
based on a parent's use of
cannabis I think we need to look
at this a little like we look at
our call and if the child is
somebody consumes too much
alcohol they're certainly held
to a standard if they're not
able to care for a child I think
with cannabis we need to have
the same sort of language and at
a minimum the standards should
be best interest of the child if
that's the only thing that gets
fixed I think that gives those
entities charged with protecting
kids kids the best available
resources in order to do that
and I bring this to you because
I have a case right now with the
two year old agency tested
positive for cannabis thank you.
Next Marshall Martinez.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I Marshall
Martinez in the executive
director of equality New Mexico
the statewide LGBTQ civil rights
organization.
The legalization of cannabis is
a racial justice issue is a
gender justice issue is an LGBTQ
justice issue the failed war on
drugs the failed ban on cannabis
has for decades because the over
criminalization of LGBTQ people
of color in fact trans women of
color significantly more likely
to be stopped searched detained
arrested and incarcerated than
their cisgender peers and that
is most frequently happening
because of the suspicion of
possession or use of cannabis I
want to see quality Mexico
really appreciates the work of
the sponsors to pass this bill
and she does justice for
communities we believe
wholeheartedly that legalization
is not enough we strongly
support this legislation asked
that while it we just through
this process the voices of queer
and trans New Mexicans of color
and our perspectives and that
that are in this current bill
are not raised by the voices of
so called experts in the legal
commercial or regulatory fields
lastly we believe that perfect
cannot be the enemy of good well
we urged the legislature to
fight for the most racially and
socially just legalization
framework possible we can not
continue to allow
criminalization of our
communities as a product of
disagreement thank you.
Thank you did not following
honest.
Hi you hear me yes.
My name's in that format is I
and bulk Kali Evans when your
right palm act actually work
together in the family law
attorney as well and I echo the
sentiments and the the message
sent by on twenty a I do support
this bill but creating another
standard
under essentially to protect
children would kind of add to
the the different nuances in
levels that we already have in
the children's code and family
court laws that are designed to
protect children
additionally it doesn't it
doesn't take into consideration
when a parent is using and
essentially just exposing their
child to their to
To that cannabis and THC which
would certainly have long term
effects on the chill on the
children and
And that plague them in harm's
way I think it is best to leave
the the best interest and
custodial provisions of this
bill to the codes that are
already in place in the
children's code and the domestic
relations code that are already
in thanks.
Hello did not nice to hear from
you yes you to get in a long
time I have set out I don't see
any more hands up right now so
let's go back to the
Committee.
And thank you for me.
Would you like to
make some comments before we go
to committee questions.
madam chair I think we're ready
to go to questions thank you
very much.
Madam chair deep I understand it
they were amendments that we
need to consider from.
Representative Armstrong and I I
was going to college
Representative Armstrong first.
You madam chair as soon as you
know that one I also have one to
consider it's it's very minor
technical in nature.
Okay Representative Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair and I
think you should have the
amendment.
And the to the two oh two number
that yep that's how they're
organized in the share files so
two two one zero five four point
two.
Okay I don't see that.
This
is not your fault I am sure.
Madam chair I in the share file
yes ma'am it was up loaded at
nine OO five I'm not sure if it
was up loaded after I sent the
link earlier today let me resend
the link that may okay hello
madam chair mate we have the two
to one more time.
Sure yes two two one zero five
four point two.
The file.
I think I uploaded or downloaded
nine before that we was in there
so.
It looks like it's a little
challenging to keep up with the
the ShareFile has grown.
If everybody's noticed yes madam
chair I just reset the link
madam chair members of the
committee.
The only one that you added.
I am unsure madam.
Right I'll just open the whole
new thing.
I am in the same boat as you
been trying to keep up with the
numerous amendments we have to
proposed amendments we have
today.
Okay okay good deal.
Are you ready madam chair.
I just really want to see it
okay.
Okay here we go I am finally
ready.
Thank you madam chair the first
part of this amendment relates
as I said to the cannabis
consumption areas and I
I just want to remind the
committee that in the bill
on page one seventeen I think.
Is under the D. Johnson clean
indoor air act smoking is
permitted in indoor or outdoor
cannabis consumption areas
pursuant to the cannabis
regulation Act.
So what we've added in this our
first amendment.
Is on page twenty five line
thirteen we have inserted.
Smoking and cannabis consumption
area I'm a licensed premises
shall be allowed only if the
cannabis consumption area is in
a designated smoking area or in
a standalone building from which
smoke does not infiltrate other
indoor workplaces or other
indoor public places where
smoking is otherwise prohibited
pursuant to the D. Johnson clean
indoor air act and I would read
that all together because that
all that language is right from
the
clean indoor air act it's
In other kinds of facilities so
we're making it consistent with
the clean indoor air act when
smoking is permitted.
So that's that's the first
amendment.
The other amendments are a
technical corrections noted by
the governor's general counsel.
And
So.
So the ones on.
Page.
Fifty six and the ones paid
sixty one
have to do with
The amount of cannabis R.
someone can process and it was
written two ounces of cannabis
sixteen grams of cannabis
extract and eight hundred
milligrams of edible cannabis
and
We're changing it to.
For.
and the concern was that as it
was written with the and it
created an ambiguity as to
whether an individual would need
to have more than each of those
categories in order to be found
in violation of the act and it
should be
have more than any of those
categories would be in violation
of the act.
So those are what those
amendments are and then on.
Page
it's a page.
To find it page one seventy six.
this has to do with us of the
last two is to not
C..
Madam chair I believe it's on
page one seventy seven.
Right to route to put back in
the all drug.
paraphernalia.
So that the I'm trying to find
the count the COVID I have.
From the governor's office.
That it was not the intent to
prohibit forfeiture of other
drug paraphernalia.
with that I'm a stand for
questions so that was number
eight so what I'm.
Let's let's say that I move the
amendment for discussion
purposes just for technicality
here so are the questions on the
amendment.
Let me go to the.
On the amendment.
Representative then by chair are
you on the amendment yes thank
you madam chair and thank you
Sanchez we've heard of it in
public comment and certainly
I've received some communication
throughout the course of the day
and into this evening
about what you're attempting to
be thoughtful here on madam
chair and representative on that
clean indoor air act I'm still
receiving communications about
page one seventeen like why that
section Kate is in there at all
can you help clarify and confirm
again why
How this is structured and how
that relates back to this
ammendment like people are
saying your amendment does part
of the way there but they still
have concerns with one seventeen
can you help me understand the
intersection of where that sits
madam chair and the funds are.
Thank you madam chair and
representative and all make an
initial stab and then turn it
over the superintendent it it
has to do with there are
regulations tied to the indoor
of the clean indoor air act and
so for instance
the and designated smoking areas
there's a lot of regulation
around that and so by having it
in the call clean indoor air act
of we it there is a sorority
under those regulations to
to be consistent in the
regulation of what's allowed in
designated smoking area
particularly for outdoors so how
many feet from a building for
instance and employees don't
have to walk through the area to
get to a door to go and those
kinds of things are in the
regulations and
madam chair if we can let the
superintendent.
Respond further about the
linkage.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative so there has to
be an exemption in the clean air
act in order for smoking an
account of this area but what
we've done with the further
amendment in the of in the in
the regulatory act cannabis
regulatory act is ensured that
the department has the tools to
of specified but if there's
going to be smoking of cannabis
that there would still have to
be an outdoor designated area
like any of the other types the
tobacco areas the hotels those
is this the same standard that
would apply to those types of
areas but we go a little bit
further and we're using language
that is also under tobacco
manufacturing company and that
is is that there has to be an H.
fax system that would ensure
that the smoke doesn't go back
into would another indoor area
that's not designated or to any
other area that's not allowed to
be but that's not a designated
smoking area under the need
clean air act but there has to
be an exemption in that act in
order for the cannabis areas to
even be created.
Thank you I'm so madam chair
Sanchez if I just might make
sure I'm understanding this
correctly you all have to create
exemption in order to build and
administer the appropriate
regulations of.
Smoking as it relates to
cannabis use so that that's
helpful the the remaining piece
I'm I'm still hearing and just
would love to learn more about
from your expertise is that even
without smoking and I don't even
know if I'm gonna pronounce this
word right there's a malodorous
affect of cannabis consumption
that can come from other
products that people may be
consuming feel like I'm being
very repetitive here consumption
consuming all the waste
hello with that intersect with
what otherwise would be
considered smoking areas if
there is an odor that comes from
cannabis potentially even when
it's not being consumed through
smoking but through other
mechanisms or.
Our products madam chaired
Sanchez.
madam chair this is really only
dealing with smoke it's even
with tobacco you get odor of
tobacco on on things as well and
and that doesn't deal with
with odors that deals with the
actual smoke.
Which is harmful potentially to
longs.
Okay so madam chair and Sanchez
it's the.
Negative consequence of the
smoke that is regulated by the
Johnson clean and indoor air act
and that's why the limitations
exist on the smoking areas
correct thank you madam chair
and Sanchez that's all I have on
the amendment.
On the amendment Representative
Townsend.
No ma'am on the bill okay
Representative night party on
the amendment.
Yes.
Okay go ahead.
Why do we want to treat
This type of consumption similar
to cigars instead of cigarettes.
Madam chair and representative
I'm sorry I missed that did you
say why do we want to treat it
like cigars instead of
cigarettes or like cigarettes is
so sick are.
Well.
Madam chair representative.
Even with your amendment.
We have a situation where you're
treating cannabis.
As it were.
As gar I will
consumption and not a cigarette
type of consumption.
Madam chair and representative
of I don't think so the
The only way we might be some of
the regulation around cigar bars
but cigar bars are allowed to
have alcohol this also within
the within the bill not the
amendments or the clean air act
doesn't permit alcohol on the
same promises and this is
the outdoor smoking is usually
cigarettes outdoor smoking
the end designated smoking
areas.
I think it's more like
cigarettes.
This is a little bit of both
probably.
Madam chair representative of
the reason why state the is the
carbon out of the Johnson act.
Was to allow.
Segar as we smoke indoors and.
C. R. bard Jr or in areas where
the person going into that
players know exactly what they
were getting into the employees
who work there know exactly what
they were getting into and it
seems to me that with your
question.
Yeah I'm correct okay.
That you're creating that
directly the same as a cigar I'm
not a cigarette because we don't
bank does carve outs for
cigarettes.
madam chair I could let the
superintendent respond.
Thank you madam chair
representative so the car about
is similar to a tobacco
manufacturing plant the car
about four cigars and for retail
cigarette bars on retail tobacco
stores and cigar bars is the
standalone building a car about
for a facility that manufactures
tobacco which would be
cigarettes is the clean air
through making sure that it
doesn't infiltrate into indoor
or outdoor non designated areas.
Representative former
representative if we.
If we look at Representative K..
I.
I'm just have a hard time.
I guess grant concept to of what
we're trying to do I I agree
with one of the
Commenters that.
If we're going to do this I'm
very concerned with this motto
and its affect on other parties
and have.
If we treated it like
cigarettes.
A yes I would have a thank you
Sir with that but if we're
treating that like other things
you.
Yes are you more of a concern so
I I'm wrestling with with that
issue why we need to a paragraph
K. E. which would car about
another your exemption to be of
the Johnson clean indoor air
act.
Yes.
There's no resolution but I
don't think the amendment does
anything change.
If I understand the amendment
correctly.
That's all I care.
Thank you Representative Mr
speaker on the amendment.
Yes thank you madam chair of the
first let's see.
The.
Amendments to and agree on your
and that makes sense to me
because we're there were talking
about.
What.
Constitutes reasonable
articulation of suspicion of a
crime.
and so to me it makes sense to
swap the and for and for
because there.
You're able to say that none of
those things you standing alone
with with it or none of those
things standing alone would cost
reasonable suspicion of a crime.
Four and five.
I think good opposite direction
it and it it struck me as
somewhat inconsistent madam
chair with the.
Social justice goals etcetera
legislation because it lowers
the bar
I which a person can be charged
with a crime
for possessing cannabis
so the the changes on page sixty
one.
On line seventeen.
When we change in New Mexico or
or.
As written in order for you to
be and you know having committed
a crime you have to have more
than two ounces of cannabis.
Plant material some current and
extract and.
And will.
Milligrams of cannabis.
I'm.
Together right you have to have
all three of those things if we
change the enter or attempt to
position anyone of those three
things and series.
Would constitute the basis for a
charge of the full misdemeanor
for possession.
And madam chair Representative I
don't know if we want to.
I understand it.
The the times which you have all
those things.
Together is probably pretty rare
so you know bit by making it or.
We do make it easier to charge
someone with possession.
And Madam chair representative
we don't.
For your tobacco alcohol other
of the things we don't put a
limit on possession.
Right like I can have one case
of beer or a dozen kegs of beer
or you know ten cases of wine in
my car and
there's no there's no concern
there we don't limit the amount
of tobacco that a person can
possess.
I I guess I'm sorry for the
perspective Madam chair
representative why we even have
you know a possession limit if
we're creating a product it's
legal to purchase.
and consume it is just you know
why why make a possession limit.
And then to do we want to make
this change which lowers
threshold for charging so crime.
Matt madam chair
And the speaker Egolf and I I I
understand this is the
Representative Armstrong some.
So I I hope I'm not a line here
but
you know I I think you to your
first question I mean it's you
know I I think for me it's more
of a philosophical question
right I I agree with you.
Of philosophically if if we are
legalizing this
you know why are we creating the
standards of how much you can
process.
Yeah I think the the the short
answer to that to that question
really is you know we we have to
kind of come up with a limited
that would.
assume that that is your
personal use perhaps for the
day.
and you know in the spirit of
not having an open ended amount
of cannabis that you can go
purchase simply because it's
legal you know we kind of came
came to that to that
determination and you know I
know I know drug policy alliance
has been working on these issues
across the country and I don't
know that we you want to give
any insight as to why the you
know why the two ounces and and
the.
You know the sixteen grams but
you know I think the short
answer Mr speaker madam chair is
you know we have to limit
somehow.
Mr chair members the committee
Representative
yes the to anses is really as we
looked at other states you know
all states that have legalized
do have a possession limit
possession limit in public which
is really important under this
bill as you know you can have
more than that position limit in
your own home it's it's locked
and out of state so I do want to
mention that the I'm other
states actually have higher
position limits than we do for
example Maine is two and a half
ounces not to so that too is not
out of the line the other reason
we chose that two ounces was
also because of the rural nature
of our state and the importance
of folks who made you know go
travel from their rural home
into a more you know to purchase
and and go back home and so
allowing them to purchase more
what's important so those Wirth
some of the factors as we said
that one.
How much Madam how much is two
ounces then is it like handful
is it like I mean I have no I
zero concept of how much volume
like.
Is it the size of a baseball.
Is it I mean how how big is it.
Madam chair and speaker got you
know I I I I've not a
connoisseur either of.
The dime bags whatever they're
called the list of market but
this call to block please jump
right in.
Madam chair and speaker one
Adams could be the size of a
small copayment.
So could fit in your hand.
so.
Thanks.
It I have a good chart I wish I
could share my screen that but
if I if I had if I to you know I
I I I can visualize a pack of
cigarettes if it's cannabis in
their stead of tobacco how much
is that in a pack of cigarettes.
Madam chair let's see less than
an ounce chair.
At just about it's it's probably
less than an ounce but I
actually don't know if it's
rolled how many cigarettes but I
can find that out before we
close the.
Well so you know maybe two in
and madam chairman senior I'm
I'm not an expert in this by any
stretch.
Just maybe two ounces right
number I do think that we should
you know at least.
Yep laws in given notice at at
the
You get you are as the release
to the portion of the amendment.
Where we're lowering the
threshold for the charge of the
crime Mr Evans for five.
I don't know madam chair
representative Martinez is that
something you want to do I'm not
going to make a bigger deal out
of this and and just fighting it
for the committee so that we can
be aware of what we're doing if
we decide to move forward on
these tickets and madam chair at
on Mr speaker Representative I
if I can and I you know I think
is is that it's the pleasure of
the committee and I would go
more two of Representative
Martinez and.
anally as to a preference on
that it was something that
the governor's office pointed
out that thought we had an error
so I'm not weighing in one way
or another I'm I'm not sure.
Yeah madam smelling chair and
and chemistry grad that thing we
can hold off perhaps maybe for
the rest of the night as we as
we get some answers to those
questions.
Mister speaker you've finished
yes I am in I'm happy I'm happy
to madam chair move adoption of.
I have the right.
Okay yeah I was.
And then with the with the
exception of.
R. as numbers four and five we
can we can we can
hold that is Representative
Martinez suggests madam chair to
we get some clarification.
But I'm having a reduction of.
Amendments.
one two.
Three six seven eight.
One two three six seven eight of
the two oh two number two two
one zero five four point two and
so the speaker this adoption of
that modified amendment.
I'll second that motion is there
for the discussion on the
amendment.
Okay I'm.
It's call the roll please.
It is.
I'm not sure what.
Yes the motion is to adopt the
in
A modification of the amendment
so Adams one two three six seven
and eight of amendment two two
one zero five four point two.
Representative Alcon.
Yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Cook.
Yes.
Speaker eagle yes.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Lewis.
Representative Lewis.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert.
Yes.
Representative Rehm yes.
Representative Townsend.
No.
Representative Cook no.
Since its.
Use Representative Lewis.
Yes.
Yes.
Madam chair chasing.
Yes.
In the affirmative into the
negative.
With that the revised amendment
is adopted Representative
Armstrong did you have another
amendment.
No madam chair that's all I have
I think Representative Martinez
had one.
Representative Martinez thank
you madam chair of the.
The two to one number is two two
one zero five nine point one.
Give you all the second to to
find out up on share file.
And madam chair the amendment
and and superintendent Rio will
we'll walk this walk through
this with us just to kind of
give you some context but
the amendment online on page
four nine eleven after resin
strikes remainder of that line
strikes line twelve and thirteen
and inserts in there
tetra hydro cannibal can a can.
Or other substances from
cannabis by extraction methods
approved by the division and
then on page sixty two line for
after the word extract it
inserts from home grown cannabis
and then on page sixty two line
five of to the period insert the
use of any other solvent or
process is expressly prohibited
unless it is approved by the
division interpreted to heal
this came from from from our
office so having to give a
little bit more context as to
the need for the amendment.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Mr chairman and members of the
committee the changes the
cannabis extract definition are
simply to recognize.
Two things that we learned today
one is that THC can happen
before it gets to the rest
endpoints this will make sure
that not only resin but THC
products and there are
potentially some emerging
technologies innovative
extraction processes that don't
have anything to do with
solvents and we can't really we
can't really.
Make laws about those at this
time because we don't know
exactly what they might be this
will make it so that and less
and then tell the Division
approves those process sees that
maybe with nonvolatile solvents
that they're still going to be
bill legal.
And then the last one on page
sixty two that was kind of an
oversight it should have been in
relation to personal production
always I think that was just we
just kind of go of missed that
one of someone can do personal
production with what they're
allowed to grow but it has to be
with these non volatile
solvents.
Those what those what those two
amendments are.
Okay and
Is there discussion of the I am
moving intended for discussion
purposes and is our discussion
on the amendment.
Representative Townsend Here not
on the amendment are you.
I still got your hand don't
worry yeah on the bill are not
on the field.
Okay very good discussion on the
amendment.
Chair Dr.
We have a motion by
Representative Akan to adopt the
amendment.
I will second that motion.
Is there any objection to
adopting the amendment and I
want to make sure that we're
clear here.
We you please indicate if you
object okay it's not please show
all members present voting in
the affirmative.
And that amendment is adopted.
And madam chair just to make
sure I'm clear that was
amendment two two one zero five
nine point one yes two two one
zero five nine point one thank
you madam chair they're just
three amendments on that page on
that.
Egolf okay great.
Representative Martinez to have
another one no ma'am that's it.
Okay I'm.
I want to address.
I want to propose an amendment
on the fly here.
That
The attorneys who practice the
same kind of law that I do
pointed out and I I really think
what you've done in it but right
is I think you're trying to
protect children and you've
actually cap children from being
protected on page fifty three
what's over there just think
here.
Line.
It's subsection C..
And online I.
The proposed okay.
Well subsection C. reads a
person shall not be denied
parental rights are custody R.
or visitation with a minor child
by the state or local government
based solely on contact that is
lawful.
pursuant to the cannabis
regulation out.
Unless the person's behavior is
such.
So what it needs to say here is
what I think we need to do and
then I'm going to invite
the panelists to Antonia Roybal
mac to joining issues with the
a ten day tour joined the panel
so she can explain this to you.
But what you've done by putting
clear and convincing evidence
standard in Representative
Martinez you provided law
enforcement from during a forty
eight hour hold.
When there's a concerned about
the children.
And I know you didn't want to do
that.
So I'm did we get okay we've got
and how do you write about mac
here with this and so what.
To me and I agree with her
because I do this work.
Is that.
You would but after the word
act.
Then you would say you would
essentially say.
The children's co takes over
from.
The children's code is set up
for the best interests of the
child.
So what you would say in statute
we would strike the rest of the
line by line six seven.
And you would say nothing in
this provision prevents courts
or government bodies from acting
in the best interest of the
minor child.
Is that a friendly amendment
thank you madam chair and and
thank you to to his rebel mac
for for pointing this out you
know we we we went back and
forth on this of the learned
here and we were we were
servicer to ensure we would land
on it I appreciate your
willingness to to propose an
amendment I don't think it's on
the fly I I think that's what
this committee does it is very
thoughtful Committee and and
full of very smart people so I
would take this is a friendly
amendment chair okay and this
madness right about that would
you please address the committee
and.
Explain to spend the night at my
allergies are terrible and
amazing and I'm tired.
Yes madam chair and members of
the committee by putting a
here yet after cannabis
regulation Act each fifty three
line I and adding this sentence
nothing in this provision
prevents the courts and
government bodies from acting in
the best interest of the minor
child what you're basically
doing is diverting back to all
of the law that you've already
created in the children's code
and you're also differing back
to all of the law all the
jurisprudence that has been
handed down to us over the years
in case you are in the family
code so what you're allowing
police officers to do is if a
child is in danger even if the
sole reason is because of a
consumption of cannabis a police
officer can put a child on a
forty eight hour hold which is a
mechanism they have right now to
protect that child if a judge
finds that a child is in danger
and they have to do an emergency
restraining order you're
allowing that judge to take that
child out of a dangerous
situation and when you compare
this again to maybe our what
you've done in the liquor
licensing code and those sort of
things you can look at it and
say okay it's really clear that
you know we want we we don't
want parents if if all you do is
go have recreational cannabis
you're not gonna lose your
children but if your consumption
of rate of recreational cannabis
makes it where you create a
dangerous situation for that
child then the courts the police
the children's court the
children youth and families
department can step in to
protect the children thank you
madam chair.
So that's the amendment I
proposed.
I'm.
Yes madam chair of I just wanted
to double check the wording on
the second sentence if the you
said nothing in this provision
prevents the courts from acting
in the best interest of the
child to I think what you need
you you're not quite nothing in
this provision prevents courts.
For government bodies.
From acting in the best interest
of the minor child perfect I
just wanted to ensure that we
have the word minor child.
Thank you.
I would move that amendment is
there a second.
All second.
Second for representative
Armstrong.
Question sure.
One is spoke about all all call
is there anything in the code
for children that follows the
same code for so money that
would be affected because of all
call for child.
I'm gonna let this Roybal mac
answer that
thank you madam chair and
members of the committee there's
nothing in the counter if you
fix this language I read through
the remainder of the bill and I
don't find anything else where
that would be problematic for
children.
Action in this circumstance I
hope that answers the question
well I think what Representative
dot com maybe addressing is
that.
we don't do this with alcohol we
don't have this whole provisions
state is that what you're.
Thank you.
This is the only.
Well I really.
Okay.
In the in the children's code
you know if parents have.
Whiner beer with dinner that's
one thing but if they're drunk
all the time and the children's
code allows the court or
government bodies to step in no
I think that what they've done
here is made a statement about
the.
Just because they are lawfully
using because this is all new.
And I really think it's just an
an attempt to say please don't
be concerned we are wanting to
protect the children still.
Am I right Representative
Martinez.
Sure yeah I mean I I think
yeah I mean I I think that this
is and you know I I I I will
defer to the committee but I I
think that what we're trying to
do is make sure that
You know if if children are in
danger and and again if if if
the parents smokes a joint or
ingest inedible I mean I I don't
think that would be grounds
that's equivalent to drinking a
glass or two of wine and I don't
think those are grounds to to
for the family court to kick in
and you know my child be removed
I would think
then again if I am
drunk or high all the time and
my child is being neglected
then that's where.
Appropriate action will be taken
to ensure that the child is safe
whatever that action might be so
I I I I think federal immigrant
you know I would love to hear
from other committee members
though to see what the you know
if if there's any anymore is
that they can find and then
having his Roybal mac I think on
the line is really helpful as
well you know since she's the
one that that race issue.
Representative dot com.
I.
I'm just hoping that we can find
a way to the early off a hot
area and do the same thing.
Representative.
Madam vice chair on the
amendment yes madam chair and
the amendment thank you and I
really appreciate this
conversation just want to make
sure I'm understanding what
we're doing here and and as
you've attempted to do
understand the intention of the
Sanchez so for me it is really
important this first chunk of
section C. starting on page.
Fifty three line line to again
and I think the impetus of what
we're seeing in that that first
time good portion shall not be
denied parental rights or
custody of or visitation of the
minor child by the state or
local government the young
conduct conduct those awful as
we go on and on and on that part
is really is really important to
me and I know madam chair.
Within an understand the
implications of this amendment
that it is out to you as well
that we are making sure as we
move New Mexico in a more
responsible direction that
improve the lives of our little
ones and also improves public
safety that we don't continue
To perpetuate some of the the
stigma and bias that has existed
within different iterations of
New Mexico child welfare system
in which someone could be
targeted or focused on in a way
that had to do with their use
and part of what I just want to
make sure we're getting right
with your amendment and I'm and
I'm looking to to figure out to
make sure I can support this is
Is understanding that if there
were neglect or abuse wouldn't
there be other grounds B. sides
the lawful cannabis use within
out what H. B. two is intending
to do anyway like if that kid
was in in danger whether that's
under children close statute or
the unreasonable danger that's
included in section C. I imagine
the system whether it be other
functions of our government or
the courts would have mechanisms
to safely move that kid anyway
but is there something I
misunderstanding.
This Roybal mac would you answer
that yes thank you madam chair
and representative and and that
if you look into the children's
code and I might get a little
technical here so I'm sorry
about that but specifically in
the children's code what this
that the rest of that sentence
and and I'm in agreement the
first part of that sentence is
needed nobody nobody's kids need
to be taken away because they
choose to participate and
consuming medical cannabis one
of the things is under the
children's coated and again this
is the section that CYFD has to
substantiate if a child is born
drug exposed were affected due
to illegal or illicit drug use
and that's a a section NMAA AC
eight point ten point three
point one seven and that's a
difficult that this would be
contrary to that because if the
mother just consumed cannabis
and the sole reason that child
is born exposed is the
consumption of cannabis there's
no way for the department to
protect that child I'm their
other issue you have is the way
that need for we move on to the
second issue that is my point I
I don't think that I want
Our government to have the
capacity to remove a kid if it's
based on that consumption of
just cannabis without other
indications of neglect or abuse
and and for me I got to work a
lot on H. B. one thirty a couple
of years ago and I worked a lot
of perinatal substance use and
that's particularly what I'm
getting at that I want to make
sure we're bringing families
closer to care they need if they
have underlying substance use
disorders but if somebody is
lawfully using cannabis under
the provisions that we
potentially will pass in the
special session I don't want to
create conditions in which there
could be a forty eight hour up
hold or otherwise on their
children because of.
Cannabis use that doesn't
connect to the neglect or abuse
otherwise.
Madam chair representative get
out one of the the issues that I
see is
the standard is different so
right now the standard you have
is best interest of the child
and that means that the court's
going to do exactly that what do
they believe is best for the
child by creating an
unreasonable danger outlined six
and clear and convincing
evidence standard online seven
that's a much higher standard so
if that child.
It's still in the best interest
of the child to keep up with
that parent they're going to do
that but this under reasonable
danger by clear and convincing
evidence that's a very high
standard for us is family law
practitioners and abuse and
neglect attorneys to do and then
the under reasonable danger is
also really that's difficult
language and we were almost
there and instead of being able
to protect the child in the
immediacy and then figure it out
later what we end up doing is
meeting you know a long drawn
out trials and experts in order
to protect the children.
Okay and I know you wanted to
get to the second point madam
chair but I just want to share
quickly found the language from
the Lynn and Erin compassionate
use act which said a person
shall not be denied custody of
our visitation or parenting time
with the child and there's no
presumption of neglect or child
endangerment for contact allowed
under the act so certainly maybe
that something we can also look
at I very much want to to meet
what you're capturing I just
don't want to undo that
intention of the sponsors that
also means a lot to me but I I
know miss expert right Act I
know you wanted to get to my
other concern as well thank you
madam chair sure and madam chair
representative contended that no
presumption language would also
be good language in section C.
but again that hearing
convincing evidence verses our
best interest of the child and
then the second part I was just
going to answer this may have
already answered your question
was that the way it's right and
it's I'm when you guys define
eclectic child abuse child in
the children's code sections
thirty four eight four dash to
I think that it makes it harder
if a child is in danger under
those definitions so basically
what is going to be doing is
creating two separate it's it's
going to be creating a new
Piece of law we're we're not
gonna be able to use our our old
case law as to what's best for
the best interest of the child
so I think I got a little
convoluted there sorry.
thank you madam chair and then
my last piece on this amendment
is I certainly have different
expectations for what process
the family might reasonably
expect in a court room and then
also in a field situation where
they're potentially in a high
stress environment potentially I
family dynamics a lot going on
and yeah I expect if we're gonna
remove ads from a home or
situation that we should keep
the standards high certainly and
I just want to make sure that
with the the new lawful
provisions that would come with
passage of HB here in front of
us but we are not potentially
creating more impetus for
removal of kids without the same
standards that already exist
connected to underlying neglect
and abuse so thank you madam
chair and Sanchez.
Thank you on the amendment
anybody else
Did you did you need some.
Yes I just want it comes time I
want to I I thank you to
Christina for clarifying the
language I just wanted to double
check the section and the
stricken part for it for the
amendment south.
Right before I finish the motion
just we can go over all the.
Representative Nibert you on the
amendment okay go ahead.
Thank you madam chair
concerns number one I I question
whether the word governmental
bodies is that correct
terminology that we are to use
because generally bodies the
notes a.
City council or county
commission
and the people that are actually
be doing this are going to be
police officers sheriff's
deputies our children youth and
families folks so I'm not sure I
would have the right language
but governmental bodies does not
seem to be the R. right
language there may be agents of
governmental.
Something.
I would question that and then
my second concern is.
It seems to me the.
There's nothing in this act as
drafted.
The.
Okay.
Marijuana in front of their
children share.
The the that ought to be.
And I don't know whether be of
this amendment or whether it
ought to be elsewhere the
smoking marijuana in front of
children just doesn't seem to be
the.
The parents of the during and I
don't think that this bill ought
to.
All while such so.
Comments with respect we.
Here.
Maybe I miss Kelly can thank you
something that would be more
appropriate would be open to
hearing that in the course of
the discussion Mr speaker you on
the amendment yes chair just one
quick question I had a
conversation with the Sanchez on
this topic over the weekend.
Get I very definitely do not
practice in the area of family
law with one exception many
years ago.
At.
The.
For me madam chair and in is
Representative all mac.
Is it is it correct to say that
with the amendment proposed by
chairman Chasey.
That.
Adult use recreational cannabis
will be treated and seen by
courts to the same lands that
they see alcohol.
Madam chair and not Mr speaker
that's correct if you accept
that amendment what it's going
to say is that that the court
can do what they believe is best
for that child with the evidence
presented at that time.
Okay very good that that and
that that's that's where I am it
was wanting to land and I
appreciate the amendment and
look for spring thank you for
your answer a question thank you
madam chair.
Other questions on the
amendment.
This Kelly what do you think
about governmental bodies or do
you.
It got more than three hours of
sleep.
Well they could come up with
something better Roybal mac let
me just tell you that the brains
of the outfit are the attorneys
who are analyst.
Share it.
Yes go ahead.
Yeah what we're really talking
about here you can outline it
children youth and families
department.
law enforcement or the courts
you can say is that a
governmental bodies those are
the three charge right now with
protecting kids and that might
solve the question.
I like that.
Instead of governmental bodies
because you already have point.
You can see right here.
Those are the.
So in front of in front of
courts.
State law enforcement.
The children at the evening use
the family department or courts
because you don't go to the
courts before law enforcement
CYFD are involved.
And I don't know that would take
care of Representative night
that's concerned.
But but I think that what
Representative Representative
Roybal mac cheese.
I.
Miss you.
Regenerate ball mac.
I think that would be an
excellent change.
What do you think representative
Nibert.
Okay so it goes.
Law enforcement children youth
and families department or the
courts.
Yes.
From acting in the best interest
of the minor child.
And interest is laurel.
There's an S. on interest.
Yes okay.
Right.
Okay so I'm we.
In context one more time I'm
just trying to follow now the
all new language thank you
nothing in this provision
prevents law enforcement
children youth and families
department courts acting in the
best interest of the minor
child.
So in other words the children's
code applies.
And where it is it where does
that begin though that's what
I'm asking like what did also
yeah are you after you put a
period after act online flights
and strike the rest of that
paragraph subsection state.
Thank you madam certainly there
are sins okay that's what I was
in here okay down all right well
the clerk please call the roll.
Adopting and.
Yes madam chair Representative
Alcon yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Cook yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Representative Eli.
Representative Lewis.
She was represented.
Yes.
Representative Nibert.
Yes.
Representative Rehm.
Yes.
Representative Townsend.
Representative Townsend.
Yes ma'am.
Representative Eli yes.
Representative Lewis yes.
Yes.
Madam chair chasing.
Yes.
Twelve in the affirmative zero
negative.
Okay very good all right so
we've adopted that amendment.
And do we have any more
amendments being proposed.
Okay we're on the bill the
amended bill.
And the first one on my list is
Representative Townsend.
Thank you madam chair I have a
list of questions.
Going through this this morning.
That I just want clarification
on Representative on page two.
there is some
Definitions thank covering
advertisements.
as you all know the product that
we are dealing with it's still
going to be federally
prohibited.
How.
And yet the bill talks about
radio and television and at at.
How's that going to work with
the federal media.
FCC regulated regulations for a
cannabis product.
Thank you madam chair and and
representative Allison so you
know we we we limit
advertisements to.
to specific mediums
and we don't allow
advertisements on.
you know in in any way shape or
form in through any medium that
could be potentially used by
those under twenty one.
so this really would have to be
done through maybe subscription
based services consensually of
course you know billboards and
that sort of thing are allowed
so long as you're within
you know specific distance from
the school or or or whatnot
daycare center.
you know you you're not gonna be
seeing advertisements for
cannabis products you know on on
channel two or channel for
whatever you know they'll have
to be tailored to subscribe
subscription based services
how that interacts with the FCC
you know I'm not sure I'm not
sure what kind of oversight the
FCC would have over a
subscription based service for
example
but then obviously federal law
in those situations with trump
you know state law.
So Representative and on that
line what about a Billboard on a
federal right away would that be
problematic.
madam chair and was of Townsend
you know potentially
I guess potentially could be
problematic and and the.
You know the.
whoever owns the Billboard I
guess would have to make a
determination as to whether or
not they would sell advertise
things face to to whatever
company.
Representative your bill's on
page two line I think it's well
let me just get that I was.
This.
used verified the problem on.
Hey for.
Page eleven.
There's.
There's a conversation about a
person with knowledge of the new
role but by a government
regulatory authority.
And then it goes on the state of
New Mexico Indian nation tribe
or pueblo artists that
participate in its medical
cannabis programs.
I had a constituent.
That.
Asked me if.
Eight.
A person
who was in the United States.
Of without proper documentation
would they be able to
participate.
Work.
For.
For B. L. R. V. legal to
purchase cannabis from one of
these facilities that.
Are prescribed throughout the.
Madam chair representative so so
the the section that you're
referring to on page eleven
really goes to to the issue of
of people who reside out of
state but who have a medical
cannabis rack the card now to
the second part of the question
would somebody who is in the
country undocumented it can they
participated in the retail
aspect of adult use cannabis and
the answer is yes.
What documentation with they
used to to prove the age.
Madam madam chair and and
Representative if they are a
residents the state of New
Mexico they will probably have
access to either a state issued
ID or driver's license which is
what folks use now to do
everything from banking to
purchasing all fall.
So I guess my point is what they
have to have a government issued
ID in order to participate.
madam chair and and
Representative yes the the the
the regulation Department
through its through its working
the rulemaking process will
we'll you know ensure that there
are rules that speak to that
fact I am more likely than not
for anyone of us who enters one
of these establishments and
attempts to purge is a no use
cannabis we will have to show
proof of age are usually through
the use of a government issued
identification card.
Thank you Representative on page
twelve nine nine and TM.
the bill purports to be
consistent with industry
standards can you tell me where
they came from and where can I
get a copy of these industry
standards who wrote you you know
what what what what are they.
Where did they come from.
Thanks for the question madam
chair and and Representative all
all take a stab at it and then
I'll look to my experts but you
know other as other states have
legalized industry a cannabis
industry across these different
states I think have created a
number of different standards
from you know from growing
outside to growing inside two
manufacturing process sees too
you know proper retail
you know
Rules and regulations and so my
assumption is that a lot that's
what they would look to for
those standards I'm not sure
that there is one set of
standards that residing one
potential data bank for example
although I would assume that
that's probably a business of
itself now as more states
legalize I'm sure that there's
an entrepreneur out there who is
banking all of these different
industry standards were
different states and then
providing them to states that
are looking to legalize.
So
just to be clear madam chair and
and Representative is there AT
is there any granted industry
standards out there that I could
look at to verify that what we
are proposing meets industry
standards Madam chair
representative all Alaska either
the superintendent or miss
coffin box to to jump in and
find the answer well I do a
quick search myself okay thank
you Sir.
Madam chair and representative
I'm not aware of any such
sort of industry standard as you
have described it.
Well.
Matt
Madam chair and representative
of.
Nine eight through a line
eleven.
The bill says no later than
January first twenty twenty two
the division's shell promulgate
rules that are consistent with
industry standards necessary for
the division carry out its
duties.
Pursuant to the cannabis
regulation act as follows so
what you're telling me is there
are no industry standards
available well madam chair and
representative of I don't know
that that's completely accurate
I mean just doing a quick search
are there are a number of
different associations that have
listed a number of different
standards including focus
standards dot org the cannabis
industry dot org
there is one on cannabis
indicated security my assumption
is that the good folks at the
regulation and licensing
department I would probably do a
a a literature review of all of
these different sources I think
the I think what makes
Kaltenbach was referring to is
not a you know there's not a
national.
Repository of industry standards
that New Mexico is going to look
to I think that we're gonna have
to look through the different
states
hold public and private entities
to see what those standards are
and New Mexico is it promulgates
its rules and regulations that
those rules and regulations will
you know to what extent more or
parallel those that are out
there already in other states so
I I don't think that the
you know I I don't think that
we're we're we're embarking on a
legalization framework that has
no standards I just don't think
there's a national repository of
standards that we would be
looking into the way we would
for example to manufacture
vehicle tires I'm sure there's a
repository of standards to do
that with this particular
industry the lack of federal
action to make it legal I think
creates a patchwork of different
standards that we will have to
look to.
I appreciate that representative
madam chair is there a
recognized national association
that is develop industry
standards.
To your knowledge Madam chair
representative recognized by by
a particular government entity
or what do you mean by that well
I was trying to figure out what
she meant by it on line line I
mean when.
I mean.
Consistent with industry
standards necessary is the
language in the bill and I was
just trying to figure out.
And I did a little search on my
own madam chair representative
and I was able to find what I
would consider a national
recognized association and I
think you said early on we're
the fourth or the fifth estate
force I believe it was in the
nation in order it just caught
me.
I was just trying to figure out.
Are we.
Heading off into the front here
all by herself or is there some
basis for what we're doing.
Well madam chair and and
Representative that's a great
question I mean I I think that
we we would be the fourth or
fifth state to to legalize
through the legislative process
but we will be the fifteenth to
legalize all together and many
of those states that have
legalized before us have done so
through ballot initiatives I
don't think we're walking in
blind at all first of all I
think that we have some pretty
good at standards that have been
set forth by the medical
cannabis industry over the last
fifteen years in New Mexico
whether it's growing or
manufacturing or retail whether
it's independent testing quality
control I think a lot of that
stuff we already have to the
medical program now if we're
looking at industry standards
across the country again I mean
I think this is going to take
some some shoe leather for more
for more folks are regulation
licensing I'm looking right now
at the at the National
Association of let's see when we
get this right the national
standards for the responsible
cannabis industry and this is a
you know an organization that is
providing guidance to the
different industries within the
cannabis industry on what those
best practices are so I suspect
that the regulators will take
all of that into account
including as I said earlier the
standards that have been set by
the medical cannabis industry
New Mexico.
Thank you for that not looked at
the national standards for
cannabis in.
Representative early in your
Introduction of the bill you
talked about eight all that was
seventy four percent I believe
is a member ditch quoted can you
tell me where who did that
Poland what what group was so.
Yes madam chair representative
the drug policy alliance
actually Commission The that
poll and all have Emily dive a
little bit deeper into the ins
and outs of that poll because I
I do think it's interesting to
see how it.
You know how how it relates
particularly to every corner of
the state so on and we do want
to talk about the pope please.
Sure madam chair representative
that whole it was done this past
fall and it was done across the
state with likely but New Mexico
voters and
Quickly if you have specific
questions about the poll the
we've been using
The poster for many years so you
know we've seen.
the the change in public opinion
so we've been asking the same
questions and what it showed was
that seventy five percent of
voters were in support of
legalization.
Age group and Bob where those
hello these are
that all voters so eighteen
years and older.
Representative and and this
because of equity please go to
the chair.
I apologize madam chair and
representative those were at
ages eight for for boaters so
eighteen and older.
And madam chair and
represented Mr but can you give
me any more details on the.
All maybe this economic.
The first in the group that was
coming is.
Can you tell me more about the
group other than just eighteen
and older.
it was almost equally square by
By gender if we looked at can
break down by
political party if you would
like so democratic voters
support was near universal at
ninety four percent
independent support legalization
at seventy eight percent and
There were and then if you
looked at it was a pretty good
Knicks of ethnicity we also over
sampled native American voters
across
who also showed majority support
for legalization I can pull up
the crossed if you'd like to
dive down that's fine I was just
trying to find out
madam chair and and
Representative Stratton back
exactly.
where the poll was.
I mean they're just to say we
had Apollo we can all get Apollo
I'm just trying to figure out.
Who it was that was hello I can
go on a little bit
Representative on page twenty
two twenty one and twenty two on
page twelve it's talked about
tracking record keeping and
tracking of cannabis from seed
and tails sale can you describe
that process for me.
What you believe the process
with the.
Madam chair and and and
Representative and you said
bottom of page twenty one and
twenty two no on page twelve
line twenty one and twenty two
I'm sorry got it thank you.
Yes so thank you madam chair
representative if we look at the
a little bit above that no later
than January one twenty twenty
two the division will promulgate
rules are consistent with
industry standards are for the
division to carry out duties
pursuant to the cannabis
regulation act as follows.
and then goes on to say cannabis
establishments record keeping
track of cannabis from seed to
sale those are rules that will
be set up by the by the
department
prior you know by that date and
I would imagine and and you know
US department three oh please
jump right in but I would
imagine that this would entail
some sort of proper mechanism so
that these are these applicants
for licenses can can track their
product all the way from C. to
sell I'm sure a lot of it will
be electronic sure others we
used paper you know it's it's a
process that will be developed
by the regulators to present
three oh go ahead.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative so the department
of health currently has a system
that tracks the cannabis plants
from the sea to the sale and
it's a pretty comprehensive
program they're able to tell how
many plants there are they're
able to tell how much is sold so
that program would just continue
to be used to figure out now the
only thing Madam chair
representative that we would not
do for adult use is the medical
program keeps track of how much
a medical patient purchases
because they have a certain
amount that they're who is
considered to be an adequate
supply we will not be under this
act of the department is not
authorized to take any
information other than that a
person is of legal age to
purchase the cannabis so we
won't be keeping track of that
sales specifically to a specific
person but that does happen with
medical patients right now.
But for the the madam chair and
and Representative and by the
way good to see you again
For the recreational that will
not occur is that correct.
Madam chair representative it's
good to see you too and that is
correct the we will not be
keeping track of who
particularly purchased adult use
cannabis okay thank you for that
Madam chair representative
mystery of.
I'm in may be I'm not gonna take
the words from Representative
Martinez's math if you may want
to take this but on page
thirteen lines six through nine
there is
the description of a person is
twenty one years are old or
older shop purchased shall not
purchase more than two ounces of
cannabis in a time and goes on
to the extracted in the the
edibles my question is.
You may have just answered it.
There will not be any I mean a
person can buy two ounces at
that time.
Does that mean that a person can
go five times a day and by two
ounces of time and is that going
to be tracked or is what's your
answer no it's not going to be
tracked.
Yes so the managers of that the
answer is yes the the answer is
is folks could potentially go to
different establishments
and purchased more now you know
it is legal to have it on you
right so so you you probably do
want to
you know not do that but yet
technically you could do that
and we're not going to track
that.
Well as I read the bill and you
please correct me if I'm wrong
Madam chair representative
There's no.
There's no
Limit on how much a person could
have been there all.
As the speaker talked about
there was no limit on how much
you how many.
Beer or whatever but so a person
could stockpile.
and no amount of cannabis if he
or she was willing to buy at it
finances at a time more yes I
think it was
Well plants for House so six
plants person even if you had
five people in the house but you
could have five people by and
two ounces of peace multiple
times a day from the same
establishment if they can stand
at that wall so that's okay.
Page
Fourteen.
Okay on the bottom of page
thirteen there is talk about
procedures that promote and
encourage full participation in
the cannabis industry governed
by the cannabis regulation Act
by Representative committees
that have been
disproportionately harm can you
described in the.
How the community would be
disproportionately harmed.
In the cannabis Act world.
Yes madam chair and and
representative so you know if we
look at the history of the war
on drugs overwhelmingly.
enforcement of those laws have
fallen on.
What color particularly in New
Mexico you're looking at that
Latino native American rural
communities lower income
communities these are
communities that have bore the
brunt of the war on drugs and so
what we're asking the department
to do is to create procedures
that will promote the
participation of these
communities in this new industry
because as we've heard before
this new industry is potentially
going to make some people very
wealthy I'm and it would be a
real shame if we don't take
affirmative steps to ensure that
those same communities can have
access to that new industries so
that's what the language is
referring to are on the bottom
of page thirteen in the top of
the page fourteen and if you all
gone down and that line eight
through eleven there is
Not unusual language but there
is language that says procedures
that promote encourage racial
ethnic gender geographic
diversity and New Mexico
residents see among license
applicants licensees and
cannabis industry employees.
Applicants.
Even the licensees.
But when you talk about and the
best industry imports.
Do you see that being.
To an area or statewide to me
what what are you contemplating
and that if you write that or
issue remote yes.
Well you know I think that my my
hope for this new industry is
that people from you know people
from diverse communities
including your Geographic
different geographic locations
are participating in the
industry highs so this could
mean a number of things I mean
this could be you know ongoing
training this could be you know
access to resource guides to
help people connect with maybe
low low interest capital to
start the business when it comes
to employees you know I I would
hope that is we see the
potential of this of this new
industry New Mexico that we
would take affirmative steps to
ensure that communities all
across the state are benefiting
from this you know over the last
week I've heard a lot from a
from a advocates in rural
communities who were saying wait
a minute we want to make sure we
are included to in this and so
for me this is the kind of
language that can help create
those pathways in a number of
different ways I mean I
obviously we can't dictate
everything in in in a bill but
we are putting a lot of this on
our regulators to come up with
these different
ideas policies and procedures to
help
ensure diversity in this
industry from from the the
wealthiest of of licensees all
the way down to the employee who
is you know serving the cannabis
to the to the customer.
Thank you for that I I think
that's going to be challenging
in many ways but we'll get
through that
On page nineteen.
J..
Yes.
Wording is the division shell
monitors line demand of Canada's
drugs started in New Mexico by
licensees and president and
present annually the appropriate
interim committee of the
legislature.
In that.
Made me remember.
I think
When we.
Yes the gambling
bill.
Media contact me years ago.
Legalized gambling.
Probably is the right way to say
it there was a report that was
supposed to be generated
annually.
I don't think it's ever been
done are you aware of that are
you are you aware of what I'm
talking about Representative.
Madam chair representative I've
been in interim committees where
we've heard from gaming
operations I'm not sure of that
refers specifically to gaming
compacts I'm not sure about the
language in the gaming compacts
that requires annual reports to
interim committees yeah yeah I'm
sure we'll hear more about it
tomorrow but I I I don't believe
that report has it ever been.
produced and and I would
encourage you.
To.
Add language to the S. that not
only.
Stated that it would but some
follow up and some chief to make
sure that any of because this is
a big stat
we haven't done anything.
As we're required to on the
gaming I'm so and I think
Eight report we should be
required in what and the
legislature should ensure that
it is done on a timely basis
Page twenty four.
Winds.
There is there.
Is a statement about driving
while impaired.
you know as well as I do that
the state the.
aspects of this has to be
paramount on our minds.
And.
It's my understanding that there
are limited.
Procedures.
Accurately.
Ascertain levels of impairment.
Do you know has there been any
improvements in the technology.
as you have been investigating
this that would.
allow law enforcement to gain
definition to impairment.
I'm Madam chair representative
you know that there are there
are some out there I'm aware of
one in particular in fact they
came to the state capital I
think it was two years ago and
put together a a presentation
for provided towards and and
department of public safety and
person and and state police and
if I remember correctly was some
sort of breathalyzer I I don't
know that it's I don't know that
it's in the market yet I think
it was still in development
stage that is that is one that
I'm aware of of course local
state and local law enforcement
agencies have had the problem of
of and we as a society have had
the problem of of impaired
driving for a long time and so
what we've developed is the use
of drug recognition experts
across of law enforcement
agencies across the state and
that is currently my
understanding my understanding
is that that is currently how
impaired driving is is measured
for things that are not you know
although hall related and that
can be detected detected through
a breathalyzer test
you know up drug driving is
illegal today and drug driving
will be illegal to Morrow and
even after this bill passes if
it passes.
and so the challenge for us the
state will be to continue for
the time being to invest in
those drug recognition experts
to you know invest in the
development of these
technologies and like I said in
the previous committee the the
I'm sure there's a number of
entrepreneurial spirits out
there that are already
developing the next big
technology that will be useful
in this space you know as as
more and more states legalize
because I do think that it's
something that that is going to
need to be developed in the
meantime you know we will we
will continue to invest and
ensure that our law enforcement
agencies have the appropriate
resources to ensure that the
tackle the issue of drug driving
one last point I'll make madam
chair and representative is when
it comes to impaired driving.
You know a lot of it is
enforcing the law and getting
those drivers off the road but
so much more of it is preventing
and I believe our state has has
done a good job of really really
targeting and and ensuring that
those messages are getting out
to the public I mean you know
I'll tell you what you know for
people of my generation are you
know who who kind of came of age
with some of the most tragic
stories of of the W. as in our
state people of my generation
are are very very scared of the
impact of the Y. I made a
comment in the previous
committee like I'm the kind of
person who who after one beer
I'm not gonna drive I don't care
funded or not I'm just not gonna
do it it's not worth it in any
way shape or form and I think
that that's the cultural shift
that will begin to see not only
with alcohol but also with
cannabis so I think it's a great
question and it's it's one of
the
one of the most interesting
tension points in this
discussion of cannabis
legalization right how do we
ensure safety on our roads and
of course we're all committed to
ensuring that safety on our
roadways.
All right and I join you in that
the representative but
my point Watson I think you
confirm that today it's really
hard to for a police officer.
To
ascertain.
Impairment.
Of a marijuana cannabis driver.
with today's technology it's.
It's it's lacking.
as we go on to
Hello.
On page twenty four.
Paragraph at.
The director shall not renew the
license go on and it.
But there's no what shall not
what I would call typical
Enforcement language which shall
not it should be added which
shall not be unreasonably
withheld.
I mean there's no penalty for
not doing it on a there's a
timeline but if it's not done
A person should have.
A.
At eight.
The loss of a mechanism to to
and sure that the secretary the
department
just didn't say I didn't get it
done I'm not ready yet I mean
there's no provision there so I
think that needs to be looked at
on down on on line twenty one
on.
There is a statement that says
the division may require
licenses to request information.
Why does that not say shell.
Why why should.
The.
Not require a license.
Miss madam chair representative
all I'll have to present three
you answer that question for you
okay thank thank you madam chair
representative so if you look at
the entirety of the subsection
eight this marks off saying that
the department can't require any
information and so that second
sentence that you just read that
we may collect it is is an
exception for that in other
words we still can collected
under the medical program it's
not necessary and we may at some
point find that we don't need to
collect that information so it
wouldn't be necessary for it to
say shall but we needed that
second sentence in order to
allow us to continue to collect
that kind of demographic
information about medical
cannabis medication and I
appreciate that but earlier in
my line of questioning the
representative and grant me if
I'm wrong hi we are of.
But I I understood you to say
that these.
Yes I would need a record eight
government issued license.
They would need some
identification and and and and
and H. you're exactly right it
says except for verification of
age but then it goes down and
says may and I just wondered if
that is correct.
Madam chair can I Representative
please remind the members in the
distance to please go through
the chair.
Mr speaker.
so that was my the reason for my
mic my question was.
madam chair and representative
Sarinana if they.
Lysons.
at bank of America I do is
required.
This doesn't say that it says
may and so my.
Question was is that right and
is that
Yes the same back up but the
what I'd heard and madam.
Trujillo Madam chair
representative you know what my
my answer to the previous
question was that the the the
body of the bill here requires
age verification and then what I
said after that was that the
department the division would
come up with that mechanism and
very likely it's going to be a
government issued ID I would
assume that's the easiest way to
a ascertain verification of age.
And if I'm correct
superintendent please correct me
but I that's my assumption thank
you madam chair representative
so so this isn't about whether
or not they have to have the
medical registry card they will
still have to have the medical
registry card to be in that
program and to have the tax no
taxes on the cannabis that they
purchase but whether or not we
continue to collect demographic
information about them it's not
necessary for us to do that
because the department of health
will collecting that information
as part of the registry system.
This is at the cash register
this is information at the cash
register Madam chair
representative.
Thank you
Mr shio.
Madam chair and representative
on page twenty six nine fifteen
there is the requirement that
cannabis establishment licensees
to ensure that it least ten
percent of their cannabis for
instance.
Their cannabis in stock on a
monthly basis is designated.
Or sell the qualified patients
is there is there reporting that
goes with that
On a monthly basis has that
tracked.
Madam chair and representative
all defer to superintendent the
on that one.
Thank you madam chair
representative so that of the
subparagraphs that you're
looking at are in the event that
there's a there's a shortage
right has to be a shortage in
the supply and yes that is part
of what's kept track of on a on
a regular basis how much supply
is in the system and the
department of health actually
has that on no less than a
quarterly basis at this point
and regulations licensing
department would continue to do
that as part of that seed to
sale.
Record.
Thank you madam chair and and
Representative mystery of that's
exactly what I want I want to
know that are you looking
quarterly to make sure that
adequate supplies will not only
to the recreational use or to
the matter.
There has been a number of
constituents.
From all over the state.
New Mexico.
Madam chair that have popped
about.
Water Rights.
In.
Whether a license the producer
has to.
Find.
Approved of.
Water which is.
I it's kind of troubling and.
To me at least.
It would only succinct and and I
believe it is your intent that
that is only a concern on large
growers is that correct
Representative and and madam
chair.
Madam chair representative I I
think that's a concern period in
the state like New Mexico.
Well I and red Madam chair
representative that you know a
mature plant was taken about
three gallons a day.
And
I was kinda lost a where you
where you might be coming from
it so if you have a we're our
ditch growing madam chair and
and Representative in downtown
Albuquerque inside of a.
Building.
And they own they have provided
for.
You know water to be of service
that building and they are
willing to pay for it are you
looking at a different.
pay a different price for water
I mean.
Is there some method that you
are foreseen to try to control
the amount of water to this
product Madam chair
representative or if I water
meter and I can afford to pay
for it.
Don't I have the right to buy
that water I want to make where
where do we draw the line here.
Thank you madam chair
representative so it is a
condition of licensing pursuing
to this to this act of the
applicant of to the license has
usually will write to a
commercial water supply
in your example you know I I I I
the that large scale cannabis
operation would be treated like
any other large scale commercial
business yeah I'm not sure Madam
chair representative if if there
are different rates for those
kinds of customers
you know I I I don't know the
answer to that specific question
but they would be treated the
same and so in downtown
Albuquerque where we have tons
of warehouse space where we
probably will have some of these
operations set up shop other
gonna have to abide by all the
all the local rules all the
business registration rules that
going place there and then
they're gonna have to deal with
the other cricket radio county
water utility authority to see
through their water and then
when they go apply for their
license are gonna have to show
all the documentation to ensure
that in fact they are in line
with whatever the the the
division is requiring of them.
Thank you that Representative
madam chair.
Yeah I.
I believe that that and then.
Water is something we're gonna
have to work on I I don't know
the right way to do that I don't
know that a person that decides
to grow.
medical cannabis should be
treated from different and look
at it decides to grow.
Maybe send a warehouse I mean if
you have the right to the water.
And have the capacity to pay for
it that to me is a little
different issues up
Representative I think I'm gonna
stop right there for.
For now I have probably another
hundred questions as I read
through the bill today
But I will list some
Maybe we won't have as long a
discussion to mark so
Representative thank you very
much
Madam chair thank you.
Thank you Representative.
Representative Akan.
Thank you madam chair.
This is just a question of
questions one then this happened
earlier in the conversation.
I heard this Mr speaker staff
about
the the fourth degree felony for
providing as a minor with
cannabis.
Anyway.
Is there a
and I find displace.
Thing is the L..
The range is that there's really
and
sixty day service you are.
The
I'm receiving all calls code
The three meals for those free.
How are we going to in that the
for the for the reseller for
providing a minor with cannabis.
Thank you madam chair
representative I'll go on so you
need in a previous committee the
question came up and as we did
more reserves we figured out
that in fact providing cannabis
to a minor would fall under the
the the purview of of
contributing to the delinquency
of a minor which is a fourth
degree felony
and so you know that particular
illegal act would be captured by
that statute and we don't see a
need to include a kind of a
specific crime when it's already
captured by another statute.
Madam chair of rules do you are
you sure is going to be selling
can contributing to the
delinquency of a minor it's not
a misdemeanor madam chair
representative all the for to my
experts I think you still on
here Mister Dorsey she's are
criminalized for its just wait.
Chair.
Representative I am just barely
awake
but thank you for the question
Representative all clone
chairwoman section thirty dash
six dash three is the section of
law that defines contributing to
the delinquency of a minor and
it is categorized as a fourth
degree felony and essentially
what that law does is it
provides that any time a an
adult acts in a way or admits
performance of the duty that
tends to cause and do excuse me
a minor to act in dealing with
manner they can be charged with
a felony under the statute and
the case law that has been
developed pursuant to that
statute from the accident back
in nineteen sixty three and it's
amendment in nineteen ninety has
developed a wide range of
factual scenarios that satisfy
the statute and that includes
things like providing alcohol to
a minor providing illicit or non
prescription drugs to a minor
providing fake ID's to a minor
and any other number of
Potentially delinquent acts.
Chair and representative.
Mr Dorsey what I'm trying to
find in the legislation can you
show me where in the legislation
into first of that for the
reseller New York to the
delinquency to a minor Madam
chair representative it is not
in the legislation.
It is not.
So madam chair representative
how are we going to enforce
that.
Madam chair representative
because it already exists in law
right if if if this bill passes
and and the governor signs it
and I find cannabis to to
somebody under the age of
eighteen I would be charged
through the statue that was
Dorsey cited I don't have to be
charged by this statue right
here I would be charged by that
other statute.
Madam chair representative if I
may put you back on to that just
add an additional piece of
information.
Speaking to the judge al cone in
this context your honor in this
we don't need to added into this
particular piece of legislation
because that statute is already
in effect in already very well
developed and regularly use in
fact in the last I would say
year and a half or two years I
actually handle Senator
magistrate court cases where
individuals were charged at
least initially of prior to a
preliminary hearing in the
magistrate court without fourth
degree felony specifically
providing for providing drugs to
under age individuals and so
regardless of whether they
cannabis regulation Act passes
the legislature during the
special session or not that
remedy will still be available.
Thank you okay okay so or
million or where we're coming
from and where the judges had
died Representative Ely stop not
a way to get but okay when you
go to the alcohol to the
providing on call to a minor it
is very easy I.
And if the fees yes so I would
just be one and we the
prosecutor thirty can so that in
front of the judge sentence
there.
Okay.
No this the prosecutor during
the DA is a little before the
judge and he's going to say
eight hundred and seventy two
being this year tell me again.
This person.
For the reseller only because he
provided in this the minor thank
you and I know who's in drugs
okay when I see error was
cocaine whatever.
Okay you know I can see that but
I don't find cannabis in that
category.
Sure.
Chairman or chairwoman
Representative if I can respond
to that your honor that's a very
good point and I understand the
distinction that you're trying
to make we have one statute that
very explicitly defines what
happens when we're talking about
giving alcohol to a minor and it
is true that contributing to the
delinquency of a minor doesn't
specifically say providing
cannabis is a felony however
Schedule at all or if it's
prescription it's a violation of
the law.
Okay thank you thank you madam
chair.
I'm just worried okay in the
number just to explain that I'm
worried as an expungement bill
coming up.
Okay inspired meals gonna say
we're gonna clear anything
having to do with marijuana or
you know just as a misdemeanor
offense.
So
This is.
In the.
In the whole.
K. lowered and I don't see the
definition if the definition
really defying that we're like I
said the prosecution journey the
DA can just the letter from the
that judges in there it is you
can see it just sells.
So that's my one concern okay
I'll leave it at that does not
on and then to be another one
changing things but I am
concerned that there is going to
be a problem.
Number two Representative do you
I have a question that came up
in the analysis Lucy will
Academy in order to get to the
end of the line where I live
that.
You got a pass through
restorations everywhere which is
federal land how am I going to
get ten of this.
From Albuquerque or anywhere in
the state.
To work to my area of the state.
Hello through.
Madam chair representative you
know I I I would assume that the
the village of Milan is is is it
on tribal land.
The general really is is is city
landed to.
Instead of property or state or
municipality but everything
surrounding the Williams should
you read this is the new in
lander Federal and.
So we'll be able to bring it
will be able to travel and bring
in cannabis through federal land
anywhere in the state of New
Mexico.
Yes.
Madam chair representative no I
I was being for report federal
federal I mean I think we know
that there's still a federal
prohibition
you know a couple of things to
me at the number one depending
on the number of of people who
live in in the village of Milan
you know it's it might be a good
business opportunity for
somebody to set up a dispensary
in the village so that you don't
have to deal with driving from
Albuquerque back to Milan.
That's number one but at the
same time
you know I think that what we've
seen with the federal government
it under under the previous
under the two previous
administrations are three I
should say now.
Is been a relatively hands off
approach in states that have are
there medical cannabis or adult
use cannabis and so I would I
would seriously doubt that you
would have to face.
You know enforcement mechanisms
necessarily
I know that's not the that's not
the best answer you know I think
I think what we would want to
know is that in fact you will
not be.
you know charger prosecuted by
the feds in that situation but
it's it's highly unlikely it's
not perfect and I realize in a
state like New Mexico with with
you know with so much federal
and you know the and and federal
jurisdiction that that could be
an issue.
Okay so so madam chair and then
the Representative do a.
So yes.
Dr.
Good.
Not allow.
Get the best with the land.
Well.
Senator I believe trust some
tribes don't allow for liquor to
pass you know to be on their
land to write.
and so I I would assume it it
follows the same sort of logic.
Well.
Madam chair representative
pretty much most of the tribal
entities are supported casinos
or a.
Know the allow us a long call on
their lands but I haven't heard
of anything of anybody saying
that you cannot.
Because no federal law again
all of the hall coming into the.
Federal and.
there is this federal stating
that hangs over everybody that
could be a possibility and could
be a problem.
And and
that is a very for point men
chair representative.
Thank you madam chair I I'm
done.
Thank you Representative dot com
next I have Representative
reading.
Representative Rehm.
We're going.
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair.
Several of.
General questions some specific
things in the bill and I'm
probably not your kernel mall
it's getting late.
One major concern madam chair is
the impact the more important
marijuana use may have on.
Young people I know that this
bill always.
Authorize.
Sell of marijuana to adults.
Age twenty one and above.
But I am really concerned about
the.
The impact that has on.
Younger younger people
particularly with respect to
their brain development because
of.
The studies that I've seen.
Indicate that.
Marijuana use.
Development of.
Slows the development of.
A young person's brain and so
I'd like to hear some commentary
from the.
Representative years as to.
Whether or not
you should be given any credence
at AM number two how the state.
Is.
Prepared to deal with any
of personal facts regarding that
issue.
Thank you madam chair
representative yeah I would
agree I mean I don't think young
people should be using.
A self says whether it's
cannabis tobacco or alcohol I
think we were very clear on the
science of brain development
and and how how how how how
negatively can affect young
people are so we're in agreement
there
I think the fact is that
cannabis is readily available
today our whether it's for
adults or for children and I'm
not talking eagle cannabis to
the medical program I'm talking
illicit market cannabis cannabis
that is often times laced with
chemicals and other very
dangerous drugs.
Through this legalization
framework I believe that not
only will we will we be able to
generate resources to reinvest
in those types of prevention and
education programs but we can
actually regulate and track and
understand the cannabis that
exist in our state in a much
better way than we can right now
similar to the D. W. I. issue
By legalizing adult use cannabis
we are not legalizing cannabis
use for for young people and and
for for teenagers at all and as
we heard with the previous line
of questioning you know there
are some pretty severe
consequences for adults who
choose to provide cannabis to
young people but I agree with
your with your first point.
Brain development is is brain
development and young people
should not be using any of those
substances you know at least not
until they're of age.
Question would be the.
What.
Does that affect your rate.
Madam chair representative.
Madam chair representative at
what age does it what.
What is the the brain
development issue based on your.
Well madam chair of the that the
the the I'm I've I've seen
different to different up to
date on this right I mean I I I
believe for for many might
actually be later you know
twenty five twenty six
you know and and and for some of
us you might be forty or fifty
if you ask my wife about me
probably just what should say
but you know at the same time
you know we've made it a policy
decision to allow twenty one and
older to consume alcohol twenty
one and older to consume tobacco
this simply tracks with both of
those substances.
service
For good or bad
May not have the the same.
Fax six seven if they call
themselves we're
Continue to abuse act does
damages lever and and maybe
organs but the maybe Dawn
doesn't do some of the damage to
the the.
Marijuana can do to two one
one's brain that there are also
studies madam chair
representative that indicate
that and I think.
There's also a number of studies
that indicate that.
Certain drug use.
Correspond with certain
Mental.
Illnesses
and I've read
Representative some studies that
that link marijuana use with a
higher incidence of
schizophrenia have you seen any
of those studies.
Madam chair representative I've
I've read quite a few studies so
the past few years on this stuff
and and I I have seen some of
those reports.
Madam chair representative of.
You know one in right and I I
admit I have not got me through
the entire bill I'm.
Pretty good what is through but
have not the red to the to the
final page of the.
Is there anything in the bill
that addresses how the state of
New Mexico.
Is going to respond to some of
these mental health issues that
that are in the studies that the
you're just the stuff that
you're aware of this or anything
in the bill that the is going to
prompt the state of New Mexico
to engage in some of proactive
work.
To still work to
Therefore maybe some of these
occurrences.
Yeah thank you madam chair
representative so you know I am
aware of those studies you know
I I
with a lot of the studies
because cannabis is still
illegal at the federal level the
the research has been quite
limited and and you know thank
god for the medical cannabis
programs across the different
states and now dual use cannabis
you know one of the licenses in
our bill is actually a research
license also that New Mexico can
really you know be ahead of the
game on these issues because the
research that you and I have
read I think continues to be
limited you know this
schizophrenia cannabis question
it's it's unclear if it's kind
that's costing the schizophrenia
or fixed schizophrenia that's
pushing people into not only
cannabis but of the hall another
another other substances other
drugs so you know that link
there I think it's still it's
still kind of problematic in
terms of what the state will be
doing you know of one of the
things that this bill does is it
establishes a public health
advisory committee within the
department of health in part of
the work that they're supposed
to be doing is publishing these
these public health reports for
the division and for the
legislature to to see among
other things to see what the
impact of legalization is our on
state DWI on on on young people
using on on behavioral health
you know other aspects of this
and so we will be able to be
better informed I believe as a
result of our framework with
regard to those particular
issues.
Or
sure Representative.
Person who believes that once
the genie is out of the bottle
you can't get her back at.
And.
What my my real concern deal
with with what you just stated
in that.
We're going to study some of
this stuff.
But even if we determine down
the road that there is a higher
incidence of.
Do you live that there's higher
incidence of schizophrenia that
there's a higher incidence of
maybe lack of brain development.
And go on down the line.
were no we're not going to get
to go back and so you know this
bill.
This process that we are going
through right now
Yeah yeah it's pretty pretty
important for us as a state.
And so I'm really concerned
about the outcome
M. the studies that have been
done indicate some some problems
and the up the R. it looks like
we're on a course to to
disregard some of those studies
and maybe maybe part of the bill
bills with some research I I
read that more in terms of
research
the cannabis industry of stock
not reserves are some of the bad
effects of that I'll take your
at your word the baby if that
was the latter but I am really
worried that if we see some some
L. affects some L. facts of
frankly some other states of
saying.
And you have I don't I haven't
yet seen anything in the bill
that tells me what the state of
New Mexico is going to do to
address those
Problems problems that I think
are are foreseeable based upon
the experience of Washington
based upon experience in
Colorado are the two that I've
seen
and so I I I was hoping you
would tell me yes we we've we've
those are we've dealt with
government paragraph or whatever
but
I I just by you is there
anything in the bill right now
the that the
allows New Mexico to be
proactive with respect to.
Largely those mental health
issues that I just point out.
Madam chair representative yes I
mean I think this whole
framework is very proactive
you know by legalizing adult use
cannabis it doesn't mean it'll
use cannabis is of a setting up
a plop down on our state
cannabis has been here for ever
and unfortunately the cannabis
that is access right now by
people not on the medical
program is cannabis through the
illicit market much of which is
going to be.
Probably bad and toxic for them
so I think that we are taking a
very proactive approach to the
issues you're you're raising now
with regard at you know again
going back to the study said at
the beginning of the debate
right
part of the room part of the
reason why we don't know enough
is because at the federal level
this is still very cool and so
research has been very hard to
come by again states with
medical programs in state some
states with adult use programs
are now researching and you're
absolutely right the research
license under this bill is not
reserves for the cannabis
industry about how to be more
profitable the research really
is about what are all the other
benefits what are the risks one
of the things we should be aware
of in cannabis and that's why
we're creating a specific
license to to approve that
particular activity.
You know one of the things we
had in a previous version of
this bill a year to a goal was
actually funding to help support
prevention education programs
and to help support behavioral
health programs we have to
remove those funding sources
all primarily because we know we
were kind of putting the the the
cart before the horse right you
know there is no money revenue
touched it is yet but we're
already spending the money so we
pull those off but my
expectation is to come back in
the following session and
probably establish some of those
funding sources to ensure that
people who might be suffering
from those you know mental and
behavioral health issues
actually have a little bit more
money to provide services to
them.
Chair representative would you
have any estimates of.
What.
Those costs might be or or maybe
a percentage of the tax revenues
that come into the state what
the percentage of that might be
a with respect to those costs of
the state may have to bear.
Well madam chair representative
with regard to the cost it's
it's hard to quantify again the
cost is right here right now
even without this bill right in
you know I guess if we looked at
the at the other version of
house bill two you know the you
appropriations bill from this
past session perhaps we get a
better idea of how much for
investing in behavioral health a
lot of that behavioral health in
this state actually goes into
treating people with the drug
use disorders I mean I can tell
you none of them have a cannabis
use disorder most of the people
that are being treated under
those programs are gonna be
people are on on opioids or or
other hard drugs not cannabis
but I think it's a hard number
to quantify when we have no
sense of how much cannabis out
there right now and the quality
of the cannabis.
On that point.
Madam chair.
Yes go ahead Representative arms
if I can just stress madam chair
and representative Nibert that
Unless it's legal so that we can
control the quality you don't
know that whether if there's
issues around brain development
or schizophrenia you don't know
that it's pure cannabis either
or what it's laced with or how
it's grown and what toxins and
contaminants might be in that
and so your issue is
is one of concern and is one of
the primary reasons why I think
we need to legalize it so that
we can regulate it
and control the quality and get
it out of the streets and and on
contaminated and then be able to
research it and get those
answers and are also madam chair
and representative of I just
wanna remind you if you haven't
gotten to that section there's a
pretty stringent regulation
required around packaging and
labeling and marketing so that
it's not attractive to kids so
that it's not easily opened and
being able to access by kids
that's a mistake the Colorado
maybe they because it was a
referendum they didn't have
regulations around packaging and
labeling and that they had a big
problem additionally because it
was packaged often to look like
candy bars or other things that
that kids could for their
parents about a weather what was
that they had
that that was a big lesson
learned from from Colorado in
particular.
Thank you madam chair.
Sure Representative Armstrong in
Colorado I'm I'm not sure they
fully tackle that issue yep
there's still a lot of young
people going to hospital.
due to ingestion of particularly
apples
that the.
Younger but a smaller children
cannot handle
The amount of.
Active ingredients of
Representative some of those
animals and and I think that
problem even persisted that and
I'm not sure that.
That packaging gives us
completely around some of those
problems the the
I'm glad we at least did
something to to make it maybe
not as attractive.
And madam chair and
representative
Representative just pointed out
what one of my over arching use
of this and and I think she may
have answered the question
because it looks to me like you
have
This product.
Is is over to us it seems to me
that in three pages we could do
away with
Illegal aspects and we would
need a hundred seventy nine page
bill we can just declare that is
no longer
Prohibited substance and and go
down the road
but apparently that's not what
we want to do and as I read the
bill it looked to me like.
What this bill in assets does we
support that I've read.
It in essence we're going to
legalize bill the marijuana use
for adults.
And we're gonna turn it over to
the regulation the licensing
department the figure it all out
well but by the way we don't
trust them completely we want to
put some bombs on that's a
settlement and some parameters
on things so so I'd like to hear
from the representative madam
chair
what.
One in the framework that it
sent because the service that
the speaker said earlier is
somewhat compelling to me that
if we're going.
If we're we're going to legalize
marijuana let's just legalize it
not worry about how many plants
people grow let's not worry
about all this regulation and
stuff was just went out there
and what the market control.
And chair on the one forty four
I just wanted to note that
Representative Nibert I accept
the compliment.
my batteries running low so I'm
gonna have to switch your
computer is here so I go dark
you'll you'll know why.
Yes Representative yeah I mean
that's a that's another great
philosophical question right I I
I fall on on your side of the
argument unfortunately number
one and my experience here in
Santa Fe is that nothing can
really be legislated with you
know with one page in fact a lot
of the pages in this bill
particularly toward the back are
you gonna be
you know whether it's Tax Court
criminal court and they just
have to include the entire thing
even though we only strike one
line
so you know that's part of that
the other issue though is you
know we wanna make sure we get
this right I said this a few
weeks ago on the house floor.
You know this is one of the few
times that we get to build an
entire industry from scratch and
so in my opinion you know let's
let's try to do it as as best as
we can to the best of our
ability let's try to get it
right
but your point is well taken
Madam chair representative.
No.
I'm obviously not necessarily in
that yeah in the camp that wants
to legalize it but but to me if
you have been accomplishes all
these great results we could
have done so and a lot less
pages and maybe not have so much
oversight that I think what the
other representative stated is
that the real goal is is to have
a not a little regulatory scheme
but I would say a huge
regulatory scheme that frankly.
Even gets down to the the
telling the businesses how
they're going to two of.
Conduct their business
activities and
you know I I'm I'm not the.
I'm not one that generally
slides government get into that
detail but well let me try to
pick out a few little bitty
problems that the maybe what was
your great effects as the saying
goes on
All.
Well but the bottom of last
three lines
If I understand the the
definitions correctly you can
have a eighteen year old livery
person but that person could not
deliver
This product because they're
under age is that correct.
madam chair and representative
that is correct so my son when
he was in high school we he was
a delivery person for a
pharmacy.
He was probably sixteen
seventeen years old he was the
delivering I suspect
opioids and and a lot of other
things so to people all over
town and yet.
You would prohibit.
A person to be employed.
Under the age of twenty one to
simply be a delivery person if I
read the bill correctly.
Yes madam chair representative.
Okay I I guess you have a good
reason for that madam chair
representative other than you
just don't want that that
particular product being handled
by people under twenty one that
is correct madam chair
representative.
Seventeen.
I'm looking at winds twenty
through twenty three.
is a work licensed person
defined term in the bill
anywhere or is it coming from
some other.
Thank you.
Madam chair representative I
don't think it's a defined term
but I see superintendent Rio
with her hand right so let's put
our.
Thank you madam chair
representative it's actually
defined in the statutory
construction act.
What Jack statutory
construction.
Madam chair representative it's
in the statutory construction
act.
What's the citation of a.
Madam chair in it said twelve
dash to a dash one.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Had it memorized I was just
waiting at fifty second be
forcing it out loud.
Okay getting just getting just
getting.
The
one that is winds twenty and
twenty one and then again and
one twenty three the word
license person appears and it
looks to me like maybe the term
that you were intending to use
will be licensed premises which
is a defined term.
So.
Person appointed to the cannabis
regulatory budget committee
shall not hold any ownership
interest or investment in a
licensed.
Mrs.
The the defined term
but if licensed person is a
defined term elsewhere I don't
know what it means with it
that's what you're intending
that's what you're intending but
in two places that look like
licensed premises
we're we're one of them
what you madam also it talks
about the
Provided that the superintendent
may appoint a person who holds
an ownership interest in a
licensed person as a non voting
member
Yes looking at the.
At the types of businesses of my
own this that would be very few
corporations that have non
voting members.
Google would be one.
there there's a few others that
have a class of stock that is
not voting but generally
corporations have if your
shareholder you have rights to
vote if your partner in a
general partnership you're going
to have the right to vote if
You know there's a number of
business entities where most
people who have an ownership
interest are going to have the
right to vote so.
I was kind of wondering why.
That provision was worded as
it's worth including the.
Defined terms.
Madam chair representative so
that are you looking at the
bottom of the seventeen you
said.
Yes one one the.
Basically eighteen through
twenty four yeah that that
section refers to the cannabis
regulatory advisory committee is
a committee that would be
appointed by regulation and
licensing to help advise the
cannabis control division on a
number of different issues
related to cannabis.
and so that particular line that
you're referring to would allow
somebody who
who
who who has experience.
in as a license person in
cannabis as a non voting member
so they can so provided by an
insect they can vote to avoid a
potential conflict of interest.
Number.
Over on page twenty.
Hi.
Are you looking at the lines
thirteen through sixteen and
later on that program be the.
Talk about we're gonna monitor
changes in cannabis use that and
you want all the stuff broken
down by county race and
ethnicity M. you know I keep
hearing that but we need to get
away from that stuff.
and yet here it is in this bill
and I just question why why do
we need it broken down by by
those things particularly in
this day we're we're trying to
get away from our.
You know those things that I am
trying to prove everyone sign.
Is is there a specific reason
why we need to write it down by
specifically race and ethnicity.
Yeah madam chair representative
I mean I I think I think what we
want to get away from is is
racism right I don't think we
want to get away from
understanding how industry
affect different races
ethnicities
you know in in our state or any
other states so I I the that's
why it's in there I mean I I
don't think I don't.
I don't think color blindness
for.
You know race blind is is is
what we are seeking to do what
we're seeking to do is to
dismantle racism
you madam chair.
And I see to representative
Nibert time my screen.
That will now we're down to one
one one's ready to give up.
Our guests are we've gone to all
The next question is program the
why do we need a safety
committee.
Madam chair representative added
water within the safety
committee up Madam chair
representative yeah this goes to
previous question right about
you know what what kind of
mechanisms we have in place to
to to to address some of the
potential issues that could come
up and so this committee is the
one I was talking about that
will be providing information to
the division to the legislature
on things like child access road
safety workplace safety you know
has there been an increase in
you know in in emergency room
visits you know whatever the
case may be that's why we needed
you know we we are we want to
make sure we know all.
you know the ins and outs of of
these new industries you know
the I I I believe there's a lot
of good that comes with it and
and you know that if if whatever
bad is out there we want to
study it and fix it.
I wish us luck in that regard
all of a few moments ago you
were discussing with
Representative Townsend some
issues on page twenty one
wind seven road safety and
driving while impaired
and and you said something about
the.
That this will result in a
cultural shift after legalized
M. and my observation because I
I have a son that does live in
Denver and lived in Denver when
when they legalize marijuana and
then there was a chef I'm not
sure of the cultural show up but
there was a chef at and.
My experience so we used for the
the.
Here to actor after that the law
went into effect.
Was that you be driving down the
interstate at sixty five miles
an hour and all of sudden you
come upon a car that's for about
twenty five or thirty and smokes
coming out the windows and
everything and.
I can tell you that that that
was putting everyone in danger
and the you know I hope that the
our experience is not to have
that happen in New Mexico but
it's not just a of the weaving
in and out of lanes like you see
we're we're our drivers who are
intoxicated with alcohol you
have people driving that are
really of Bolivia's to.
Everything going around of that
they're not they're not driving
what I would consider unsafely
they're not we've been in and
out there laying serve their
hold their line pretty well but
they're just driving at a
totally inappropriate speed
under the circumstances and the
that in my mind is as dangerous
as as the alcohol impaired
driver group chat maintain away
and that's just a comment yes
from from some of the things I
saw them for
One the page twenty four.
the director shall not renew a
license that they're going
taxpayer with that include
property tax or do we need to
spell out property tax.
That goes to the county.
That would be reported.
Not to the taxation and revenue
department but really the county
treasurer.
So I'm just wondering if if we
need to have another car graph
that would deal with the they're
not away one of their property
taxes.
Good good.
In paragraph G. Madam chair
representative it says no
licensure be transferable or
assignable from a licensee to
another person so basically this
bill will restrain alienation
and you will not be able to
sell.
A business that is engaged in
the transport the growing or
selling the manufacture of these
products or is that really your
attention.
madam chair and representative
Nibert that the intent really is
to ensure that we make clear in
the law that these licenses are
not to be sold or leased the way
we do our liquor licenses now
the selling of the business that
I I feel is a little different
right so if I if if I have a
vertically integrated license
and I have a hundred thousand
dollars worth of equipment I
don't think anything keeps me
from selling all of my equipment
and making my money back plus
more I just cannot sell the
license to operate the business
that new friend that new person
that new venture would have to
get their own license from the
regulation and licensing
department to engage in the
activity.
Representative madam chair and
representative.
That it meant.
Only has value if you can
continue to use current page
that appointment was purchased
at and so no one.
Is going to.
Enter into an agreement to
purchase that business without
some assurance that.
Those licenses
are going to be issued or it can
be transferred and and obviously
that can't be transferred
because we say that we
transferred but I'm I'm just
wondering if that's your your
real and yes it does
You know this would be a bit
unusual in the business sense
and I understand we we created a
real train wreck with with the
Of worker licenses and and I too
would not want to repeat that
but I think that this restraint
on alienation is is there's a
problem and I'm not sure that
that.
This provision of.
In practical terms
what you really want to do I I I
think I think there ought to be
You know these licenses are only
good for a year is that correct
that's correct madam chair
representative
Yeah it seems to me that that
the.
Our.
The statute probably or the bill
I have to say something to the
effect of the the the
The
person intending to acquire.
Bus right all
our qualifications of the
licensee under this.
And make it clear that there is
no assurance that that license
will be renewed at the end of
that year but the certainly
there there should be some
assurance that they will
continue the operation of that
business at least for the the
the duration of the term about
life.
And then make a comment on that
point we're going.
Madam chair the the common law
certainly New Mexico I believe
in every state.
Poll of licenses are not
property their permission from
the state to conduct activity.
You cannot sell a barber's
license are you cannot sell a
medical license you cannot sell
a law license are you cannot
sell your driver's license.
No license maybe so it was a
very odd and.
Basically unprecedented
development that the sale and
transfer of liquor licenses.
What's allowed.
So what we have here is just a
statement that these licenses
are to be treated as every
single other license in the
state of New Mexico Enviva
hunting if I L. tag fishing
license I can't sell or transfer
it.
So madam chair if I have the
Kandace license at a location
and that license is lost for
whatever reason.
The recourse that the licensee
has is to sell the.
Our equipment.
Sell be.
Property sell the intangible
assets to that business so all
of the things are property to
someone who may apply for
license going forward.
In these licenses are going to
be
revoked a lost usually for
pretty good reason.
And anyone who would want to buy
the property will be able to
apply for a new license.
And if they qualify they'll
receive one is we don't have
limits on licenses are under
this proposed law the way that
we do for liquor licenses I
think it's it's best to keep
these licenses.
Why literally every other
license we have madam chair
except for the yes thank you.
Representative madam chair I
hate to disagree with the
speaker but the I do think some
of the examples are particularly
when it goes to L. group here I
think the the tag.
My dad can go on or near Deir
europei
But.
I I realize we're professional
licenses those are a bit
different this is not
necessarily a professional
license it's a license to
conduct business activity yeah
and I think that there are
number of.
Of licenses that businesses
receive that.
Allow the business to be
perpetuated even and I sell
transaction and then when it's
renewed to the next time that it
comes under the blue ant
entertainment.
Excuse me I'd like to ask Miss
Kelly on that point do you have
something on that miss Kelly.
I did just want to kind of
indicate that with all the
licenses that are issued by the
regulation licensing department.
Of the for example building on
what the speaker said of those
licenses are not property and
they do belong to the individual
so if I am a physician or item
by item a contractor license by
the construction industry
division or I'm licensed as the
manufacture home unit if money
licensed as a financial
institution division if I
receive that license from R. O.
D. E. and I want to sell my
business I cannot transfer my
license the license belongs to
me as an individual if I want to
sell my business then the person
purchasing the business from me
must obtain their own license
from our LD.
So this provision in this act is
very recent reasonable and
similar to all the laws that are
regulated by our LD.
Thank.
And madam chair I agree where
it's it's Vigil by the
individual warrants held by the
company.
And is a corporate license
I mean.
I've done several bills were
were licenses get the get
addressed the purchase and sale
agreement and
Generally but yet the.
Dealt with and I'm not sure of
new license issues until the
termination of the old by the.
That's that's just so thank
about
On page twenty five winds ten to
twelve.
So as a licensee may conduct any
lawful activity or in a
combination of law.
What for activities at a
licensed premises.
And except for those under the
liquor control act I just
question with that included
daycare.
Madam chair representative no
because
these types of operations are
not allowed within three hundred
feet of a school or a daycare.
Would there be any other
types of limitations or any
other types of activities are
that we may need to crawl in
that language a little bit.
It just.
Pretty pretty broad the.
And do that except with respect
to look for
That you're gonna have an auto
body shop or or driving school
and.
The.
Yes yes I'm sure yeah
All the ten percent medical
marijuana.
Hold back.
As I would call it
What happens to the producer yes
they don't have a medical
license.
Based off the whole back ten
percent.
Madam madam chair
Representative yes and I think
Emily had her hand up maybe or
maybe was superintendent three
oh one of the to have their
hands up they can go ahead and
jump there.
Madam chair and Representative I
just wanted to mention that if
you are licensed to do
commercial activity you also
have to be providing medical
activity as the.
Bill is written.
So so at as Representative.
If you're engaged in the the
sale of recreational.
But you also have to sell them
to the medical arena as well.
Yes Representative but not the
other way around you can not or
rather the you can choose to
only be medical and not the
others.
Well I'm I'm going to expose my
my parents all the subject for
it is there not some difference
between the the medical versus
recreational.
Or is it the same stop.
Madam chair representative all
so the the cannabis it is that
there are different strains and
and different strains are used
for different conditions I think
we're percent of Armstrong can
go into more detail.
but yes there are different
strains for example for cancer
patients you know who might need
help with their appetite or
whatnot but Representative
Armstrong going jump in.
Thank you madam chair and and
representatives of the medical
community has has cultivated a
wide variety of strains for
different symptoms and different
effects so it and our
recreational can certainly do
the same so I would say certain
strains of.
Certain plants and
the genetic line of those plants
are may have different effects.
So if you're selling recreation
do you have to secure product
from another person who.
Who markets those particular
strains that deal with the
medical aspects.
Yes.
I'm.
Chair and representative no I
don't I don't think so you
could.
CPOs and develop a a a pretty
are good medical line but are
otherwise I think it will
probably be market driven if you
don't.
produce and have
products that meet the symptoms
and a fax that medical patients
different medical patients want
they'll go to a different
dispensary that that does the
maybe a different strain if you
are having pain verses if you're
not just
and or if you can't sleep or
so for that could be a different
strain and particular strain for
our let's see for instance but
there's no requirement that you
have all the strains to meet all
the different medical
conditions so it's going to be a
matter of what you offer just so
there's something.
Are so that you retain some
amount of product to have a
supply for medical.
Well yes therefore requiring the
recreational.
Retailer to.
Also engage in the medical side.
Would that.
Retailer be subject to.
Maybe a lawsuit if they did not
supply the right product to the
medical patient who comes in
their store.
I'm madam chair and
representative no I don't I
don't think so.
Madam chair representative I are
and I hope you're right
I'm just a little concerned
because we were forcing.
We have medical dispensaries
already at and I assume that
they'll continue to soar that
the.
That clientele.
This bill I thought was moving
toward the recreational side and
was and so I was a bit surprised
that they had to hold anything
back for medical if they're only
dealing with that side but now
you're telling me that I have to
serve.
Recreational users and medical
users and I'm I I guess I'm just
the.
A little concerned that we may
be.
Opening them up to to some
problems down the road.
Were they thirty one of.
One more incentive commented on
on this type of language and and
other bills so basically we're
workforce sorry portable list of
things and then work turn it
over to regulation and licensing
to determine any other to.
So what might work question is
why don't we just leave the rest
of it out and let regulation
licensing determine that for.
Why don't we just put a list of
things we intend to not let them
take it any further.
Yes.
For a school soccer goal
question their overall page
thirty three.
There are a number of business
entities listed there.
It talks about background check
and talks about certain are
business entities but does not
capture all of that and I'm a
little bit concerned about that
is our if you have other
business entities that are
listed here can Janet that the
for under one of those acts and
escape having to go through this
number one and then number two
with respect to a couple of
them.
like number one the limited
partnership you do background
secretary on the limited
partners.
But I'm not sure I'm not sure
that necessarily means a general
partner says each partner of the
limited partnership.
That could be a little bit
ambiguous as to whether the
general partner will be included
as a partner of the limited
partnership
and then the limited liability
company each member what about
the chair of the president.
Some things like that
and then you have some some
business at the face of our
lowest
What I'm saying but all of.
The
state is.
I know the the community or the
communities that I represent
would really appreciate.
having the ability to have some
some say and and whether or not
sales of these products would be
allowed within their
jurisdiction.
And I I heard you earlier.
Representative talked about the
opt out of but you look at it
wallboard spent good life here
your thought that starting
controls are and that thank you
SO two reasonable policies to
reflect and I think your words
work community values are but
could not program but it.
And I know the the communities
that that I represent the would
like to have some sorry.
It is
possibly opting out particularly
some of the smaller communities
and so I have a a proposed
amendments
Point two two one zero five
eight point one.
and I think it's on the shelf
are.
What is the amendment does madam
chair is to allow a local
jurisdiction to within a very
short period of time following
enactment of this legislation
being six months
to elect to opt out of this
this bill and not allow the sale
of
our of the these these drugs for
recreational purposes within its
jurisdiction
The.
The local went to take and
change its mind later.
In any jurisdiction that does
not opt out of the in the first
six months is prohibited from
opting out later so it's a it's
a one way street.
Forces them to promptly act but
it does give the communities
that have a concern
with this R. and it's only the
cell it's not the possession
it's not growing it's not the
personal use it's not about all
that can be done but but the the
sale of the product from
establishments within that
jurisdiction would be prohibited
yes this of member were to be
added to the of the bill and so
madam chair our workgroup
this amendment at this time and
gives local jurisdictions within
the state of New Mexico the
ability to probably opt out here
for if this legislation does
does become enacted and bill are
statute that allow them to of
our not be.
Subject to the they sell
portions of the act at least
until such time as there is a
change are more.
and I would Martinez.
Representative Martinez which is
just a friendly amendment.
Get a state madam chair a
reserve neighbors one of my
favorite wraps.
And and I appreciate his work on
the amendment look at I like I
said before in in previous
iterations of my bill I I've
I've I've had these local opt
outs.
and I just think that it becomes
I think it becomes bad practice
and and you know I think at this
point in time at this hour I'm
gonna call it on friendly but I
I really truly appreciate were
representative Nibert it's
Perspective is coming from I
think it's it's valid and it's
it's real
But I'm gonna have to call it a
friendly.
Sorry Representative Nibert.
Representative Representative
Eli madam chair since we've
debated this to death I'm gonna
move to table the amendment.
Amendment.
Second element I'll second that
motion.
I thought I was getting your
endorsement madam chair.
I'll explain my vote later.
To call the roll of the tabling
motion.
Representative Alcon.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative.
Thank you all yes.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Lewis yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert.
Representative Rehm no.
Representative Townsend no
ma'am.
Thank.
Yes.
Madam chair Chasey.
Yes.
Affirmative and for in the
negative.
I want to explain the.
It's my understanding because I
watched the tax committee today
it's law enforcement but does
not want this ammendment out
that's going to be my
explanation for money.
Representative Nibert are you
finished.
Well it was passed and I guess
I'm just thirty five are crap
hundreds of ages ago
Representative.
Just go
please.
I'm.
Thank you okay thank you
Representative read.
Thank you.
Up begin.
One of the things that I'm
concerned about is the
contributing to the delinquency
the.
And
what I remember from.
My days on force then is that
you had to encourage the child
to commit a crime.
And this legislation removes
staff
so I have the concern as a.
As as the judge does and I don't
know if you have a comment on
that or not.
Madam chair representative
remain good to see you you know
I I I have that concern earlier
but I I think my concern has
been quashed by the explanation
that both the speaker and his
Dorsey gave earlier.
Madam chair and
Representative if we can we can
go to our analyst Tom dial when
I think you could explain it
better for me.
God Mr dell.
Thank you madam chair and
representative.
With all due respect to the
speaker and Mr Dorsey
It appears to me that there
still could be issues with using
your the one still a minor.
And in particularly when you
look at.
The the Supreme Court cases get
distilled into uniformed jury
instructions to help.
The attorneys in the state.
Able to explain the crime and
and identify the elements of a
crime to a jury in when you look
at you need I've fourteen six oh
one which is the contributing
language you know minor.
You need I'd in the central
elements essentially set up
three different theories.
For which you can.
Prosecute.
Contributing to the delinquency.
And the first is causing a
courage in to cut tried to
commit an offence.
And that is been planned as a
criminal offense or defense that
would cause them to be.
Subject to delinquency Act.
And with this bill and the
legalizing of
Possession of marijuana with
regard to persons under eighteen
it is now just a civil penalty
and that is not a delinquent act
that would subject them to the
children's co.
So you only have two other
theories that you can prosecute
contributing to delinquency of
minor and that is refusing
increasing the child to refuse
to obey the reason a lawful
commands of directions on their
parent.
That may be present in a in a
basis giving liquor to are
getting.
Marijuana or cannabis to a minor
That's an extra.
Step of proof that a prosecutor
would have to investigate and
have and get that parent come
into court to testify about.
For the third is conducting
themselves in a manner injurious
to their.
Health morals or welfare and
that again requires prosecutor
put on proof.
That giving marijuana to a
person under the age of eighteen
is injurious to their health
their morals are their welfare
and I gives a room for a defense
to argue to a jury that under
the facts of a given case it was
not injurious to health moral or
welfare
it is for this.
Challenging reason that I
believe legislature.
Created the separate crime of.
Selling or giving alcohol to a
minor if there were cases that
talked about giving alcohol to
minors contributing.
But after the enactment of sixty
dash seventy dash one which I
believe Representative I'll
call.
Mentioned.
That is the specific law that
you have to prosecute for
alcohol offenses and without a
specific law for.
Cannabis.
Can be used but the there are
some.
Obla automatic issues with the
achieving successful convictions
under that and
It's it's not that it's not
possible but it's more
problematic especially given
that the.
Possession of.
Marijuana by minor will now not
be a delinquent act subjecting
them to the children's coat
that's the classic way
prosecutors.
Ask you contributing is that the
contact you have the child
engaging and is itself a
delinquent act subjecting them
to the job.
It's not necessary the only way
but it's one chief funding so
that's those are the concerns
with using that for our trip
solely relying on contributing
to delinquency as a of a way to
prosecute someone who helps a up
a minor obtained marijuana if
this law is passed.
Thank you thank you.
Representative review have the
floor.
Representative right yes ma'am.
You have the floor.
Anyway I I think that that is
one of the problems I think I
have a solution a little later
on that opening up up Madam
chair of the and Representative
the other one is
the state owns a license and I
think that that's a real good
idea however
I thought that perhaps maybe we
should have some language in
there that let's say that in two
years we decide this is a bad
deal and we're going to close up
we're going to close all the
cannabis shops of the
recreational shops
Maybe we need some language that
you know the state cannot be
sued for an investment you made
and business loss.
And then.
The third general concern is.
so medical marijuana both
locations can begin selling
January one and the other new
recreational Spence Ezzell
beginning April one and I think
we're kind of creating an unfair
business environment we ought to
have everybody we selling
recreational on one date
whatever that meant madam madam
chair representative ream so the
all sales begin
on or before April one of twenty
twenty two
that there's no there's no more
advantage to to to anyone at
this point everybody's gonna
start selling on the same date.
production licenses are supposed
to be provided for shortly after
September one all other licenses
including manufacturing and
retail January one and then
actual sales could not begin
until on or before April one.
Madam chair representative was
go to page eight and go to.
Why nine.
So you know we can go ahead and
but you know an individual can
go ahead and grow marijuana L.
what I see is you know I've I've
been around marijuana grows and
there is such a pungent odor
that comes from it.
So when you have townhouses are
problems that are close together
that odor is going to of float
on to another one's property and
I think that that is problematic
all right and I don't think we
should be having individuals
growing their own marijuana.
I don't know if you have a
comment on that or not yes Madam
chair representative I mean I
think yeah I think that's that's
a fair point I I would say
though that you know.
and I think home grow is an
important aspect of of of this
framework you know not only for
medical cannabis patients but
really for for people who who
might have a you know in our you
know when it comes to to to
growing we are limiting as you
know to to a specific number of
plants and that we limit what
people can do with them you know
you can transact with them you
can't sell the.
But you know of the the way I
view it it's it's it's no
different than you know growing
Basil or chili or tomatoes or
whatever else I I'm good at
growing with the only difference
that this is a limited number.
And and on that point
Representative Martinez.
I think I understood
Representative ring to be
describing the.
Order from.
From the.
Smoking of it because the plants
don't particularly smell you
know anymore than as you state
like baseball or peppers just
right.
And and if we have.
Right legalize recreational
cannabis people can be getting.
They can cause you to be
subjected to the pungent odor
without rolling.
When they're consumed.
Who legally at their home right.
Madam chair Madam chair
representative I hope perhaps I
mean I I guess it depends on the
situation right where you live
and you know the example that
Representative ream gave about
maybe a town home maybe a first
floor second floor kind of
situation.
It's not the growing equipment
the pungent odor right.
I mean I
I guess it would depend madam
chair.
I I my brother lives in Oregon
it is you have some plants
causes wife has arthritis and I
I didn't smell anything from the
plants growing so that was just
on that point Madam
Representative.
Madam chair and Representative
I'm talking about growing
when we would get to a location
that was growing marijuana you
can smell it before you ever
found it you know are served at
acres are a few plants a few
plants in a house you go in the
house and the whole house smells
like all wanna.
These were outside so I was not
picturing them in the house yeah
you know another showing that
I've heard Ford is skunk weed
so.
You know yeah it's it has a
strong odor.
And Representative was moved to
thirty one and on line fifteen
madam chair that point we need
to consider the impact of could
sue eight
on the or factory.
The sensors of New Mexicans
because those are quite constant
our state roadways.
The state.
I don't know.
Madam chair I have no idea what
we do that is but I'll avoid it.
And
we does the weeds that grow
literally feet per day and
produce the very large leaves
along highways in the summertime
they also lifetime warranty.
Texas internet out sort of
expanding out into New Mexico I
think they're from the south yes
Tennessee and and places like
that where we and madam chair
would see them very often.
First read about amid falters
novels we have a very distinct
an unpleasant odor.
Madam chair.
Okay.
Representative review referring
us to page thirty one.
Okay.
You madam chair and the
Representative.
And one in fifteen.
Basically when we say we're not
going to consider some of these
issues for qualifications so we
have a guy that says a member of
a drug cartel and he has a prior
conviction I'm not sure that we
want that individual of
obtaining a license.
Yes that is correct madam chair
representative and that's why
here it says that you know
language from pay from line
eleven all the way down to line
seventeen shall not be the sole
ground you know that example
that you're using that person is
going to have a whole lot of
other stuff attached to him or
her that would prevent them from
getting a license.
Madam chair and Representative
if we can go to page thirty
four.
And I am an amendment for this
page and the amendment is two to
one.
Zero five two point two.
It's two to one.
Zero five two point two.
And what this ammendment does is
this is looking at the drug
cartel guide the that's growing
any legal marijuana.
And these growing that without
permits and outside of this act.
And
What it says is is okay if you
get caught growing the legal
marijuana which every state that
Senate acted
recreational marijuana has
experienced this that you will
be fined a hundred dollars per
ounce.
Of of whatever you've ground.
That money just so that you know
is per article twelve section
for the constitution all four
for jurors unless otherwise
provided by law and all fines
collected under general laws
the net proceeds of the property
that may come to the state of.
Sh the show go to the current
school fund that's where the
money would go.
Madam chair can I get a copy of
the amendment emailed to me
please.
I'll send that to you right now
Representative thank you thank
you Gary.
Yeah I ask if the cat was
product is is what's.
Was harvested
The plant or is it the pip.
Madam chair it could include the
plant
it would be
A plant or harvested material
whatever whatever possession
they have and in this act I saw
that it defined it as not
containing stocks and
you know it's such as that so.
Not containing what the the
stock of the plant.
Madam chair could I get the two
oh two number one more time.
Yes I'm sorry Representative it
is two to one.
Zero five two.
Point to.
And Representative Martínez and
Romero and madam chair I just
email that Sanchez.
Thank you have a.
Madam chair sorry mentor I'm
gonna ask as repeated to a two
number again please.
Madam chair representative it's
two to one.
Zero five two point two thank
you.
It was a narcotics officer they
had of federal law.
That was two hundred dollars an
ounce
Illegal marijuana and I think
the state we ought to do
something similar and and
collect the money if they're
going to grow any legally and
not fall the act.
madam chair and and
Representative
Well I guess you have an
asked me if it's really not so
this way if you to I I I I
thought maybe you just go there
I'm sorry.
Please please tell us is late.
You know I I appreciate the
intent I mean I I just I'm not
sure.
You know if if if I process
liquor that is not obtaining
compliance with the liquor
control act
You know is there a fine for
that it you know I'm in my
operating outside of the law I'm
assuming I am but how do you
enforce that so.
I'm I'm not sure I'm not sure.
I don't think this is friendly
not because I disagree I just I
just don't really see the need
for it madam chair and
representative respectfully.
Thank you very much discussion
on the amendment.
How would you move them and for
discussion purposes.
Madam chair I move for amendment
two two one zero five two point
two and I note that this is for
the legally grown not lawfully
grown.
Is a discussion on the
amendment.
Representative Eli you madam
chair since there's no
discussion on move to table the.
A second.
To call the roll please.
Representative Akan.
Yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Cook.
No Way.
Yes.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Lewis yes yes.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative night.
Representative Rehm.
No.
Representative Townsend.
Madam using.
Yes.
And the negative.
Okay that amendment is been
table Representative renew still
have for.
Madam chair thank you and
Representative I'd like for you
to think about it over night
we're gonna have an illicit
market and we need to you
deal with that
And let me find the the next.
Madam chair and representative I
looking at forty four it talks
about the you know distribution
to a individual it's under the
age of twenty one and in fact
under eighteen and what the
penalty could be and the you
know again we don't see a
criminal penalty we see As of
civil penalty in this.
Madam chair and representative
we we go to page forty five year
old line seven so the sale was
made in good faith believing
that the person was twenty one
or older we don't even allow
that for alcohol servers and I
think that's really
inconsistent.
I don't know if you have a
comment on that yes madam chair
and and Representative you know
I think I think that if if you
if if we read this section.
Stina starting with section do
It serves as a defense to to the
to the licensee red and if all
of these things are true then
the the license you will not be
subject to the to the penalties
that are provided for our you
know I think in terms of the of
of you know of of what you call
the inconsistency you know I
think and and I spoke to one of
the members
on the floor about this earlier
today you know I think we we.
I think we're moving away
That we need to be moving away
from particularly in these
industries you know right now in
liquor if if you are a server
and you over serve our are you
Sir somebody under the age of
twenty one you know a lot of
that a lot of that falls on you
is individual right and and
perhaps not enough also on the
business and so here what we're
trying to do is to really put it
on the business.
you know to ensure that they're
hiring and training and and and
you know holding their plea
please accountable to ensure
that they live up to the to the
standards set forth by this act
you know I think in terms of of
you know the criminal aspect I
mean I I know that we've had
some disagreement here between
our our analysts but you know I
think that the criminal aspect
continues to hold again perhaps
we disagree on whether or not
the
you know contribute to
delinquency of a minor is is
enough about pool but needless
to say the tool is there to
provide for the criminal
penalties you know this is
really just getting at the the
the civil peace and even then
it's it's imposing that symbol
of fine if you will that civil
penalty if you will on the
business owner and not so much
on the server although the
server does face some
consequences to economic in
nature right they can lose a
permit and I'm sure if I as I
said earlier if I'm the license
holder if I if I own the
business and my employees sales
to a minor you know.
I'm gonna fight fires that
person I mean I think that's a
fireable offense for sure so you
know I I I don't I don't see as
much seeing is inconsistency is
as as as much as US charting
sort of a new path here through
this legislation with regard to
the issue that you are referring
to.
I.
Madam chair representative I
think you could have a policy
that you shall check all ID's
but if you don't have a policy
that rigid I think that your
termination would have up the
problematic with that language
but when we move on I don't
wanna take all night on here
let's go to fifty three.
And was going to one nine
paragraph the.
And
This is really problematic where
we talk about person on
probation or parole can go ahead
and smoke marijuana or or
release pending trial and those
are conditions of release for
bond.
And as a you know just a general
condition it's it's no drug use
and no alcohol.
And so we're saying or you can
have drugs but you can't have
alcohol and we're getting in the
the judge's release conditions
and I don't think we should be
saying this at all I think that
paragraph needs to come out.
Madam chair representative I I I
mean I I I I think the way it's
written I mean I think if if
somebody's on parole and the
judge says that part of your
parole is to not use cannabis I
it seems to me.
Seems to be pretty black and
white.
And if that's not the condition
and that's not the condition
right.
Madam chair and representative I
would say line eleven shall not
be punished or of the rights
panel on just.
Right but you know if you go
down further if it's a condition
of of of of parole or probation
then than they would be
penalized.
has been okay.
Okay.
Thank you for that clear of the
and madam chair and
representative on the same page.
One seventeen I see that is and
is contrary to federal law
because a lot of those
you know like a housing deal
with you know show might use
drugs.
Madam yeah and and again if we
read further down you know I
less is required by federal law
so you know if if we have public
assistance programs that are you
know run by the state
administered by the state all
we're saying is that you know
conduct the conduct made legal
under this act should not.
Should not count as the Nile of
those of those services I'm as
required by federal law so I'm
sure they're federal programs
out there that you may not
qualify for if you if you use
cannabis but.
Madam chair and representative
I'm sorry because I went through
this so fast.
Trying to prepare for today
let's go to page fifty four and
one three.
I'm.
Being under the influence I
think is problematic.
You know because we're talking
about
drug driving.
But
you know and maybe we just need
some words for clarity there.
We go to page fifty six Madam
chair representative was go to
page six of fifty six and one
six.
So the odor of cannabis cannabis
extract or Burke cannabis.
It cannot be grounds to go ahead
and the suspected of a crime or
searching vehicle or anything
like that.
So when a DWI drivers stopped.
The officer smells alcohol as
part of the reasonable suspicion
for EM that then move to us
about how much you've had in or
you impaired giving a field
sobriety.
Well the same would apply here
if we had a drug driver.
you know I stopped vehicles
where the you know you roll down
the window and the old Cheech
and Chong the smoke is roll out
of it you know in so it's
problematic and I I really
believe we need to remove that
chair representative up if if
you go further down to that
section do it says that it
doesn't apply to an officer
investigating of DWI so I I
think that that probably out of
solves the the the concern you
raise.
Madam chair and representative
that's that's part of that but
let's say that a person is.
League the legal grower of
marijuana and you know you're
smelling marijuana in the
vehicle
and you want to go ahead and
find out are you legal or
illegal and I think the upper
paragraph prevents that
investigative enquiring.
Madam chair representative that
that thanks for that
hello I you know all the we'll
have my little likes for jumping
here give us a little insight
was Dorsey please.
At thank you Chairman
representative Representative I
just wanna make sure that I
fully understood the question
that you're posing or the
suggestion that you're
presenting here it it sounded
like you were saying that you
believe that the odor of
marijuana or cannabis excuse me
burnt or otherwise should be
allowed to be considered as part
of reasonable suspicion in other
circumstances beyond D. W. Y. is
that what you were getting
answer.
Madam chair and Mr CS.
And I I believe you said that
that the instance you were
talking about was for cases of
illegal growers.
Madam chair and miss Stewart C.
U. S..
So madam chair representative at
I guess I'm envisioning a
situation where a person is is
driving down the freeway they
get pulled over for speeding or
whatever
but the investigating officer
does not see any indicators of
impairment to but for the odor
of of cannabis is that this
situation you're envisioning
yeah madam chair and Mr Dorsey
that is correct okay thank you
Representative yes I understand
that I wanted to make sure I
understood this and are you were
envisioning so and madam chair
representative remain I
understand why you may feel that
way because of the situation
that I just described it if I
was for example driving down the
freeway and I had a truck packed
full of cannabis products which
you could readily smell I'm sure
very easily if you roll down the
window of my call card check if
officer redeemed asked for my
driver's license he could smell
it if I otherwise appeared to be
entirely sober under the
language of this bill right now
if I if my driver's license was
current my car was properly
registered I had my insurance I
was not impaired I was able to
appropriately answer officer
reams questions and at that
point in time under our current
constitutional laws and
statutory laws officer reams
ability to investigate the would
cease because his reason for
stopping me would have been
concluded he give me a speeding
citation or warning or whatever
and we would be done and the
reason for that Representative
Freeman the madam chair is
exactly what chairman Martinez
was referring to earlier we
don't want people to be unfairly
investigated when they when
there is no suspicion of a crime
in that scenario that you're
describing Representative Rehm
what I'm hearing is that the
only possible factual scenario
that could contribute to
potential criminal activity
would be.
The the owner of a substance
that is not legal.
And so that should not be the
basis of reasonable suspicion
should not allow an officer the
opportunity to expand their
search beyond what they have
reasonable suspicion to believe
and the owner of a substance
that is legal should not in of
itself be enough just like if
that same driver was pulled over
for speeding and the officer
could smell a strong odor of
alcohol.
asked for example which I've
seen done many times ask the
driver to blow in their face and
didn't smell any alcohol coming
from the person's breath and
they didn't have bloodshot
watery eyes in their speech was
not flared in they were able to
produce the requisite documents
and they were articulate and
polite and cooperative well that
should be the end of the inquiry
because perhaps they had alcohol
spilled on their shirt or
somewhere in their car and that
person should be free to leave
and move on with their life and
the same is true for cannabis.
Madam chair and representative
was moved to page fifty seven
and one six we talk about a
person that violates this will
be subject to a fifty dollars
civil penalty.
How can you walk me through how
that civil penalty will come
about.
yeah madam chair in
Representative
So you know going up to.
Graph one.
Nothing in the actual construe
should be construed as to allow
a person to smoke cannabis
products in a public space.
Except in a cannabis consumption
area and so a person who you
know if if I'm smoking a joint
out on the street I believe an
officer could
site me fifty dollars for
violating subparagraph one of
subsection eight.
Madam chair representative what
is the process does he issue a
ticket or what how do you start
of civil a civil proceeding.
Yeah that's a fantastic question
I am assuming it's a ticket but
all I'm looking at Megan for her
her back up here.
Thank you madam chair chairman
Martinez Representative green
that is a great question and
you're exactly spot on a penalty
assessment citation is issued in
the same way a penalty citation
penalty assessment citation
would be issued for any other
traffic infraction infractions
so the same way that you would
issue a traffic citation for
speeding it be the same
situation for a cannabis
citation issued issue the person
the citation they would get to
circle the little thing that
says whether they would like to
contested or or just pay the
fine and it would either proceed
through the court process or
they would pay it by mail and
depending on the individual
selection.
Madam chair Mister president
this is a symbol
procedure not a criminal and
penalty assessments are for our
criminal statutes what the
officer would have to do is go
to the
So portion of the court and file
a
a civil complaint and the
summons would be issued would
not be the process.
If I may madam chair
representative ream I certainly
understand why you would think
that that does sound like the
logical solution however in
practice that's not how it has
been happening over the past
year since marijuana possession
in small quantities has been
decriminalized the officers are
still issuing citations at they
just use the civil citation
format is still filed usually in
the magistrate or municipal
court depending upon the
jurisdiction and proceeds
usually on the the traffic
docket though of course that's
up to each individual court to
decide whether to put it on the
civil docket which they
certainly could do or to keep it
on the traffic docket and in my
experience at least in Santa Fe
magistrate court and in match
record in burn a Leo they are
handling them on their traffic
doc.
Thank you and madam chair and
representative on page fifty
nine
of one eighteen just kind of a
COVID that's going on.
Recently I had a parent contact
me.
And apparently adult drug
dealers are going to the high
schools and recruit being the
juveniles to go ahead and sell
their drugs and
I just think you need to be
aware of that probably more
you know when they're and
they're being pretty
intimidating to the kids
but that's that's something to
be aware of.
C..
Madam chair representative let's
go to page sixty two and wine
night those the the wind line
the section thirty two.
What I'm afraid of is you find a
need legal grow and the
individual says yeah I'm growing
it for research but you know we
hasn't come up with that and I
just I think if you read these
words online can.
after a person.
Is just as eight
researchers will license almost
thank you need to clarify a
little bit more in that
section.
Madam chair representative
you know I I think maybe if we
go to the definitions
may be because that's that's a
good point you're making and I'm
I'm wondering if we go into the
definitions I'm not sure that's
the.
If that's the right place but
let's take a quick look.
My assumption would be that
research research process
pursuant to Lynn and Erin
compassionate use act for
cannabis regulation act would
imply that you are licensed.
let's make sure.
Since we're already here.
And all of a little for us with
the three if you have a.
Have a response rate of top of
the head I'm not seeing a
definition for research but go
ahead superintendent madam chair
thank you thank you madam chair
Representative it's good to see
you Representative Rehm so it
that last sentence there where
it says that the research has to
be Kentucky conducted pursuant
to either the Lynn and Erin
compassionate use act or the can
Rick cannabis regulation Act and
so there is you put I think you
noticed that earlier there is a
license for a research
laboratory and they'd have to be
licensed in order to conduct
research under that capacity.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair and representative
was going to page seventy one
and
Under.
One fourteen so R. excise tax is
going to be twelve percent so
called router was currently
using thirty three percent and
they're showing that for every
dollar of revenue they receive
they're spending four dollars
and fifty cents on unintended
consequences and I'm wondering
why we're so low if if.
If they are you know if we see
something similar that we're
gonna be spending some more ten
twelve dollars per dollar of
revenue.
Yeah madam chair representative
you know we have this discussion
and and house tax earlier today
or yesterday I guess it was and
the twelve percent excise taxes
actually gonna go up to eighteen
percent
and you know part of the
discussion was exactly that you
know if this is an industry
starting from scratch and it's
an industry that we expect to
generate millions of dollars
let's get as much as we can
possibly get to help fund you
know some of these costs that
are going to be associated.
and so we did put on the
amendment and how staff so the
excise tax will now be eighteen
percent in it'll be phased in
over a number of years.
Your.
Representative what's going to
eight one six right.
Madam chair representative of I
I I kinda lost you there I I
can't really hear you.
Madam chair representative was
group page one sixty three.
Madam chair and representative
on this page I have an amendment
and the amendment is two to one.
Zero five five point one.
That's two to one.
Zero five five point one.
And madam chair I'd like to move
this amendment
for discussion.
Your amendment.
This ammendment it creates a
penalty for distribution of of.
cannabis to a minor.
Representative madam chairman
and members the committee could
you please repeat that you're to
number for me yes madam chair
and initials is two to one.
Zero five five.
Point one thank you.
Your chair.
On the amendment Mr speaker yes
please may I ask madam chair
For a this Dorsey to explain to
the committee
why this amendment is
unnecessary based on the
statute we have on the books
regarding acting at contribution
to delinquency of a minor.
Sure go ahead.
Thank you madam chair Mister
speaker representatives I was I
did listen to Mr Dow's
explanation regarding his
interpretation of the uniformed
jury instructions relevant to
the crime of contributing to the
delinquency of a minor and he
did accurately reflect one of
the uniformed jury instructions
relevant to that charge I'm and
I think that the leases I
understood it and again it was a
while ago but at one of the
major points that he was making
is that the easiest way to prove
contributing to delinquency of a
minor is when somebody
encourages a minor to break the
law specifically L. law that is
prohibited or the children's
coat.
Absolutely that is a hundred
percent the easiest way to prove
that specific crime but as Mr
Dow indicated is only one of
three ways to prove that crime
there are two other ways in
which to accomplish that task
and it as a point of comparison
since we've been talking a lot
about D. W. Y. the easiest way
to prove it D. W. why is to
prove for alcohol it is to have
a blood or breath test showing a
point zero eight percent alcohol
we know that's a per se limit it
means somebody is for the most
part automatically guilty of a
crime I'm in the same is true
here and are contributing to the
delinquency if they've if you
have encouraged a juvenile to
violate the children's code it's
an easy case but we know I just
like in D. W. why there are many
other ways to prove that crime
for example for a drug related
D. W. why is the standard is
different they must prove that a
person is impaired to the
slightest degree making it
unsafe for them to operate a
motor vehicle can you do that
mostly with circumstantial
evidence just as you would in
this context so in order to
prove someone was contributing
to the delinquency of a minor in
a way that did not violate the
children's code.
You have to use other types of
evidence and that happens all
the time it happens regularly
and there is very firm case law
showing exactly the types of
factual scenarios that have
already been held to be
sufficient by both our appellate
court in our Supreme Court so
for example I would draw your
attention to state you were
sterile which is the nineteen
ninety four K. and one one eight
and M. six nine six and in that
case the court held that the
defendants acts did have an
adverse effect upon a minor and
Koster to become delinquent
excuse me up let me rephrase
that the court found that prove
that the defendants Tax had an
adverse effect on a minor and
because that money or to become
delinquent was not required to
support the conviction for
contributing to the delinquency
of a minor so essentially in
that particular case the trial
court found allowed instruction
exactly to what Mr Dow was
speaking to the interest effect
upon the minor and that in and
of itself was sufficient to
establish the Kerr the crime of
contributing to a delinquency of
a minor and and specifically and
factually for the non lawyers in
the room what that means is in
that case the defendant provided
alcohol and drink alcoholic
beverages with the minor
alcohol.
Alcohol which is a legal
substance but not for minors and
the court found in that case
that that was sufficient to
establish contributing to the
delinquency of a minor.
And that has been upheld
multiple times since that
original ruling and in fact
actually it predates that case
in the sterile goes all the way
back to disincentive and which
was in nineteen sixty seven K..
In that particular case which
has not been overturned and
evidence supported the finding
that the defendant was who was
charged with contributing to the
delinquency of a minor made a
sale of beer to the minor that
the defendant allowed as a young
person to remain on her property
and when cops arrived they found
for it young juveniles in the
defendant's living room at their
open cans of beer in front of
them that's it there was no
there was no evidence that the
individual the juveniles were
impaired there was no evidence
that they actually drink those
open cans of beers but in that
particular case it was
sufficient to charge that fourth
degree felony and have the
defendant's conviction of that
fourth degree felony held
because that person was in the
room with minors with open beers
and there was circumstantial
evidence that those miners may
have consumed alcohol.
And that similar holding was
continued in a case most
recently in two thousand and one
in state B. Pereira which is one
thirty and M. seven three two
and in that case the evidence
regarding the defendant's
provision of alcoholic beverages
to a minor was sufficient to
support the conviction for
contributing to the delinquency
of a minor and so you can see
for decades upon decades the
court has held that providing
alcohol to a minor
is.
Is contributing to the
delinquency of a minor and so if
we're treating cannabis the same
way that we're treating alcohol
and we're saying that is a legal
substance that we want at people
in the state to be able to
utilize safely when they're of
age then it would be treated the
same way in court jurisprudence.
Chair Mister C. thank you but
don't you think it would be good
to have a specific statute
detail in that water of times we
hear bay does send out statutes
and
I don't know if you have a
comment on that or not.
Madam chair I would be happy to
come in on that excuse me just a
moment Representative I think
she gave me your answer and she
didn't ask a question so I I
think we might be sort of
covering the same ground here
okay.
Anyway that so I think that we
you know discussed earlier Madam
chair of the the alcohol statute
the sixty dash seven the dash
one and I'm just trying to add
clarity in the law.
You have the floor
Representative Rehm.
Madam chair anyway I've offered
the amendment.
okay hi is there discussion.
Move to table madam chair.
Second we have a motion to
representative Ely to table and
a second for representative
Armstrong.
To call the roll please.
Representative Alcon yes
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Cook no.
Speaker if all yes.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Lewis.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative night.
Representative Rehm no.
Representative Townsend what it.
Presenting blue.
Yes the table.
Madam chair Chasey.
Yes.
We have one excuse seven in the
affirmative informed the
negative.
That amendment is tabled
Representative returning still
have the floor.
Representative Eli madam chair I
move the do pass of house bill
two is amended.
Second.
We have a motion and a second on
house bill two as amended.
The clerk to call the roll.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative.
Yes and.
Folks in the out house
composition please know that we
can hear you saying you're not
needed.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Lewis.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert
Representative Rehm.
Representative Townsend.
Representative Townsend.
Representative Lewis.
Representative Townsend.
No ma'am.
Madam chair cheesy.
Yes.
When excuse seven in the
affirmative for in the negative.
Mr chairman of taxed Rav
Representative Martinez you
have.
To pass on house bill two as
amended.
We are adjourned thank you madam
chair thank you members thank
you madam chair very much when I
ever intended yeah good morning
and good morning everyone
morning mornings or speaker in
the morning.
I.
