Good morning in Judiciary just
don't seem to fit together but
I'm here.
Representative Nibert.
A bit of that statement I'm
more.
Representative Rehm there.
Representative Townsend.
Here we have found common ground
I agree with stricter both of
the other representatives thank
you.
Good morning at present.
Well maybe that same remark when
I asked the clerk to call the
roll that morning in Judiciary
although you know we actually
did start eleven a few days last
week but it's just very weird.
I'm.
I think we.
Begin with Senate bill one
twenty seven which the vice
chair is going to put on and
I'll be happy to respond to
questions as well because I did
serve on the commission and I
see that we're joined by chief
judge Jennifer Delaney.
Who was on the co chair of the
commission that
We're so hard to create this
legislation and the other
colleagues of mine on the
commission Katherine bell ski
and Representative Hubbard.
From the family New Mexico
family advocacy program so I'm
going to turn it over to the
vice chair to begin with so that
all one twenty seven and let me
just apologized in advance not
yesterday my bed with miss so
that I had to keep turning on
number on it I may have to do
that it's not because I don't
want to see your also your faces
but you won't see.
I need to do that go ahead I
stripped down to thank you madam
chair and test this morning I'll
be introducing Senate bill one
twenty seven on behalf of our
colleague settlement with
Senator Lopez who is currently
on the floor as the Senate bill
one twenty seven just to confirm
madam chair we do have judge
delay Anne and the others in the
gallery already.
Okay thank you.
Good morning also in in its
simplicity SB one twenty seven
creates the office of Family
representation and advocacy I an
independent office for the
representation of children and
families in abuse and neglect
matters so without madam chair
I'd like to turn it not to judge
still a need for a quick
introduction before we go to a
public comment.
Thank you madam chair
representative Cadena and
members of the committee I am
chief judge Jennifer delete from
the sixty Daschle district I
also on the chair of the family
representation commission which
is a New Mexico Supreme Court
commission it is now taken on
the work of the family
representation task force I was
a foster parent I am an adoptive
parent and I've also served as
an attorney for parents youth
and children involved in the
child abuse neglect system
throughout my career as the
committee is a where children
and young people come into
foster care for variety of
reasons related to abuse and
neglect and then they become
involved in the children's court
appropriately New Mexico courts
are statutorily required to
provide legal representation to
these children and young people
as well as to their parents
custodians and guardians the
administrative office of the
courts has been managing the
representation of children
parents since nineteen ninety
three through its court
appointed attorney program with
funds allocated by the New
Mexico legislature there of
these of course are different
attorneys from those that work
for CYFD to find this
representation the
administrative office of the
courts contracts with over a
hundred attorneys with any point
in time are engaged in about
fifteen hundred cases which
involve approximately twenty
four hundred children and twenty
one hundred parents guardians or
custodians it's unwieldy and the
administrative office of the
courts has needed the staff nor
the resources to monitor these
contracts to ensure quality
representation statewide this is
not a new problem over the last
twenty years plus a number of
efforts have been launched to
improve performance primarily
through the children's court
improvement commission what
we've made some gains it's not
enough and we have data that
show it's not working in two
thousand and thirteen the New
Mexico Supreme Court children
quite improvement commission
conducted as a study of the
quality of representation that
found that children's court
judges and clients had concerns
about the inadequacies and in
equity in.
Representation across the state
in two thousand and eighteen the
children's court improvement
commission in conjunction with
the administrative office of the
court point and the American Bar
Association center on children
and the law conducted an
assessment of the quality of
representation for children and
parents and abuse neglect cases
the assessment found that the
major challenges for New Mexico
included an adequate oversight
for tourney retention lack of
diversity in cultural human
humility an adequate funding and
most importantly that the
current location of a court
appointed attorney program
within the administrative office
of the courts hindered
independent decision making an
oversight that it's strange the
AOC and the court appointed
probe Attorney program resources
the assessment also recommended
that a task force be formed on
improving the quality of
representation in the family
representation task force was
created by Senate Joint Memorial
ten during the two thousand
nineteen legislative session as
you heard Madam chair
representative Chasey as well as
Senator Lopez both served on the
family representation task force
with me I'm Senate bill one
twenty seven before us today
adopts the first recommendation
that the task force made to the
legislature it creates the
office of Family representation
and advocacy with a structural
model pattern after the law
office of the public defender's
office it includes an oversight
commission as well as budgetary
independence Senate joint
resolution eleven is a
constitutional amendment that
complements this bill seeking to
amend the constitution to place
the agency and the judiciary
with independence and a manner
similar to the creation of the
law office of the public
defender we are hoping to get
that through in the next
legislative session and on to
the twenty twenty two general
election ballot well the
structural model of this office
will be based on the LAPD
creating an independent agency
and the judiciary practice model
will be based on evidence based
best practices of the inter
disciplinary legal team services
we know the quality
representation is critical but
we.
Also know that outcomes can be
vastly improved if provided with
this interdisciplinary team
legal team of services this
means parents and children will
benefit from teams consisting of
lawyers social workers
navigators and peer mentors New
Mexico is already way ahead of
the game on this we already have
such a model called the family
advocacy program that was it
that will be adapted into the
new office and there's actually
a federal five year grant to
accomplish this expansion I have
with me today we've hovered in
Katherine Favell see that are
currently two of the family
advocacy program parent mentors
and they are going to speak
shortly after I finished
speaking Alyssa Davis who is a
former foster youth who also
sits on the family
Representative Tatian Commission
wanted to be able to be here
with you all today I don't see
that she is present but she's a
huge advocate on behalf of
children in the foster care
system and greatly believes that
this office needs to be created
in order to ensure that parents
and children are getting the
best representation it's
available in that they deserve
so we are have hoping to leave
here today with your support
Senate bill one twenty seven
will be quality representation
for these families a reality
working collaboratively with
CYFD and other stakeholders we
will create better outcomes for
children and their families
including reduce time in foster
care whether it be reunification
guardianship or adoption I at
this time madam chair I would
like to turn it over to we've
however.
Hello everyone.
my name is clear Herbert and I
am a parent mentor for New
Mexico family advocacy program
I'm a parent who did go to the
child welfare system with my
children my children my children
were removed due to substance
abuse and criminal
I got into some trouble so my
kids are removed but I'm here in
support of one twenty so student
bill one twenty seven because I
do feel that families need that
support families need office to
go to whenever they feel like
they want to you know reach out
to their attorney reach out to
the social worker and reach out
to their parent mentor I am when
I was going to my case I didn't
have that I have so much shame
and misunderstanding going on to
where I just I sit down I didn't
want to fight for my children
anymore I wish I had someone or
even offices to go to to say Hey
I don't get this process I don't
know what the next steps look
like I need support and so
having that and being able to be
a peer peer mentor now I've seen
families I've seen parents
succeed because they have that
support they have put forth the
effort to try even if it it
didn't make sense to them even
if they didn't know what the
next steps for they try they had
a support system they had an
attorney that met with them not
the day of court but meetings
before court days before court
they had a social worker to say
Hey I understand how you're
feeling how can I support you in
is they used a clinical aspect
to support that parent not only
that parable supportive family
as well and having a peer mentor
to say Hey I totally understand
what she's going through how can
we do this together that right
there is into disciplinary
Nestle families the thank you
for for listening to me today
and I ask that you all support
bill one twenty seven.
Are you going to speak.
The state did.
Your cell.
Good morning madam chair vice
chair and the rest of the
committee my name is Katherine
Favell skiing and I am also a
parent mentor on the New Mexico
family advocacy program and I
was once a parent and the child
welfare system.
In two thousand ten my children
were removed from my custody
because of addiction and
inadequate living conditions in
the years to follow I would
address my addiction.
Find and keep adequate housing
and maintain employment I did
absolutely everything I
treatments are.
I changed the causes and
conditions that brought my
children into custody but
circumstances at that time did
not lead to our reunification my
district attorney knew that that
could happen
she made sure to have everything
that she needed brought into
evidence in my here I was given
an appellate attorney who was
very knowledgeable about
criminal court but did not
possess the same knowledge of
children's court and I have not
seen my children since two
thousand fifteen.
We need.
In New Mexico need adequate
legal representation and so the
children.
No parent in New Mexico because
of poverty should be given an
attorney who is not.
Fully versed in children's court
law we need to secure adequate
funding for these attorneys who
represent the parents and
children in these cases also so
they can be adequately
compensated for their time.
Thank you for your time today
and for also supporting Senate
bill one twenty seven thank you.
Madam chair if I might make a
brief comment before we go to
the audience.
Answer thank you
I would say this morning on a
hectic overwhelming Monday I was
grateful to just get a quick
text from from with Clovis and
asked me to stand in her place
today but frankly I just want to
name and appreciate the
incredible generational in
decades on leadership of chair
Chasey and madam with Lopez for
their work in this area when I
get to show up in House
Judiciary every day sometimes I
think my most monumental moments
come from the incredible
expertise that's been shared
with me over many years by
system impacted Mamas who have
been in and out of the system
who miss their kids desperately
more than I can ever imagine and
who will be the first to say and
be accountable to where their
life has been and the potential
in front of them also when I
think about what's become in
front of our committee and body
this year madam chair this piece
of legislation could be one of
the most transformative things
up for New Mexico families and
I'm grateful to stand in this
moment and I certainly just want
to appreciate all the the women
and moms and parents who have
taught me so much over the years
about what it means
to to be ready in a different
place to to keep your kids safe
and to have some rates and and
representation in a long path
that that is important for
families and that all families
deserve thank you madam chair
and madam with a far for you
important work on this and makes
my Monday to get to step in for
a minute and and and just see
you all shine so thank you madam
chair.
Thank you very much I'm.
Did you want to mention funding
I know you've been through
Senate finance and I think just
perhaps to set the stage for
this committee and before I go
for public comment.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee yes so we we
worked really hard with Senate
finance the weekend before we
presented in order to ensure
them that we can provide
financing so currently
there is funding that is already
allocated to the administrative
office of the courts for this
for the first year this office
would continue to run solely off
that money over time potentially
the next five years in order to
get this off as to what we
believe is the highest quality
of representation for here in
New Mexico we would need to
provide an additional an
additional seven million dollars
the feds have recently recognize
the importance of parent and
child representation in these
cases and so now we are able to
draw down title forty money in
order to meet some of the
challenges of representation in
these areas additionally we've
been working with CYFD and
Secretary Blalock wonderfully
work with Dr Scrase secretary
Scrase for us as well we can
figure creative ways in order to
use Medicaid billing it to help
with some of the social workers
navigators and other person
involved in this office and so
we are confident that without a
large burden on the general
budget going forward that we can
make this office successful it
really is the location within
the office administrative office
of the courts and the fact that
it has to compete with all of
the other AOC programs that
limits the ability to ensure
quality representation so moving
into its own distinct office
would allow this to happen.
Thank you are you ready for me
to go to public comment now.
Okay so I'm what we do in house
judiciary as we take a quick ten
second all of those folks who
are in attendance on this
particular matter and ask if
they favor of L. or if they do
not favor bill they thought
yesterday noted in the report
those results and then I invite
the those to speak who wish to
do so so let's go into the pool
right now.
Okay we have.
One in opposition and twenty
seven in favor and so I will
just go to public comment and I
I would we will limit the
comments to one minute each and
if you don't need to speak
please don't feel obligated to
do so please not try not to
repeat anything that has been
said by it another member of the
audience thank you and I will
call on you on this particular
issue first I have John Nye.
Please go ahead.
You will need to I need on your
end.
Mr nine.
Let me skip you and see if we
can get you later on Annemarie
Lana.
Go ahead.
Madam chair members of the
committee this is Annemarie
Linda from children youth and
families department I'm the
acting director for CYFD and
CYFD supports this legislation
we strongly believe that our
families are parents deserve
quality representation and are
hopeful that this program this
project will improve the
permanency for our children
thank you.
Thank you I'm having Esparza.
Thank you hi Mr chairman of the
committee my name is Thomas for
summer resident in Mexico and
I'm in support of Senate bill
one twenty seven because it
would have been helpful to have
this from my attorney to
represent me better and my case
to act.
Thank you she says voting yes on
the that's.
Thank you.
Let's try John nine again Mr now
you need to undo it yourself.
I'm sorry but I I am not here
for this bill okay just.
Maybe in your excuse you that
hello Baca.
Go ahead.
Good morning
and the kids are gonna good
morning members of the.
Madam chairman and members of
the committee
I am in full support of this
bill because I am a former
foster youth and did not have
the proper Representative then.
When I was in care.
Thank you very much.
Next I have.
Former senior justice Petra
Jimenez Baez.
Good morning thank you very much
Chair I will stand in support of
Senate bill one twenty seven as
a trial judge an appellate
justice I think that this bill
is rolled address two of our
most failing of our current
system the inadequate
representation advocacy
l'istituto remaining foster care
for longer periods of time than
necessary creating lasting
damage to the children and their
families there is the second one
there being two matched her
attorney to turn over
inconsistency representation and
consecrated by the attorney
contracts being administered by
the our court system the office
will get the best legal
representation and advocacy
possible to keep them together
when we can and then find other
avenues for permanency and help
and those new families when they
need the the legal assistance as
well so thank you very much for
giving opportunity to speak this
morning.
Thank you very much for joining
us Erica Sanchez.
Go ahead Erica.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Erica Sanchez I'm with New
Mexico can a nonprofit that
partners with young people
impacted by foster care and
juvenile justice to support
their transition to adulthood
and can as a thirty year history
of working on proofs experiences
of children and youth in foster
care and we stand in strong
support of Senate bill one
twenty seven and our work with
young people we see the impact
of an adequate representation
including children in years
remaining in foster care far
longer than is necessary having
numerous negative consequences.
These are families deserve to
have highly qualified attorneys
who are properly trained have
support staff receive decent
compensation and have oversight
we ask that you support this
down thank you.
Thank you and I also want to let
the committee know that's the
end of that people with hands
raised I wanted to let the
committee know that
Current justice Barbara B. hill
called me this morning and said
that she would not be able to
participate today although she
has been participating in all of
the hearings and just like
justice
My as.
Just just as Vigil was also a
children's court judge before
she became an appellate court
judge and she has worked closely
on the legislation I can.
A chance to that.
So I think are you ready for
questions then madam secretary
we just had one hand should up
it looks like secretary
Blaylock's joined us wonderful
of him quickly thank you madam
chair yes.
Is he in the panel.
I see him on the attendee list
let let me put him into the
cattle here.
Go ahead Secretary Blalock
we're.
Sure thank you madam chair thank
you members of the committee and
sorry if I got my hand up a
little late there I just wanted
to really appreciate Senator
Lopez and Senator Sedillo Lopez
to bring this bill in all the
work that you to sherry as we
continue to move forward with
reforming the system The New
Mexico and building it overall
child well being system this
bill which would really improve
representation for families and
children will be such an
important part of it so I thank
you so much let me see can
support you with the happy to
support this bill and I'm
looking forward to efficient
asking for to working with
everyone to ensure that it gets
off to a great start thank you.
And I just wanted to add to that
when we heard from some of the
our presenters talk about the
quality of representation and
and I know Secretary Blalock
house to hire good children's
court attorneys as well it's
kind of like the balance between
the public defenders and the
district attorney's if you have
a really
If you don't have a qualified
attorney on one side of the
other it raises the opportunity
here not a particularly good
opportunity raises the out
the result of having an outcome
that's in question and that has
to go on appeal and reverse all
and.
Particularly in cases like this
I and I know I had an
indigenous child welfare Act
basis that I appeal successfully
kept the child for an extra year
year and a half from being with
anybody whether it's a plaster
parents or the family so
when you are going to the the
appellate route in these cases
the it really doesn't serve the
best interests of the children
so with that let me take
questions from.
Committee members.
Right now.
I don't see any hands raised.
Madam chair.
In the past and on Senate bill
it's the how is Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill one twenty seven.
Representative Lewis seconds
back.
Her to call the roll.
Representative welcome.
Yes.
Representative Armstrong.
Yes.
Representative Cook.
Mr speaker.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Lewis.
Yes.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative Nibert.
Representative Nibert.
Representative Rehm yes.
Representative Townsend.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Nine yes zero no and if you.
Two passed congratulations thank
you very much.
I don't it is Representative
Hochman Vigil yet here yet.
She's to present.
Our second item but I she said
she might be in a Senate
committee.
In which case we could go on to.
The next bill but I don't want
to overlook her which is.
madam chair what we're on we're
going to roll the first bill on
the agenda you an ounce that you
know what I have it I haven't
looked.
My printer is acting up and I
didn't print out the revised
agenda we're not going to do
that one today that Senate bill
one fourteen that yes.
I will be we'll do that
tomorrow.
Thank you very much for
reminding me to take that out
I'm kind of on a little behind
my staff and where we are.
So.
We can go to the on Senate bill
seven their driver's license
suspension penalties for Senator
Wirth if we.
Is there somebody presenting for
senator Wirth or.
That's you okay let's go ahead
without them Representative.
So this actually came as a shock
to me all by the way we I have
monocle also we should be
promoted to a panelist she's New
Mexico state director for fines
and fees justice center.
We've heard from her before.
This madam chair this actually
came is kind of a shock to me I
had a friend of mine who I think
many of you know when your call
me saying she just seen a TV
show I I'll like a news Dr
talking about this problem and I
was curious of anybody's
coverage I found out senator
Wirth was and so that's how I
got involved in this New Mexico
has suspended over two hundred
and fifteen thousand drivers
license between two thousand
sixteen and two thousand
eighteen alone because people
could not afford to pay a court
gaps or they Mr here so what
this bill does is eliminates
that and eliminates the
reinstatement fee I want to be
clear it does not eliminate
suspensions and revocations
based on dangerous driving or an
overdue child support and it
doesn't limit the court's
discretion to impose sanctions
in criminal and traffic courts.
But it what it does do is take
away that conflict of people
trying to decide should I
continue to drive and you know
go to work and figure things out
or should I drive illegally
because they can't pay the fines
I mean it's just ridiculous and
so we're trying to get rid of
that.
Problem of really putting people
in this never ending debt cycle
where they want to pay off their
debts but they can't because
they can't drive and so this
eliminates that and I know ms
all wanted to say a few words
and hopefully she's with us
result there.
Yes Madam chairwoman and.
Thank you so much so I'm good
afternoon Madam chairman members
of the committee my name is
Michael all time in criminal
defense attorney in the state
director of the fines and fees
justice center I'm the first
issue I just wanted to briefly
address is within the FY are
this is with regard to the
technical issues that were noted
in the bill Senator works office
and I met with madam secretary
Schardin Clarke TRD as well as
deputy chief Jerry result those
of the motor vehicle division in
order to which address those
technical concerns we amended
the bill in the Senate finance
so there should no longer be any
conflict of
along with in state or or any
state or federal law and just to
note to for the for the compact
in the
Is that in addition to just
amending the bill there are
several states that have
actually undergoing some form
of.
License suspension reforms that
are also members of the non non
resident violator compact
including
why it Idaho Maryland
Mississippi New York Texas
Vermont Virginia West Virginia
Wyoming and in the last I would
say three weeks Illinois and
Utah have joined that list as
well as DC there's also five
states that have never suspended
for failure to appear failure to
pay they're also part of that
contact so there should no
longer be
Issue or any any any technical
issues with the bill
I won't repeat anything that
representative Ely stated but
I'd like to just highlight a few
things
which is that I'm really Senate
bill seven it's a simple
correction to the counter
productive process of any
driver's license suspensions for
his court hearings an overdue
overdue fines and fees
what we've seen is that because
so few New Mexicans actually
have access to reliable public
transportation
these suspensions really forcing
impossible choice stopped
writing and lose access to work
child care health care food and
other basic necessities or keep
driving on a suspended license
and risk criminal charges and
more unaffordable fines and fees
and in this practice would
improve our businesses and
workforce improve public safety
and protecting New Mexico from
uninsured motorists
really the bottom line is that
when someone is not able to pay
fines and fees or misses a court
appointment it does not help to
suspend their driver's license
because that just makes it
harder for them to earn a living
take care of their families pay
off their debts and comply with
any court orders and we also
like to note this is a truly
bipartisan effort nationally
red blue and purple states have
enacted this reform of we're up
to fourteen states now Utah on
that particular bill has gone up
to the governor is in waiting
and is awaiting signature
there's several other states
that have a driver's license
suspension bill
On in their legislatures this
year and we also have the
opportunity to take advantage of
the potential of federal dollars
with the driving for opportunity
act that
is sponsored by Democrat senator
Chris Coons and of Republican
senator Roger wicker so with
that I'm happy to stand for any
questions madam chair that will
stand for questions.
Okay let's go to the audience of
the state will do the ten minute
call those in favor please say
yes those in opposition of the
state now that will give people
an opportunity to speak if they
wish to do so.
This on Senate bill seven.
Okay we have
Twenty nine in favor and two in
opposition so it was some.
Sounds like it's a favorable
proposition at this point.
Given those in attendance and I
want to allow those who wish to
speak an opportunity to do so
the least Larson.
I get afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is judging least Larson and I'm
here on behalf of the municipal
judges association would first
like to clarify that we are not
in opposition of this bill we
just have some concerns that we
believe exists that have
potential unintended
consequences that need to be
consider first as we all know
the Courts need more tools at
its disposal to work with those
who have infractions not fewer
this bill removes the last
restrictive needs to hold
offenders accountable I'm
currently we have the
opportunity to issue a warrant
for those who cannot pay or
cannot appear or we can suspend
a driver's license and if we
take this opportunity away from
the courts and we no longer have
it as a tool the only option we
will be left with his
incarceration and issuing a
warrant which poses greater cost
increases to our members of our
community loss of jobs and also
greater incarceration costs for
municipalities and counties.
I do have a lot more to say in
other concerns to address
however I did recognize that my
one minute time limit is up I do
appreciate we look forward to
any type of conversation to
address these concerns and I
thank you for your time today.
I'm not the member of the New
Mexico sentencing mission not
like to note that the commission
noted.
That.
And voted in support of this
legislation as eighty eight
percent of licenses functions
were for that payment reasons
and not due to the interest
rate.
Thank you madam chair members of
the.
To Rikki Lee Chavez.
That regulates this.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee this is Rikki Lee
Chavez on behalf of the New
Mexico from the fence Boyer's
Association we encourage you to
support this important measure
in a state like ours in New
Mexico where so much is rural
this is incredibly important in
my short time representing
clients in Chama New Mexico many
of the programs that they also
had to complete as part of their
probation or in Espanola which
is an hour and a half away you
had to pay a fee in order to I
tend to those programs and so on
top of giving up a day's worth
of work you also had to pay a
fee to attend the programs and
is a fee to reinstate your
license so you put people in a
really impossible bind that
encourages and brings them back
to the criminal justice system
as opposed to allowing them to
re enter communities and to
actually prosper so thank you so
much madam chair members for
considering this legislation and
we encourage you to support
thank you.
Yes Rojo.
Actually new madam chair members
of the committee my name is how
general phone number research
and policy analyst with New
Mexico voices for children one
of my areas of expertise is
economic tax and budget policy
ending that based driver's
license suspension suspension is
truly a national bipartisan
effort it is not only supported
by lefties like myself that
believe it disproportionately
hurts low income individuals and
families but also by fiscal
conservatives that hate
government waste because from a
purely fiscal perspective when
it comes to fines and fees like
the ones this bill is trying to
eliminate the juice isn't worth
the squeeze as has already been
highlighted we as a state lose
money trying to collect and
administer these fines and fees
also when we suspend a person's
license competitive pay we
inhibit that person's ability to
work in Polis themselves from
their own bootstraps to pull
Grover Norquist a conservative
activist Nick tax reduction
advocates in modern America how
do we expect anyone to earn
money and pay for traffic fines
if one is under effective house
arrest unable to drive a hard
work in conclusion fines and
fees are all the precarious
rational mechanism to fund of
government but they also
function as a regressive tax
that hurts our economy thank
you.
Sh.
The cash.
Good afternoon I really urge you
to vote yes on SB seven one of
my family members is
unfortunately a pretty
dysfunctional adulthood along
addiction history and its
intended effects he has had his
license suspended not for
driving related offenses but for
his failure to appear and his
failure to pay this is the man
who has absolutely no way to pay
a fine or a fee he's got no
resources and no job at this
point as he gets his act
together his driver's license
will be critical to creating a
new life for himself not having
a driver's license is a huge
impediment to building and
maintaining a life for any of us
as important as a driver's
license is to building or
maintaining a life it makes no
sense to suspend driver's
license for failure to appear
or pay these have no bearing on
the ability to safely operate a
vehicle thank you.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Kim Chavez Cook
with the law offices of the
public defender and here to
stand strong support on behalf
of the LAPD for this legislation
we spend a lot of man hours in
our department's defending
people against driving on
suspended licenses and this
would definitely have an impact
allow us to divert our resources
to matters that have more of a
public safety impact
particularly because this bill
does retain the ability to
suspend licenses for dangerous
driving I also wanted to just
speak on behalf of the
communities that will be most
impacted by this legislation
because they are the community
that we represent as well which
is folks who who really live at
or below the poverty line in the
state the need to be able to
drive to get to work is crucial
to keeping families together and
keeping families stable and this
bill will have a very real and
practical impact on people's
lives we urge you to stand and
support thank you.
No wonder Trujillo.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is fact not
looking July from Espanola New
Mexico and I'm a policy fellow
with bold features for many
young women United will feature
just as insubordinate SB seven a
driver's license isn't lodges
critical for holding jobs and
economic mobility but a licenses
and assess it when it comes to
getting we're getting gainful
employment can be fat families
for an evening because they
cannot go to the store for if
you're getting pulled over a
driver's license in the form of
an ID and without an ID options
become even less limited can I
rent a hotel room without being
AT some jobs will not hire an
individual if they do not have a
driver's license.
Mentions of driving license
because of failure to pay our
fee it's unnecessary policy you
need to support SB seven.
Thank you sorry on all.
Thank you madam chair members of
the my name's ninety study on on
line with the ACLU of New Mexico
in my short time here I have
learned of how.
How this really hurts our
communities
me just reaching out to my
friends and families from here
Bernalillo county to Travis
county and Justice cycles
punishment and it keeps people
trapped in poverty I just
haven't picked this cycle and
put people over profits and so
we support we strongly urge you
to support this Senate bill
seven thank you so much.
Two weeks.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee Jason Weaks
registered lobbyists from
Bernalillo county earlier Kenny
stands in support of this
legislation I think that it's
important to understand that is
the the cost of collection of
some of these fines and fees as
particularly associate with
driver's licenses was like
nonviolent occurrence it's it's
not just born by law enforcement
or the courts it's also
important by the county jail and
so there's a significant expense
to the county jail and law
enforcement that hasn't fully
been considered and and talked
about in in the reality is when
you consider that cost the rear
the the way to move forward with
this is to actually collect the
fines and fees because they
actually cost more to collect
than not collect and there is a
there's a fairness issue
involved as well and for those
reasons we think this is a good
piece of criminal justice reform
thank you.
Includes our public comment
let's go to the committee and
first I have on my list
Representative Alcon.
Thank you madam chair
while.
While
take off my Representative do
had Representative do you input
on my ex judge had.
Wow.
I'm really.
Hi this let me explain what I'm
that we've hired we're doing
this and then I'll go to a
question Hey.
Workgroup.
Judge yes once losses stations.
Well if you're in requests
Cibola County we have interstate
forty that.
Go through our community.
State police are pretty busy is
because Mr us and all of these
people that get pretty busy.
Citing the bill for basically
traffic infractions mostly
speeding.
But the.
Thank.
K. to that court.
And then.
That we're creating gets the
citations.
No we would just say days
doesn't respond to it doesn't
bother David doesn't bother to
appear.
You are leaving the options are
you leaving the judge what
option does that job data now is
that judge could not suspended
driver's license and.
that one first.
Madam chair arms are a result
first vessel would monitor.
This all we can't hear you.
It's all.
Madam chairwoman and
Representative can you can you
all hear me now yes I'm sorry my
internet is I'm stable so I'm
just going to remove my video if
if that if I permission to do
that.
You're going.
Thank you so madam chair woman
and Representative all con and
thank you for that question I'm
in so in my experience as a
criminal defense attorney
first what and of course AOC
change their rule so first what
what would happen is the court
would issue a summons for that
person to come in to pay if that
person did not go to their court
hearing then the court has a
choice they can issue an
additional summons or they can
issue a bench warrant for that
person to appear and that is
those are the tools that are
available to the court I'd like
to note that the court is not
the one that suspends the
license I'm so that tool
actually isn't available to any
court that pool lies with motor
vehicle division.
Madam chair that last one part.
The magistrate court the
municipal court will issue an
order to suspend and they do
suspend the license motor
vehicle department suspend the
license if you face if you
fail to pay a penalty assessment
that we were supposed to have
been paid to motor vehicle what
the court does and we'll.
Send out a suspension of a
driver's license so.
I have to make sure that.
That
was solved this you can respond
to that I guess.
I just want to know where you
got that information from.
And Representative one I'm the
only tax amending and yes the
the courts they send notice to
the motor vehicle and motor
vehicle as the entity that
suspends the license the only
the statutes that we are
amending in in the in the
traffic code only has to do with
motor vehicles ability to test
the the courts do in fact send
notice but they're not actual
entity that suspends the license
okay thank you thank you madam
chair but the action is does
come from record first before
motor vehicle does their park is
that correct.
Madam chairman yes that is
correct thank you for.
I said so now the judge
sentenced thousands.
And.
So this is really an expensive
item that manages not
to spend too not just summon
madam and not a second summons
issuing a benzo are.
To use the option.
Hey.
This is the first invests Liza
doesn't get suspended.
Include a lot.
The solution.
Representative Eli
That all other remedies are
available including that right
or bring a man yelling at him
I'm sure you would scare people
like crazy one that we don't
want to do that is so
counterintuitive is telling they
can't drive so if you want them
to come to your courtroom and
you suspend their license how
they get your quarter how they
got to play the fee how they got
to get a job how they going to
support their family we have two
hundred and fifteen thousand
people whose license had been
suspended solely prepared rate
that.
Right so what's that all about
but we're we're is that going so
I agree madam chair
representative that yeah there's
one tool is taken away you got
lots other tools you know.
What taking away their driver's
licenses the one thing that
you're doing that penalizes
everybody Society the person
even the courthouse at eight yes
can we suspend their license how
did they get down to your
courthouse to their living alone
or they're supporting their
children and their single mother
or father how did they get there
if they are living far away from
the courthouse without violating
a court order.
It just doesn't make any sense
and what we're trying to do with
all of these changes Madam chair
representative is is what I told
Representative ring the other
day we're trying to make the law
a little less stupid that's
really what we're trying to do
this is just dumb.
Representative Eli I I I I just
have to bring it back to re to
use an audio okay that I hope
that hopefully will will.
May call you simple okay so.
I'm I don't.
The gross I since you spend in
lower for whatever reason by a
police officer.
Your days of roses for the
license and I'm on my way home
thank.
Right.
Right okay and madam chair and
representative to the left.
There's my wrists now.
The rose Madam chair
representative.
And for some reason other than
officer whose real or if there
is a warrant for my arrest what
happens now.
We can arrest.
Madam chair representative
exactly that offices in the
cuffs on the.
On my car and in jail right.
Solution and we saw with our own
data had to suspend the driver's
license I am in jail
I have been given my current
balance I am going to have to
pay for the fees and fines and
spend time in jail.
So what are we solving here
right Madam.
People are Madam chair
representative is changing and
that's currently true.
I know I chair representative
Representative changing any that
when you say will only all we're
saying is Madam chair
representative all we're saying
is don't take people's driver's
license away simply because they
can't pay a debt or because they
Mr here.
Just.
If they get arrested for a bench
warrant and they go to jail
that's already happening that
tool is already there.
Madam chair representative I'm
sorry but I'm just you the
system as we currently have it
is not working when we're
looking at two hundred and
fifteen thousand people that's
ten percent of New Mexico's
population or almost that we're
not drive I think what that does
to ancillary issues like car
insurance.
We're driving around without car
insurance I mean it is just bad
public policy to take away
people's driver's license
because they couldn't pay a that
doesn't make any sense for all
the other things that we're
talking about Madam chair
representative not only are in
the line or not changing but are
already happening you have a
bench warrant issued for
somebody's arrest you can arrest
them they pick them up on any
other citation they can and do
arrest them none of that
changes.
With a very limited surgical
approach to a problem in New
Mexico that is clearly not
working.
And I just want to make sure
madam chair representative that
I've answer that correctly
hello.
Correctly missiles let's make
sure.
Madam chair representative you
and Representative all con
that's correct I'm in my
experience and in I used to work
for the law offices of the
public defender we go to court
every day.
Stockist and always what would
happen is both what happened the
court would send notice to
suspend the license and a bench
warrant would be issued I I'd be
happy to discuss also getting
rid of the bench warrant but
that's outside the scope of this
particular bill but both both
things in general have you
cases.
Madam chair.
Representative thank
you but in amazement District at
and I know of okay and I know
that if you fail to appear
warrant does not go out this
notice.
The failure to appear the only
mentors those al is if you fail
to pay a fine would you have
from this debate.
You may remember the course
they'll find it does would this
is the so the suspension notices
for motor vehicle these infants
or and then there is a dollar
amount because that's the amount
of dollars into over.
But it says the notice in the
knee this is for the license
there is no pin for that time
there is no maintenance warrant
status to the simple.
I notice to suspend.
So.
And that is what I say is.
So now like I said we're not
going to spend license yes this
issue one.
So fifteen thousand people
whose licenses are suspended
with two hundred fifty thousand
people going to jail.
Mr chairman and madam chair
and representative was the less
because no auction what do is so
important.
Madam chair representative I'm
sorry I'm I I just totally
disagree with you there's just
no other way to say that you're
saying and let me just see run
follow this logic you're saying
what the judge can do is suspend
the license and that solves the
problem that's what you're
suggesting and clearly that is
not happening it's not working
suspending a license is not a
panacea what we're trying to and
it is dangerous because you got
people out there now without
licenses that are driving
without insurance so they get in
an accident it's the public at
large is impacted by so if I'm
missing something madam chair
representative where you've got
facts and figures of state
suspending the licence is a very
effective tool and it will force
people to come in and pay their
fines and it's all going to work
right and then we won't have to
issue bench works fine that's
what we're seeing that's why
we're promoting this bill it's
not working just mentions just
are not working and so we have
to try another way no I'm just
saying.
The magistrate judges to
municipal judge.
Not working.
Not what and so we have to try
another way and we're limited
one to.
Does not work.
That doesn't work thank you
madam chair Representative yes I
just scanned document I you
mentioned that that having two
hundred fifty thousand people
you there on wheels impounded
and then locked up in jail is a
lot easier than suspending
driver's license and when the
people go to get their license
renewed they find out their
licenses are suspended and then
the thank you the problem.
My.
The missiles bases.
My I see you your option the
car show you people being the
simple solution to suspending
the license I don't like it I'm
sorry it doesn't work I would
not like to have people are
straight in because they didn't
pay a fine I would rather have
their driver's license
suspended.
Thank you madam chair.
Next.
You
madam chair I got a free with
the judge outcome the
That is exactly right what's
going to end up happening I've
gone to court on madam chair and
Representative B. Y. I've gone
to court on traffic citations
they failed to appear the judge
says well I'm gonna go ahead and
suspend their driver's license
to start off with we'll see what
happens and instead what you're
now going to have is what judge
outcome described well we're
going to issue a bench warrant
go ahead yeah I was gonna say
I'm that maybe I'm not answer
cry a good with enough clarity I
know is all too has been texting
me and she'd like to talk to it
madam chair that's okay because
I'm I'm I'm not being clear
about this so I'd like
governor's all to answer the
question madam chair.
Share.
Madam chair representative Ely
and Representative rating I'm.
So I think that's wonderful that
both of Representative Alcon
when you were a judge and
Representative Rehm your
experiences with many judges
that they weren't issuing bench
warrants for failure to pay or
sorry to hear that has never
been my experience and I've been
in front of some amazing judges
the rules state that you can
issue a bench warrant for
failure to appear or failure to
pay and those happen the rules
state that you have to first
issue a summons for failure to
pay and then after that hearing
you can issue a warrant for
failure and for the failure to
pay I'd like to stress also that
we already are incarcerating
people at huge rates for not
being able to pay these fines
and fees
I'm we have reports that show
just how much money is spent on
how much money is lost so for
example in I've had the
opportunity to discuss a
different bill with you all last
week which which talked about
the amount of money that's
converted into jail and
community service credits a lot
of and if for example in
Bernalillo county was two point
two million dollars and a lot of
this money or a lot of
additional credits occurred
because a bench warrant was
issued somebody was taken into
custody there was a hearing in
which the the judge
either directly.
I'm imposed the the jail
sentence for the failure to pay
or because the individual chose
to convert their fines and fees
to jail because they knew they
couldn't pay as a public
defender I used to do
arrangements and I would say and
there be a list of all of the in
custody's and I could see which
people were there for FTE
warrants and I would advise them
on what they should do I'm so in
my experience both things occur
both because the driver's
license suspension is not just
in traffic cases this is this
this is you're allowed to
suspended driver's license also
in criminal cases so I hope I
hope I answered the question I'm
I'm happy to to go into it
further thank you.
Well madam chair Representative
Ely agency all
So what let's clear up one thing
for the committee.
If you if you're driving on a
suspended license for failure to
appear that's all.
The officers going to issue you
another citation and what you
drive off and that's what judge
outcome was just pointing out.
The only arrest that can be made
for a suspended license is the
one twenty two George that we
donor of reference which is the
DWI you're driving on a
suspended license because of a
DWI.
So just so the committee
understands if you're driving on
a suspended license all you're
going to get is another ticket
I'm less it's for DWI.
But the court or at least my
experience with the court is
while they would a person failed
to appear they would send them a
letter saying Hey we just
suspended your license and guess
what we're going to issue you a
warrant if you don't get in here
quickly contact us and I think
that's an important step that
you need in this process.
When we take a little different
angle for a moment Madam chair
representative B. line missed
all.
is the real problem with with
this legislation.
So when I write one I wrote the
traffic ticket.
And the person said I'm gonna
take the penalty assessment.
And I go ahead and and they sign
on their that citation does not
go to the court.
That citation goes to department
of motor vehicles and I can't
remember if we've got
legislation this year to try to
move that back to the court.
so the so that Juan agents of
one group is looking at it but
anyway that said DMV.
The court never sees that
citation they don't have a.
So when the individual says you
know what I'm just not going to
pay it.
What happens.
First Madam chair representative
there are seventy two thousand
suspensions every year by MBT
that is a colossal waste of time
and resources you just pointed
that out so now you want to put
it all together so the courts
will be overloaded with these
cases look at all the time and
money that is spent on
suspending people's driver's
license for failure to pay a
debt.
That's crazy can they suspend
based on impaired driving you
back absolutely our our reckless
driving dangerous driving
absolutely a hundred percent of
the time as they should but we
are spending a colossal amount
of money Mr we talked about on
behalf Bernalillo county the
same kind of problem we are
spending lots and lots of time
on pursuing people don't have
money and now can't drive to
earn money it's just a colossal
Lee dumb way of doing things and
I just
trying to cut through when
you're talking about well maybe
we should you know Courtney the
so that we you know just the
courts are doing what what
difference does that make that's
just me at the if anything
that's more expensive we're
gonna have the courts burden was
seventy two thousand suspensions
here is that what we really want
to do for debt related
suspensions is that what we're
doing that just does not make
sense to me so Madam chair
representative I I'm Bob respect
both you and Representative Akan
but on this issue we are just
going to disagree that's just
the way this is going to.
I'm Madam chair representative
of the line I'm sorry maybe I
didn't make myself clear so I
stop a person for speeding.
So I go ahead and I issued them
a speeding citation they said
I'm going to go ahead and Hey I
agree I was speeding all pay the
penalty assessment also learned
that they don't have insurance
on their car so they give them a
ticket for no insurance.
Okay the ticket for speeding
goes to MVD.
It never goes to the court the
ticket for no insurance goes to
the court.
So now what you're going to have
is he decides I'm just not going
to pay the fine.
There's no penalty.
There's no penalty for not
paying the following it's a DMV
you just took it away in this
piece of legislation okay I'm
I'm just so I can be
deprivations about I'm gonna let
managed from what ms all tents
that questions it's a process
problem yeah a letter answer the
question.
Madam chair representative you
and Representative Rehm I'm.
The bifurcation of citations
would be outside the scope of
this legislation
as far as it being a process
issue if and I know that NBC has
other financial penalties would
be imposed for example I could
look at a of a rule eighteen
point nineteen point six point
eight the imposition of a
penalty which states that the
NMED a penalty amount of twenty
dollars could be imposed on for
each instance that attracts
hundreds Department is not paid
upon presentment
and this penalty would be in
addition to any other financial
penalty that the motor vehicle
code but this is a good example
of a penalty a financial penalty
that the motor vehicle has that
each candidate imposes on folks
and enforces in the in the
scenario that thank you
mentioned madam chair and
Representative Rehm motor
vehicle could could go after the
the the other citation amount in
a similar way that they go after
other funds.
Madam chair and Representative
all right and I'm sorry miss all
how are they going to go after
the fine in this legislation
when you just said eight if you
don't nothing's gonna happen.
Madam chair woman and
Representative Rehm I'm I'm not
saying that nothing's gonna
happen what what I'm saying is
that the motor vehicle division
has plenty of other financial
penalties that they do in fact
impose on others and they would
use the same practices that are
available to all of the other
entities going after dat.
Madam chair representative
that's the point there are
plenty of arrows in the quiver
for both in the need and the
courts we're taking one away
we're taking the one that really
spectacular doesn't work and is
inconsistent with everything
else we're trying to do is that
people can't if people can't
drive they can't work they can't
work they can't pay their fine
they can't work they can't
support their families they have
to drive that's our society they
have to drive and let's tie
those together if they are
dangerous drivers drunk drivers
yeah let's get them off the road
but they can't drive in the
because they can't pay their
debts and let's not make it more
difficult for them to earn money
to pay their debts that's what
this is about.
Madam chair and representative I
I hate to beat a dead horse on
this but the the problem is the
process there's not in this
legislation it needs to say if
the ticket is not paid then it
shall be returned to the court
you know it showed return to the
court for them to go ahead and
process because basically here
Representative that's a
different bill you want to
applaud that build up to the.
Well what Madam chair
representative V. like what I'm
pointing out is.
We need to tell everyone all you
have to do is sign the penalty
assessment don't pay the fine
and nothing will happen madam
chair and representative to beat
a dead horse ms Walters answer
that now many times and she is
said that is spectacularly and I
want to be respectful when I say
this not true.
And we do have some other tool
she is laid those out for you
the courts have other tools
she's done the same I don't know
what else to tell you sorry
madam chair representative maybe
I'm just tired but I don't know
how else to answer it other than
to say that's just spectacular
not true.
Okay Madam chair representative
it why let's go ahead and take
the out of state driver.
See right now we have a compact
with the other states if you as
judge Alkhan pointed out there's
an interstate you get a ticket
on the interstate you go to back
to whatever state you live in if
you didn't pay your New Mexico
ticket we would then send a
notice to your state who would
then suspend your lights.
And that's gone yeah I'll have
to let is all to answer the
question.
This all madam chair and
Representative Rehm I'm the
issue of notice that was
something that we dealt with
with the motor vehicle division
and the secretary of TRD
and we amended the bill in the
Senate finance so the
notification requirement stands
we will still notify all states
within the compact
New Mexico of course we don't
have control we can't suspend
the license that we did not
issue and those states are free
to do what they like and if they
choose to suspend on that they
they can we don't we don't
this bill there is no conflict
with with the compact and and in
my opening remarks I listed all
of the states that have ended
this practice and still are
members of the compact and then
the five states that never did
this and are members of the
compact I'm so we're we're not a
violation there madam chairman
Representative ring.
Thank you well madam chair
I'm fortunate I I agree with
judge out on on this one this is
not ready for prime time
we need to amended a little
further rather than pass it
anyway thank you madam chair
Representative be live this all.
Yes thank you very much and I I
wanted to
Know that there was a little bit
of irony that I heard where on.
The.
So and I don't know which one of
you was arguing this but.
The they didn't they do that
let's call on the defendant
receives notice that his
driver's licenses been suspended
and.
I believe it was stated so he
needs to go back to court to
work this out so it's best to
get there so that just just my
question Representative Lewis
you're next.
Thank you madam chair.
Cast.
Well second that motion.
Further discussion
Representative local.
Chair thank you just one point
before you go to vote I'm
speaking with sixteen years of
experience as a judge and I
would rather not have the people
that I serve locked up in jail
because he didn't pay a fine I'd
rather have been given a
citation for driving on a
suspended license instead of
having them arrested their cars
impounded them going to jail
because they did not appear in
court and they didn't pay a fine
so that madam chair that's all
I'm saying this side this method
that we're working on is not
going to help the people in New
Mexico this is really going to
hurt the citizens that we serve
thank you madam chair.
Thank you is better for the
discussion.
The clerk please call the roll.
The way.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Cook yes.
So.
Yes.
Representative way yes.
Yes.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative.
No.
Representative Rehm way no.
Representative Townsend.
Yes and these people are trying
to make me put it different
inflection on the way to get a
whole different meeting but I'm
gonna keep it polite like
Representative Townsend so yes
ma'am thank you.
Representative Chasey yes.
Yes or no and do you have.
Thank you very much thank you
Everybody.
The next item on our agenda is.
Senator sixty six we haven't had
Representative Hochman Vigil
shop probably.
Okay let's go to Senate bill
sixty six.
And I believe we have Senator
schools and.
Senator to wait I don't know if
you're both here but please join
us.
Just for the public it's not
time to raise your hand yet
component.
In a minute I I will give you an
opportunity.
I am here and I believe Senator
Duhigg is also in the room were
getting on great I see her here
as well.
Thank you are you ready for us
to begin go ahead.
Thank you madam chair of Senate
bill sixty six amends the New
Mexico bank installment loan and
small loan act if the governor
priority and endorsed bills the
main function of SB sixty six is
to cap the interest charged on
all small loans at thirty six
percent APR all in costs.
Thirty six percent with the law
New Mexico from nineteen forty
seven to nineteen eighty one in
the late seventies and early
eighties hyperinflation push the
prime lending rates up and the
usury laws that have been in
place for decades we're no
longer appropriate New Mexico
along with many other states
remove the user ID.
SB sixty six restores that tap
that we've won New Mexico for
over three decades it matches
the military lending act
Representative protects active
duty military however our
veterans don't have these
protections and are often preyed
upon with these very high
interest rate loans.
Over seventy percent of New
Mexicans supported cap of thirty
six percent with many of those
who do so because they believe
thirty six percent is
unconscionably hi about a fourth
of the calls I get on this bill
are angry at me for supporting a
bill with such a high interest
rate.
The current legal interest rate
of a hundred seventy five
percent is a drain on our local
economies will slow our economic
recovery from the pandemic
pandemic caused downturn this
hurts all businesses I rating
index then to predatory loans
millions of dollars will stay in
our communities where the money
will be spent and turned over in
the New Mexico economy there's
an adage of economics when money
moves the economy improves high
interest loans stop the movement
of money by **** get out of the
bottom of the economy instead of
being spent in the local
community read used to buy
groceries Services medical care
childcare and closed high
interest loans destroyed the
base of the local economy.
Predatory loans harm families
and push people toward proper
poverty they prey on people who
are living paycheck to paycheck
and are on the margins they
weaken the foundation of strong
communities and the economics
that they're built upon.
At fifty six is been in the
works for years I first became
involved in two thousand fifteen
while serving on the Indian
Affairs Committee where there
was a discussion on predatory
lending practices and how they
affect our indigenous people.
In two thousand seventeen I've
produced a bill to cap interest
rates at thirty six percent
there were several other bills
being circulated that you're
dealing with short term high
interest loans I pulled out of
the discussions when it was
where the industry was setting
the interest rate at a hundred
seventy five percent to protect
their profits I could not
justify supporting something so
outrageous.
It was very difficult prior
bills we listen to the industry
and their concerns that people
need access to capital by
putting in provisions to ensure
that we that if we again see
hyperinflation and double digit
hi and interest rates thirty six
percent cap rises parallel to
the prime rate this is what the
credit unions to the table and
you will hear them it's a clear
doors this bill they are
prepared to make small dollar
loans to people in need at the
thirty six percent APR four
under.
This bill out of the financial
committee substitute in the
Senate Judiciary Committee that
make provisions for legal we
found and clarified some of the
concerns we heard from some
lenders.
This bill had a lengthy hearing
in the house covers very
substantial amendment was
accepted that allowed for a
limited number of optional it's
weird drugs such as insurance to
cover the balance of the loan
for extenuating circumstances
this brought to additional
industry partners who are making
loan that this right help with
the bill included putting the
optional products within the
thirty six percent cap.
The bill have amended the we're
going to be proposing today that
brought the entire industry
organ brought many more from the
industry organizations that make
small dollar loans.
This is called impact and they
require their members to stay
under thirty six percent cap
they are in New Mexico and they
are ready and prepared to expand
more in New Mexico high interest
loans don't just hurt
individuals their families
children and communities in two
thousand nineteen this entry
industry right those last two
thousand two hundred and ninety
three vehicles that's two
thousand two hundred ninety
three families that don't have a
vehicle to get to work buy
groceries yes of the doctor's
office to take the children to
school further pushing families
into poverty.
On Wednesday I was stopped in
the hall by a staff member here
in the capital she asked about
the one carrying the load.
She said I'm not dumb but I got
trapped in the one of these low
I thought it would be easy to
borrow some money for a new
table and pay it off the table
ended up costing me more than
twice the original price and it
ruined my credit rating.
I'm still trying to get out from
under the problems that caused
me please get your bills passed.
In closing SB sixty six makes
for a thirty six percent APR all
in cap on interest rates.
SB sixty six have the provision
that if prime rate increases
beyond ten percent the thirty
six percent cap also rises this
was a huge compromise that
brought in the credit unions as
partners.
Increases from five thousand to
ten thousand the maximum loan
covered under this thirty six
percent cap the closest
potential loopholes used to get
around that thirty six percent
all in provisions it matches the
interest rate many other states
and the military lending act
that was implemented to ensure
the readiness of our troops to
protect them from undue hi you
just right well we are not the
only in state that has enacted
this type of legislation we
joined other states in
protecting their citizens
communities and economies in
controlling high interest rate
low this will take millions of
dollars in New Mexico where the
money can work with the families
and private provide the economic
base for other companies and
businesses.
Over seventy percent of New
Mexicans support thirty six
percent interest cap with much
of the opposition because they
believe thirty six percent is
still too high this isn't about
access to credit it's about
exposure to debt.
We say that again this is not
about access to credit it's
about exposure did that there's
a broad coalition of people and
groups that support this
legislation including the credit
union association of New Mexico
one group a credit union
ProConnect.
Of Navajo Nation the Navajo
Nation Human Rights Commission
center for responsible lending
New Mexicans prepare mending
coalition New Mexico Center on
Lott poverty prosperity works A.
A. R. P. New Mexico AFP New
Mexico native American voter
Alliance New Mexico Asian
families New Mexico voices for
children.
New Mexico cafe New Mexico the
rights progress now New Mexico
education all right retake our
democracy in New Mexico the
attacks New Mexico chairman
advocacy ministry in New Mexico
the New Mexico conference of
Catholic bishops Mexico
conference of churches the City
of Albuquerque's city of Los
crucis McKinley County New
Mexico counties and alleged
county and over seventy percent
of New Mexicans out with that
you know if I could turn it over
to my co sponsor of Senator
Duhigg and for any comments that
she might have and she also that
would forward the amendments
that we propose.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Senator I you know Senator
schools I think really covered
it
I am available to to answer any
technical questions that folks
have I know that there were two
amendments that were provided to
the committee.
And.
I'm not sure who who on the
committee will be will be moving
them but I'm happy to.
To move here to amendments for
discussion purposes Senator if
you'll just guidance to the
amendment and that the numbers
and so forth madam chair I I
have them and this is Damon I
have the so okay I'll go ahead
read the numbers to go through
them okay that sounds good we'll
let you put them on all right
arm so so I've got to one is
that my friends is right
Senators fin tech right is the
friend that one that you
referred to Senators souls in
your opening that number is two
two zero seven eight eight point
one
it add some language let Senator
Duhigg talk about that in a
minute and then the second
amendment and and madam chair do
you want me to do this together
that Senator Duhigg and then
talk about them or do you want
me to do them separately.
Honestly don't want what I don't
know what makes the most sense
let's do this let me do both of
them and and and then Senator
you can talk about both of them
because they're there for
discussion purposes rather than
for you all do them separately
for adoption all cases second
amendment down is the two or two
numbers two two zero eight zero
two point one and that also add
some language that really
actually thanks for the first
one to provide Jack I've had to
have that explain to be civil
to.
I'm not sure I still gathered
for the second when I do get
that adds language that they
won't be charging one individual
consumer in a twelve month
period so without I would move
those members but simply for
discussion purposes madam chair
and then chair I'm sorry can we
get to to to.
Right if this is going a little
quick I just wanna make sure
we're looking at the right
amendments and I yes yes Mr
speaker absolutely I I I have
three proposed amendments in the
Here file
Okay so so let me these are this
is really part of their
presentation and so I thought I
would just do this and then have
Senator Duhigg explain them to
the committee.
And I agree that's what we're
going to do because we will ban
these may affect to come public
comment and we always talk about
the amendments that we may put
on after public comments that we
want to go and do that this
Kelly did you need to clarify
something for us.
Yes madam chair for the the
committees of purposes of both
the the amendments that
representative Ely just spoke to
are in my bill analysis and it
is the short analysis of what
they mean are also an ideal
analysis on page four.
Okay.
Now as this has those okay you
madam chair would like to do
then is is to read the tool to
millions okay of the the first
amendment which is to provide
economic is two two zero seven
eight eight point one it changes
us from language on page
seventeen line twelve.
And then the second amendment is
point two two zero eight to zero
point one which changes language
on page two line sixteen Madam
speaker you have it that I read
that Selena.
Yes you read slow enough
Representative Eli thank you
madam chair.
I think.
The benefit of the doubt the
work being sarcastic ****.
What was the reason.
Not just any day for is to.
Wherever you madam chair just
point of order Representative
Ely is not supposed to attention
very sweet or ruin my life until
after four PM also just point of
order we're three hours ahead of
schedule and I don't appreciate.
Our.
That's that's the he's not
supposed to try to ruin my life
for a public health for side
till four o'clock okay that's
the range and up to this point
in these daylight time or non
standard I'm.
He having a problem it being
within eight days of the close
the session that rule is been
waived Mr chair.
I
one thing I would like is you've
given where the members are
technically if Senator do we
could just explain the real
quickly before I go to public
comment so that if there is
public comment that might.
Very based on.
Potential adoption of the
amendment I'd like the public to
know that.
Absolutely madam chair the first
one the the fintech one.
What that deals with this there
are provisions in this bill that
are designed to make sure that
lenders can't evade our state
usury laws
and there's there's a number of
ways that they do it do that
they use the is out rent a
banker rent to tribe's schemes
there's a lot of things that
they can do to try to get around
it so that so that when we put
in reasonable interest caps they
are subject to that with this
first amendment does is it says
that for those companies that
are are going to stay within the
thirty six percent all in
interest cap the anti evasion
language in this bill won't
apply to them because the whole
point of that anti evasion
language is to make sure that
they don't try to eight get out
from operating under the cap
that would be in this bill so as
long as they are employing at
thirty six percent all and cap.
The anti evasion south one apply
to them and and there are some
there are the is there some of
these these fintech companies
that that are already doing
responsible lending in this way
and so we want to make sure that
they are still able to to
provide access to credit here in
New Mexico while still
supporting that the aims of this
bill and and not using predatory
interest rates.
The second amendment what it
does is that there's this bill
allows for.
A small processing fee and what
that moment just makes clear is
that that few can only be
charged once a year I heard per
person who's who's getting that
allows
it's not current loan so each
loan would have its own
processing fee potentially but
those processing fees could only
be once per year per customer.
Senator so expert.
Yes you did but I'm not hearing
we care.
Yes if we could have we have a
three experts to would like to
make a short.
Turning off by video.
Would you like to continue that
object.
Yes you can can you.
Yes if you like me to continue
we have three experts one is
just for technical issues of the
other two would like to make a
short presentation Winona not
about who is with while SB
credit union and then also Paul
Stoll who is with the New Mexico
credit union association and
then also Representative have a
it's been a huge part of our
team I would like to make some
comments as well.
Madam chair this is unrelated to
the presentation but.
Representative Herrera your vote
is somewhat urgently needed in
the Appropriations Committee on
Senator Stewart E. R. B. bill
can you perhaps Representative
Herrera switch over to that zoom
so you can I'm I'm I'm I'm I'm.
In senators do a consoles or
start a hijacked but that issue
is important as well and so
we're we're trying to juggle and
do double duty so I appreciate
your cooperation and and as
Representative Ferrary thank you
for a building at two places at
once sorry for the interruption
not at all we're all kinda doing
the dance right now of trying to
be multiple places.
Senator introduce your other
experts and let them speak their
piece.
Okay so the the first one is is
not a with the quality of the
credit union.
Okay madam chair and members of
the committee we have twenty
three thousand members and six
branches three in Santa Fe are
branching Espanola tells more
and when in Las Vegas New Mexico
that opens this summer what I
would be credit you already make
small loans to meet emergency
needs last year we made over
nineteen thousand of those loans
that were ten thousand dollars
hello the average dollar amount
was five hundred twenty eight
dollars and the interest rate
was a high of twenty four
thousand and most below that
these loans are predominantly
lines of credit once the credit
line is set up borrowers can
access the funds at the teller
line by phone or mobile device.
There's no minimum advance no
annual B. or any type of the
dance origination fees.
Our goal is to improve the
financial lives of our borrowers
emergency savings is the need of
many New Mexicans to meet that
need a special savings account
can be set up with deposits up
to ten percent of the loan
payment amount the savings
account pays them the same rate
of interest of the loan charges
for example of the line of
credit rate is twenty two
percent they would are twenty
two percent APR on your savings
account.
What would be credit union also
offers a bar when state short
term flows the on loan that has
a savings component available
but the loan is paid in full.
If the borrower is already stuck
in twelve right yes like what we
can offer predatory get really
wants to provide an escape help
the repair credit these long
range are fifteen percent of
secured by car titles or twenty
four percent of unsecured one on
one financial coaching is
provided from our certified
financial coaches as part of the
loan to help them really get
back on track these long states
that the nine borrowers over
three hundred thousand in just
one year that was money that did
not applaud of New Mexico.
If this bill passes and these
lenders follow through on their
threat to leave the state we are
ready to expand these programs
opted into many more New
Mexicans.
With greater volume it is likely
the interest rates would be even
lower than the current twenty
two to twenty four percent and
staff of course would be hired
to meet the demand my fellow
credit union CEOs and I are
already talking about it a joint
advertising campaign to create
awareness of the alternative
programs offered by credit
unions at a much lower cost.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members I'm happy to
answer any questions you may
have.
Madam chair if I might and I
think out.
Yes went on that you misspoke I
think you said twenty four
thousand dollars or something I
think you met twenty four
percent early on and so.
The people understood it I don't
think anybody Mr the of credit
you with making thousand percent
interest rate the twenty four
percent interest rate okay I am
so sorry I was saying that there
may be we made loans ten
thousand or below what the
interest rate of twenty four
percent or below yes ma'am thank
you it also all who is the
executive director of the New
Mexico association of credit
unions and so Mister all if you
were this.
Yes I am and Madam chairman
members of the committee hi it's
a pleasure to be in front of you
today.
Credit unions were founded in
nineteen oh eight by an employer
that was really upset because
his employees could not get
small dollar loans banks would
loan to them and the only other
alternative was loan sharks the
origination of credit unions was
to me small dollar needs for
people who were working class
folks we've been making those
loans since nineteen oh eight we
are the original experts in
small dollar low interest loans
we've made in the past we're
making them now and we will
continue to make them in the
future just today I spoke with
the national credit union
administration in Washington DC
and ask them to credit unions
make the small dollar loans all
over the country their answer
yes in every state credit unions
make low interest small dollar
loans we have the experience we
plan on continuing to do.
Credit unions look at loans to
help people get out of debt not
get in that predatory lenders
exist to put people into debt
and when they say we don't make
that money loans well maybe it's
because of the fact we don't
refinance those loans again and
again and again putting people
further into debt with no hope
of recovery credit unions want
to help New Mexicans we serve
more than nine hundred and fifty
thousand New Mexicans at one
hundred and forty seven
locations in the state we do
have experience we do serve most
New Mexicans and we will
continue to do so into the
future I urge you to please join
us in do pass Senate bill sixty
six.
You.
Are you ready to go to the
audience madam chair yes that is
our presentation just whenever
Representative had that as
people to get back to you have
some comments also K. use very
much part of working she's back.
If we could let her make a
couple of COVID that would be
wonderful Representative.
Thank you chairman Chasey and
members of the committee and
thank you for allowing me to
join Senators souls and doing it
in placing Senate bill sixty six
before this committee
I came before this committee my
freshman year of two thousand
nineteen and I'm back again I'm
I think this could be the year I
think that this bill is one of
the most important bills we have
before this legislative session.
I and you've all heard that this
this bill amends the small loan
act in the bank installment loan
act nineteen fifty nine reduces
the maximum allowable interest
from a hundred and seventy five
to thirty six increases
the sizes of the loans covered
by this legislation from five
thousand ten and it includes
important language which
prevents businesses from
circumventing the law.
It's interesting when I first
told a group of legislators in
two thousand nineteen that I was
gonna push for this thirty six
percent cap they also to me why
so high why not make it fifteen
and the reason we're doing that
is is because that's the
interest rate again for the
department of defense to the
military lending act
When people get trapped in these
loans they can be deployed so
it's safe response to military
and national military reading
situations this directive was
passed in Congress in two
thousand six as a way to prevent
abuse of loan rates in different
protect young families in the
military I really think New
Mexico needs to do the same.
When I really when I first
thought about of bringing this
bill and I didn't think it be
such a heavy left this I was
really really surprised then I
found out that there's an entire
sub industry in the state that
has been created to counter the
effects of the small installment
loan industries are major
counties are major cities our
our colleges they've also set up
limited companies within their
finance departments to help
people get out of these
crippling loans
in two thousand nineteen before
the pandemic cat
the.
Ninety two thousand three
hundred ninety eight small loans
forgiven out New Mexico by these
installment loan companies.
What that meant that was about
approximately six hundred
million in loans are given out
and two hundred million of that
was in fees
thirty one percent of these
loans are found to be more than
that more than ten days late in
their payments so I think the
question we need to ask
ourselves is why why do the
small loan companies give out
loans to people who simply can't
afford it and they know that
they know that when they give
out the loan and it's because
the return on their investment I
think it's too high return on
investment for the people of New
Mexico.
What you need to understand is
that five hundred and twenty
eight of the five hundred
approximately five hundred
ninety seven companies that
there's eighty five percent of
these are storefront lenders in
New Mexico and they're out of
state corporations.
In June of two thousand eighteen
seventy percent of these out of
state corporations storefronts
Enforcement supervisory
regulatory actions against them
by the federal consumer finance
protection bureau and they
continue to operate in New
Mexico security finances fifty
four store fronts time it'll
listening fourteen these past
expresses ten store fronts on
these.
These have not been good players
for New Mexican recipe residents
and let me just read you some of
the report here security finance
made improper collection efforts
to collect delinquent debts
including physically preventing
borrowers from leaving their
home visiting and calling bars
place of business work well
knowing that this contact could
endanger their employment I'm
I'm just gonna skip down to the
funds that they had to pay
security finance was ordered to
pay five million civil penalties
I don't Max was ordered to pay
nine million Boller Pam entities
is cash express was ordered to
pay five million in refund
buyers and five million and
civil penalties.
Opponents of this bill will tell
you that the that this business
is a high risk business and that
they need high rates to recover
their costs seventeen states
plus the district of Columbia
and our neighbors to the north
Colorado set their rates at
thirty six percent I think next
New Mexico can do this now in
the same the compound this
problem the level two literacy
rate New Mexico as forty six
percent almost one half of our
population is unable to do
simple math.
That means most people who
signed these loans don't even
know what they're signing it's a
perfect storm created by out of
state corporations.
Frankly I just want to say that
as a state legislature and as a
local municipality there's some
businesses that you don't want
encourage state law has a limit
on the number of liquor license
we discourage motels that
operate in sex trafficking we
don't like strip clubs in our
communities I think I think that
small loan companies with
interest rates at a hundred
seventy five percent our
businesses we should encourage
the Lujan entities that in our
families.
And just so that you all
understand the enormity of this
problem there's an installment
loan company for every three
thousand eight hundred nineteen
residents in New Mexico by
comparison there's a McDonald's
for every twenty three thousand
two hundred ninety eight
residents that's about right for
Espanola let me just let me just
give you this on a local.
We have about seven or eight
installment loan star friends
and one McDonald's the city of
Espanola is about ten thousand
people and the county's about
thirty eight thousand.
I don't think that installment
loan companies so with interest
rates at a hundred and seventy
five percent are businesses that
we should encourage fifty years
ago I was just a small farming
community had to farm feed
stores lots of local small
businesses locally owned small
businesses twenty years ago the
casino's came into town.
There is one at the beginning in
Pojoaque a one right in the
middle of town and at the end of
town and after that about five
years later installment lenders
sure that predatory lenders came
into town in northern part of
this Spinella is is a robust
section of town it's gone and
certain of mostly fast food
restaurants search chain
restaurants and certainly the
largest Walmart in the state and
the lows so that part of the
town is doing pretty good I can
tell you the old part of town.
Small businesses have really
dried up and there's just no
discretionary spending left it's
mainly become we have good
restaurants still it really is
it looks like they can strip
malls predatory lenders and
dollar stores that's what's
going to these these predatory
lenders heard communities
The.
It's important to note that I'm
not asking that we close these
businesses down and nobody is
here we're asking that we simply
cap the interest rates of thirty
six percent and for those people
who say we can't do this you
know I called that I called him
quarter that she owns a small
installment loan company and not
listening to us and I called the
two years ago and I colored just
last week and I said him what do
you think can you do this
business at thirty six percent
are you going to close down and
she said you know we're real
proud of our local company it's
been three generations my dad
owned it the pass it on to me
now I have my kids working and
at really proud we have good
health benefits for all
employers and
last year couple years ago the
Rev to give the for one K. plans
to all their employees so
they're doing well doing well
she said you know when we first
looked at those numbers we
didn't think we could do it and
then I looked at that we looked
at the numbers and we decided we
could do a thirty six percent
cap she said we won't give we
will give loans out for three
hundred more but will give them
out for five hundred and we
think it's going to improve our
business because we think that
that players will leave the
state and would bring more money
into
into local companies that have a
thirty six percent cap rate and
I think that will I think it
will expand business for credit
unions and I think that's that's
an important story so closing
madam chair and members of the
committee I'd like to remind
this committee once again the
line it's majesty prevents the
rich and poor alike from
sleeping under a bridge for
stealing a loaf of bread.
M. New Mexico state law in its
majesty allows of rich and poor
alike to borrow money at
interest rate of a hundred and
seventy five percent thank you
madam chair and I clefts.
Thank you very much
Representative and.
And it was good to have you here
I'm gonna go to public comment I
did talk to the bill Sanchez
we've had three public hearings
on this prior to House Judiciary
I'm going to allow about John.
It it's on each side so
I I I don't want to cut anyone
off first we'll have a call so
you have an opportunity to vote
if you're for or against the
Senate bill sixty six and then
we will
go to I will last one side to
the other to raise has
individuals wish to speak in
favor or in opposition.
Please know that we have gotten
a lot of emails of yours and
visited with also.
All right just just to let you
know we're not everything hinges
on the next ten minutes for your
site so let's put the alcohol
out first if you'll do that was
sentenced okay we have a ten
second call don't.
Okay.
Spanish we have about sixty
seven percent in favor and
thirty three percent in
opposition that forty nine
people and twenty four people I
hope that.
The.
Public comment will be limited
to no no repetition and all and
very brief comments thank you
one minute each.
Thank you Mr participants would
like to speak I'm.
I'll start with those in favor.
Michael Doyle.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members Senators well
the speak plus I am a member New
Mexico trial lawyers association
workers compensation attorney in
our center name out earlier so
just I'm asking you to vote in
support of this bill Senators
souls during his beginning
reminded me I'm also thanks for
sergeant Erman very nice young
man came and tell me one time
that he got an interest loan to
get a vehicle you shocked the me
to death twenty told me got
three hundred percent interest
and it took a great amount of
work done do that to help that
are meant to stand strong
supporters Bill thank you.
Thank you I am Santa Griego.
Can you hear me yes okay.
Thank you.
Look regal and one of the
committee as a chief financial
empowerment officer just wanted
to give you an example of one
case that we saw and I did send
emails to many of our
Representative strike of samples
of contracts that we've seen
come through our our industry
where we're bringing stopped
working and could be repaired
she had seen the commercials for
one of these letters on TV which
means our products seem like her
best option in a panic she went
to having gave her loan for ten
thousand dollars to repair the
parts of Burnett secure the
title to the car the payments
were thirteen thirty four a
month for forty eight months
with an interest rate of a
hundred and fifty percent and
the total interest to be paid
was fifty four thousand she paid
over five thousand dollars in
interest and just four months by
the time we were able to get her
out of.
there was no
Determination of capacity to
repay to repay and so we are in
favor of this bill and
thank you for your time.
Thank you I'm Nick Madison.
Yes all right madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Nick Madison I'm a consumer
protection attorney in
Albuquerque where I regularly
speak to people who are having
terrible problems of predatory
lending but I can't help because
the legislature has given its
seal of approval two one hundred
seventy five percent APR loans
there was one person that I have
Representative that I wanted to
tell you about to to give you a
sense of what it means to be in
a triple digit loan and that's
Mississippi is consumer number
two on the hand that you
received I just want to draw
your attention to the fact that
Mississippi's lone is not even
at the full one hundred seventy
five percent it is only at one
hundred thirty percent APR and
although she was disabled and
received only about one thousand
dollars a month she brought
about six thousand dollars and
was obligated to repay thirty
four thousand dollars over the
course of four years with
payments being about seventy
five percent for total income I
urge you all to put an end to
these practices thank you.
Thank you next Dr Terry Greer.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Dr Terry
Greer and I'm speaking as co
chair of the a a RP New Mexico
consumer advocacy team at RP New
Mexico is in strong support of
Senate bill sixty six because it
will help seniors who are having
trouble making ends meet.
The rise where people need to
get their hands on money quickly
however they shouldn't be taken
advantage of we need to protect
New Mexico consumers by capping
the lending rate at thirty six
percent we thank the sponsors
Senator souls and do heck for
bringing this bill forward thank
you madam chair for allowing me
to speak.
Thank you Jacob Vigil.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee and my name's
Jacob Vigil M. policy analyst
and advocate with New Mexico
voices for children and we won't
try to repeat a lot of what's
already been said but is it just
a children's advocacy
organization we really see this
as an issue of child well being
we deal a lot in data about how
children have
No date on child well being
particularly on how children
have suffered from the economic
shock that has come with this
pandemic and so
Recognizing that working
families need access to credit
and their tax refunds having to
resort to options that lead them
in cycles of debt makes it
harder for them to escape
poverty and that is one of the
key indicators of child outcomes
so
For those reasons and many
others New Mexico voices for
children stands in strong
support of this legislation
thank you.
Thank you more had.
Good afternoon honorable members
this committee you madam chair
Ron Morehead president first
financial credit union with a
two thousand members in New
Mexico and branches in nine
communities we can serve all New
Mexicans with our central
charter within the state we
offer a payday lending
alternative long as well as an
overdraft line of credit for
signature loans as low as a
hundred dollars and as high as
twenty five thousand neither
yield traded nor are overdraft
line of credit loans look at
credit scores is partnering
process with the willingness and
ability to repay we also provide
financial literacy and education
to any of our members who would
like it for free we urge you to
support this bill for the sake
of our members thank you.
Thank you I'm gonna Porter.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee I am
with prosperity works and we
brought the product to connect
to our communities about four
years ago during this period of
time more than four thousand
people have borrowed more than
eight million dollars from Los
crucis to tiles from C. N. M. to
Comcast companies have adopted
this opportunity for low income
for low cost loans for their
employees this is an important
resource for our communities and
save not only the families but
also the communities the high
cost of predatory lending
additionally you will hear that
of.
credit unions are just new to
the game as that Mr stall said
they are not new to the game
they help our communities every
single day I have evidence of
that with the communities that
we serve the people we serve in
many different ways please pass
this bill today.
Thank you.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Mari foundation and managing
attorney at the consumer law
practice group with New Mexico
legal aid New Mexico legal aid
strongly supports SB sixty six
based on our decades of
experience working with multiple
populations it's our belief that
strong regulation of small
dollar loans is needed to
protect consumers from falling
into debt traps which they can
never escape from.
One one case I had to talk about
is this need this customer three
hundred and out that you are
provided she is a disabled woman
living in Las Vegas she was
living off or disability income
of all the seven hundred seventy
dollars per month and just to
make her basic living expenses
she borrowed loan after loan
after loan and she could not
afford to repay that she was in
the loan cycle for over eight
years by the time she came to
our office and her car is
currently at have tens of
repossession because she ended
up taking a title on this is
just one example of familiar K.
pattern and I urge you to pass
this bill.
Thank you.
Stratum.
Good afternoon on madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Scott Estrada and I'm here on
behalf of the American fintech
council as one of its board of
directors members the agency was
recently formed as the unified
voice of the fintech industry
bringing together some of the
most responsible industry actors
more than fifty members across
banking lending Representative
wealth management and other
fintech segments the AFC
advances programs summer
policies consistent with those
principles of financial
inclusion racial equity and
embracing regulation to promote
responsible innovation after
discussions with some of the
advocates I'm here on behalf of
the AFC recorder support for SB
sixty six with the amendments
discussed by Senator do eight
out allow our members to
continue to serve on New
Mexicans with responsible
affordable access to credit is
responsible lenders we know it
is possible to adhere to an all
in thirty six percent cap and
offer of alternative for the
loans to borrowers including non
prime credit with the
individuals thank you.
Sorry.
Alan Sanchez.
Go ahead on.
Madam chair.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Alan so I'm
just I'm the executive director
of the New Mexico conference of
Catholic bishops other missions
are worried about the user in
this we've been working on this
for twenty years with promises
that things would get better the
heartbreaking stories just keep
coming to us and the with the
bishops of taking this position
it also want to ask me Alan you
know you are you organizations
like Saint Vincent DePaul the
gonna start making loans and I
said no I think just give it
away that brings into the
question that we have people in
emergencies we need to be
looking for social services
that's one of the agents in this
reason for a cap on it.
Will be in the emergency.
You Mr you are guarantees for
the.
Now when we look at the we are
still.
The storm.
Madam can be found in this
legislation please support.
Thank you.
John and I thought John had
already spoken to my wrong about
that.
No I'm not but I I approval the
not a proponent that
way I will get to the all.
Wait thank you for asking
investment.
The call under the age.
Members of the committee my name
is Mikel Landa vision and the
secretary with the beauty way
foundation we work with
indigenous in rural New Mexico
and then also a leader with
Albuquerque interface which is
composed of sixteen dues paying
institutions including schools
churches congregations temples
nonprofits and community members
we have listened to the stories
of our community members and
their crushing financial debt
caused by predatory lending New
Mexico ranks low in many
socioeconomic categories I want
to up lift Representative
Ferrary is presentation and
remind you we need to dissuade
bad actors in New Mexico that
add to our socio economic plight
we must remember that
legislation is a moral document
we must respectfully request
that you vote yes on Senate bill
sixty six thank you for your
time.
Thank you.
Next Austin we aqui.
Thank you madam chairman of a
committee member all we ask in
I'm here on behalf of an
innovative approach we stand
today in strong support of SB
sixty six because we understand
this is an issue of equity we
know that sixty five percent of
the wonders of and fifteen miles
of tribal lands we know that the
lenders will centralize run
communities of color or
communities border towns and
areas of less access to good
financial literacy it doesn't
take a degree to know that
thirty six percent is absolutely
more affordable than a similar
loan at a hundred seventy five
percent you know the regardless
of the credit for nobody
deserves a predatory right we
understand the committee has a
choice between real strong
consumer protections or an
endorsement of predatory triple
digit rates which permanently
hinder the our quality of life
of historically marginalized
communities we know that this is
not an unreasonable ask and we
owe it to New Mexicans to bring
our state part we owe the people
of color elders and people in
poverty and voters the right to
real credit not recurring
exploited that we are committed
to vote to pass on this
legislation.
Part.
I'll go ahead.
I'm sorry manager was on the
apologize good afternoon madam
chair members of the committee
thank you very much for having
me I'll park registered lobbyist
on the behalf of the New Mexico
consumer credit association the
consumer credit association is
made up of a consortium of
responsible small lenders here
in the state of New Mexico we
want to thank Senator souls and
Senator to hate on working with
us with respect to the
amendments to Senate bill sixty
six as well as all of the
advocates including Karen Myers
and for the nation we stand in
support of Senate bill sixty six
as amended thank you madam
chair.
Thank you I just want to let
everyone know we've gotten more
than ten minutes I'm going to
make it fifteen that please.
I noticed several hands for one
organization so if you'd we've
already heard from the
organization if you could put
your hand down I would
appreciate it I still think.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members hi
Representative eight hundred
eighty eight you W. New Mexico
members we support passing SB
sixty six we also appreciate
that this bill constraints and
array of lender fees and other
charges which is been used to
boost loan checks are
potentially thank you for your
attention to this matter we
appreciate your passage.
Thank you okay.
Yes madam speaker I mean sorry
madam chair committee members
and bill sponsor my name's Paul
Gibson co founder retake Our
Democracy an all volunteer
organization with twenty five
hundred members statewide this
year we saw Torrez espys one
sixty six very strong way the
expert witnesses expressed very
clearly why this committee
should get this bill to pass
what I'd like to focus on is
your responsibilities
legislators why you need to
consider the needs of look
legitimate small businesses you
do not have to protect
businesses that prey on our most
vulnerable Mexicans your prior
to do I hope is to protect the
interests of those essential
workers we've been stocking our
shelves caring for our children
delivering our food and
medicines and caring for our
sick at all to remind you that
the federal small loan rate cap
of thirty six percent protects
military families and is in line
with most other states we take
our democracy and it's twenty
five hundred members strongly
supports this bill.
I will.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee and Camilla I on
David speaking on behalf of the
Sierra Club and R. thirty five
thousand members and supporters
we stand in solidarity with our
tribal partners in support of
this bill sixty percent of these
lenders are within fifteen miles
of tribal nations and that's
unacceptable we hope you'll vote
in favor thank you.
Thank you amber County L..
Sorry thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is amber Karia and I am the
executive director of the L.
public consulate governors and I
just want to
mention to us speaker Egolf that
we sent you a letter of support
to SB sixty six today and in
that letter we did mentioned
several points including that SB
sixty six is a common sense bill
providing for consumer
protections we also see this as
a racial justice issue the
storefront lenders are unfairly
targeting the most vulnerable
native American communities in
New Mexico if anyone drives
through grants New Mexico every
other corner has has a
storefront and the majority of
folks living in that in that
particular area are people of
color what's amazing to me is
that this that predatory lending
has been able to make so much
money off of the vulnerable of
New Mexico we strong we stand
strongly in support of SB sixty
six thank you thank you.
Carter Bundy.
Madam chair members of the
committee Carter bonding with
asked me we have been working on
this in some form or another
since Attorney General Patricia
Madrid was working on this long
time ago this is long overdue
and will help prevent the
downfall of working families and
so we strongly support thank
you.
I would like to hear.
Madam chair members of the
committee we might serve
representing senior citizens law
office that provides free legal
services to central New Mexico
seniors age sixty and older we
instituciones to Greece sport SB
sixty six S. yellow represents a
substantial number of clients
annually borrow money from small
small loan lenders without
understanding the consequences
the worst consequences when
seniors make high interest loan
payments to small lenders rather
than pay their rent and once a
person is infected is very hard
for them to provide future
housing nobody will read to them
in recent years estilo has had a
number of senior clients who've
become homeless trying to pay
back their high interest small
loans extended their rent is a
travesty could each be sixty six
well hopefully remedy thank you
very much.
Thank you we have to our one
from a number.
Eight more grant great.
Thank you madam chair as usual
for more chair I will and you
only wanted one.
Group up I will past thank you
thank you so much and so we have
one more person miles to get
out.
Thank you so much chair and
members the committee this is
miles talking deputy director of
les New Mexico and do we and
our.
Our members fully support this
bill and we hope that I get to
do past thank you so very much
thank you let me ask for those
in opposition to please raise
their hands.
First I have Ricky keys.
Madam chair and members of the
committee according to Bankrate
dot com sixty three percent of
Americans didn't have five
dollars to address a household
emergency this is the equivalent
of one point three million New
Mexicans unfortunately New
Mexico already has one of the
highest rates of poverty in the
country and inability to access
mainstream forms of credit will
make an already bad situation
worse I believe that unlike many
who advocating this bill like to
share will trust payday lending
not installed amending is the
problem I believe that this bad
bill passes it will it is
estimated that an astonishing
forty six percent of all New
Mexicans will lose access to
safe affordable state regulated
credit with that I just suggest
that you oppose this bill thank
you.
Can you hear me Madam gem we can
go ahead.
Madam chair members the
committee my name is Andrew
Morrison with bondage Management
I feel like Gallo years trying
to explain to the inquisition
the sun doesn't go around the it
looks that way the facts about
APR are not complicated but they
outcomes are into it APR on not
indicators of cost except
between loans of equal size and
duration otherwise they are
constructing the basis the
biggest alone the lower the APR
but the higher the cost of the
dollars and as a percent of the
amount financed APR caps do not
save people money they cost and
keep them longer and at the
federal reserve says the
smallest loan you can make it
thirty six and breakeven is
twenty five hundred dollars that
means of thirty six right cap
white order loan service more
than back leading consumers to
be preyed on by on regulated I
let one main boasts that it
makes lands at thirty six but
that's because it's average loan
is eight thousand it won't help
most New Mexico borrows please
protect vulnerable consumers who
need small arms and vote against
this bill.
Program.
Thank you very much my name is
Joe Ruben I've Representative up
loans we are a fintech platform
we attempt to find a to help
consumers find better rates by
attempting to help them shop
affirmatively shop for better
rates amongst three six percent
landers unfortunately we find
that ninety percent of them
won't get lots even amongst our
some of the folks that are on
the call today we believe that
high interest loans should be a
loan of last resort.
And so we believe that there
should be a safety belt if
consumers try and attempt to
provide a credit at lower rates
that's fine that's great we
welcome the participation of
credit unions and others but if
they can't find that in loans
emergency loans at at these
rates there should be a safety
valve a way for them to obtain
credit in this event are there
are there are reasons that there
are so many.
Lenders of last resort in New
Mexico we like to see them that
number declined but we also like
to see them have continue to
have access to credit.
Ricardo Gonzalez.
Madam chair woman members of the
committee my name is Ricardo
Gonzales I usually am and then
at a lobbyist for all past
electric but today I'm not
talking to you on that I'm.
A very personal issue
I am opposed to this bill
because I deal with these.
Loans every day my father is a
degenerate alcoholic and
gambler.
And I get calls from these folks
once a month on loans that are
paid out
and they're small loans
sometimes I take care of them
sometimes they don't.
I'm but I know that when I get
the calls.
I'd say a little prayer to god
thanking him that he's alive
he's not borrowing from illegal
entities have also dealt with
that and that's a really scary
situation and so I just.
Want to let you guys know that
that I know we're talking about
the greater angels here and I
appreciate that I was brought up
by a single mom hi I have
actually dealt with this stuff
on my own making bad decisions
but I'm telling you that
in the gutters of the world
these loans do make a difference
and
and that's just the story I'm
gonna give you I don't have
anything on the policy side it
is.
Your types that be part of John
nine.
Thank you madam chair we own
three family operated small one
stores and I've been with my
account and essentially models
thirty six percent all in at
five hundred dollar loans and
nine hundred dollar loans and it
is not sustainable.
There is no financial analysis
with this bill that supports
sustainability.
That's interesting.
They're only too well and
there's a correction you're only
two other states.
That have thirty six percent are
women.
That's Connecticut and South
Dakota.
In both examples of what happens
is that all the storefronts are
gonna both.
And the ones that have taken
over our sovereign landers come
in at three hundred and seventy
five percent a hundred percent.
Statements that it's been stated
that we make loans to people who
cannot pay we're not ignorant.
I don't know why we would be
making loans that we do not
grateful to people who do not
have the ability to pay that is.
Public affairs.
A good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee David
Pena registered lobbyists for
select management resources the
small installment loan industry
a regulated industry in New
Mexico the financial
institutions division is charged
with licensing and regulating
the approximately five hundred
sixty one small loan companies
in twenty seventeen HB thirty
three three four seven reform
legislation did away with payday
loans if you are went from four
hundred percent to one seventy
five percent it required data
reporting and business is
required to pay into a fund to
establish a financial literacy
program which to date has not
been lost by FID twenty nine to
twenty nineteen legislation H.
B. one fifty was a result of
called compromise reached with
stakeholders included no
changing APR rates did include
customer protection such as a
right of recision and extensive
annual data reporting
requirements due on April
fifteenth of every year FID is
charged with compiling
information and generating
annual reports by July given the
effective date of this bill was
January first of twenty twenty
twenty twenty calendar it is due
to FID on April fifteenth twenty
twenty one.
If you.
Please go ahead thank you madam
chair members of the committee
and Danielle fake we are low
senior vice president of the
American financial services
association we've been around
for over a hundred years our
members are both bank and non
bank in all areas of consumer
credit after does not represent
payday lenders title lenders for
credit unions I have one
question and one point of
clarification the question is if
credit unions love this bill so
much wired exempt from the bill
they're exempt from it and they
do not have to abide by it the
point of clarification is that
everybody knows you cannot break
even on thirty six percent below
twenty five hundred dollars the
United States federal reserve
economist report last year using
data collected during the Obama
administration says
unequivocally and I quote a loan
amount of twenty five hundred
thirty dollars is necessary to
break even at thirty six percent
thank you.
Two weeks.
Thank you madam chair members of
the Jason Weaks on behalf QC
holdings QCA stands in
opposition to the bills drafted
while well intentioned this bill
had intended consequences of as
you've heard from others driving
important access point to credit
out of the state lenders just
simply won't be able to land and
roughly twenty five hundred
dollars to thirty six percent
APR if your works great for
large amounts of for short term
loans equates to about three
percent interest a month the
reality is this is an issue in
the state we do need to address
it we need to have that
conversation however we do and
we should wait to evaluate the
data that we're gonna get on
short term lending that was
being collected pursuant to a
twenty nineteen bill once we
have that that and how we can
make more intelligent data
driven decisions and we can
understand whether or not this
credit will dry up entirely if
we pass this legislation as
it presently is we will be
cutting off that access point
for those reasons we stand
opposed to legislation thank
you.
Madam chair can you hear me yes.
Madam chair members of the
committee good afternoon my name
is Tony Tanner homeowner Tax
Court finance was small Mexico
family owned business operating
in Gallup and Farmington since
nineteen eighty nine thirty plus
years we offer refund
anticipation loans which have a
high rate APR would have a tip
for total interest percentage
rate of about eighteen percent
we welcome credit unions to wait
in and help New Mexicans through
free market competition which is
the basis of the US economy
allowing firms to compete with
each other not by legislative
competition out of business.
Chair members of the committee
we cannot support Senate bill
sixty six thank you for your
time today.
Our.
Thank you madam chair Dennis are
representing access financial
services we do not do title
loans or payday loans and I do
echo the comments you've heard
from others like Mr weeks I
would point out that are typical
loan is five hundred to twelve
hundred dollars for four to
twelve months at thirty six
percent a five hundred dollar
for months loan would return
nine dollars and fifty one cents
a month not even the equivalent
of one hour of minimum wage many
of the lenders that had spoken
today as alternatives have
either turned down our customers
or offer loans at rates and
costs and amounts so much higher
than none of our customers do it
one main average loan is seven
thousand dollars for four to
five years our customers need
five hundred dollars for four
months we respectively oppose
this bill thank you.
Thank you.
It's our public comment.
So we're going to go back to the
committee.
And I think I want to go to
Representative Ely for the
amendments.
Thank you madam chair and there
is one further amendment but
it's a simple one yes said the
implementation are to make the
effective date I can read it out
July one of twenty twenty two
but I don't want to pleasure the
committee as I'm happy to move
the amendments now or wait for
more discussion whatever the
chair would like
You know maybe I should ask the
Senators does it make it seems
to me that makes sense to adopt
each amendment.
Right and and take a vote on
that so
Senator Duhigg which one of
those amendments I'll.
A minute number one but you tell
me which number one edit.
For so number one it would be
the the fintech.
And.
And.
I believe I do have the two oh
two number Representative I do
right let's let's do this if I
can make suggestion madam chair
let me just go ahead I think I
know the order I can do okay I
can do a pretty quickly all
right I would I would move the
adoption of.
And then then I try to to number
two two zero seven eight eight
point one we refer to it is the
pandemic commandment I'd I'd
move the adoption of that
amendment now.
Okay do you want to I think I
need it explained further
It
that and then I'll take
discussion.
On the amendment.
Second the adoption motion
Senator do.
Or apps thank you madam chair
so.
So in this bill half pages.
Where is it.
Thank you all for the language.
It's page seventeen line twelve.
Thank you.
So there's there's language in
here yes thank you.
R. this is anti and then you can
let.
And because what we've seen is
that what often happens is a
state will adopt a reasonable
cap for interest rates and then
lenders come up with lots of
different ways to get around
that one of the the ways that
they do that is by.
Doing something.
Where so you go to let me money
dot com as as a borrower and you
apply for a loan through them
you think you're getting the
loan through them here that
paying them back there the one
servicing your loan unbeknownst
to you let me money dot com has
an agreement with that the bank
of North of bank of South
Dakota.
And they bought and now that's
an FDIC bank and those banks are
not subject to state regulations
they are subject to federal
regulation and so they are not
limited to I things like thirty
six percent all in interest rate
caps that states adopt
so so the the bank of South
Dakota is the one who's actually
originating the loan for let me
of money dot com the U. S. the
consumer and and they're doing
that only just to escape the the
the the limit on the interest
rate cap.
You is the consumer have no idea
bank of south Dakota's involved
anyway all you know is let me
money dot com and so one of the
things that this bill does is it
dos something called the
predominant economic interests
yes and what that does is it
looks it whose actually
benefiting from the house like a
a Cui bono analysis
in this case and that the
example I gave it's really let
me money dot com that's
benefiting from it's the one
that is making the money off of
it it's the one that is getting
the fees it's the one that is
interacting with the consumer
it's just borrowing a FDIC banks
I designation in order to escape
state usury laws they don't they
do this not only with banks they
also do this with tribes they
borrow tribe's sovereign
sovereign status to escape
imposition of of these interest
rate caps and so what this first
amendment and so.
So this is something that if
they're doing it just to escape
the imposition of the interest
rate cap that's something we
don't want to have happened
that's why this languages in
this bill but for responsible
lenders who are green that they
will abide by the interest rate
cap that we're creating here the
thirty six percent all let we
don't want to do anything that's
going to mess up of their
business model and we want them
to a lot we want to make sure
that they can continue to
provide that access to credit to
responsible it is credit to New
Mexicans and so we don't want
over the anti invasion language
in this bill to trip them up
because we know that they're
already going to be doing the
right thing I'm and they have to
be doing the right thing in
order to make sure that the anti
evasion language doesn't apply
to them and so that's what
amendment one accomplish just.
That.
And that was kind of a long
secu Sears circuitous
explanation there into a line
twelve.
Is there.
Okay discussion on the amendment
and I've got it heals up already
so I don't know if they're on
the amendment for the for the
bills Representative McQueen are
you on the amendment.
On the bill madam chair okay
Representative all COVID are you
on this ammendment the bills
chair okay.
Very good.
So.
I'm on the amendment
There you are
all.
Go ahead not by your I just want
to ask a clarifying question
thank you Senators it's been
said a couple of times that some
of these lenders are borrowing.
The sovereign nation status and
I'm just a little bit concerned
about that language in part
because I want to respect
this sovereign nations are
sovereign nations and they
deserve to make not only do they
deserve they have the right to
make their own decisions about
what's appropriate for their
economic activities for the
economic development I don't
want to comment on the decision
sovereign nations are making for
themselves but might you
Expand a bit on and on that
borrowing language and and just
tell us a little bit further
about how this ammendment might
interact with the rights of
sovereign nations to engage and
contracts or business
negotiations as these may come
in front of them.
Absolutely madam chairman vice
chair and and.
What we see happen here is that
to the extent that that we
absolutely sovereign nations
have the right to do what they
want to do and and we.
And to the extent that that they
have facilities that are making
loans at whatever rate they
choose and we want to make sure
that that those are funds that
that benefit that the sovereign
nation and stay there and
benefit those folks adding this
language actually facilitates
that because what happens now is
that that money ends up all all
the profits of that end up going
to these out of state companies
on the they don't stay with the
sovereign nation
because they are the sons of
sovereign nation gets a to
minimus amount in exchange for
using they're basically allowed
the allowing the the use of
their sovereign status to cover
one of these companies but the
real profits of it and the
profits that are being taken
gently from folks who are living
in and around that sovereign
nation doesn't end up staying
there locally so having this
language they're having this
language will help with those
funds stay with those sovereign
nations and be re it be part of
that community not be absorbed
by these out of state companies
as it is currently.
Madam chair I guess I'm just to
be clear I don't understand how
that's going to happen like how
are we going to do that without
compromising the integrity of
sovereign nations to decide for
themselves what kind of business
and.
Ski and and and investments they
want to be part of with their
status and madam chairman by Sir
thank thank you because I I I I
understand that so so they can
still make these contracts
absolutely this would not in any
way limit a sovereign nation's
ability to enter into these
contracts the only thing that it
would do is that for the folks
who that who have the actual
production who is actually
benefiting who who have the
actual predominant economic
interest they would have to
abide by the thirty six percent
all in
high interest rate.
So that interest that's being
paid back to them.
So so if if that interest was
being paid to the sovereign
nation because what Senator
happened what how this could
really come into play is when
there's a lawsuit and there's a
court that is looking at the
different elements of of looking
at who actually has the real
economic interest here if
there's a determination that the
sovereign nation is the one who
actually has the economic
interest then there would be no
limit on that that the limit
would be whatever the sovereign
nation chooses to have it be but
if that now also showed that the
person that the entity that was
really the one that was
benefiting if if that interest
was really benefiting one of
these out of state companies and
stat in that case that if they
were not using the thirty six
percent interest that would be a
violation of this of this act.
Okay I feel more comfortable
with everybody else I know I'm
not sure I'm convinced on
including the tribes or
sovereign nations in this
ammendment thank you madam chair
and and madam chair and members
sure just just to make clear
this doesn't specifically
include sovereign nations and
tribes the language of this
all I was that's just one of the
examples that we've seen when
issues around it's P. E. I. put
on economic interests has come
up
there's been a number of high
class action suits about it it's
the and and that's often come up
and that not often but sometimes
it has come up in this and in
the tribal contacts I believe
miss Kelly might have something
to add on this her hands up.
Let me go to this Kelly because
she did prepare the committee
analysis and a lot of research.
You need this County.
Sorry I wanted to ensure that
that the vice chair the
amendment strictly clarifies
language just to loan right it
has no effect whatsoever REC
whatsoever on the tribal nations
abilities or their rights.
So what Senator Duhigg was
trying to explain was giving
examples on what my what what
might happen but in connection
with our tribal sovereign
nations it has no impact.
So don't worry the amendment
doesn't make any changes to our.
Since rights madam chair.
You I mean that is something I
understood but it it just threw
me off to hear that the the
reference to borrowing the
sovereign status just wanted to
make sure I understood what was
happening there Madam chair on
that point.
Last.
Thank you madam chair and that
and vice chair condemned I you
know
I just wanted to chime in here
too because I don't think that
there are any tribes in New
Mexico that are offering this
but there's actually a really
good documentary by Netflix's
like a series called dirty money
where it does talk about how
folks are going into these
partnerships with tribes and I
think that's the point that
Senator Duhigg was trying to
address where you know it's not
the tribes themselves at certain
partnerships where savvy.
Seventy businesses are looking
to the tribes and their
sovereignty to go about this so
I I and I'm glad that it doesn't
address the tribes here in New
Mexico because of their
sovereignty as well but I I do
think that's important I
especially for
That there's also a great piece
in our hand outs to that talks
about predatory lending and them
being around native American
tribes so if there's that
connection where maybe a tribal
member might say oh well now the
sovereign nation of whatever
tribe is part of this they're
going to look out for my
interests so so I think that's
helpful in trying to identify
where some companies might go
around that out thanks for your
question.
I'm not sure is that all.
Yes
yes madam.
Right thank.
Will we have no further
discussion on the amendment will
to correct this call the roll on
adopting the first amendment.
Representative Alcon.
Yes.
Armstrong yes.
Representative Cook yes.
Mr speaker just.
Representative Eli yes.
Representative Lewis.
Yes.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative Nibert yes.
In a rural.
Thanks very.
You
are handsome yes.
Passionate Representative Rehm.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Just.
Eleven zero one million and the
doctor
it is adopted Representative you
live the second amendment yes
madam chair this is the second
of three the last phone be the
easiest I promise and I don't
think this was gonna be
difficult I hope not this is to
R. two to number two two zero
eight zero two point one on page
two of the bill is before you
line sixteen after principal
insert the words that shall be
charged no more than once per
individual consumer within a
twelve month period so what this
does is it stops these lending
companies from having a of
finance the war interest fee
that they're charging more than.
Processing fee that they're
charging more than once a within
a year I think I said that right
have I said that right Madam
chair Senator Duhigg.
I believe the yes.
With that madam chair I move its
adoption.
For
second that motion.
I think I'd like to try it well
let's go ahead and call the roll
on that mission.
Representative.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Cook no.
Mr speaker.
Yes.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Lewis yes.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative Nibert yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Thank
you.
Madam chair.
What.
Yes.
Yes to know.
Dr amendment.
Okay next we'll go to
For the last amendment.
So this one does not have a two
oh two number this is apparently
something that they have talked
about E. commerce doing in
judiciary and that is to delay
the effective date of the
provisions the bill so the way
it would read and I'll be happy
to get to the Allison the
drafters the language it would
say on page forty line I created
new subsection I'm sorry a new
section fourteen this is the
very end of the bill as follows
effective date the effective
date of the provisions of this
bill
yes July one twenty twenty two.
So it just delays the effective
date of the provisions and with
that madam chair I would move
adoption of that amendment I
realize that it does number two
oh two number.
Second that.
Is there any objection to
adopting the delayed
implementation date.
The show all members present
voting in the affirmative on
adoption of that amendment.
Back to debate on the amended.
Madam chair I it I'm sorry I'm
sorry I cut myself off what I I
don't mean to authorize the
discussion when it's appropriate
I mean I'm happy to turn over
others but I do have questions
about the bill as well so okay
all right so then you're next
after Representative McQueen
okay thank you madam chair.
Madam chair my up.
Sorry I needed myself yes you
are Representative McQueen.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair Senators.
Couple years ago I voted for the
the other seventy five percent
bill.
And it was
Maybe the most distasteful photo
I've ever taken in the
legislature because normally you
know you folks forget bills vote
against bad bills and that was
clearly that bill.
And I had to decide whether or
not he was better than the
status quo.
And so it but for.
Madam chair Senators I'm eager
to change that.
I to.
I think thirty percent thirty
six percent is too high.
But I respect the work you've
done this in the reasons for
picking thirty six percent.
I do have one question though.
That's come up in your heard
some of it today the public
testimony and I've had some
emails about it.
With small loans like if I need.
You know a hundred dollars to.
Okay my utilities or two hundred
dollars to get my car fixed.
I I don't see how the small
loans survive.
with the all in interest rate.
You know I are a hundred Bucks
and pay it back next month.
It just
The transaction cost and time
involved in writing and I just I
just don't see how that happens
so have you considered a is the
sort of microloans carved out to
your bill.
Madam chair and representative
if I might we can look at what's
happened in other states and
these up caps on on loans have
occurred and typically what
happens is other mechanisms kick
in many of the people who get
into these loans have other
resources that they haven't
wanted to tap in we've heard
stories about people that go to
these companies and ask for a
small because they didn't want
to put it on their credit card.
They got a credit card that they
could do that but they've heard
that you shouldn't carry a
balance on your credit card
other credit card may be at
under thirty six percent but
instead they're taking out a
loan that is much higher than
that and so it's to encourage
them to find other mechanisms I
think you also heard Alan
Sanchez with the Catholic
bishops it say they've got
programs within their church to
assist people in those very
small needs right now types of
loans are you also heard from of
one of the credit union and some
of the other credit unions that
once they have established
credit for someone there is a
credit line that is available
for them that very small amounts
at under the thirty six percent
cap so there are a number of
other places of the stories also
from other states that have done
this indicate that people when
they need a very small amount
like that are more likely to go
after their family to to help
and assist they're more likely
to ask friends to help and
assist during those times we
have a myth in this country that
we're supposed to be independent
we're supposed to manage our out
on our own that we don't want to
ask for help if we just work
harder and suck it up a little
bit more have a little bit more
grit that we can get through and
all of us have that means and
usually what has happened in
other states for the very small
micro loans like you're talking
about is they going get those
from family and friends as more
of a a paper type of a borrow
rather than where there actually
are getting into something that
may grow into a predatory type
of loan.
Hi
and and Representative
Representative if if I may madam
chair if I may add to that so
that's kind of microloans really
are beyond the scope of this
bill because this bill and and
the sectors that it deals with
those loans already have a
minimum term of a hundred and
twenty days so all of the loans
that we're talking about in this
bill and under under these
provisions under these statutes
they're not they're not your
your month long lot Sir not even
your ninety day loans these are
all minimum a hundred twenty day
term loans I so so why I hear
what you're saying of about
about that maybe I I I need for
microloans I think that would be
beyond the scope of of what
we're doing in this legislation
just because of the statutes
that that are
at issue here.
Chair Senator is a need
clarification on that.
So are you saying that this bill
would impair the ability to do
micro loans at a higher interest
rate.
Madam chair representative I I
don't know that we have a
service and and perhaps miss
Myers can address that but I
think for loans that are outside
of what is designated under
these statutes are that that's
gonna be a different inquiry but
miss Myers.
Madam chair representative my
name's Karen Myers I'm an
attorney in Albuquerque New I am
a former a the head of the
consumer protection division at
the AG's office and have been
involved with regulating these
industry for a long time the
answer your question
representative madam chair is
that payday loans were offered
and marketed as microlending in
many places because they were a
single payment loan they were
being made at three hundred four
hundred percent for our interest
and have hallmarks of rollovers
and inability to fully pay which
is why the state of New Mexico
several years ago wisely
eliminated them
I think that what you've heard
from credit unions
Representative is an example of
microlending which is they do
make loans at very small
amounts.
And they do that targeted to the
particular person and their
ability to pay that back so it's
it is much more calibrated
to connect does the same thing
which is who has a microlending
aspect to it if you will I also
think that on in one of your
examples for example utilities
we also should look at social
services and there are there are
utility emergency services that
can help people with that
there's rental assistance their
services that can help people
when they can't pay that so it
is a broader thing than just
taking out a loan.
Chair Senators for it you thanks
for your answers but I guess I
still don't quite understand.
it and I decided a couple of
examples
in you cited some examples of
the alternatives.
Credit cards friends relatives
the Catholic Church
I I just it seems to me that
they're playing situations where
people might need two hundred
Bucks they don't want to go
through the process of going to
a credit union setting up an
account they're not Catholic you
know they don't the other
parents don't have the money
they'll have crackers there are
various ask their friends I mean
I just it seems to me like if if
I need to box
in someone could give me chair
box in.
You know I got him back in
thirty days two hundred fifty
Bucks that's clearly a huge
interest rate but it gets me
over the hump I'm okay with that
we have protections built in
that we don't we don't continue
that cycle we have to school I
mean they're all sorts of things
you we can do in the and you
know that better than I do.
But I I don't.
It seems to me like there is a
role for that it sounds like
we're for closing that.
And representative madam chair
representative if I may so
existing law already does not
allow for these thirty day loans
that that you're talking about
under the installment loan act
existing law already requires a
minimum term of a hundred and
twenty days so which which
number one hi it allows the
lender to have to have a longer
term to collect interest on
but and but then number two I
think it was also in there to
give folks more time to pay
those back because they they
might have a greater ability to
pay them back over time but but
we already under the installment
loan act and the small business
loan act there's a minimum term
of a hundred twenty days nothing
in this bill changes that.
Madam chair on that point.
Please.
Thank you madam chair
representative I am really
appreciating Representative
McQueen is questions here
because I have the same reaction
it is not experience that Pete
knowing people that I've loved
and held and worried about and
lost sleep over knowing folks
that I've met in my life as an
elected official policy
advocate.
Not every New Mexican has access
to a credit card a Catholic
church or family or friends
that's the point and I I I think
I understand I want to clarify
that in twenty seventeen we
banned these installment loans
and said that you couldn't make
them for a term of less than a
hundred twenty days I think I'm
following you on that but I just
haven't heard a concise and
clear answer yes or no
Representative McQueen question
with this piece of legislation
in front of us I don't even
remember the name of SB sixty
six right now would we also be
capping APR at thirty six
percent for these installment
loans that I do understand
cannot be a period of less than
a hundred twenty days is the
thirty six percent landing on
potentially the smaller amount
what we might call microloans.
And madam chair madam vice
chair.
Right now we don't have a lot a
structure to create those those
don't exist so so it's not that
so so right now if you're going
to get a loan under the
installment loan act you there
there is not an option to get
those the shorter term smaller
loans so as not impact that you
at a smaller amount so I'm not
asking about the term I'm asking
can someone today go get a five
hundred dollar installment loan
on a hundred and twenty day
term.
Absent the madam chair then vice
chair yes absolutely and and
this would apply a.
The the thirty six percent all
in cap would apply to any alone
ten thousand dollars or less
under the installment loan act.
Thank you that's the question I
believe I wanted answered back
to Representative McQueen thank
you madam chair.
So madam chair up to do Hey I I
try to get my calculator out.
If I borrowed five hundred
dollars for the hundred twenty
days have.
How how much could lowincome the
charge me.
Madam chair representative the
loan company it could would
charge.
Thirty six percent all in a pair
and and the reason the reason
it's it's important that we're
talking about APR here is
because this is what's required
by federal law we're required
all of these the terms even
though we might think about
loans and and in shorter time
frames and that's not what's
required that's not what's
permitted
by federal law there's a raise
over fifty years ago the fed
just wanted to make sure that
when people are taking out loans
that they have a real
understanding of what the cost
is and what they realize is that
unless you put frame things in
terms of a PR you're not
actually giving consumers of
meaningful understanding of what
the costs are that they are
going to be exposed to and so
every time even if you're taking
out a loan for only a hundred
twenty days when you get that
disclosure paperwork everything
is framed in terms of APR and
federal law requires disclosure
of everything in terms of a PR
and I'm sorry I might have
gotten a little off track there
and and and and.
Interest rate and and I
appreciate that and I do think
it is to be cast in terms of
interest rate and I do think any
origination fees or whatever
should be added into the
interest rate because otherwise
everything will be fees but I'm
being told that.
If I borrow five hundred dollars
for the hundred twenty days the
at thirty six percent APR that's
sixty dollars.
in profit and that's you know
that's probably pretty marginal
of for a long committee to make
that loan in terms of the time
in the risk in it it certainly
yes
this is something less than five
hundred dollars it it gets a lot
more marginal pretty quickly so
like giving a hundred dollar
loan for hundred twenty days.
Is probably not gonna happen
because it's just you can't do
the paperwork in a way that the
you can turn a profit and and so
that's why I asked the question
is this something that I think I
mean I I think this interest
rates but I think that's
a legitimate you know business
transaction I will support this
bill I do support this bill it's
been amended a few times it's
going back to the Senate I would
be interested in seeing a
amendment like that on the on
the house floor since sorry been
amended.
and
that that's just my only concern
about this bill so Madam chair
Senators thank you very much.
Thank you.
Next Representative Eli.
Representative Alcon I'll be
really brief I mean I think one
of the same concerns that
Representative queen have I have
just in different languages so I
won't repeat it I really like
your lenders are not from the I
know offense but not from the
lawyers or the senator is I want
to know that they've read this
bill they understand the
amendments and that they would
be able to have acted that
people would have access to
capital and that's where the
critical issue is are we by
passing this bill impacting
people's access to capital I
recognize we trying to do the
right thing and stop this what I
would call a tax on the poor
I get that a hundred percent but
I want to make sure that we're
not
cutting off credit capital to
these communities that really
desperately needed and I need
the lenders to be talking about
that issue so I'm Representative
you want miss Nava or Errol.
Credit line I would appreciate
that yes madam chair.
Great.
Well this is not madam chair and
representative I do want to say
that we do this now and it's not
a problem this I mean we do yes
a hundred dollar loan you don't
make anything on it but you make
it you so make it because a
person needs it so I'm not
really clear and our interest
rates are no where anywhere
close to the rates that they
have to charge I understand we
do different things out of the
same building.
But yes and then I understood
madam chair this is to the
sponsors that.
Remember who was that was good
out park and I don't I miss some
of the public testimony did he
yes I do have any the wonders I
thought that he represents
wonders that also would be able
to work within the framework.
That correct Madam chair Senator
do hear your center so madam
chair representative yes yes
that's correct our economy was.
Yeah I didn't write down the
name of the the group but yes.
Okay
click on that point since we
have is not a.
Absolutely Mr speaker madam
chair can we hear a little bit
about what you and other credit
unions do with regard to.
Borrowers who had bad credit
terrible credit or no credit.
History.
Needy small loans the question
number one question number two
are you what sort of.
Outreach and until the end of
your ability is there for folks
who need the small loans you
have bad or no credit and also
no.
Bank account or no credit union
account right so the the
unbanked.
with live with with bad or no
credit.
What's what is in place for them
now.
this should be my two questions
madam chair.
Well.
Madam chair should I answer.
Absolutely okay I would say
first of all to become a credit
union member.
You it's a five five dollars but
we have before when if they
don't have the five dollars we
can take that out of the loan
proceeds and it's their money if
they close that account later on
they could they take their five
dollars.
So it's not I don't consider
that to be much of a burden we
do work a lot to try to thanks
the under banked one of the
limits that we do have though
because we don't charge so super
high rates we don't have the
ability to advertise to the
level individually that they did
and that's why we're talking
about doing a collective
advertising push
to get it out there I mean I
realize some of the very large
credit unions to advertise but.
You know those of us that are
under five hundred million I
would say I don't really have
the funding to advertised
extensively and we do a lot of
community outreach but it
doesn't always get the word
across and then measure the
second piece about credit so do
you if you have some of the
walks in
Looking for a two hundred fifty
dollar credit line five hundred
dollars or whatever the smallest
notice we do charge a credit
check is there one one at in if
you do one what happens is so
because back in their credit
scores four hundred or four
fifty year yes this is a very
low number it would be limited
to three hundred dollar credit
line.
So the CVV so madam chair just
etcetera etcetera so comes in if
you are a terrible credit
history or no credit history at
all.
they would still be able to open
a three hundred dollar credit
line.
Yes they would.
Pre K. because we're very
concerned that they can repay
obviously we won't do it they
have no means of repayment but
it's more about them being able
to read and in fact of those
loans I talked about earlier
five thousand seven hundred
forty four of them have no
credit score that we made loans
to last year.
And madam chair is so is it
stated income.
do you require proof you know a
stab I mean how do you how do
you verified ability to repay.
It depends on what type of loan
that we're doing if the bar once
a once I talked about are much
easier they're they're a little
bit more along the lines of
stated income if you do want to
revolving line of credit which
is the easiest one to do you do
have to have verification of
employment yes.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
So.
Representative.
You lie was that your last
question madam chair was I'm
good okay.
Representative Alcon.
Thank you madam chair I most of
my questions have been answered
on the on the points.
But I do have one question for
the senators is a.
If somebody needs alone.
let's say a five hundred dollar
rules for emergency and
And in two days the world so
they don't have a there is a
devoted to or somebody like
that.
Or a church just like
Representative McQueen went
through earlier.
and the lady you.
How can they get the five
hundred dollars.
If they qualify.
To some of the with well of the
credit union okay if madam chair
and committee if they are if
it's a R. one say they can get
it like really immediately.
If that is the line of credit it
could take a little while but
not too long but the big one is
if the bar on saves are for the
ones that need it immediately
immediately.
So madam chair as okay thanks to
the in in the winter storms I
could understand because I'm not
a banker huh.
What are you saying that.
In other words if I go in there.
The car breaks down okay.
Jenny says I need a five hundred
Bucks thank you can you fix for
me in two days so they can get
back to work on the third day.
Thank you and walk out of there
with five hundred dollars so
they can take it to the mechanic
so he can fix like our.
Thank you.
You typically I mean I'm not
It there are in most instances
the answer would be yes but it
might be limited to three
hundred so that's where I'm
getting stuck because yeah I
mean if your credit is really
really bad.
Because what we would do Sir is
we would refer them to one of
our financial coaches who would
do a multitude of things one
thing is they would look at all
the resources that are available
in our community that could
possibly help them as well we
have even done so much as take
up collections that are staff
from our staff to make up the
difference we if it's a real
emergency.
If the regency I'm sorry to say
this but if the regency is to go
to the liquor store not so much.
Understand that madam chair and
I can understand that you want
to give the money to go to the
casino and I can understand that
madam chair Senators and
quitting you people but I cannot
understand I I I want to listen
to this date how soon can I walk
out of there with five hundred
Bucks I can get my car fixed so
I can go to work.
What typically the same day and
I guess what I was saying about
the barman saves there's
something that you can do what
the teller line that usually
takes only ten minutes so that's
where I was going with our fast
this okay thank you thank you
madam chair and the.
He's not okay with the very next
requests.
so close to you in my.
I think that first financial has
a branch in they are in in
requests.
So it really communities only
and then we community in the
listed in New Mexico we have a
credit union that somebody can
go to.
Madam chair all.
What also.
And it may not be missed nobody
who knows the answer that it
might be used the Senators okay
the one that I'm chair.
We are.
Or somewhere like that madam
chair of.
One of those places where there
is a small loan company would I
be able to access the credit
union.
Madam chair.
All who is with the executive
director of the New Mexico
credit union association I might
have the title long but he may
have that information if you
still with us.
Yes I am here
And there are one hundred and
forty seven credit union offices
distributed across the state of
New Mexico geographically as we
all know New Mexico is quite a
large place and it would be
impossible to have a credit
union and every tell us that
this would be possible I know
that
we were talking I believe I was
asked where the question was
around more up and there are two
credit unions located or
so that would be no early
Los that that that is the the
question so I here if that
answers the question but if
there's more detail please let
me know.
Thank you thank you madam chair
thank you Sir so you said a
hundred and forty credit unions
throughout the whole state of
New Mexico yes one hundred and
forty seven.
Forty seven thank you and madam
chair and senator shows only the
is the home of the loan
companies to
That we're looking at here are
spread out throughout the state
of New Mexico.
Many communities.
Madam chair and senator I can
look that up Karen Myers one of
my experts might have that
number at her fingertips and I
want to point out also that
there are a number of the loan
companies that are functioning
and are planning on continuing
to function at the thirty six
percent cap and so yeah that I
don't know if you have a
question to be that broader how
many that are charging up of the
thirty six percent cap.
Mr chairman and madam chair as
senator I'm just asking how many
local companies.
Throughout the state of New
Mexico.
Madam chair representative I
don't know the exact number I do
remember hearing statistics that
there are there are five times
as many
loan companies that are charging
folks a hundred seventy five
percent interest as there are
McDonald's in New Mexico so
there's no question there's a
lot of that.
Thank you madam chair in a and
senators so therefore I needed
five hundred Bucks every to fix
my car so I can get to work in
duties
James they could probably get
that they wanted others in my
car fixed and get to work and be
able to repay that loan right
right.
Madam chair so so I actually
found the to the number it's
five hundred and sixty one and
and right now you can get that
five hundred dollars five
hundred dollars on a six month
loan you charge a hundred thirty
five percent and you would pay
another two hundred eighty three
dollars and eighty four cents
for that five hundred dollars
under this bill that same five
hundred dollar loan for six
month term of the cost to you
would be fifty three dollars and
seventy four cents.
And madam chair and I understand
that madam chair and senator I
do understand that however you
gotta realize what I'm looking
for is a five five hundred
dollar car.
Thanks for my car so I can get
to work so I can feed my family.
As you were jailed and isn't it
true that is a moment five
hundred dollar loan from this
loan company.
is I've dated Authority are you
will not have to pay that whole
love the full amount of
interest.
Madam chair representative there
yeah we do not have prepayment
prepayment penalty is in New
Mexico so so those who are are
able to pay them off early can
do so that's not what we see and
that's not what we tend to see
though what we more far more
often see is that folks aren't
able to pay them and then they
get refinanced over and over and
over again and.
At a certain point that five
hundred dollars that you took
out now you're paying back
twenty five hundred dollars and
it's taking years to do so.
A question Senator and Madam
chair is that if I could be beta
is that they allow for early I
will be that food amount that
you quoted of interest madam
chair yes absolutely we're able
to do that thank you madam
chair.
Thank you madam chair the
December some like to offer an
amendment.
And it has been turned into the
committee and I know I saw it
it's already on the in the file.
And the number of the amendment
that I have madam chair is a.
Two two zero eight one zero two.
And
Through windows of Ruben who is
pretty much a.
Who knows a lot.
You want the money is not my
thing okay if you look at my
checking account you know that
money is not money my world so
Mr Rubin would answer any
questions and pretty basically
what it does is it gives you a a
the ability to.
You or or or whatever and ask
for a low end if you turn down
you have the ability to get a
loan from a really slow
companies can turn it over to
the Strubing.
Madam chair with the
information.
Where is.
He should be in the attendee
list madam chair.
And I think we can fight.
Okay.
Good.
So.
For him to explain the
amendment.
And
We can go forward from there
with your permission.
Okay.
Thank you madam chair
representative my name is Joe
Rubin as I said earlier I'm with
opt loans we are a fintech
platform so I really appreciate
the opportunity and thank you
Representative for the for the
opportunity to discuss this
ammendment so the main feature
of this amendment is that it
would enable a consumer who as
you know as we discussed earlier
a consumer who
at.
Who needs of under of last
resort to obtain a loan at a
higher than three six percent
right the the loan would still
be capped at ninety nine percent
but it would enable a consumer
to get a loan at that higher
rate it also complies with
federal law so as senator I do
he discussed earlier in fact
federal law does allow
out of state banks to to land
across the country that is a a
court of federal law and are
these lenders and fintech
partners that we represent
to comply with with the state
law the comply with federal law
they are audited by the FDIC
and so this will amendment
really would enable those
consumers who can't get a loan
from a lower interest lender to
obtain a loan in New Mexico.
I'm happy to answer any
questions.
Madam chair of the stand for
questions on the it will allow
movie amendment for discussion
purposes and will stand for
questions on the amendment.
Chairman I'll call.
What is your amended do exactly.
Mr is somebody who has been
denied a loan to go back and get
a loan and ninety nine percent
from these companies.
Madam chair representative
excuse me I'm sorry in addition
it also imposes some significant
consumer protections on top of.
What's already available in New
Mexico lost so loans that are
higher than thirty six percent
we have some significant
additional consumer protections
imposed as well.
For example we discussed fees
would have no late fees no NSF
fees original fee origination
fees renewable impairments loans
would have to be underwritten so
consumers could have the ability
to pay this back
no wage garnishment and
importantly it's also reported
to credit bureaus so that
consumers have the ability to
rebuild or build better credit.
Thank you thank you.
I think I have I I have to work
questions but I think
Representative vice chairman
Representative Castellano a
question by Representative.
Was up on the bill now thank
you.
Representative McQueen.
Thank you madam chair the first
of all just to confirm it's two
two zero eight one zero point
two soccer Act.
And if Madam chair
representative include ensuring
okay so.
Madam chair of regional come.
I guess you're some similar
concerns about the.
For short term small are out
there all alone but if I need to
go get my car at the repair
shop.
At the time to give the credit
union file loan application get
turned down.
I mean I I just want to be able
to go get the money right I
mean.
You're making me you're making
me work for it is that.
Is that accurate.
Mr Chairman Representative
McQueen a look at the amendment
over and over again and yes that
is exactly what's going through
my mind but however it does give
you an option to somehow find
out money that you need this is
the ability and and the you
might have to get your car
mechanic to give you another day
to come up with the money.
Okay so I I guess it's it's not
really
It's not really that the fix I'm
I'm looking for it and I also
wonder you know if we pass this
bill.
You're not going to be two or
three the shots in every strip
all.
I would think there would be
fewer and farther between.
so it might not the you know if
if they're only there as a
backup that my tribal other
business
you know I haven't.
You know I'm really going to be
quite.
Representative we.
Actually should have announced
all throughout my video if my
computer's unstable my and what
I'm I should have asked the
Sanchez about the amendment and
I.
To them now and then and then
let you ask your questions I'm
so sorry.
Thank you madam chair and if I
can start and then for the
technical things Senator Duhigg
is is very versed in these of my
concern as it's written is if
somebody goes to the credit
union and we had of the CEO of
quality credit you said they're
not going to loan people money
because they're headed to the
casino so they turned down for a
thirty six percent loan for that
reason would they then be
allowed to go to the.
The company right next door get
charged a hundred percent loan
for that same one because
they've been turned down it
doesn't state what the reasons
for being turned down or
anything of that sort so just
kind of a question this is an
unfriendly amendment.
Can I ask a question on
what Senator Duhigg also way and
and then it will go back to you.
Thank you madam chair and had
like to kind of walk through
what this amendment dies because
because it's it's a little
different than what we've heard
I so first of all.
Let me start by saying there was
a reference to the fact that
there's a bunch of consumer
protections in this ammendment.
Most of the consumer protections
in this ammendment are things
that are already disallowed by
state law in New Mexico I.
A cruel a balloon payments non
so if it nonce insufficient fund
fees origination fees prepayment
penalties these are all things
that are already not allowed in
New Mexico
The.
That it would requires of the
disclosures that comply with the
federal truth in lending act
that is already something that
is required under the law New
Mexico
The underwriting underwriting
personal isn't isn't defined
here so would not require any
lender to do a a a debt to
income analysis which that's the
kind of underwriting that that
actually provides consumer
protections I'm just saying
underwriting without requiring
with underwriting is an
requiring that inquiry.
That would not protect New
Mexicans in any way it also if
this continues to allow for
repeated refinancing of loans
so.
So I I have to say it is I do
what.
I do not see these as as.
Putting in protections that will
will significantly help New
Mexicans in the way that.
That that I think that this bill
is attempting to achieve but
here's what's what's really
really important here and this
is something that wasn't
mentioned.
And this is let's see this is
number six.
Of the amendment on page
seventeen striking lines six
through twelve in their
entirety.
So what that would accomplish is
to take out all of this anti
evasion language that's in this
bill almost all it would leave
in only two parts.
But by taking out all of the
rest of that that opens this
massive loophole for for any
lender to even if we are
instituting strong consumer
protections otherwise in this
bill are often this ammendment
they are rendered meaningless by
taking out all of the anti
evasion language and taking out
all that anti evasion language
not only means that that folks
wouldn't be limited to even
under this amendment thirty six
percent or the ninety nine
percent if appropriate it means
there would be zero effective
interest rate cap in New Mexico
because you could get around it
by using all of these evasive
techniques so what this
ammendment really does is
completely got every protection
that is in the bill
and it's really important that
the committee understand that
now in talking about to the
ninety nine percent option.
One what we're doing there is
we're making sure that those who
are probably in the worst
possible position to repay a
loan because they have been
approved for the thirty six
percent that they are getting
the most expensive loan product
when they are probably the
probably the highest risk for
default.
But another really important
thing to realize here is that
even though this would kick it
to F. ID to approve rates over
over the thirty six percent and
one there's been no no FIR on
this ammendment so so we don't
know what the financial impact
would be on if I do but apart
from that nothing in this would
set any standards for why
someone would be rejected for
thirty six percent APR.
So I am a lender I have no
incentive to approve anyone at
that range I only have an and
and and and it is completely
within my discretion to decide
who I am approving and homeland
disapproving so we are creating
a financial incentive for
lenders to always go to these
higher rates there there's
nothing in here that would say
if someone has such and such
credit score they you have to do
the right or or or hear some
other criteria we would have to
stick to that thirty six percent
right.
So that that those are some of
the reasons that this it would
be an unfriendly amendment not
madam chair thank you.
Thank you Representative please
go back to your questions now.
The thank you madam chair and.
I appreciate you of stepping in
because the the Sanchez
explanation was.
Full
In a
Small card out but I would want
you know those consumer
protections built into that car
about.
and I also the this this seems a
little to me like making
You know food stamp recipients
go around and collect job
rejection letters before they
get their food stamps it just it
seems unnecessary that the
additional steps.
So I.
I appreciate I appreciate that
information from both the
sponsor in the Representative
Alcon thank you madam chair.
Are there other.
Questions on the amendment.
Okay now I do have a question
madam chair after on the
amendment okay go ahead of them.
is there are.
I appreciate the clarification
senator thank you so much about
what consumer protections
already exist in New Mexico law
and certainly I'm grateful that
we've taken the steps in the
decent and right direction I'm
hearing something about
garnishment of wages and only
refinancing if the borrower is
in good standing with those beat
new an additional protections
that are found within this
ammendment that don't currently
exist.
And I may have to I I maybe
pointing this in the wrong
direction I I apologize for that
that may be a question of our US
sponsor here sponsored the
amendment but.
Is is is it a complete overlap
about what protections already
exist for consumers or their new
pieces that would directly
relate within this ammendment.
So madam chair madam vice chair
no there those two things are
are examples of things that we
don't currently have in our law
but that said because this takes
out the anti evasion language
none of those things would be
enforceable.
To anyone who is doing it take
doing any of the evasive things
that we've seen over and over
and over again and that the anti
evasion evasion Language.
Spies would specifically I put
an end to so so you're right
those those are new things and I
would those be great things have
in our law as long as they're
forcible under this amendment
they would not be.
Thank you madam chair because
they have a grassroots group
into a.
Explain this on the amendment.
Yes thank you very much
representative madam chairman
appreciate the opportunity so
the.
The a critical anti evasion
provisions that Senator two
eight as senator do we calls
them in fact these are aligning
with federal law federal law as
I mentioned earlier does allow.
thanks that are in different
states to to loan in a the in
other states that's how credit
cards work Mr vice chair that's
how the tribe's work that's how
they make these loans as well so
it really is not an anti evasion
vision it's in fact.
In New Mexico from being sued by
providers for violating federal
law and if that in fact these
are enforceable the peak the
amendment clearly states that
that that any provision that is
any any lender that lands above
that thirty six percent is
eligible to I'm sorry is subject
to those additional provisions
and Representative McQueen I'm
part of the reason for including
that that one strike was to
ensure that that a consumer has
not taken advantage of you know
as a Senator two weeks that we
want to make sure that
that consumer does apply for a
lower interest loan there is it
could there is a concern I think
legitimate concerns that there
are some high interest lenders
that are trying to steer
consumers to hire just loans and
so this is a this is protection
for those consumers
and so.
So it can we believe that this
is an amendment which would
protect consumer availability of
credit.
As a last resort this is not
intended to high interest loans
are not intended to be
protection for consumers who
have the availability of better
credit this is the this is an
ability to protect those that
need access emergency access to
last minute credit.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Representative Lewis.
So as the sponsor of house bill
I believe it was one fifty and
twenty nineteen you know.
I I I I just want to kind of
remind everyone where we were
back then because we did have
Representative had at as
bill similar to this with the
thirty six percent cap and so in
working with.
In working with.
So many stakeholders it was a
long process it was a heavy lift
that we Matt in the session
numerous times and I remember
there were so many people
involved there were a lot of
concessions on both sides and we
came up with something that
everyone agreed to which was the
collection of that data learn
more I'm so again this hasn't
occurred just yet because of the
timing of the legislation
it will be reported on April
fifteenth of this year.
But in in terms of taking all of
that into consideration as well
as the
Issues brought up by
Representative McQueen you know.
It's it's it's it's it's hard
because we don't have
individuals that have access to
credit cards to family
family members being able to
provide them with loans but we
do have emergencies and.
Especially now with the pandemic
and people losing their jobs
through no fault of their own
losing their health insurance
through no fault of their own
I I I just think that we need to
consider all of these issues.
And again I am a huge supporter
of the credit unions I think
they are doing fantastic jobs I
I I I I lab that you know
they're in a lot of our
communities and being able to do
that but I think sometimes that
might not be an option for
everyone and I think having the.
I know it's an extra step
Representative all calm is
proposing here but.
If if folks are.
The night at the credit union
for whatever reason
Where do they go they go online.
To seek out how they can get
money fast perhaps those
protections are available for
them
And and and I don't know where
they go
so so.
I.
I'm really concerned about.
I thank you know not being able
to address that and I do think
that this perhaps could be not
a fix but at least a way to
ensure that folks don't have to
go to those other resources
primarily online
where they can be taken down the
road that we're trying to avoid
I'm it's.
New Mexico's poor we all know
New Mexico is poor and I just
don't want people to be without
that money for those emergencies
so
I would have liked to have
waited to see the data that we
worked really hard on in twenty
twenty nineteen with house bill
one fifty because again it was
such a heavy labs it was a lot
of discussions with a lot of
people
but I I just wanted to make
those comments I I I'm looking
at Representative outcomes
proposed so and and I do like
that alternative
so I just wanted to provide
those comments madam chair.
Thank you.
Mr speaker.
Thank you madam chair
I want to start by saying that I
appreciate the sentiment and
of the thoughtful Mr chairman
I'll call on who is
I think.
Well intentioned well motivated
and I.
We should have bring in the
amendment former for the
committee's consideration I also
want to say.
This session.
we have been working very well
with our.
Colleagues in the Senate when it
comes to amendments that are
considered.
You know unfriendly for men men
state sponsors of bills I don't
wish to have included in house
bills when they come before
Senate committee.
I want to you know once again
thank and Senator souls and his
committee in the Senate for
working with me and share with
Lundstrom on the impact aid bill
I was very collaborative process
Senator Stewart and I.
Have been in communication quite
a bit
over the last several weeks to
make sure that as we manage
bills.
In one chamber came from the
other that there is a sense of
collaboration and a sense of.
Sanchez knowing what's coming in
and try to work toward consensus
so I I'm I'm not gonna be able
to support the amendment
primarily madam chair because I
think it would be.
Inconsistent of me to ask that
the Senate not add unfriendly
amendments to house bill as they
go through committee but then be
here
You know in and do do the
opposite of what I'm asking from
our colleagues in the Senate.
You know if they had the Senate
to this point is as I said has
been very cooperative in helping
us avoid surprise in helping
avoid unfriendly amendments
being added to House Bills
after the session has been a
change from prior years I think
it's a change for the better and
because of that asked for that
for our members in there in the
Senate I had to get your heads
up and and not have an from the
members attached.
I don't think I should be.
You're supporting and for the
moment here this committee
especially with all the help
Senator souls is given.
Has given us on impact eight
which pastor his committee this
morning unanimously approved
which I'm very appreciative and
very grateful for his work on
that as same would be for
Senator Stewart.
I also point out that we have
changed the effective date on
the bill to July one if next
year.
And this is going to give us
some time to address in the
thirty day session some of the
finer points that might come up
and I agree with the comments
that we've heard from I chairman
the claim today madam chair that
there might need to be some
alteration in the bill.
For this very small loans to be
made available.
Outside accrediting the context
where needed one of the things
it just makes intuitive sense to
me.
Is that if you're borrowing a
hundred dollars.
At thirty six percent interest
in you pay it back in three
months you madam interest you
would pay back in three months
is nine dollars to borrow a
hundred dollars you prepare a
hundred nine dollars the minimum
wage in New Mexico right now is
ten fifty next year it will be
Matt Levin fifty I think so
you're having you know less than
one hour of time is minimum wage
employee to process a hundred
dollar loan on behalf of the
wonder and it and I think those
loans I will likely No Way is
fees must be included APR
calculation I think that's
something that we can look at
that I how the state right now
madam chair.
That I am not able to offer or
suggested a solution to that
issue because of the late time
in the session and I just don't
have the data and then also
madam chair goes I think to
chairwoman Lewis's point that
we're on the cusp of getting
quite a bit of data thanks to
her work in prior sessions and I
think it would be a good idea
for us to get this bill you know
continuing to have to move
forward to the floor and and see
if the Senate will concur in the
house amendment to this bill
and and then use the data that
we get.
R. over the next next several
weeks to see how we can improve
the bill in the thirty day
session before becomes effective
in middle of next year so that's
why I sit and say madam chair
market will support the
amendment that it's just not
because I don't love I chairman
I'll call it's just because of.
Research is we're having we need
leadership the two chambers I
think I need to stay consistent
that thank you madam chair.
Mr you madam chair I kept saying
I was going to wait till the
bill but it seems like we're
having there really extensive
action figure out how people are
going to act on this ammendment
decided just to.
Flush out what my remaining
questions and thoughts and
considerations are as we work
towards a vote on this amendment
and this.
I just want to fundamentally as
our speaker did just appreciate
you Senator souls for your
leadership on impact aid all the
work you've done to be in
partnership in collaboration
with our chamber as we work to
try to show up and figure out
what's right for New Mexico
I ate as you all know we have
been hearing sold from so many
constituents so many advocates
also it looks about what this
bill is and what this bill isn't
I want to agree with you a
thousand percent New Mexicans
should not be getting into loans
that are a hundred seventy five
percent I believe that with my
whole heart.
But New Mexicans are getting
into these loans because they're
desperate and sometimes they're
facing survival so early on in
the comments or presentation we
heard an example about someone
buying a table
but as we move through this
debate doesn't examples I know
those are the examples that are.
We over me just certainly we
talked about what alternatives
people might be able to face as
someone that survived violence
as someone that's managed
unwanted pregnancies as
someone's that that's trying to
figure out what safety means one
second to the next with
literally nothing in my hand
your name.
This to me isn't about avoiding
debt for some people it's about
survival and that doesn't make
it right and that doesn't mean
that family should seek that out
just the high interest rates but
I am worried.
That here we are creating a
policy that eliminates some.
Financial decisions for New
Mexicans but does not create a
mechanism for people to access
small amounts of money in a
hurry when they really need it
and I'm thinking of a story
something that showed up in my
life since I've been a
legislator and as many of you
all know a lot of my work is
investing in access to health
care and building health care
policies so The New Mexicans
every date hopefully have what
they need to be well a lot of my
work is in pregnancy related
care a couple of years ago I was
in northern New Mexico for an
interim committee and I got a
desperate call from someone a
whole that was in an unsafe
toxic violent relationship had
found themselves to be pregnant
and we're trying to desperately
to to seek an abortion in
Albuquerque at a clinic in
Albuquerque and because they
misunderstood what it looked
like to try to get Medicaid and
didn't have qualifications yet
and and didn't understand the
whole health care system to get
the abortion that they needed
that day it was five hundred
dollars.
And that person as they found
communication with me didn't
have access to a credit card was
talking to me in pretty
terrifying terms explaining to
me like if they couldn't afford
to provide money for that care
that date.
They don't have room to be in
this world anymore.
So I am desperate because their
appointment was like an hour
away as it happened I told this
story before
What I'm Pete paid leave absence
my Michael income my second
income who's a good worker and
works in bill can't take any
jobs and I'm serving so the two
of us go for a couple of months
with having no income and try to
just make our expenses work the
rest of the year so that's
session we're putting expenses
on credit cards.
Regis and I'm barely paying off
credit cards for my first time
in the sixty day session right
now I knew that was a shitty
financial decision and it's what
I have to do to show up here so
that happens I don't even have
five hundred dollars on a credit
card to pay for this person's
abortion so I did a card
companies and banks amendment to
extend my limits on the spot so
I could get someone to health
care they needed.
There's no way the Catholic
Church is gonna find for
someone.
It under dollars in a hurry.
That.
Could you talk to an anti or
grandma and ask for that money.
Emergency situation.
They were on their way to try to
find a loan in a hurry and
somehow the universe brought us
together and I put that money in
my credit card.
So maybe that will be part of
what I'm paying off in the next
couple of months.
But they're real life
circumstances that people are
facing every day that are
private
that are terrifying that are not
about a splurge on a on a Labor
Day sale but about like the moms
I know that have been evicted
several times and finally are
living near an elementary school
where their kids are healthy and
safe and want to keep of their
and I'm trying to figure out the
next week what you all are all
right.
Is this repay option when
not in the credit union side not
on the lender side that's true
but when I think of families in
the circumstance they know
they're probably thinking in the
end anyway but they're trying to
see if by some hustler some
miracle or some blessing they
can get by one more month.
And with that I'm really torn on
this ammendment I appreciate my
colleague I told Representative
uncle that I trust his his work
and his understanding about how
properties rolling through our
New Mexico communities every day
that I support is amendment but
I also keep hearing as my
colleague Representative McQueen
said I don't want people to have
to jump through hoops and I know
what was asked of you before
have you considered a small loan
card about but that's something
to me like where I'm really
stuck is there a small loan car
about at five hundred dollars or
less or thousand dollars or less
something that we can take to
conference committee and further
conversation to figure out how
we cover this gap in small
amounts for people that really
need money.
I just last couple of comments
here
I'm looking at my notes here and
I was scribbling so trying to
find find the nine hundred
eighty.
All that to say just I guess
Representative with that I I I
believe in what you're doing
I've.
This is our state on this issue
I just don't think we have a
mechanism yet.
Thanks that really really truly
need it like matter of life or
death whether it's a vacation or
access to Health Care Act thing
else because they're not.
Unfortunately I see too many
times and every day that's not
in front of families always and
I'm I'm worried about the
unintended consequence of doing
something that takes right
direction makes us feel good but
doesn't capture any one I know
in our state that we really want
to hold thank you madam.
Thank you.
You know I I want to say that I
actually I agree with the
speaker on.
that is on friendly to a belt
and I didn't.
I didn't get back on Senator
doing an opportunity to respond
to that the latest on.
Explanation from the
expert that Representative Alcon
has brought with us so I would
give her an opportunity he I'm
maybe to explain that how the
division alright.
Is is self defeating.
In your view.
I know I have put words in your
mouth but go ahead.
Thank you madam chair and and
and before I I just I I I just
want to say madam vice chair.
I agree with you completely that
this is a matter of life and
death for a lot of people
that that that being able to to
get that money hi.
Has impact in people's lives
that that we can't even
necessarily anticipate and that
it's really important to have
access to those funds are
especially in a situation like
the one you described
you are at and absolutely right
about that and and this isn't
about folks.
Getting getting a loan for for a
Labor Day sale I I appreciated
use hearing that from you
I do what we have seen in other
states with that have done this
is that that access to cry
because there's been so much
focus I think today on on the
credit unions and and other
alternative places to go for
funding
but what we've seen in other
states that have implemented the
the kinds of things we're
talking about here is that there
still is that access to credit
are there still some folks might
leave yes but actually Mr
Rubin's employer
I was looking at a map the other
day about where up fi operates
and states that have similar
there's one that have thirty six
one half forty I can't remember
off the top of my head which
spaces are at now and have the
same anti evasion language that
we have here in place and
they're still operating in their
we just want to make we we don't
want to run folks out of New
Mexico we don't want to dry up
access to credit we just want to
make sure that the folks who who
are are using those services I.
Our can do so in a way that that
isn't going to harm them more in
the long term
but madam chair I.
At as far.
I got to say that there was a
statement made the the the
changes in this ammendment
bring would bring Mexico in line
with federal law
and that's required to avoid.
Suits it's just not true madam
chair yes there is especially
under well the.
Under the trump administration
the the C. F. P. B.
chose not to Institute some
rules that would have close that
the bit the loopholes that we're
seeing that we're addressing
here on a national level.
Yes the trump administration
didn't adopt rules to do that
that's why it's on the states to
do so
but.
Again without the anti evasion
language in here there is no for
for any lender who who wants to
to use this run to being run to
bank approach or or do any of
the things that we've seen over
and over and over again that
lenders due to avoid state usury
laws there is no effective
interest rate so so the online
lenders under the invasion
language in here those would be
covered people wouldn't wouldn't
be having to resort to online
lenders who could charge them
absurd amounts with
senator do it may I just ask you
so the on page seventeen when
this man would strike lines six
through twenty five that's the
if Asian language that you're
are referencing absolutely and
then on to it would strike the
rest of that language on page
eighteen as well okay thank you
I just want to clarify that.
And and I'm sure I know you all
have to go to the floor so also
there.
What's the pleasure of the
committee.
Madam chair I'll move adoption
of the amendment.
Representative Cook was to adopt
the amendment.
Thank.
Representative Nibert second
sent.
To table the amendment so I
didn't take that motion first.
And I'll second that madam chair
I can be done either way.
Okay thank you.
So what do a roll call vote on
tabling the amendment.
Representative Alcon.
Representative Armstrong.
Representative Armstrong.
Representative Cook.
No.
Mr speaker.
Just.
Representative.
Yes Representative.
Representative.
Now and I'd like to explain my
vote.
Representative.
Yes the table.
Representative Nibert no to
table.
Representative Rehm.
Ma'am.
Representative Townsend no.
And second.
to table.
All three hundred dollars
already paid yes.
All.
Representative Armstrong is
here.
Yes to table.
Eight.
I apologize no to table no yes
to table the table I'm sorry I'm
trying to put on another bill to
yes to table thank you.
No to table.
Right
yes six.
Okay.
Russian fails.
And chair yes quickly explain my
vote please I'm sorry yes.
Thank you madam chair and I and
I do appreciate everything that
Senator Lopez done three in
regard to impact a that's hugely
important in a fight that we
waiting for for so so so long
but you know I mean I I.
I I I just feel really
uncomfortable with.
I was trying to put forth bills
and and solutions that we have
to certain issues that are
important to us and and one of
my bills got help pulled from a
committee hearing that was
supposed to occur this morning
because there's amendments to it
and I hate to be pointing the
finger back and forth again
because I know that we all have
different issues that are close
to us and you know this is this
is a bill that's close to the
native American community as
well and and it got pulled
because someone wants to make
amendments to it that probably
aren't too friendly but but I I
just want to say that you know
it it's really hard to because
we're all trying to work
together I totally get it
But but I just I just wanted to
state that and and I'll.
Conclude that conclude with that
thank you madam chair.
This the minute.
The four okay because we have
another motion.
But before we go to the other
motion
could have limited I wanted to
do this ammendment madam chair
Stephen that when you vote for
that person we cannot get ready
you who and I get money from the
credit union or a bank and the.
Honestly the whole deal lesser
bass you today there's a lot of
our people who are the
emergency you can get the money
they would end up having to
borrow money from the somebody
or somewhere was a really good
thank you
So I was just hoping that with
this amendment would have some
kind of revenue for that.
First and we need help thank you
madam chair.
So.
I wonder let me ask you a
question on that before we vote
on the docked in the amendment.
Would you be willing to work on
a different amendment that
accomplishes what you're after.
The.
Really what the senators would
like to would like to do is have
some kind of and the news is
that and and and then I don't
know what the number ninety nine
nine nine percent comes into my
mind to acquire additional
maximum that they can charge
maybe or somewhere in that area
but that there would be some and
then you will for these people
that don't have access to the
committee you will.
I was or something like that
because I just along the doors
closed.
Madam chair if I may please.
Yes Senator.
Thank you some of the concerns
with this amendment is who
denies the thirty six percent is
not clearly stated if you were
to go to Wells Fargo and ask for
your a two hundred dollar loan
at thirty six percent they won't
even talk to you.
But they may give you a paper
that said we turned it down at
thirty six percent where the
credit union right next door
might have.
But that paper from Wells Fargo
would now be able to be taken to
someone is gonna offer ninety
nine percent my guess is the
ninety nine percent is because
it's only two digits instead of
three digit when in fact it
really is triple digit okay we
in this you already passed an
amendment that delays this to
twenty twenty two which means
that there is going to be
information coming out April
fifteenth but it also means we
got a thirty day session and I
would be very interested happy
to work with Representative
Alcon then out with
Representative all cold on
trying to find a way of carving
out these micro loans if you
will or a way of putting those
into law to meet those needs for
that kind of emergency and the
to try and find a way where
maybe for a very very short term
that there are there's a
mechanism to meet those needs
because I think some of what
they indicated is is very
appropriate we also need to make
sure that there are when people
are turned down for instance at
a credit union for one of these
small loans that there is a list
of social services that can
assist people we need a robust
social service program so that
there are people who can go and
get those kind of help that it
sounds like Representative said
then that one lady with is make
sure that they're those are
known for people who are in
these dire situations that they
can get the help through those
of social service organizations
the nonprofit.
Thank you.
Welcome.
Thank you madam chair I so I I
rest.
We're on
motion to adopt that amendment.
We please call the roll.
Yes.
Representative Armstrong.
She Representative Armstrong.
He's.
Representative Cook.
Yes.
Mr speaker.
L..
Representative.
No.
Representative Lewis.
Yes.
Representative McQueen.
Representative Nibert.
Yes on the amendment.
Representative Rehm yes.
Representative Townsend.
Yes.
Representative Armstrong.
Just check and Anna.
Wishing we had a better
amendment for My Girl and.
Yes.
I'm gonna hold open the vote for
representative Armstrong because
she's trying to go between to
committee.
She just.
The state should.
This is W. are we on the
amendment I'm sorry yes we're.
The vote is whether or not to
adopt the amendments that.
Thank you thank you.
I'm reading now.
Yes.
The amendment.
Okay.
I'm I would ask the Sanchez what
their wishes are at this point.
We would like to continue we
think that the good part of this
bill are are still need to be
heard in the to be voted on
these.
Madam chair I need you passes
omitted.
Madam chair that's three times
four times amended.
It doesn't matter how many times
we only see amended once in the
house right.
Go it's been
all.
We have a second.
Representative Eli.
Okay back to Colorado.
Madam chair this Representative
Nibert had his hand up.
Representative.
Discussion.
Thank you madam chair
now that we have and amended
bill by my question is has the
effective date for the entire
package been changed.
Madam chair Senators.
Madam chair representative yes
are effective date applies to
the entire bill.
And that affected date if I
understood it would be twenty
eight twenty two am I correct.
Madam chair representative yes
at July first twenty twenty two.
L. madam chair and senator I
also heard the some discussion
that prior legislation called
for the
A report to be done all these
types of loans and that date of
the report would be what year.
Madam chair representative I I
believe Representative Lewis
actually probably knows that
better than I do.
You.
Given her involvement with that
bill chair I'm I'm sorry
representative Nibert was a
question.
Madam chair representative Lewis
what my questions are that this
bill now that it's been amended
doesn't go into effect until
twenty twenty two and I heard
some testimony or maybe some
discussion that a report was due
under the prior legislation that
we passed on these types of
loans and I was wanting to know
what year are we supposed to
receive the our report all of
these types of loans and their
impact on New Mexico.
Representative Nibert and so the
bill actually requires annual
reports and the reports are due
before the fifteenth day of each
April but because the
legislation was passed in twenty
nineteen they haven't had a full
year to compile that information
so twenty twenty was the first
fully air to get that
information so the very first
report will be due on April
fifteenth of twenty twenty.
One this year and then and then
every fifteen year excuse me
every April fifteenth after
that.
So madam chair and and Senator
it just seems to me that sounds
we have those two things and
affect this bill then take
affect until twenty twenty two
we're not going to get a report
on the study until twenty twenty
one.
It just seems to me that that we
ought to
maybe look at the report before
engaging in substantial
legislation dealing with with
the issue and so I it seems may
we all look at the report first
and then craft the legislation
and for that reason
I I'm real hesitant to vote for
the bill even as amended and I
certainly appreciate the
representatives and that that's
all I have madam chair thank you
very much.
Thank you is there for the
discussion.
The clerk to call the roll.
Representative Armstrong.
Is this on the bill.
State yes yes the ones.
Representative.
No.
Mr speaker yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative matter.
No.
Representative Rehm.
No ma'am.
Representative Townsend.
Representative Alcon.
Yes.
Thank.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Yes.
Yes for now and then pass.
Thank you senators for spending
most of the day and one of us.
Thank you your we appreciate the
hearing and the.
We'll see on the floor.
We have time to do
Senate bill one twenty nine is
probably going to be
It's going.
Senator Tallman can someone get
Senator Carolyn.
Madam chair if this is
Representative.
Representative Chandler is yours
your that's right yes and I do
have to experts Christina Fisher
of think New Mexico and Sam
Collins from the treasurer's
office.
Okay great let's get them all
right.
Do we have everybody if we're
ready let's go I'm happy to
present very quick.
I know you have a long afternoon
I've been watching some I I
apologize for not having my
video one that I've had dad
let's problems still.
I understand that so this bill
amends the work and save I mean
work and save act which we
passed I think it was last year
I was a co sponsor along with
senator Tom and and and others
It is it really is what I would
regard as a cleanup bill it does
not ask for an appropriation and
has no fiscal impact the bill
simply extends the time line for
implementation for the two
programs under the act the
retirement our market place and
the Roth IRA program the bill
clarifies that the bit at the
board will not be directly or
even indirectly managing program
participant funds or accounts
employers are not responsible
for any losses that an employee
might have due to prove poor
performance of the employees
investment selection in the
state of New Mexico and the
board are not guaranteeing
investment performance the bill
also replaces the requirement
that the board purchased a
blanket sure Eddie by bond by
allowing the board to determine
and then purchase appropriate
coverage
and what the bill does not
change is the fact all of these
programs are voluntary it does
not change the Legislature
jurors original mandate that the
board will design and implement
the marketplace plan in the the
payroll deduction Roth IRA
program and with that madam
chair I you have experts I
believe available perhaps if
you'd like to ask question if if
it's appropriate we could go to
questions in the experts can
promptly and Luminate you that
way to in the interest of time.
The that would affect public
comment we can have them do that
briefly now and then
but I I was like to give
everyone as much of a.
Lays much foundation as possible
for the.
Great great.
Mr Collins.
madam chair committee at no
pressure associate director of
the New Mexico really add
nothing to add to Representative
Chandler is excellent
introductions Bill it is really
just some technical cleanup and
then pushing out that time line
implementation we were very
ambitious Opry COVID last
session and it is just gonna
take a little longer than
helped.
Mr Collins.
I'll just questions thank you
sounds good sounds good.
Myself will have a ten second
call those to the audience in
favor of Senate bill one twenty
nine basically yes those in
opposition respect now.
We start.
Well here's a new one for today
we have a hundred percent in
favor.
Let's see if there's anybody who
wishes to speak and.
Public comment.
Marc Fleisher.
Here thank you madam chair
members of the committee I'm
Marc Fleisher registered
lobbyists for the office of the
state treasurer and I sit in
front of my computer in support
of SB one twenty nine.
This program Wirth say has that
delays implementation to the
COVID nineteen pandemic and this
bill extends time frames to
allow the treasurer's office
additional time to implement
this important voluntary program
to benefit employees what
employee to determine they want
to participate are you to
support SB one twenty nine thank
you for your time.
Thank you that in our P. state
president Roger Greer.
Go ahead Mr group.
It
was so madam chair and members
of the committee my name is
Roger Greer and here's the
volunteer state president would
a RPG Mexico.
A. R. T. New Mexico with over
two hundred forty eight thousand
members statewide as make this a
priority bill mistakes
supporters Senate bill one
twenty nine as submitted.
Hey your PS worked on working
state legislation for many years
when we were related last year
when the bill was passed with
little overwhelming bipartisan
support and then signed by
governor Lujan Grisham.
This year we're supporting this
bill that clarifies definitions
and provides flexibility for the
board to implement is provisions
we thank the sponsors for
bringing this bill forward thank
you.
Thank you very much that
concludes public comment let me
go back to the committee
to have any members of the
committee raising their hands.
I do not what is the pleasure of
the committee.
Do
we have a motion passed from
representative I'll call.
And I will second that.
Is there discussion.
To call the roll please.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Armstrong.
Yes.
Representative Cook.
L..
Mr speaker yes.
You know.
Representative.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative Nibert.
Now.
Representative Rehm.
Representative.
Representative.
Representative Townsend.
No.
Yes.
Madam chair yes.
Yes for now and to pass.
Okay you have a do pass thank
you very much Representative
Chandler.
You guys thank you okay great
right.
Hold on one second I want to
check with the speaker.
Mr speaker I just want to I was
actually just trying to check
with you to see if all right.
Eight I think this is the last
item on our agenda with respect
earlier because Representative
Hochman Vigil wasn't available
Senate bill two forty seven and
she is heading back to join us
there she is she's with us now.
There you go.
Thank you very much madam chair
members of the committee good to
see you again and thank you so
much for considering this one
last bill after marathon session
today this is house bill two
forty seven madam chair what it
does is it aims to bring New
Mexico in compliance with
federal law which does not allow
for life sentences without
parole for juvenile offenders it
also sets out a process that
after the juvenile offenders
served fifteen years the
sentence they may be considered
for parole at every five year
intervals I and it also allows
for those intervals to go down
to every two years after a
thirty year mark but that is
takes an outside of the realm of
the juvenile system and with
that madam chair we do have an
amendment trying to be
respectful of the committee's
time
the two oh two number is point
to two oh eight oh six point
one.
What it does madam chair is on
page eight point sixteen after
law stricter remainder of line
straight line seventeen in its
entirety and strict line
eighteen up to the period what
that does madam chair is it up
there was amendment put on and
Senate Judiciary that allowed
for award in to recommend parole
for juvenile offender however
this would actually be
this that this would not be in
compliance with New Mexico state
law as it is that's not our
process and with that Madam
chairman introduce my experts
really quickly if they can be
pulled in the now we will send
you the staff attorney from the
ACLU Eric Alexander he's a
senior advocate at campaign for
for sentencing of youth and
president ship he's a senior
policy counsel C. Y. F. C. F. S.
Y. and I've asked them to all to
provide very very brief
statements madam chair thank
you.
Miss Wilson.
Yes chair thank you okay.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Dan Ali
Wilson I'm a staff attorney at
the ACLU of New Mexico and I'm
not trying to buy a couple of my
colleagues who who wish that I
mention that they continue to
support this well they can be
here today that's first initial
district attorney Mary Carmack
all twice and retired Supreme
Court justice Richard possible
they're not with us here today
that continues to support this
bill and a letter from to the
Santa Fe dust COVID can be found
in your packet on this bill the
New Mexico there seventy five
people serving sentences longer
than fifteen years for crimes
committed as children and many
are serving sentences that mean
that they will spend the rest of
their lives in prison.
Many have already spent decades
in prison cell over forty years
for crimes committed when they
were just fifteen or sixteen
years old and these are
sentences that that tell
children that it doesn't matter
what you do over the next ten
twenty years of your life it
doesn't matter the person that
you become or the ways the you
commit yourself to repairing the
harm that you cost we're telling
them that it doesn't matter and
that we don't care.
But it does matter matters
because all children are capable
of and worthy of redemption.
In the New Mexico courts
the judiciary has been called on
to answer this question for
twenty years and each time the
courts have said that the
legislature the New Mexico
legislature is the body to
address this but the New Mexico
legislature has not yet acted
and in the meantime there people
in the state who are continuing
to serve adult sentences for
crimes committed as children
that deprive them of the
meaningful opportunity for
release that the US Supreme
Court in our state Supreme Court
have said they're required to to
have.
It won't be long before the
judiciary has to look at this
again
and if the Legislature switcher
continues to decline the
invitation to fix this problem
the courts will act and the
legislature will be divestiture
of opportunity to have a say in
what this looks like.
This bill will not swing open
prison doors this bill which is
modeled after legislation that
has worked in many other states
we'll get those serving long
adult sentences for crimes
committed when they were
children an opportunity to show
us what they've done and we have
people like Eric Alexander who
can put a face to that you can
show us what we might miss out
on if we reject an invitation to
give people a second chance.
With that if if he's on.
Yes I'm here.
Thank you Nelly thank you
chairman vice chair committee
Senator Sedillo Lopez again
America exam and I was once one
of the children of this type of
policy would allow a second
chance more stories similar to
that much about the using your
state got into serious trouble
that our lives are more by the
somatic experiences that
ultimately put us on the path to
present fast forward twenty
seven years today are servicing
advocate for the campaign for
the famous the sentencing and
use what we work to replace life
without parole another extreme
penalties for children with age
appropriate spices to the
accidents and accounts with
exposure to trauma prepares them
for Reno reintegration into
society what we're talking about
here is is the capacity for
change what what our society has
the greatest potentially
capacity for change other than
are you the Supreme Court has
made several rulings on this
issue and has included that is
to be rich reserve and applied
only in cases what individual Mr
chairman to be court they went
on to add that you should be all
offer reasonable opportunities
for release says then the
majority of the country hasn't
moved away from life without
parole as a sentencing option
for children and over seven
hundred you who were told they
would not present I now hold
over one hundred and forty of
those men and women with so that
they would die in prison act
members of I can't incarcerated
children's advocacy network a
national action network that I
have to call from one of these
individuals serve traffic
homicide related offenses in on
our whole living productive
lives some is elementary school
teachers in your state
substitute counsel paralegals
entrepreneurs and they're all
contributing to their
communities in a variety of
positive weights we are not
monsters yes we made critical
errors in judgment as
adolescents and committed agrees
Act we all more than the worst
thing that we ever did I leave
you with the wise words of god
no human being is so bad it here
see is beyond redemption.
Thank you for having me with you
today.
Madam chair I think we have one
more expert Preston ship.
Yes pressed you.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative and I will be
very very brief on I've had a
long day but I a service senior
policy counsel for the campaign
for the fair sentencing of you
and we work all over the country
on legislation like this and I
can tell you that you know when
you can get Arkansas and
Massachusetts on the same page
or Oregon and West Virginia
which is what we're talking
about here these are some of the
state to just this kind of
legislation you know that you're
talking about a moral issue and
not a political one basically
you know the pendulum swung so
far towards punishment in the
eighties and nineties we had
kids as young as thirteen and
fourteen years old being given
sentences of thirty forty fifty
sixty years we've life without
the possibility of parole but
what we're seeing that's already
been alluded to is a dramatic
trend away from those sorts of
sentences because we understand
the kids are different from
adults.
And they should never ever be
condemned to die in prison and
so what this bill is about is
finding a balance between
public safety and the respect
for the rights and needs of
victims on the one hand but also
investing in rehabilitation and
age appropriate sentencing
policies on the other and it's
working well of all over the
country thank you have a report
about the low recidivism rate
like one point one four percent
so when given the opportunity
parole or to getting this right
they're keeping people the and
who have not been rehabilitated
they're leading folks out who
can contribute to their
communities the way Eric was
just talking about.
So we're really thankful for
this opportunity to New Mexico
at this.
To join all the other states
Virginia and Ohio
of Wyoming and Utah and the to
cut at the to take questions or
provide more information to be
helpful.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and I just want to make one
correction the amendment that
I'd like to put on is is not to
take away amendment that Senate
Judiciary applied it's actually
an amendment to the original
bill and just quickly madam
chair this is well that'd
legislation on its last
committee just a quick point of
personal privilege I have
watched this bill come to
fruition throughout the interim
I started working on it two
years ago before the pandemic
cat and it's the combination of
the work of some several
outstanding advocates what this
is about rehabilitative justice
verses retreated Justice Bob
madam chair members of the
committee and these kids deserve
a second chance when and if they
prove that they are deserving of
it thank you with that will
stand for questions.
Thank you very much I'm going to
do a second call with the those
in attendance to see those in
favor of Senate bill two forty
seven and I was in opposition
was open that up now.
Okay we have forty eight in
attendance four forty eight in
favor it that's eighty four
percent sixteen opposition I
want to give people an
opportunity to speak but I do
not want to have people repeat
what's been sent if you
represent a group if there is a
large group like the association
of district attorneys I would
like to have a spokesperson
rather than every individual in
the organization so without let
me be.
Instantly rural start with David
Schmidt and David you may begin
you have one minute.
Chair members of the committee
my name is David Smith child
advocate and responsible for the
development of the current
children's.
There are provided and to bring
court challenges.
To the life sentences of
children who have committed
serious criminal acts as
children under eighteen and then
some of those adults our New
Mexico state court.
As stated this has got to be a
legislative and not a quote
it's.
Senate Bill.
Two forty seven is that
we have a due consideration that
thank you madam chair members
of.
Thank you thanks yes.
My name is Doug banks and I'm a
resident of sandy part I
strongly support.
Senate bill two forty seven.
bill is not about an individual
case and does not allow for
automatic release which case in
each person.
Can and should be considered
carefully in order to determine
the right conditions of gratuity
for release and the safety of
the public the parole board has
the right training and expertise
to make this determination
keeping people incarcerated who
have been read rehabilitated is
a drain on resources that could
be used to prevent further
across you to crimes and assist
victims and recovery thank you
for your consideration please
support this bill thank you.
Ben Gamel.
Please go ahead.
Okay madam chair committee
members thank you for allowing
me to speak.
R. I'm a previously incarcerated
individuals for a serious crime
and I had to prove my words are
being given another chance I
have a wife now and two kids I
got my college education while I
was incarcerated and a welding
program and I'm really strongly
in support of my community now
and I'm just really grateful
actually for the mercy that I've
been given and the grace that
I've been given it really wants
me to the it makes me drive to
really help my community and pay
them back for that mercy and
grace that I received and I just
want to strongly urged support
for this bill.
I I think I have an organization
here A. F. P. H..
Which is the secretary.
Thank you Mr yes hi.
madam chair and members of the
committee thank you for the
opportunity to testify in front
of you today my name is Steven
that's been a registered
lobbyist and for prosperity New
Mexico and I'm here today in
support of SB two forty seven if
he believes that an effective
criminal justice system holds
the rule law opposed the rule
law protects people and
preserves public safety respect
human dignity restores victims
remove barriers to opportunity
for people with criminal records
and insurers equal justice under
the law.
SB two forty seven is an
effective reform which we
support because the bill gives
the parole board an opportunity
to weigh individual
circumstances and make a parole
decision accordingly while
allowing reform men and women an
opportunity to access seed and
contribute to society currently
juveniles can be sentenced to
life without parole this bill
mandates the parole board
providing first rate individual
who was sentenced for offenses
committed under the age of
eighteen with a meaningful
opportunity to rejoin their
community smart on crime
solutions toward redemption and
reformation have shown and.
Sorry we're we're running really
short on time so I'm Chavez
Cook.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Kim Chavez Cook
with the law offices public
defender and I don't want to say
what everyone else will say so I
want to highlight one particular
aspect which is that it's
important to remember that the
brain science shows us that
children do not fully
cognitively develop until age
twenty five and why this matters
to that to criminal legal system
in New Mexico is that initial
sentencing in front of a judge
the judges looking at a kid who
is maybe seventeen sixteen maybe
eighteen nineteen and the parole
board fifteen years later is
going to be looking at a
completely different person so
while the offender near in time
to when the crime may have
occurred would not be showing
signs of rehabilitation it's
that it's after that age of
twenty five when they start to
that develop the ability to show
that that real that real growth
and change and so that's why
this bill is so crucial and we
really urge the committee to
support it thank you.
Thank you I actually want to
stop public comment we have got
to get to the floor so I'm gonna
give the I I think we had about
five people at the other side is
there any opposition here need
to speak I would like to just
have one or two.
Anyone in opposition I'm not
going to and those of you in
favor please take your hands
down.
Thank you I really appreciate
it.
Okay docker Gingrich.
Are you in opposition.
When we get it Barbara Romo.
Go ahead please.
You madam chair and committee
members my name is Barbara and I
and the district attorney for
the thirteenth judicial district
I'm here representing the New
Mexico district attorneys
association and we are opposed
to this bill as written we are
not opposed to the spirit of the
bill and we do appreciate the
amendments that have been made
pursuant to negotiations
especially the five year review
of parole eligibility after
fifteen years is not something
we can endorse nor have we ever
despite claims to the contrary.
Other states that have adopted
similar laws have made parole
eligibility particularly for
first degree premeditated murder
from twenty to thirty years or
hire someone else mentioned
Arkansas thirty years
Massachusetts thirty years.
This bill has absolutely has not
been sufficiently vetted with
all stakeholders in a manner
that would allow you to make the
best decision for your
constituents especially the
victims and families who have
suffered tremendously from
juvenile offenders your input
has not been sufficiently
allowed or considered there are
many victims who have not been
allowed the opportunity to speak
on this bill who wanted to do so
and again I understand the time
limits but this is just not fair
to the victims and it is in
contrast in contradiction to the
victims of crime act this bill
has not treated victims fairly
or with others.
We urge.
The lack.
Yes so I propose that the U.
forty seven because my other
sister was the victim of violent
crime committed by to not enter
I want to find that give people
a second chance this bill is not
correct would you that imposes
to severe burn on the crime
victims and it does not separate
out to get Representative and
making a note of early parole
for the more are currently
assessed inviting welcome you do
what you now enters.
I I think I first and all
avenues rehabilitation act like
that and we do not as an adult
is never taken lightly.
At two forty seven would
disregard and he's like to have
a parole board the reality is
years of energy decades of
intense therapy and counseling
fox more than one fifty four
years work if this bill is going
to result now that is being
released before they're fully
rehabilitated we got help they
need and it really isn't going
to help us develop banners what
portion of the families from the
New Mexico hangs when there's no
chance of the appropriation yes
we did go ahead and get it's
just causing unnecessary pain
our current setting system
bounces you do not budget like.
We're going to the committee
now.
Representative Cook.
Thank you madam chair
representative thanks for
bringing to some really
interested this and I really
want to support it but.
I wanted to get a little for the
clarification from your opening
statement did I understand you
to say that this brings us into
compliance with federal law.
Thank you madam chair
representative that is correct
so federally there's already a
law on the books that does not
allow for FY sentencing of
juveniles without parole.
Thank you madam chair and
representative but we don't have
to comply with federal law on
our sentencing rules do we.
Thank you madam chair
representative cook it depends
under which system the defendant
is being charged.
Okay so under.
Your bill or where we are now in
our law with regard to syncing
juveniles are we out of
compliance with the federal law
that we are supposed to be in
compliance with.
Thank you madam chair
representative now so if the
juvenile state is sentence under
the federal system then of
course federal law the control
if we're talking about juveniles
are sentence under the state
system and this this law with
that contract would control
however we do have a Supreme
Court case that has already been
decided I Justice Boston is
actually has spoken on
additional court but this in
court has ruled these types is
our.
Are unfair and unusual however
it left within the purview the
legislature to make the cut the
correction because a political
question okay thank you madam
chair representative but we
don't have any power to any of.
Pass federal laws with regard to
syncing right we were only
supposed to we only have the
authority to pass sentencing
laws in New Mexico correct in
state courts.
Madam chair representative that
is correct okay so there's
nothing that that holds the
street coming into compliance
with federal law correct.
Madam chair representative no
but you know if it's systems are
to propagated federally than
others president and there's a
reason for it.
Okay.
And you know what I was we taxed
with my colleagues and I I was
telling me I think this is a
great great bill and then I
heard the dust speaking I wonder
if you could respond to what
that with the district attorney
said in particular with regard
to input from victims.
Thank you very much I I'd like
to also responded that to act
you do Representative by hand
madam chair thank you madam
chair representative so we've
actually taken extensive
Comments and suggestions from
both the district attorneys that
have that there have been
several that have testified in
favor of this bill you've also
worked with the attorney
general's office that's where
Google these amendments came
from and on multiple instances
have they've done their families
been notified as to when these
hearings were occurring giving
them a chance to indeed call in
and be heard on the bill I
cannot pontificate as to why
that did or did not happen but
they have been notified and that
was one of the
things that we actually
committed to you before I last
hearing here on this bill was to
make sure that the the victims
and their families knew when
they would have an opportunity
to be heard.
We also this is what I wanted to
say Representative Curtis that
in the not the twenty twenty and
term but in the twenty nineteen
interim we had a very lengthy
hearing of courts corrections
and justice committee we had
victims we had district
attorneys we had proponents of
the bills and then as you as you
see from some of the experts
here are some of those of folks
who are advocates for it are
actually former juvenile
offenders so there was a lot a
lot of testimony.
Okay well thank you madam chair
and thank you Representative
feel like because the time I
feel like I've been cross
examining which I don't need to
do that really this is a big
it's this is a good bill I think
I'm still not sure we're going
to come down when the vote comes
but to because I am worried
about what to do a same with the
victim's and may not feel that
we heard from one victim
particular so I appreciate very
much the bill and to that's all
madam chair.
And share.
Mr speaker yes sorry I was
looking to see who what hands
were raised I move the past.
I'll second that motion.
Is there for the discussion.
Okay click to call the roll.
Representative Alcon yes.
Representative Armstrong.
Representative Cook.
No for now.
Mr speaker just for now.
Representative.
As for later yes.
Yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert.
No one I'd like to explain more
about.
Representative Rehm.
Representative Townsend.
No.
Representative.
As.
Yes I'd like to expand my vote.
Chair.
Yes now and always.
And to explain their votes first
Representative Cook is it was
you Representative Cook.
With no.
Okay
now.
Representative night burnt and
then Representative cut down
that.
Thank you madam chair.
I'm really wanted to support
this legislation but are.
The fifteen year and after some
other states have thirty years
that really weighed on on my
decision then and I.
wonder next fifteen years as is
the right number particularly in
light of the fact that
Massachusetts others right yep
thirty years so for that reason
I've ordered thank you madam
chair.
I'm Representative condemn thank
you madam chair I just wanted to
appreciate the incredible
And compelling.
Expertise and insight that we
heard from New Mexicans from
every corner of the state I
certainly is that with this and
the part that brought me to test
and get me to yes is that after
these time periods someone will
be eligible for parole that
doesn't mean they're getting out
that doesn't mean they're
staying and they become eligible
and I'm trusting that through
the parole hearings and a probar
decisions they will they will
appropriately review what's in
front of them and make decisions
but mostly madam chair and
sponsors it continues to break
my heart that we don't have a
ranger spectrums of options for
young people many of whom are
survivors of trauma themselves
who move through the world to
matic brain injuries certainly
in my family this is something I
saw first hand as a kid
when someone in my family we.
What they would respect a
horrific violent acts that that
ended in death and I just see in
New Mexico we there have keep
someone in prison or we leave
let them out and I just hope
that we continue to invest in
the resources and mechanisms so
that we have a spectrum of
programming recovery treatment
so that we can care for young
people in their survivors of
trauma we can invest and believe
in young people when there's
room to support their
rehabilitation and that we can
absolutely and almost keep
survivors and victims and their
families state so I appreciate
this legislation again because
it gives opportunity for parole
enters the parole board as they
move through these complex and
weighty decisions thank you
madam chair.
Thank you Representative and
I I I have actually had an email
from a constituent who was both.
A victim.
And had a family member was a
victim and a family member who
was the perpetrator and he he.
Really again such.
Nice explanation of why he was
in support of the legislation
and as you say you know fifteen
years is a really long time when
you're only twenty five or
twenty and
You're gonna change a lot.
Then I know one of our our
letters is from doctor George
Davis is a pediatrician who
talks about how the brain
changes.
Or
It is Representative Hochman
Vigil Senator.
But we fail to amend the bill.
Representative Hochman Vigil
have that amendment
so I'd like to hold the vote in
advance and let us get that
amendment on and and change the
motion sorry Representative not
that I'm not making you stay any
longer.
Is that right.
I wanted myself let that one get
by.
Well maybe what I'm counting on
you for that the three
my call.
So
I move that equipment for
adoption and I think
representative Nibert seconds
that right
Then.
Okay and is there any objection
to.
Adopting that amendment to
Senate bill two forty seven
we're truck we actually we we
haven't done that today but the
speaker gave a speech about how
we don't want to immense Senate
bills and make them have to go
for concurrent but since you're
asking for it.
Please show all members present.
Present voting in the
affirmative on that amendment.
And let me just ask if there's
any change them in your vote on
the amended bill.
I see no indication about so
we'll report the
they do passed motion and then
to.
Thank you very much members of
thank you for a long day a lot
of hard work thank you committee
to do more about twelve thirty.
