Chasey.
Representative Lane there.
Mr speaker.
Representative McQueen there.
Representative Nibert there.
Representative read here.
Representative green.
Representative Japan ski.
Madam vice chair here.
Madam chair here madam chair you
have a quorum okay.
Good afternoon everyone good to
see we have a very heavy agenda
so I'd like to get started as
quickly as possible and we are
on house we are on house joint
resolution one as amended and I
see the two representatives who
are on the bill ready to
present.
Thank you madam chair knowing to
destroy your committee room.
Well that was Representative
Harper wasn't.
Let's say that it on him.
Sure.
There are a couple handouts that
are being distributed to the
committee but Representative
Figueroa if the floor is yours.
Thank you madam chair good
afternoon madam chair committee.
this afternoon I am honored to
bring to the work of many many
folks over many many months
and years.
host joint resolution one which
would bring before the voters of
New Mexico the option to take
the next step in our citizens
redistricting act to finish the
job and make it an independent
redistricting committee.
before diving into the
resolution I would introduce who
is here today on my left Robert
Rattigan who is our New Mexico
state demographer.
He is also the head of UNM's to
this patient population studies
and he was one of the seven
members of the citizens
redistricting committee in two
thousand twenty one.
On my far right heather balas is
a former executive of New Mexico
first and currently the vice
president of the national
election reformers Network.
They are here to answer variety
of questions on context national
perspective.
That would be miss balas and on
New Mexico's experience and why
and the CRC itself would like to
see an independent commission.
To basic question why why do we
bring this resolution.
Because it is the finishing step
to a process begun in two
thousand twenty one.
With rigorous thorough and
sometimes heated debate New
Mexico passed the citizens
redistricting act.
It was supported by stakeholder
groups representing thousands of
citizens across the state and
inspired by a task force that
included stakeholder groups and
eight legislators.
It was a huge step forward for
the state of New Mexico.
But it is unfinished business.
The original bill house bill two
eleven.
Maybe the maps of the citizens
redistricting.
Committee final and binding but
in discussion with attorneys and
examination of the constitution
it was determined that would
take it constitute
constitutional amendment and we
did not have time.
So we passed the citizens
redistricting act and we went as
far as we could.
In making a fair and transparent
redistricting process.
And we're coming back to finish
the job.
We are here today to finish the
task with the chair one that
would allow the voters to
determine whether or not they
want an independent
redistricting commission.
It's a concrete and considerable
step toward.
Building public trust in
government in our democratic
process.
Let's be absolutely clear.
I am not proposing that an
independent redistricting
commission would remove politics
from the process it is a
political process but what an
independent redistricting
commission would do would remove
the blatant conflict of interest
and allowing legislators to draw
their own district lines and
essentially choose their own
voters.
Why now.
There are folks who would say
it's not coming for seven more
years we can put this off.
A couple of reasons to do this
now.
New Mexicans across the state
are focused on the issue they
were just more involved in
redistricting than they've ever
been in before and they want to
continue that.
Having just participated in the
process we learned what worked
well.
And what did not work so well.
We have members of the C. R. C.
who will share their insights
and who have called for this
next step.
So now is the time to turn that
knowledge of what we recently
suffered through and all of that
civic part dissipation and turn
it into clear and transparent
policy for the next
redistricting cycle.
Mr Ratigan would like to say a
couple words and then miss balas
and my co sponsor Representative
Harper will finish up.
Is.
Thank you madam chair members of
the Judiciary Committee
Representative Figueroa Robert
Rattigan I was a member of the
citizens redistricting committee
I do want to stress that I'm
here today speaking in that
capacity and not my capacity as
the state demographer nation at
the University of New Mexico
An independent redistricting
committee has overwhelming
public support so seventy seven
percent of New Mexico voters
support an independent
redistricting commission that's
according to recent research by
Dr again Sanchez from BSP
research and the proposed
independent redistricting
committee would go a long way
towards building upon the
successes of the citizens
redistricting committee in a few
key ways that I'll I'll outline
briefly one is that the the maps
but port put forth by the
independent commission would be
binding rather than advisory
this would remove the inherent
conflict of interest limit the
appearance of any partisan
gerrymandering it would temper
any attempts to avoid incumbent
pairings and would allow for
maximum transparency with every
decision being made in the
public eye would also go into
law a long way towards
preserving those communities of
interest that's something that I
learned throughout the process
was so valuable to so many New
Mexicans with to maintain those
communities of interest and have
those communities of interest be
defined by the residents by the
local residents of those
communities thank you madam
chair.
Madam chair members of the
committee on heather balance
with the election reformers
Network and thank you so much
for hearing us out today on this
important issue facing the New
Mexico voters I just wanted to
let you know that my
organization Alexion reformers
Network does support independent
redistricting as a strategy
across the country that includes
New Mexico and includes other
states as well and we do that
because of the conclusion that
we've come to that it
establishes a more fair process
than we otherwise have not the
perfect process but one that is
more fair than we might
otherwise get I would also just
say that we believe that there
is an urgent challenge facing
our country in terms of voter
trust in the democratic process
and every step that we take that
removes conflict of interest
that removes challenges and that
strengthens the trust that our
voters have in the process that
we're engaging in is good for
our country good for our state
I'm happy to take additional
questions if it's helpful to the
committee or the representative
is the hearing goes on but I'll
hush at that point and let us
get on with Representative
Harper and any questions that
you all have.
Thank you madam chair hand a
committee members it's great to
be in front this afternoon I
guess I just want to share with
you.
Really one order and having
thank most of us on this
committee having participated in
this process.
I learned some very interesting
things being kind of the the the
data entered.
when we went through
redistricting I worked with our
demographers.
And I what I just want to
understand what are the boundary
conditions what we really have
to work with and so I asked them
to prepare a map that is just
gerrymandered just as.
Viciously as you can in favor of
the Republicans.
And then as the major minute
make a map is gerrymandered as
much as possible in favor of the
Democrats.
And I asked them to make a map
that was just keeping
communities together I want to
see what the boundary conditions
were and I learned something
fascinating.
looking at both extremes the
number of safe Republican seats
and safe Democrat seats were
nearly identical.
And so to me that means really
there's nothing you can do to
put a Republican seat in Santa
Fe.
Right it's just it's just it's a
Democrat Stephen voting city
right.
But what changed work the twenty
seats in the middle.
And in the sea the favor the
Democrats the method with
regrets of those twenty seats
like sixteen or seventeen really
leaned heavily Democrat and the
Republican map.
The certeon of them really lean
heavily Republican and then the
map that was in the middle it
was almost a fifty fifty split.
So I mean I loved that those
fasting learn those things.
But what I'll mention to the
committee is that map that just
kept communities together happen
almost match perfectly the
redistricting commission map see
the communities of interest map.
Now what happened we saw this
during the redistricting session
was.
Thank the committee did a good
job they gave us for great maps.
For the need for the purchasing
Commission but those are
essentially.
Torn up and thrown away and we
started with a completely
different map.
And there was really one person
in charge of the entire process.
just.
Being open and honest right in
the past I'll say to we've known
that members were able to trade
back in force precincts and work
together if.
As long as it didn't you know
make a change the make up of
them out very much.
Let's not even really right
easier right what we should
really be doing is focusing on
keeping communities of interest
together minimizing the ratio of
the perimeter to the area of the
district is another way to say
it.
And I really believe.
This commission reduction
commission did a great job at
doing just that and so that's
why I'm really here supporting
this I think
taking it to the rest of the
way.
Really just take the not all of
the politics out but I sure as
heck a lot of the politics out
and give us really basketball
communities together so that
madam chair we stand for
questions thank you first we'll
go to the audience to get public
input so those wishing to speak
in a and just some ground before
we move no more than two minutes
we're going to assign up to
twenty minutes of public comment
on each side and then we come
back to the committee so
those wishing to speak in
opposition yes Pete all you need
to state we need to stand up and
give us your name please.
The party senator are I speaking
will drop.
okay well why don't levels will
listen to would you please madam
chair we'll go ahead P. one we
listen to you now okay surely as
the Democratic Party so our our
communication with our part of
the second director she first of
all we of the Democratic Party
have dealt position this this is
for future to every individual
Democrats I.
What I'm here to address which I
have discussed with
Representative Harper and other
people here the question of
dealers role.
I am asking.
Chair lady Chandler that the
committee take a look to see.
If a condition like this would
not try to supersede Dillard's
role I just think that all just
delayed is that only a state
legislatures local governments
but all kids governmental
process sees it the state
legalistic lead Cup under the
purview of our case The New
Mexico state legislature this
that be for the good of.
The people of New Mexico this be
for delivery rural part of the
good of all of us people in
these United States I don't know
why I wish the committee to have
its legal person take four close
look at this to see if this type
of issue but I was super rad
electoral thank you madam chair
early thank you anyone else in
the audience wishing to speak in
opposition.
I don't see anyone anyone online
wishing to speak in opposition I
see two names one of which I
know is in support so.
Miss Lopez are you speaking in
opposition if you are not
speaking in opposition please
take your hand down.
Okay all right so there's no one
speaking in opposition know that
individual speaking in support
so I nine recognize the name and
I've gotten a list so.
All right so now we are to those
wishing to speak in support many
of the advocacy groups of
approached me and asked that I
call on some specific
individuals in the audience so
we will do that and then two
minutes no more than two minutes
each so the first person on the
list is when have front front
Esalen.
Thank you very much
Representative Chandler and
members of the house Judiciary
Committee I've been here for on
and as co president of the
American Association of
university women for the state
of New Mexico we are solidly
committed to asking you to vote
in support house joint
resolution one.
Message of this resolution leads
the fight for equality will
recognize and include all New
Mexico citizens we believe that
the drawing of electoral
district boundaries not by the
state legislature in all due
respect.
Not by political commission not
provide advisory commission and
not backed up commission but
wide independent redistricting
commission will ensure that all
voices of voters in New Mexico
we better heard and served let
us recognize that New Mexico's
rural citizens marginalized
groups increasing numbers of
independence I communities of
interest seeks to be better
heard and service we ask that
you foster political
transparency.
Builds trust in government again
and allow both the forces and
citizens who do not hold public
office.
This.
Them to express the will of the
people in drawing are voting
districts Hey you W. Mexico seek
sure of course and vote to pass
H. J. R. one thank you thank you
we next have Janet Williams.
Janet is Janet online I hope
Janet's online Janet we'll get
back to you when we go to the
online participants
Mason Graham.
Is Mason Graham in the audience.
And I don't see Mason online.
So going on to the next person
Kathleen Burke.
Madam chair members of the
committee good afternoon how do
we do have the for Albuquerque
the project coordinator for fair
districts.
Coming up online for here.
Thank you all for being part of
this conversation before makes
comments I would like to correct
the record.
New Mexico.
Redistricting on redistricting
commissions it is time on the
platform of the twenty twenty
two addict party New Mexico.
To be fair redistricting should
be should not be about my
party's issues for about your
parties issues.
Rather about one issue with the.
Which is fairness in
redistricting which is I think
of the electorate the faces of
the electorate.
The United States is the only
remaining developed country last
legislators to profits from
districts.
We think the twenty twenty one
legislature for passing.
Act.
Explanation and our forty plus
for physicians statewide for our
that it is time for the
legislature to take the next
step in building for its
confidence in New Mexico.
Process I think it's J. R. one
and leading this are the.
To decide that the voters want
to process.
And lastly.
Please review the issue
legislative session with the
participations and he individual
publicly supported.
You madam we ask for your to
pass.
Resolution one.
Thank you.
Hannah of Berlin Hannah.
Yes madam chair members of the
committee I have a growing
president of the league of women
voters of New Mexico.
As we want to thank
representatives to go wrong and
her group for sponsoring a share
of one person committee to be
it to pass we have forwarded the
Albuquerque journal and the
Santa Fe New Mexican error to
editorials also urged the
committee to pass H. R. one and
put it on the ballot in twenty
twenty four so that New Mexicans
so much.
Redistricting reform on its
agenda for very.
For many decades.
And part of the effort to use to
do independent redistricting
commission to the Arizona and
California.
We believe fair and unbiased
redistricting is critical.
If we are to be true to the
principle of one person.
The legislature should be very
proud of passing the twenty
twenty one to discontinue Act
for citizens redistricting
committee the C. R. C. however.
The C. R. C. proposed maps were
only recommendations.
Yes for the legislature to build
on the success of the
redistricting act to approve H.
J. R. one and to love the voters
decide please continue to build
public trust in the political
process thank you thank you
Laura lucerna.
The firm here sure.
thank you madam chair and
members of the committee
Commission my name's Lori Cerro
and I'm speaking here of one of
the progressive Democrats of
America PDA.
PDA was formed in two thousand
four.
It's important both the party
and our country to work more for
the broad public interest and
not just the private interest
and so that's why I say and PDA
can say we are confident that we
can win elections on the issues.
Such as Medicare for all
without twiddling our thumbs on
the scales and drawing districts
to favor Democrats.
Our policies and goals speak to
the vast majority of Americans.
If there is currently no problem
with the existing redistricting
system and I've heard that
argument that there's no problem
so don't need this
constitutional amendment.
Then I have to respond and say
there's no argument against
allowing an independent
commission to draw the maps an
independent commission will not
undermine a fair and balanced
redistricting process.
Please to see has mentioned
earlier that the official
Democratic Party of New Mexico
has included on its platform an
independent redistricting
commission and I'll just quote.
We will advocate for a
constitutional amendment to end
gerrymandering by creating and
getting to forty to independent
nonpartisan redistricting
commission that includes diverse
membership specifically
including native American
representation and participation
this commission she'll be
separate from the legislative
process to prevent the drawing
of political found thank you
Serra thank you.
Support thank you.
we have is there Mary Smith in
the audience.
Michael's spearing McQueen all
there you are.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you for allowing
me to speak my name is Michael
Sperber McQueen I'm a volunteer
with retake our democracy and
with the Atlantic progressive
caucus of the Democratic Party
of New Mexico both of these
organizations urge you to move
this nation forward.
Madam chair I have heard from
Democrats who my respect and
admire.
That it is unrealistic quixotic
maybe even foolish for me as a
Democrat to be supporting this
measure.
Look at North Carolina look at
Texas Georgia.
Isn't it clear that Democrats
need to fight fire with fire.
Madam chair I think I
understand.
That argument and its appeal but
it does not persuade me.
Democrats who are
disenfranchised because they
live in Chapel Hill or Asheville
are not made whole.
By disenfranchised Republicans
who live in Hobbs.
That's not a remedy it's not a.
Constructive step towards
addressing the polarization of
American politics it's just
hostage taking.
In a world where the only law is
to fight fire with fire pretty
soon we are all living in burnt
out houses.
So I called on the Democrats of
this committee.
To gather your courage and make
good on the prior promise we may
be in the platform.
It can never be foolish for
political parties to live up to
its ideals.
Thank you Michael
Andreas photos.
Thank you madam chairman from
members of the committee my name
is Andreas fault this time with
an organization grassroots
organization called to see most
United.
We're here in support of K. J.
R. went from.
Please give the defense thank
you thank you.
Terry Christiansen.
Sir Terry Christiansen hi.
My name is Terry Christiansen
I'm a volunteer with looser
Office of governmental
ministries or the third at the
casino industry now speaking on
behalf of LA conferences
churches in the first period of.
In favor of the resolution thank
you thank you and we have.
Okay I see we have three hands I
have three of the names that
were on my list online so we'll
we'll go to them Janet Williams.
Janet.
Janet.
Yeah more items here and members
of the committee I am here
speaking on behalf of the
national organization for women
and we believe an independent
commission will lead to fair and
free elections and confidence in
those elections.
Thank you.
We have Cedric page.
Cedric.
Good afternoon this is center
page I am the thank you madam
chair members of the committee
for this time to speak I am the
co chair of the New Mexico first
redistricting task force and I
I'm here to support H. J. R.
one.
As an organization we hold that
the redistricting process yes
maximize public trust and
participation.
And in response to
Representative Figueroa asked
question why now well the
redistricting process really is
an educational process and as a
educator and younger for it's
important that we start now with
this redistricting commission to
educate the communities that
will be voting in the elections
beginning in twenty twenty
thirty
the educational process is a
lengthy one getting individuals
to understand how to make maps
and how to map and how to
understand their communities of
interest is critically important
so we again as the member as
members of the New Mexico first
redistricting task force support
is G. R. one and.
Thank you to vote are you passed
on this measure thank you thank
you
we have merry Smith.
Online very.
Thank you.
I am very H. Smith in
Albuquerque attorney a member of
fair districts for New Mexico
and Representative Tracy's
constituent I am voted for fifty
years first in California them
Arizona and for forty years in
New Mexico.
For me January six twenty twenty
one changed everything I believe
about our country and political
process I was horrified to the
point of tears to see what
absolutely rabid partisanship to
do to undo democracy.
H. J. R. one promotes the
people's voices it is not about
your power as legislators an
independent redistricting
commission acting in full view
of the public removes
partisanship from the process
and ensures that the people's
voices are paramount I care
about the representative
democracy.
The citizen redistricting
committee in the work it
produced after hearing from
hundreds of voters was a model I
would like to see continued and
enshrined in our state
constitution.
Please do not dismiss the power
of your constituents if they do
pass to H. D. R. one and let the
voters decide if an independent
redistricting commission better
protects the interest in a free
and fair democracy thank you.
Thank you we have time for one
more person my daily.
Mike Daley.
Please on mute yourself.
Thank you madam chairman members
of the commission ladies and
gentleman.
I'm Michael Daly speaking on my
own behalf from Gallup New
Mexico I strongly support this
measure thank you.
Thank you that concludes our
public comment period will come
back to the committee I have
Representative McQueen on my
list.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair representative of no
on this bill I I appreciate
where you're coming from.
just from my perspective is in
the process we just went
through.
I thought that the house process
the state has process was
excellent there were maps
proposed we made minor
adjustments to those maps based
on the tribal consensus map and
some other I think minor cleanup
issues.
And we adopted the map that was
basically one the maps
recommended by the commission I
thought that was a good process
that we've resisted the request
to.
change not only to change the
map.
The benefit one particular
A senior representative but also
a request on the democratic side
from our own members to make
some adjustments here and there
and and the rationale was
because we were sticking with
Matt so I thought that was a
good process
the Senate.
Did something else.
I would think that with them in
the the congressional maps I
don't really know the details
about that but I I thought we
ended up in a pretty good place
that we had
Competitive districts and and
one thing I recall hearing about
not directly was
People in.
What we're not competitive
districts wanted a chance.
That they didn't want to be the
designated Republican district
where they had no chance and we
had wind up with three
competitive districts they all
include the cycle ivory
Committee that people think
they'll all be right soon
enough.
And I think that's the right
response not that.
We're gonna change the districts
to make them red or blue but
that
we're gonna appeal to voters.
To make a district but.
And so that's just my
perspective of what we've been
through quite recently.
Fundamentally however.
This needs to be a national
standard.
Thank you I things are going on
in other states are
The court.
I think are plugged process
maybe could have been better.
But it was pretty good.
So thank you for bringing this
forward thank you mentor thank
you representative
Representative Alcon.
Thank you madam chair.
And I am just curious I think I
heard a number like.
Seventy nine percent or what
wasn't that are in favor of the
redistricting commission is that
correct or wrong.
Madam chair and representative I
will let Mr Ratigan into that
the number seventy seven
percent.
Is that a UNM professor gave
sentences study that that gather
that information.
Madam chair representative
outcome that's correct seventy
seven percent of registered New
Mexico voters who were polled
agreed that an independent
redistricting committee of would
be improvement to our democracy
Linda excuse madam chair how
were the full.
At.
Madam chair representative
account unfortunately Dr Sanchez
is not here today but I believe
it was a representative sample
of New Mexico voters there's a
obtained qualified of well a
voice and online heather am I
correct.
As Representative chair
representative it which doctor
Sanchez ran that as an online
poll of likely voters
registered likely voters and the
poll was organized in a way that
provided context prior to each
question so that voters could
read and learn more about the
redistricting process before
they answered if in fact it was
a question that they didn't
already understand
okay and that's why I don't use
it but I never saw the polls the
ferry that within the registered
voter for or something to that
effect.
So Bill included because of a
single pool that runs.
And if you want something.
To come out on your side you
would certainly.
You want to come out the other
way in order to third.
So this is just the electors or
on what they were doing the
full.
Madam chair and representative
we can ask professors Sanchez to
send them to you if you like.
Okay that's fair enough I guess
you're telling me you don't know
what they were.
Madam chair.
Madam chair and representative I
do not have the questions in
front of me and his entire
report and results are available
online.
And I can get that to you.
Thank you thank you madam chair
so okay at this and then to a
question so.
I'll go on you know I was the
driving down to seventh in the
morning Senator and I just
decided to pay and that we would
just basically my favorite
station this is.
I don't let like to listen to
that.
That that the reserves the
justice a.
That led the.
The last commission.
Was on the radio.
Okay and the.
The program was.
Thank you bye.
Okay.
You one of the things that I
noticed that's the blue it over
and over again.
Is that.
The only time.
That the legislature heard from
the public was here in Santa Fe.
Before this redistricting
committee
that was set up regular was
Reagan stated us listening my
hearing was pretty Senator.
And it bothered me because you
know.
When we the legislature this.
Twenty years ago no one was the
have with your the for that one
before this yeah the committee
provided.
The elected legislators.
That went out into the
communities.
And not to the people the people
talk to them.
Okay and that was members of the
hundred and whatever hundred
twelve forty two would be
seventy.
It is part of the hundreds of
people that I sent here to Santa
Fe to represent the constituents
that.
Vote for a.
A group of mostly like I don't
know what it was like twelve
fifty the.
Later someone.
And they went through all of the
discussion state.
Invited me to hear that that's
the state of the only think they
got that you heard before.
Less.
Right before redistricting and
here in Santa Fe.
Because that is totally false.
Okay it bothers me to hear that.
With Head by just about a minute
here the advertisement of.
Redistricting.
When madam chair and
I heard the ad in the dust
assess if you don't like your
current legislator.
You need to vote for
redistricting committee.
I just have you.
I honestly think and honestly I
thought that we that first time
that I was here to do and was
involved with this through with
redistricting madam chair and
members.
I thought we did a really good
job.
We did.
And I keep on hearing this very
Mandarin thing over and over and
over again in the that's exactly
what was repeated on that radio
program that I was listening to
over and over again.
If we have a redistricting
committee we will be very
mentoring and we will be
favorite anybody.
And the.
Honestly.
We went ahead and faxed the bill
lacks deal.
And we did the commission I
guess of the.
And I thought it was the most
biased Commission that I've ever
seen.
There's not a single native
American on their.
Everybody that was under way for
me to Albuquerque or bin laden
as it was with one that was not
from Albuquerque with one from
below in order to do that.
But everybody else's real fifty.
A single lady of American on the
commission.
I will.
And then they come to us with
maps.
And the.
I just think it's so unfair how.
They talk about it.
There's a like on the pretty
much basically what's there's a
madam chair members is
representative of what is going
to make his district or only
representative of COVID when it.
That's basically what they're
saying on these radio stations
on the public radio.
Which would I listen to the LESC
if it takes me awhile to get
from Milan to Santa Fe.
And it really bothered me and
then again there was one program
that was that was that one of
the ladies that there's a
program that her program and
then there was another one that
was done with the other lady
that does that and they're both
the same thing.
The both bias.
And totally unfair legislators.
And that's why I say we can get
seventy seven percent table one
way if you do it the right way.
And in all fairness madam chair
and representative I honestly
feel and I voted against the
last bill.
Okay the on the field.
That I think it is our right.
People out there it is our job
we are the seven hundred and.
I'm.
Hundred twelve hundred twelve
people that are elected to
represent the people of the
state of New Mexico.
And now we want to send nine
people.
We go out there instead of.
I don't.
The group of people that are
elected.
To serve the public.
I mean that's what we're here
for reserve the public we're not
here to hand over a job but
their next move.
We go to give up the budgeting
system CPA.
In the new that.
We will go next.
Then we will just have a
provided the consensus is a no
go home.
We would only have like a two
day so the who have to be like
maybe two or three days so we
could say essential the whole
that's it.
The.
Madam chair I I will leave it at
that I don't know like thank you
to the gals
but you already know how I feel.
Right Representative Chasey.
Thank you madam chair I really
want to thank.
Everyone from both sides for all
of the hard work in the
consideration I to
believe that the process worked
better than I had anticipated
last year and I was really proud
of the house for making changes
in conjunction with the tribal
leaders.
So I I I think it worked tonight
I just find it a little
perplexing we have immediately
to change the process because.
I like to work
I know there are many of my
constituents who are absolutely
Committed to their view that a
lot most of you here have which
is that we need to and
gerrymandering I actually
believe that I just don't think
we see much of it here I really
don't.
I've been through three
redistricting who's now two
thousand one two thousand eleven
and twenty twenty one
as a reflected official and I
haven't seen that we have
created maps that that somehow
disproportionately reflect our
populace so I have been
satisfied with with that I
appreciated the work of the
commission last year and what I
appreciated about the houses
work was that we took the tribal
Recommendations and just an
overlay on what the commission
had given us and I frankly think
that right now all this body is
very much fun equal as an equal
branch of government and I don't
really know why we would not
relinquish that power to
As as the children from civil
and Kelly said to just to just
nine people so I
I will respectfully vote no and
at the same time recognize the
the commitment and I I agree
with you if this were Texas or
North Carolina
I'd I'd be there with you it's
not and I don't see that our
maps reflect that furniture and
and thank you madam chair thank
you Representative anyone else.
Wishing to speak Representative
Eli.
Thank you madam chair I.
I do actually appreciate this
conversation happening because I
think it's worthwhile to talk
about what whether the system we
have is the best system possible
so think of nothing else it it's
burns that conversation.
but Madam I'm not convinced that
the the proposed outline this
bill is is what's best for New
Mexico.
I have a I have a concern about
well let me let me describe it
this way.
We as the legislative body are
the direct representation of the
people.
And my fear is if we delegate
this authority to the reducing
commission we we have and at
least philosophically cut the
people out from that process.
Now I understand that the the
commission is composed of names
that we put forth
different members of the house
and Senate and I understand that
that they have to hold public
testimony.
but those things are not the
same in my mind from me who has
to answer to thirty thousand
constituents
for the vote I take and how I
behave during redistricting and
how I work avail and how I don't
work a bill.
So I think that is a source of
concern for me at a
philosophical level I'm also not
convinced the ethics commission
even if we went this route is
the proper body to make the
final decision.
and so I I again I think it's
worthwhile I don't think we've
quite now the yet in terms of
how we approach redistricting.
so I disagree a little bit with
my colleagues on that point but
I I don't know this puts forth a
better model so thank you madam
chair.
Anyone else any other
Representative wishing to
comment or ask questions okay
Representative o'connor chair
move to table the full
disclosure madam chair is there
any chance to respond is this
debate or was it just listening.
I I I.
It.
If you want to close
your.
We fully.
Okay.
Madam chair and committee we've
heard a lot of really
thoughtful.
points maybe this afternoon and
Preciado the discussion that we
as representatives elected our
direct representatives of the
people.
Agreed and it is the people who
are asking for this opportunity.
They will be deciding should HDR
pass.
Each year one whether we have an
independent redistricting
commission or not as director
representatives of the people
that is our job.
There should be a federal
process.
Also agreed absolutely agreed.
But we don't control that from
here what we control is New
Mexico's process or at least the
opportunity to give the voters a
chance to say whether this is
what the shape and that with
fifteen other states moving this
direction.
Will put pressure on the federal
system to make that choice.
Third if you are happy with our
house process then that is the
point of it share one let's
codify it let's make sure it
consistently happens let's make
sure those maps are binding
instead of advisory.
If you don't see gerrymandering
here.
Let's codify it let's remove
that perception of
gerrymandering as much as we
can.
The point is removing the
blatant conflict of interest
that is in our system that we
cannot escape as it is right
now.
To let the people of New Mexico
the voters of New Mexico.
Speak their peace on this.
Thank you appreciate it.
We have a motion to table by
Representative a conduit said we
don't need a second so would you
call the roll.
Thank you madam chair calling
role.
Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane yes.
Mr speaker yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert yes.
Representative read yes.
Representative Rehm yes ma'am.
Representative Penske yes.
Madam vice chair no.
Madam chair yes.
Madam chair ten yess one no to
table H. J. R. one and.
Thank you madam chair thanks
committee Hugh thank you our.
All right we're now on house
bill one eighty five.
We'll give all the folks who
want to leave.
We are house bill one eighty
five that's of returning one
rolled over because we just to
make the changes to the bill so
and there's a song that's coming
Any moment.
This.
Okay I think we're ready to hear
Your presentation on the
committee six thousand five.
Thank you madam I would
recommend you highlight what you
change that we don't need to
hear review hold bill
Representative read out the
committee September madam chair
yes please and I'll need a
motion to consider it but.
Thank you madam chair of the
number is two two five two two
one point one.
Great everyone's got that.
Okay so if you want to highlight
what changes you made to the
original that we heard I don't
know thank you so the thank you
madam chair members of the
committee I leave removed we
heard you removed all references
to other states standards and
also the Canadian standard we we
really understood those concerns
we understand that the standards
could be change in the future
could cause confusion for us to
be removed and so that's
required moving gas fireplaces.
Computers and computer equipment
from the New Mexico standards
less because there are no
national standards.
We remove them entirely there no
national standards for these
products secondly we we amended
section nine to allow utilities
to claim these drugs and their
energy efficiency program for
three years not just one that is
a request from from public
comment and madam chair I still
I still have my experts with me
on to on the zoom and a
tentative upon right there so
whenever I'm happy to introduce
them now.
Yes you can introduce I'm sure
that Christine Brinker and right
feeding they may have to move
to.
The upgraded panelists panelists
yes that's
We're not going to be doing any
more public comment we did that
on the original bill this is
really my hope is to be focused
on what we change and whether it
satisfies some of our concerns
some of us's concert.
Okay so members.
Anyone wishing to speak
questions.
I don't.
Okay we have a motion by
Representative Romero to adopt
the minutes of the propose of is
there a second.
We're not building now we know
we're thank you.
Okay.
Anyone.
Happy to take names I take names
a lot Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair of the.
So all the references to
Canadian standards are now taken
out.
Madam chair representative and
chair representative Nibert yes
they are.
madam chair.
Of I I still don't think that
for the reasons I stated the
other day that we out of the
seven these limits particularly
for the side the south side of
the state where.
We're putting our.
Folks are retail folks at a
disadvantage with their
competitors across the state
line and we'll have a live.
There were range of products and
which to sell so the reason I
remain opposed to this but
appreciate you taking some of
those standards out thank you
madam chair.
Thank you anyone else.
Representative McQueen over the
past.
A new the do not pass on the
bill to pass on the face of
stiff.
Second to the you she.
So we have a motion for do pass
on House Judiciary Committee
substitute for house bill one
eighty five it's been made by
Representative McQueen seconded
by Representative Romero anyone
else wish to speak.
To the bill the substitute.
would you call the roll.
Thank you madam chair calling
the roll.
Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey yeah.
Representative Lane so.
Mr speaker yes.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative Nibert of.
Representative read.
Representative Rehm no ma'am.
Representative Penske yes.
Madam vice chair yeah.
Madam chair yes.
Madam chair we have a do not
pass on H. B. one eighty five a
in a due process six in favor I
know on fifty eighty five
committee so.
Thank you yes.
Thank you.
All right next up is house bill
one seventy three.
Hello Representative how to be a
good afternoon madam chair good
to see you good to see if this
is your first experience with us
this is my first two runs and
you pick the one.
That's what they tend.
Okay well the floor is yours
madam chair and
and committee
H. B. one seventy three which is
sponsored by Representative
Dixon myself read and
Representative Harper is a
bipartisan bill and it's just
one of many that you will see as
this body comes together to
protect New Mexico's children H.
B. one seventy three is an
attempt to join with the federal
government and thirty five other
states in the country to ensure
that victims of violent crimes
will cease to be re traumatized
by the very system that is
discharged with protecting them
with increased public awareness
and supported data we have
improved efforts to intervene
effectively on the behalf of
children one of the most
significant interventions has
centered on how to elicit
accurate information from
children regarding abuse and
neglect a process commonly
referred to as forensic
interviewing forensic interview
of a child is a developmentally
sensitive and legally sound
method of gathering factual
information regarding
allegations of abuse or exposure
to violence.
This interview is conducted by
competently trained neutral
professional utilizing research
and practice inform techniques
as part of a larger
investigative process in
drafting this legislation we
adopted this definition because
it has been developed by experts
in the field.
Regarding the importance of
limiting the type of and number
of times a child must be
subjected to an interview we're
utilizing the research and
findings a child psychologists
and experts in child trauma who
tell us that repeatedly
interviewing the child may very
not well likely not yield the
results the defense counsel is
hoping for yes it will most
certainly affect the child
negatively and may read that to
mice the child in many cases of
child abuse the forensic
interview is the most critical
pervasive piece of evidence for
the jury's consideration.
If a child recants their
disclosure of abuse.
The dynamics because of the
dynamics of of victimization
their other stressors this
forensic interview and the
statements made made by the
child to care givers are
teachers or others are crucial
to this prosecution even in the
absence of recantation the
original statement remains a
powerful and authentic
representation of what happened
I implore you to follow the
federal government as well as
thirty five other states in
enacting H. B. one seventy three
and to say no to re traumatizing
children who are victims of
crimes today I'm joined by a few
experts Daniel Smith is a
forensic interviewer and James
Grayson.
Senator president okay great
so let's go to the audience
those wishing to participate
speak in opposition to the bill
please raise your hands.
All right.
We were I'm allocating two
minutes per person so.
Kim.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee thank you to the
sponsors for their work on this
really important issue hello he
does oppose this legislation as
we believe it over corrects to
address an issue for which there
are ample protections and
accommodations in the current
system it does so at the expense
of the rights of the accused and
the crucial truth seeking
function adversaries.
Decades ago the Supreme Court in
state year round health
depriving Defense violates due
process and the right to
effective assistance of counsel
I do not wait the constitution
around as a technical opposition
to the bill the defense
interview is crucial to finding
the truth these cases rarely
involve physical evidence and
are often described by appellate
courts as he said she said cases
in which the credibility of the
parties is paramount and often
the only issue left for a jury
to resolve the defense interview
is the only investigatory tool
directed at questioning the
accuracy and completeness of
allegations in these very
emotional basis therefore
restrictions that serve to
protect children from trauma can
also serve to unduly elevate
child witness credibility and
undermines the adversarial to
seeking process that's why the
Supreme Court and Rhona held
that it was unconstitutional to
deny Defense interview that
deprived the defendant is right
to prepare a defense around
recognize that certain witnesses
do require protective measures
that the court noted that trial
courts already can fashion means
to ensure that witnesses will be
protected from intimidation
without unduly impairing
defendants right to prepare
defense and I'm quoting Supreme
Court when I say in the absence
of some demonstrable good
because the trial court may not
impose an absolute restriction
on defense counsel's access to
states perspective witnesses but
that is exactly what this bill
does without individualized
assessment hello he asks
Committee will pass the very
sympathetic desire to protect
children and make sure that we
do so responsibly because the
impact of this the lady on the
litigation matters into crucial
rates first there can be truly
unreliable information that a
defense interview put on cover
resulting in reduction or
dismissal of unfounded charges
and this is that.
Thank you.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee
reviewed the Chavez legislative
coordinator for the New Mexico
will defense lawyers association
the association also stranded
opposition and we actually have
some members who are on zoom for
provide you with real of the
variances of the impacts of such
legislation in continuation of
Mississauga's cook's point the
second point is that the pre
trial interview could lead the
defense to fully appreciate the
strength of the state's case and
this agreed to a plea agreement
preventing that interaction will
certainly lead to more children
having to testify at trial a
much more public than from areas
that interview in a conference
room with a handful of lawyers
and a victims advocate hello
Kitty at NCLAT asked this
committee to look past the
sympathetic desire to protect
children and make sure that we
do so responsibly thank you
madam chair
thank you van.
And our.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee money spent our
chief public defender I'm
speaking to you from the
experience of both prosecuting
to allegations of child sexual
abuse of for several years
including taking several cases
through trial and defending
those sorts of cases including
for trial
it is so important that children
not be traumatized but is also
important that those people
accused of crimes have the
ability that our system actually
set up to test those charges
it is hard as it may be for
those of you to believe who
don't work in the system these
kinds of cases complex and
actually often times the kinds
of allegations that come out of
interviews don't reflect the
actual truth which is developed
much later there is no such
thing as a neutral or unbiased
person and therefore there's no
such thing as a neutral or
unbiased investigator or
interviewer and that's why it's
so important someone have the
ability to gently ask questions
in when it's appropriate in
these cases to a child there are
so many protections built into
those interviews they are
accompanied by victims advocates
they are the company by the
prosecutor if anything a defense
attorney did you use was
inappropriate that interview
would be shut down and the
prosecutor can go to the judge
it's such an important
protection for a person facing
serious charges I ask you to to
consider that in balancing the
interests of both on this
particular bill thank you thank
you anyone else in the audience
wishing to speak in opposition.
Okay so we'll go online now
I see Jennifer
Burrel has her hand up.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name's Jennifer
Berlin president elect of the
New Mexico criminal defense
lawyers association and ask you
to oppose house bill one seventy
three because forensic
interviews of children are law
enforcement enabled interviews
that include prosecutors and
police in determining the
questions to be asked of the
child what I've seen in child
sexual abuse cases is that
defense interviews are critical
to finding the truth and my only
go practice the clearest example
of this was a defense pre trial
interview that I'm filled
information showing the child
was coached by their parents for
more than a month before the
parents notified law enforcement
of the incident the defense if
you have a child also revealed
the parents had recorded the
coaching sessions which the
father of the child ultimately
turned over this defense
interview was critical to
finding the truth which is the
goal of our justice system and
is critical to preventing
wrongful convictions thank you
thank you I see it a person
named D. Thompson.
All continue madam chairman and
honorable committee members my
name is David Thompson and I am
a child clinical psychologist
and a forensic psychologist
based in Wisconsin I'm licensed
in New Mexico I'm also training
as a forensic interviewer I'm
pleased to have the opportunity
to provide some important
information to you as you
consider the merits of this bill
one of my areas of expertise
involves reviewing child
forensic interviews such as
those completed the state house
hunters and testifying about the
impact of various factors on the
accuracy of children's memory
there are many factors that
affect a child's memory some of
them are obvious while others
are much more subtle what how
many child forensic interviews
are conducted properly many are
not and my review child forensic
interviews conducted in New
Mexico I observed a broad range
of quality unfortunately and
contrary to popular belief the
more experienced a child
forensic interviewer is the less
they are here to proper
interviewing procedures unless
they participate in rigorous
ongoing peer review and training
process this is an assertion
that is not just based on my
observations it is also
reflected in the peer reviewed
professional literature in this
area.
The trial interviews I observed
in New Mexico have all been
conducted properly and with
sensitivity by the defense
attorneys and in all cases have
also included the presence of a
prosecutor these pre trial
interviews allow the defense
attorney to ask questions that
should have been asked during
the prince academies and
Tempesta again alternative
explanations for the child's
records.
The legislature chooses to adopt
the proposed legislation allows
for virtually automatic
admission of the video recorded
interview a trial fundamental
fairness would stand to also
require that the legislature
allow the defense to
automatically present expert
testimony concerning the
shortcomings of those under I
thank you for your time today
thank you.
Madam chair the yes
Representative there's also two
expert witnesses on Sam.
That I failed to mention oh okay
Victor yes yes yes madam chair
okay very good.
So and someone else is there is
a two wheel layered Willard.
For those of okay will will
elevate
the doctor is a doctor years for
it yes Missy is.
All right so do you wish to say
any thing else before we go to
the would like to respond Madam
chair of actually that's not how
we do it so so Representative
we're coming back to the
committee.
But we do support for all sorry
those wishing to speak in
support of the bill in the
audience please raise your hand.
Alright we'll start over here.
Thank you me Sir madam chair
committee members and fans
reporters Transilvania PhD
former licensed psychologists
and child psychologist in
Pennsylvania and New Jersey I am
testifying today in favor of H.
B. one seven.
I want to address the issue that
seems to be the biggest concern
of defensive.
This bill would eliminate the
right of defense counsel to
conduct a pre trial interview I
undergo on a recorded pre trial
interview by a trained neutral
forensic interview.
Interviewer was knowledgeable
about the age of the
developmental abilities of the
child this is my third year
testified that this bill that's
how strongly I feel about it I
just in my practice I have seen
children who has been seriously
traumatized by cross
examinations like one training
Defense.
And I sometimes have have had to
have been transferred to state
hospitals if they develop
psychoses and other very serious
mental illness.
I train forensic interviewer is
aware of the potential for false
allegations and take steps to
gather evidence to validate or
refute the allegation this
impartial approach and I do
believe is impartial helps to
reduce the risk of wrongful
convictions for the defensive as
well as for
the defendant's client the
recorded interview may be
admitted into evidence only if
you use two very important
conditions want the child
witness or victim testifies
thank you thank you.
Okay appreciate it thank you.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is
Alexandria Taylor and executive
director of the New Mexico
coalition of sexual assault
programs I want to first
acknowledge that our coalition
doesn't work much on issues
impacting criminal legal staff.
Under my leadership that's
intentional and very strategic
because we recognized the
historic in present day
disproportionate impact that the
system has had on communities of
color however this bill is one
of our priorities because we
know first hand the direct
impact in rejecting Association
of children that the criminal
legal process has one child
victims one of our programs of
the coalition is the nationally
accredited New Mexico children's
alliance which supports the
twelve children's advocacy
centers in the training practice
on going supervision and review
in providing developmentally
appropriate culturally sensitive
and legally sound forensic
interviews as the co founder of
the children's advocacy center
and Valencia County I have seen
first hand children begin their
healing process and the light
begin to return to their eyes
only to have all of that
regressive they work their way
through this criminal process
there are numerous peer reviewed
studies that show children who
testify repeatedly and more than
one R. regressed in there he's.
I believe all of us madam chair
and members of the committee
have a shared interest in just.
I also believe that it is on us
it is our responsibility as the
trusted adults in the state and
the decision makers in the state
to stop sharing this information
about the forensic interviewing
process and to figure out these
protections that thirty five
other states and the federal
government has figured out in
order to protect some of the
most vulnerable in our state
which are child victims as well
as protect the constitutional
rights of the accused thank you.
Thank you.
please raise your hand again.
Madam chair members of the
committee care Canada a with the
national association of social
workers I will be labor the
point I think this Taylor said
it usually we stand in support
of this legislation thank you
thank you over here.
Madam chairman of the committee
my name is that the FY I that I
work for the children youth and
families department and we are
in support of this bill we we
don't want the children to be re
victimized for further trauma or
facing their perpetrators in
court we do ask that a couple of
the wording changed a little bit
we ask that in adult witness he
is eighteen and over and a child
under eighteen years of age and
want to be consistent with the
children scope of the definition
of child thank you.
Thank you anyone else wishing to
speak in support.
Good afternoon chair committee
members thank you for allowing
us to comment on this bill here
today Marcus Montoya a judicial
district attorney also present
of the New Mexico distributaries
Association for all the reasons
already stated we stand in
strong support of this bill
additionally just a comment is
these are already the toughest
cases to investigate a launch
that protections against
regionalization and reposition
of the children they only become
that much more difficult and
this is the basis by which we
have the least amount of
accountability for the offenders
for the reasons we support this
bill thank you.
Thank you anyone else in the
audience wishing to speak in
support.
Right let's go online.
There if it's Gerald Ortiz he
raise your hand for speaking in
support.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee I'm
Sarah fitzgerald senior vice
president of the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
the chamber strongly supports
this bill first of all this is a
public safety measure crime is a
problem for our state and when
witnesses are uncooperative
because it's been re traumatized
by the system it's supposed to
give them justice it just leads
to prosecuted crimes which only
emboldens the criminal element
in New Mexico opponents of this
legislation would have you
believe that defendants won't
get a fair shake unless the
defense attorney gets a chance
to aggressively interrogate
child victims prior to trial
that's just not true victims of
crimes especially violent crimes
child victims in short our most
vulnerable victims should be
protected and supported during
the criminal justice process not
further victimize the
unnecessary and frankly
traumatic interviews and as you
heard earlier these victims
aren't subjected to pre trial
interviews in most other states
makes no sense to be due in New
Mexico we are to support victims
thank you.
Thank you
allies Sulton.
Yes thank you madam chair
members of the Judiciary
Committee I'm here at as a
mother of a two year old and a
four year old who were sexually
abused by their father but I'm
here today as a native New
Mexican and a mother and today
before I came here I ask my
children if they had any remarks
they wanted me to share with you
my daughter who's now eight said
tell them that it ruined my
childhood no kid should have to
go through what we did please
change this law my son who is
now ten said I've never gotten
my anxiety under the control
under control since the trial
I'm a nervous wreck please don't
make other kids go through this
process I'm gonna be really
shortened to the point during
the two and a half years that we
waited for trial my kids were in
for your approximately twelve
times each time they were
interviewed they were re
traumatized and with all due
respect the current system is
not working for our child
victims and our most vulnerable
victims please we'd be support
this measure and I do pass
respectively for H. B. one
seventy three I appreciate your
time.
Thank you John Crawley.
Name is joined valley I'm tired
of just a matter of New Mexico
State University in criminal
justice I started working in
child abuse issues back within
that budget plan most average
the first child advocacy centers
I'm one of the things we found
when we started interviewing
victims is that a I just of
going through the criminal
justice system was actually lose
and miss H. and I the and the
office of this bill appears to
carefully balance the interest
of the defendant there is no one
benefits a wrongful conviction
but it also reduces minimizes
the damage both to trial begins
and honorable adults so I
strongly encourage you to
consider making sure that we
protect these victims and and
then that amount does it all
out.
In frustration and pain and let
the
offend the op thank you very
much thank you Carrie Leigh
Cloutier chair culture.
Hello this is Carrie Leigh
Cloutier and the CEO of the
Travis county casa program the
Travis county children's
advocacy center and the Artesia
children's advocacy center I
echo what is been said by
previous speakers and expanding
strongly for this bill thank
you.
Thank you I don't see any other
hand oh wait one more Melissa.
Hi good afternoon this is
Melissa you are I'm the director
of the New Mexico children's
alliance which is a program of
the New Mexico coalition of
sexual assault programs and I to
stand on behalf of our
membership our eleven children's
advocacy centers and their
satellite programs throughout
the state of New Mexico
independent nonprofit
organizations strongly in
support of this bill to avoid re
traumatizing children in a way
that is still constitutional and
is an alignment with the most of
states and the rest of the
country and.
The federal government so thank
you for your your time and we
are strong in support of this
thank you thank you that
concludes our public comment
time you have a brief concluding
comments before we go to the
committee Madam chair in my
haste I did not introduce my co
chair New Hampshire state if we
could do that sure madam chair
members of the committee I
jumped out of this bill is a co
sponsor based on the fact that
when I was a two year prosecutor
us probably the only female in
the office and that's why I got
put on these cases but I
specialize in this area for most
of my career and and I don't
think people realize that
there's about a forty percent
conviction rate with crimes
against children and they're the
most difficult cases to
prosecute and the most difficult
cases to get convictions on and
it partly is because of all this
I've put kids on the stand and
interviews from the age of five
to the age of seventeen and what
what you try to do and and I
disagree with what a lot of
people have been saying is you
have a multi disciplinary team
and it's a team that's basically
trying to make sure this child
is giving the best interview
possible so when you do go to
the state house interviews yes
there is a prosecutor there
there's someone from children
youth and family there there is
a police officer there there's a
victim advocate but they're on
the other side of the room you
were trained forensic
interviewer who is asking
questions and then through the
your phone's we're we're
following up on those questions
and what we're trying to find
out as the who what where when
why and how this occurred we are
trying to establish and biases
are divorced going on is there
is there parental coaching it is
not like in the that team is
looking to find somebody to
prosecute they're looking for
reasons to make sure that this
child isn't making up what
they're saying and that's all
done through the interview so
after that interview the whole
goal is to to not traumatize and
over and over and I watch these
kids and get.
Into counseling and then it's
time for the defense interview
and of course the court orders
that in you get in there and you
know they have a victim advocate
now the prosecutors there but
these interview sometimes will
go on three hours four hours and
if you don't know how to
question the kid or how to give
the kid a break they just
eventually break down the start
answering the same the same for
everything yes yes yes and then
this happens over and over and
over and so yeah there ends up
being a lot more please because
the kids drop off and then
sometimes we even get requests
for another for our interview
and the judges Graham and they
go through another interview and
then basically essentially if we
get to trial they get another
four hour pounding on the stand
were these kids attention spans
are that big and they just start
answering the same to everything
and it's it's just really sad to
watch them go through this drop
out of the process because
they've been victimized over and
over and traumatized over and
over by these interviews I seen
successful cross examinations by
attorneys who have never
interviewed the kid in a pre
trial interview and they are
able to pull out those biases
and anything they need during
cross examination they have that
right to confront them and I
will say as a parent sometimes
I'm sitting there telling these
kids you got to keep going you
gotta keep going into my mind to
get this was my kid now I would
let him go through this and it's
exactly what that lady said on
the phone those kids are
traumatized they go through
counseling and they usually drop
off by trial and then you do
some type of formal plea because
you just want to get a
conviction and maybe a
registration and move on and
that is what really happens and
there is a fair way to balance
getting the information you need
and balance it with the child's
right to not be re traumatized
and I'm just speaking to you
from someone who's done this my
entire career and it's a sad sad
situation so with that madam
chair thank you.
All right we'll go to the
committee I have Representative
McQueen.
Thank you madam chair.
madam chair
Representative.
So I just by way of background I
grew up in California
high school when the McMartin
preschool scandal broke and then
lived with that in the news
dominating local news for.
Like a decade
and when it first broke the I
wasn't I was in high school as
young
I am is appalling that.
These
Creepy people ran a preschool
with molest hundreds of kids.
F. course also part.
But not until after their lives
were destroyed
and it was all based on leading
questioning of kids so I I'm
very
I'm very leery of that wall to
sign same time wanting to
protect children he is so the
this difficult bill because
the question is what's the
balance.
Madam chair of the TIRS and I I
will say in in the public
testimony I heard repeatedly
that we have to protect the
children from the perpetrators
and the offenders.
And.
You know until they're convicted
there the alleged perpetrators
and the alleged offenders and
not all of them are actually
guilty and so I think we have to
be very very careful of passing
a law to protect kids from the
perpetrators.
And just assume that they're
guilty and and I've got that
really strong I listening to the
public one woman on the phone or
on the zoom said defense
attorneys wanted to crush of
interviews.
And sells me like there's
protections into.
that's what I heard from the
office of the public defender.
So I wonder as as an attorney
but not a criminal attorney let
alone a trial attorney if you
could walk me through the
process because what I heard
from the opposition to this bill
is that there are protections in
place and that there are child
advocates and that you if an
interview is
being done improperly it can be
and.
I would think that at a I think
a lot depends on the age of the
child but.
Madam chair that I would think
an interview that the lasted
more than our should be and.
I I mean I I been around kids
that's that's a long time for
kids for hours clearly to all.
So if.
If interviews are at our lasting
for four hours or if as of this
moment woman said there were
twelve interviews.
Explain to me how that's
happening under the current
system.
Madam chair and and
Representative McQueen our guard
rails are the forensic
interviews and if I could defer
to my expert witness she can
explain what it a forensic
interview is.
Madam chair members of the
committee Madam let me just I
think I have a general
understanding with the friends
that kind of you is what I'd
like to know is how how with the
forensic interview last for four
hours with a small child or how
could there be twelve.
madam chair and and
Representative I don't believe
that they were referring to
forensic interviews they were
referring to interviews pre
trial interviews but I can defer
to my witness
Mr grace and so he can ex
explain a process to madam chair
Representative McQueen my name
is James grace and I'm the chief
deputy the the at the attorney
general's office I've been a
prosecutor for at the appellate
and trial level for about
eighteen years.
And representative madam chair
in answer to your question the
the the rule that currently
stands it's rule I I will agree
that provides that any witness
in a case must provide a
statement upon a fundamental
party.
That rule is interpreted very
broadly by our courts and that
rule is is what led to
Representative re referring to
multiple requests for interviews
and we've seen that the second
judicial district over and over
we do have our interviews that
lasts for hours of interviews of
small children that last for
hours we have leading questions
being asked in those interviews
and when a prosecutor tries to
jump in the judge orders that
the interview shall proceed
because of the rules.
And and because it is that is
interpreted so broadly and so
not only is the the.
The process in theory.
Re traumatizing the children but
in practice it is greatly
traumatized to the.
And madam chair Representative
McQueen this bill.
It would greatly benefit child
victims because it would reduce
that trauma but is by no means
radical.
New Mexico is an out liar New
Mexico is one of tier of excuse
me Representative Senator just a
few if I can do to reduce
respond to my question you're
advocating for the bill I
appreciate that but I'm trying
to understand it better so
rather than.
Going off into the of the kids
to see if we could just have a
little back and forth banter I
appreciate that so if there's a
rule that to being interpreted
broadly.
By the way mineral you know to
you know for.
Incapacitated adults or young
children the court and you know
again not colonel Terry the
court shown pose.
Appropriate time restrictions
and other pertinent why not.
Target what we're trying to do
to the outcome we're trying to
get which is to protect the
children.
Madam chair representative of
the queen I think it's a matter
of perspective.
To the criminal rules are
adopted by the New Mexico
Supreme Court and rule five five
oh three as part of the
discovery process and the
perspective in the discovery
process is that there should be
as broad discovery as possible.
The perspective for this body I
think it is guided by the
victim's rights act and that is
in the New Mexico constitution
as article two twenty section
twenty for the New Mexico
sufficient provides that the
victims of crime have rates in
addition to defend its having
rights and some of those rights
are to dignity and privacy and
they are to protection from the
accused.
So from the perspective of this
body this bill would implement
the right of victims to refuse
an interview and and that is the
right that is recognized in a
vast majority of states across
the country as well as the
federal government.
Representative McQueen madam
chair I hope that answers your
question.
Implement mentor a third of.
Okay it he did answer my
question but now I'm confused
the rate of.
The right to refuse an interview
so a a we're talking about.
Children in incapacitated adults
Sir there's a gentleman here for
what is
If you were if you didn't fall
under that definition could you
refuse an interview.
Madam chair representative
McQueen not in New Mexico you
cannot refuse an interview in
New Mexico okay so compels you
to provide an interview that's
what separates Mexico for the
rest of the country.
And and in fact madam chair
Representative queen that's what
distinguishes State verses a
rona which was referred to by
mistrust could.
From this bill state versus a
rona was in nineteen seventy
nine K. that relied on federal
authority and said that a trial
court cannot prevent the
defendant.
From attempting to speak to
prosecution witnesses.
And Representative again relied
on federal authority for that
and federal authorities clear
that that's the case the
prosecution and the court can't
say two witnesses or victims
don't speak to the defense.
But what the court and the
prosecution can say everywhere
else in the country except to
other states.
Is that.
If the defendant contiguity the
defense counsel context you you
have the right to refuse to talk
to them.
A prosecutor in the court also
witness to not talk but they can
say you have that right it's
their choice elsewhere so again
here and and.
Going further into the land of
confusion if if a.
A prosecutor if a defense
attorney wants to speak to a.
The victim.
I would assume they go through
the court is that not right.
Madam Representative McQueen I'm
sorry your question was it
County prosecutor speak to
victims either but when you're
when you're in court you go
through.
The court or the at least the
other turns you're not just
contacting people right.
Madam chair representative
McQueen
would assist belong to parties
but the way the system works is
that when witnesses are named on
a witness list for a party that
party is obligated to provide
access to the witnesses and so
if a witness is listed on the
prosecution's witness list the
defense counsel contact the
prosecutor and says I want an
interview on the state or here
three dates.
And I want to interview.
If they want a second or third
interview and the prosecution
objects to that that is when we
go to the court but it doesn't
go to the court initially.
Okay
Madam chair expert so you say
New Mexico is an out liar in
that
There can be these interviews to
begin with of of anyone not just
children
If there wasn't an interview.
With the child still be and and
they went to trial with the
child be put on the stand.
Madam chair representative queen
yes.
And madam chair expert.
Couldn't we have a more
protective environment in an
interview.
That being put on the stand.
Madam chair representative
between the way the process
works right now is that there's
no judge in the room there's no
neutral.
Arbiter in the room with the pre
in the pre trial interview it is
the defense attorney.
Asking questions the loan and
the prosecutor and maybe a
victim advocates are present in
the room.
But they're not asking
questions.
But my point being
In in the context of an
interview with.
Advocate for the the child with
advocates for the victim present
whether court appointed or.
Privately hired.
Isn't there more leeway to cut
off questioning.
I I recognize that there's not
the judge an independent arbiter
in the room but.
The.
I would imagine if a child is
put on the stand and
in this house uncomfortable
answering a question.
Which may be very uncomfortable.
In open court lots of strangers
around.
They would not be in the
position to say no we can't
answer that right now.
Representative interview.
I think that might happen is
that in my.
And my incorrect.
Madam chair representative queen
if a witness refuses to answer
questions in a witness interview
the judge can suppress the
testimony.
Under the current rule and that
is what happens if witnesses do
not answer questions from
defense attorneys defense
attorneys filed motions to
suppress that witness's
testimony.
And madam chair and expert can
the witness refused to answer
that question in court.
Madam chair representative queen
no they cannot that's mentor
that's my point I mean to me.
It seems to me like these pre
trial interviews would be a way
of defusing that aggressiveness
in court.
If if in court is the only.
Opportunity to speak with the
witness the question with this
interview the witness.
That I would expected to be more
aggressive.
Potentially to the detriment of
that witness.
Madam chair representative queen
my experience is that the pre
trial interviews compound the
trauma they do not lessen.
Okay Madam chair of
Representative is the experts so
it's under the proposed bill
under what circumstances if any
could a defendant interview with
this pre trial is it just taken
off the table.
Madam chair representative queen
I know it's not off the table
This bill would apply first of
all only two children.
Only two child victims
specifically.
and it also would only apply if
the child victim has provided a
safe house interview or forensic
interview.
The two circuits it.
And also chair representative
queen if the child chose to give
a in an interview with the
defense attorney that would be
the trials for the regarding
stores.
So a mentor to assert so.
Another thing that the the we're
talking about a situation where
where the the
The the witness is his child so
we're not talking about the
tilts
In a defense attorney wanted to
interview the child.
Is there a process by which that
interview can happen if if the.
As soon the child's not making
decisions with their family the
family doesn't want the child
there.
What is it or is it that's
simply their option.
Madam chair representative queen
eight in the best interest is
right now that that is what
happens is their option in in
New Mexico if they say I do not
want to give it the difference
interview because the parent
believes the trial will be
traumatized again there checked
their testimony would be
suppressed under this bill.
Current in the trials refused to
give an interview that is that
that would be there right and
then the defense attorney could
call that individual a trial and
cross examine that individual.
so I think madam chair sorry I I
just think.
It it seems to me interviews
with proper protections.
We tend to be less traumatic
than cross again cross
examination of.
But failed not my area of
expertise but that certainly.
I believe.
The.
There was a manager there spoke
testimony about aggressive
interviews do under the current
system do.
Child advocates are chip the
child's attorney have the
ability to and interviews that
are in their judgment across.
Madam chair representative
McQueen they have the ability to
go to the judge and argue that
there has been improper conduct
in my experience those arguments
are not well heard in court
courts read the rule as meaning
the defense counsel gets to ask
what they want to ask.
Madam chair and expert is there.
It would seem reasonable to me
that
advocates for child could could
just limit the duration of the
interview is there process for
that.
Madam chair representative of
the queen there is a process for
that again they would object to
the judge and then it would be
the judge's role to decide under
the rule whether there was
improper conduct.
In the rule does not specify any
links of time on the that would
limit the to interview it meant
chair the experts with that.
Could the
advocates for the victim.
seek that protection ahead of
the area.
Madam chair representative queen
no they would during the
interview.
Madam chair at Oxford
One of the members of the public
mention twelve interviews is is
that.
The I. so I don't understand why
there would be twelve.
Madam chair representative the
queen twelve would be unusual
but multiple interviews would
not be unusual and and it is as
I mentioned it's it's it's a
compounding effect.
Each interview has its own from.
And so to allow the child to be
interviewed.
Once is dramatic to allow a
child to be interviewed twice.
It it's exponential.
The adventure and says an expert
I I still I I guess I come back
to
Wondering why we can't just
build in protections why we can
I'd like I I I guess the rules
adopted by the Supreme Court so
it's not our rural with their
rule but by statute we can
specify that.
when granting interviews for
The child or a.
Educated incapacitated adult.
The court.
Shell consider reasonable
restrictions on duration and
frequency.
Madam chair representative with
queen that that would part be
one possible Avenue but again I
think it's a matter of
perspective the New Mexico
Supreme Court has rulemaking
power they have the power to
enact rules of procedure they
don't protect substantive
rights.
So the court is not in a
position to provide a
substantive right to victims to
refuse an interview neither are
they in a position to provide a
substantive right to defendants
to have a right to an interview
if and madam chair next for I I
guess I recognize that
distinction and that's why I'm
saying by statute we could
direct the court to do so.
Madam chair representative queen
that we correct.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you representative of line
for.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair it's pretty unusual
for me to begin to agree with
the several of the.
People that spoke particularly
those that usually on the
opposite side of the I'm
concerned about this legislation
from several perspectives
Madam chair and representative
you spoke about victims of
violent crimes being
Re traumatized and then you
discussed.
I'm focused on children.
And so my question is is this
bill focused on children.
Madam chair representative and
this bill is focused on children
in incapacitated adults.
And madam chair and
representative of all the
testimony focused on children.
And yet we have a lot of this
bill.
That discusses are giving the
same protections to what's
defined as incapacitated adults
and I might add that one of the
disabilities is chronic use of
drugs and alcohol.
hi.
Madam chair and representative
of.
I have a real concern that this
is much broader than children I
think there's probably a dozen
lawyers in here who could craft
a bill.
That was very focused narrow.
And could insert a compelling
state interest when it comes to
children.
This bill goes well beyond that
does it not.
Madam chair representative at.
It is for children and
incapacitated adults so in that
regard it goes beyond children.
And Madam chair representative
because that I think the I think
we.
Do not have a narrowly focused
bill.
I think we have a a much broader
bill and you are basically.
Us.
For legislation that creates
special rules that.
Somewhat go against the
confrontation clause in the
constitution
and you want that applied
broadly where in fact the
testimony as all narrow and so I
I have a real concern with the
breath of the bill and for that
reason I have a hard time come
around because.
I think the constitution when
we.
Deviate from the constitution
and the courts have have clearly
health.
That when we deal with people's
rights.
We have to narrowly focus that.
Breath of the bill and it has
to.
Advance a compelling state
interest and I think you can get
there with the children I don't
think you can get there with as
you've defined incapacitated
adult witnesses
because yes it creates a whole
host of of folks some of whom I
would argue should not be
protected but by this this bill
so I think you have a problem
there Madam chair
representative.
What public policies being
advanced by the line and accuse
from confronting an adult
accuser.
Madam chair representative I'll
defer to my experts this.
Madam chair representative
Nibert.
this bill includes educated
incapacitated adults because
this bill is focused on trauma
and vulnerability.
These are the individuals who
cannot protect themselves they
have other people protecting
them.
And they need protection from
the trauma the commute posed by
the judicial system.
Madam chair representative
Seems to me that with respect to
adults.
You have.
Less of a compelling state
interest children.
You do not want to traumatize
the children further because you
want them to become.
Responsible citizens and and
have a bright future.
Adults they made their way in
life the fact some of these
adults.
On it use of drugs or alcohol
they've made choices for
themselves that it put them in
the very situation that you're
concerned with.
And I may be incapacitated
because of their own decisions
in life and what are you
protecting them from.
When they're making accusations
you're you're restricting a
defendant's rights.
Giving them special treatment
but they've because their own
problems so so I'm I'm kind of
wondering what we're what we're
trying to do here
And and that's my my concern is
that you're treating adults like
kids even though all the
testimony focused on children
and I'm there.
I think that there's a dozen or
more lawyers I could craft a
bill that would be narrowly
focused and assert that
compelling state interests with
respect to children and do more
less what you want to do I can't
get there when you include a
class of adults then you've done
that in this bill can you
jeopardize in my opinion the
ability for this to be upheld in
the pop possibly jeopardize the
ability of passes committee
because of it.
Madam chair and representative
Nibert thank you for that my
daughter has autism she's thirty
four years old I I am her
guardian.
If she were raped I would still
be her guardian and my job would
be to protect her rights as an
incapacitated adult.
Well you're madam chair
representative your your
List of disabilities would goes
much beyond that and I I I thank
you for the a real concern
because you are.
Changing.
A provision in the constitution
you giving.
Some special treatment and I
think when you do that just like
other bills we've heard in this
committee
when you do so.
You have to be very narrowly
focused and and I think you
jeopardize the of the efficacy
of your of your bill and so I
have some tremendous concerns
are madam chair and
representative thank you.
Thank you speaker Martinez thank
you madam chair and thank you
for the very.
substantive discussion
Madam chair representative is
I I see why you're bringing this
bill forward and I think the two
of you.
In your very different
professional capacities see this
stuff on the ground.
But I don't want madam chair in
the presenters is for us to.
Fall into the trap of inaction
simply because of how complex
this is I think we've heard
really good comments from.
Speakers on this bill up one
recommendation I would have
madam chair to to the Sanchez is
is to maybe separate out the
child part.
And maybe take a pass to the
bills need to be a different
bill where we address some of
the concerns that were raised.
that's a recommendation I would
make so that we don't lose sight
of what we're trying to do here
which is child forensic
interviews
no madam chair if if
It appears in different places
in the bill so I think it be
hard to just the men on the fly.
we probably need to do a
committee substitute so that we
take those parts out and re
letter and we number everything
accordingly but that would be my
my main recommendation
I just don't want this body to
fall into the trap of inaction.
Given how complex this is
I think we all agree up here I
don't think I know we all agree
along with the sponsors that it
is important to not return the
ties children it is also
important to protect the rights
of the defendants I don't think
those are we to exclusive and I
think we get to a place where
this bill can move forward with
some really some pretty minor
changes in terms of substance
obviously more complicated in
bill form because of how it's
written but I've got all the
faith in the world in a drafters
that they can do that and get
that to us here in due time
madam chair thank you.
Thank you Representative Eli.
Thank you madam chair
I I share similar concerns when
I look at of section two on page
two paragraph a I mean it.
Wonder talking about if you even
if you thought the best policy
was to protect these and
capacity to witnesses you're
limited to be lonely chair to
get by a court they've been
turned determined by a court
there's a whole lot of adult.
people that.
I have never been found
Incapacitated through the court
system but beyond that.
You include partial.
And also physical illness so it
you could have a scenario under
this definition is a reach that
accorded chairman that that
they're partially incapacitated
due to a physical illness and
unable to manage their personal
affairs but mentally they may
still be completely okay and
you've now looped in that whole
group of people and I'm just
thinking of from you know I
don't practice criminal defense
law but if I and this is
something I would probably try
to pinpoint so I I think I agree
with what I've heard my
colleagues in terms of the
adjudicating possible witness
and maybe you do you do in a
separate bill in another session
you you have some protections
for folks that have already ones
where there's a guardianship or
conservatorship for both in in
place because there's some
protections that go through that
process meaning that.
The there's been a physician
that's interviewed the the
responded there's a jail it's
been appointed there's a whole
process to protect someone's
rights when you go through
courtship and insertion present
dole so maybe you you could
tighten up in that way in the
future bill.
You know and then you know madam
chair I think also I just need
to have.
Maybe just a.
If I understand typically how we
do things so I need to get my
questions no underlying bill
okay fair enough.
So then helpful because it might
eliminate what they might need
to change okay fair enough
so madam chair on page six.
Section four.
This this is getting to.
The point of whether these.
forensics statements interview
should be admissible in court.
and madam chair we have
basically a standard of
trustworthiness which I think is
important it's the most
important.
But that I'm just thinking if
Defense Council it also would be
very interested in thoroughness.
Because then the reason I say
that as we have a neutral
trained.
question that conducts the
interview.
But.
It may not necessarily be
thorough it may be trustworthy
there may be an angle that I as
defense counsel in my weird way
of thinking that I I think of a
line of questioning that just
didn't come up and and there
might be a stone this left
unturned and so I wonder as you
go back and do revisit Committee
so if if we need to have any new
ones in there about thoroughness
out of out of fairness to
defense counsel because that I
do understand this this actually
doesn't take away your right to
to cross examine and confront
your cues are it doesn't.
So I think that's a misnomer
what it does is it limits your
ability to pre trial to provide
to prepared defense that's what
this really does now I
understand the presentation is
saying well it's not to the
extent that it outweighs the
harm that's done to the child
and I get that that argument
makes sense to me
but I come from the civil
context where I don't put a
witness on the stand unless I
know here she's gonna say
verbatim and if they veer off of
that and I've got a deposition
deposition transcript record
holder feed the fire.
You're you're in essence not
allowing that process to happen
for defending this case but
again it doesn't come the level
of
confrontation clause I don't
believe so one point there.
Madam chair and representative
comment on that really quickly
just make sure are you looking
for something that when you say
thoroughness like if defense
requests an additional interview
that maybe it could go back to
the forensic examiner for that
line of questioning or chest
when you say thoroughness I mean
there's always going to be
something that somebody thinks
that madam chair representative
but I guess I'm thinking if if
you're a defense attorney in New
like what they didn't ask Miss
could it be possible that we do
some type of adjustment to where
if the court orders it that I
think the part of the issues
making sure we have a good
examiner who's asking the
questions properly and not
traumatizing the child so we
have done multiple oasis's
safehouse interviews is that the
right you're looking at or in my
office the sales manager and I
appreciate the question so this
is in the context basically were
RT at trial or maybe there's a
motion filed notices given is
how I I read this so not the
prosecution's gonna give notice
to introduce this interview so
maybe there's a motion filed by
defense counsel say look yeah
maybe trustworthy but they
barely scratch the surface and
it's going to be misleading if
it's played to the jury
something along those lines and
the reason why is because there
was a whole series of relevant
questions that were never asked
and so maybe the judge rules
well you can bring that on cross
examination maybe not maybe that
toss the whole thing.
so just this idea of the concept
of thoroughness and then on the
the section above same page page
six the the right to refuse the
interview.
So we have a scenario where.
We're saying that the the victim
cannot be compelled to give a
pretrial statement or pre trial
interview my question is what
what about a scenario where.
The court is found that the
interview was not trustworthy
and so it's not admissible so
there's a finding there's a
there's a motion in limine
that's been filed the court said
nope not gonna allows because
not trustworthy that's the
finding.
Now Medicine ROS Defense Council
where.
The test was not trustworthy and
I don't know what the test was
going to be but this paragraph
seems to say will be even in
that scenario where you have no
trustworthy statement.
Defense counsel still can do a
pre trial interview and you have
to going to trial not going put
the test someone's going to be
of of the victim.
So any thoughts about that
conundrum.
Madam chair representative so
you're saying they've gone
through the forensic
the judges found it's not
trustworthy so therefore I would
think the remedy correct me if
I'm wrong with the with a lot he
would be allowing than an
interview.
Madam chair I think that would
be the typical remedy is starkly
but this says shall not be
compelled I don't think the
court has the right to.
To overturn the statute when we
put in terms like that.
Chair representative going I
think
as Representative suggested
there could be language added to
this that would allow under rare
circumstances for an additional
forensic interview to be to be
done
I think in terms of preparation
trial preparation the bill
captures the idea that.
Once a child is given a
reciprocal for that statement
and then the attorney has the
material with which to impeach
the witness.
And whether it's trustworthy or
not the child is more likely to
say the same thing at trial.
The child is not present for
that because reasons ruling and
is improved privy to that
judge's ruling and so in terms
of trial preparation I don't see
it as being a different
situation but then again as
Representative suggested that
maybe some some language that
could be added to address madam
chair I I think that would.
My perception make the bill
better because I respectfully
disagree because and here's why
I say that because if I.
If I watch the interview as
defense counsel and I have my
clients don't some totally
different I file a motion to
have that not admissible the
court doesn't hold an
evidentiary hearing argument is
that the rules you know what
you're right this is not
trustworthy if you don't then
allow me to go and ask questions
to figure out what is it that
that wasn't brought up or what
is that's not trustworthy that's
a theory I think that that is
going to come up at trial if you
don't give Defense Council
opportunity that I think then at
that point you really limiting
their ability to defend
themselves to trial so I agreed
the I mean you folks those
better ninety the chances of
these being found untrustworthy
I'm assuming is microscopic
right but in the event that a
court finds that that some
trustworthy then at that point
what you're really saying is
that that the judge or the
defence counsel hostages go off
of the untrustworthy interview
when it comes time to preparing
for trial in defense of their
clients so maybe just some
language and then you can you
mean to say you know other than
you know except for when
there's an order finding that
the the forensic was
untrustworthy and then Defense
Council gets one bite at the
apple not twelve that to me is
egregious and I think you put in
statute limit to one.
and and be very tight and how
you do that so I think because
that's the most of the comments
You know I think that overall
really what this comes down to
me don't comes down to for me
and in al-sisi's.
We need to make sure that we're
protecting the constitutional
rights of all citizens because
we're talking about felony
charges retirement take away
your civil liberties
but we have it removed the right
to confront and cross examine
the witness at the end of the
day we really haven't and so I
think protecting the child
making sure the child is not
important it's it's important
enough to where I think in these
limited circumstances we can say
look you if we find that the
safehouse interviews trustworthy
than that's what you're going to
use for for for trial so thank
you madam chair.
Representative Chasey.
Thank you madam chair thank you
all very much
The having this discussion for a
few years and
Hi I think I have.
Had reservations that have been
perceived as trying to
accommodate defendants.
Frankly after my.
My most recent case before I
finish doing the
Abuse and neglect cases which I
did for years
has been more concerned about
the prosecutors getting what the
prosecutor needs to convict
someone.
I really am worried about that
Representative Representative
some children who had a very in
adequate forensic interview.
And in fact I think that CYFD is
in charge of all forensic
interviews in the state and I if
there are other contractors I
don't know who they are but has
guardian Adlai item for Children
interviews K. I was entitled to
see if it wasn't something the
prosecutor could have used.
To.
To get what the prosecutor
native expanding fast.
I
just learned.
Because there was not it's early
indictment in that case all
charges have been dismissed.
My children's therapist had said
that they would need a
restraining order from their
father to age twenty five.
That's not happening.
He's out we'll go into the
details it's pretty discouraging
to me.
But
It the issue and I think
everyone's got a right now it's
not confrontation is due process
that.
you you really need to find that
I've I've been frustrated over
the years because I've been told
we're one of only five states
without a good law.
Nobody has given me a good Lara
look at.
To say here's what works here's
what fits with the state does in
here in this provides due
process for everyone I don't
want these people walking away
from what they're doing if they
did it and I'll guarantee you in
the case were hi Representative
Zel girls.
He did it.
So what do you do when there is
in adequate forensic interview.
So
I think that maybe you could set
up a pre trial interview.
That can show that you put in
statute to shall be conducted in
a manner place to protect the
child from unnecessary trauma
and instead of Harris.
Interviewing party shall conduct
the interview the matter that
will protect the child privacy
well being of the child.
Taking of special needs of the
child into account and so forth.
So I've seen
I had another case why
Representative father and
In the case and he ended up
being the one who was a
reunified with
His daughter's.
The well my career was in
prison.
There was another male involved
with the family and his sexually
abuse one of the children the
judge in Valencia County and
this is just a civil case right
because it's it's it's in abuse
and neglect cases.
Was really good in Houston
though child witness protection
act and.
He had
The child in his chambers and
then all the lawyers when and
and that the child and
The child's mother and the child
starting line and sat with her
and she answered questions from
the judge's chambers and so we
weren't dealing with the same
kind of pre trial interviews and
so forth that you have to deal
with their but it was it was
very sensitive and it was very
effective and the child I think
was not
Unnecessarily traumatized but
she needed to say what she said
to the judge in order to for the
judge to find that the
The what everyone's stepfather
had
In fact abused her so and we
seen the courts.
You are creating a child witness
protection I also.
It I've had criminal defense
attorneys tell me that.
They don't see the at the child
witness protection act being
used that often by the
prosecution if you want to talk
about that for a minute no
collect some of their
suggestions for you.
Madam chair representative to
see I I've never use that act
as prosecutors as far as like
you mentioned the interviews not
I guess.
Ask your do you think their
office our interviews done by
children you to family that they
don't believe our criminal
necessarily and so I know that
we're not a participant in every
single interview but we are in
our area And Madam chair
representative we have CYFD but
we have a we have what's called
the rise and it's a it's a
separate Senator that just
specializes and
sexual assault exams it's a one
stop shop you know you can you
can do your oasis singer sexual
assault exam and do it all at
one time so I've never used that
type of
situation I'm not I'm trying to
understand how that would work
because
Madam chair representative
sounds like you have a judge in
the.
Room in that situation no
you madam chair this was.
The judge was what this is way
after the fact and I I didn't
actually ever even see that for
insecurity I didn't need to my
client wasn't implicated it with
I'm thinking of the one where I
represented the children and I
saw the interview that CYFD
conducted in your right
it was it was for the purpose of
making sure they should be
taking kids into custody but it
really was the basis of the
criminal charges.
Although
My the children's corner
G.R.T. .
in that particular matter was a
former
assistant district attorney and
he thought that there could be
some other why some eggs excited
utterances that could be entered
into evidence of what the
children sent to the school
nurse and and so forth.
But I never saw.
They needed to have a much
earlier interview in that case
then they did and it needed to
hold up in court so that they
could potentially prosecute this
person.
And I I.
I honestly have to say I think
it's more traumatizing for
children.
And I don't I don't know this
but it must be were traumatizing
to see them get away with it
then to feel bad about being
interviewed again.
I I really am concerned about
that
So.
I hope we can figure out the
other suggestion in here was.
If they're a bunch of different
parties in court were to
determine that the other parties
involved have shared or similar
interests in the matter then a
presiding court could.
in order the separate parties to
participate in the same pre
trial interview so that you
don't have to have one interview
for each of the parties so
that's another mechanism that
you could put into place.
Madam chair representative at
that that's what we did in our
at six these at CYFD we had
every entity in there for the
purpose not re traumatizing the
child.
The defense can't be in that
process.
That's the board stations to
have as many many of the players
in the room as possible.
Yes madam chair representative I
would just add that in in some
cases whether multiple
defendants to the multiple party
situation it's really the
defense attorney's choice
whether to press participate in
a shared pre trial interview or
multiple pre trial interviews
and so that could be a situation
that we were lied to
successive interviews in under
the current rules.
Madam chair representative.
So I I think that gives you an
idea and
you know we could perhaps make
some more suggestions for you
but I
Yeah we're such an outlier.
Let's look somebody show us
what's being done elsewhere
that's so perfect.
So that we can at least look at
some model legislation and.
Please do not interpret.
Our concerns and criticisms as
not caring about children being
traumatized I don't want them
victimized anymore thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative Romero thank you
madam chair thank you for
bringing this for welcome to our
committee Representative
I just have a list of concerns
shared with everybody so try to
keep it to the ones that I just
from the again due process side
and and some of the clarity that
I need to to feel good about
this bill one is just on the for
forensic interview
understanding where in the
process that comes in when law
enforcement can be consulted and
when I think the just grappling
with when it when it happens and
that that that's pretty much the
you know Madame place that was
discussed on the other is any
sort of qualifications for that
forensic interview were we don't
have any language about that do
they get certified by CYFD do
they is there any sort of
wrangling around who that is and
what qualifications they have
and what their job is really in
the process all right now we
just it seems like there's just
kind of loose guidelines as far
as what we want them to do but
not so much what that what we
need them to do I suppose
then just I think just
parameters around what the
interview needs to be about
you know where are the guard
rails surrounding what we're
qualifying is something that is
true and accurate verses
you no doubt for inconsistent
and how that would be used in
the in the process as well and
what are the qualifications for
something like that and then I
think and I'm I'm really just
focused on children as well I
think a good agreement with a
lot of the my colleagues
concerns how do we just get to a
place where we're in agreement
with the the.
A child interview
and then thinking about teens
and alleged victims that's a
totally different category I
think when we're looking at the
law and how the issues with
younger children verses teens
and older children is there a
differential there and if so
what does that look like
In which case I think those are
really my my concerns that would
just be really great when we're
going through that that
Just a list of what we're
looking at in the process would
really help me understand and
perhaps clarify on that due
process piece and on that
confrontation piece that I think
but please give me a lot of
heartburn but thank you so much
for bringing this and I
completely share my concerns and
hope that you'll come back with
something.
Representative brief we.
Thank you madam chair and
And Representative so I've seen
this you know from a police
officer side where are the
interviews or.
How do I say so intense I guess
that the Victor decides not to
prosecute and that's been one of
the things that I think is the
abuse that you're trying to
Event I think that you all can
fix this and bring it back but I
had an interesting thought when
Representative Chasey was
talking I wonder.
If the testimony for the child.
Shouldn't that we shouldn't
suggest to the court not to say
absolutely but suggest to the
court that it is done in camera.
that might be you know of the
Courts kind of an intimidating
place and that was my only
comment thank you.
A just a couple comments.
I was concerned about the
definition of forensic
interview.
because it's open ended it
doesn't have anything other than
the state it's legally sound
sensitive gathering of
information.
And this will be the
battleground if this bill were
to pass this will be where
defense counsel goes after the
soft spot in the case and if you
want the case to proceed quickly
which I imagine you would
because it's not a good
experience and it's very
traumatizing for the child and
those involved.
Your I think you're opening up
another day a door with this
definition it's not.
It's just
it's it feels a little bit of
being in the eyes of the
beholder as to what some
sensitive legally sound
by competently trained well
that's going to be debatable
I and neutral that's going to be
debatable you what research and
practice inform techniques
that's going to be debatable so
every one of those things is
going to be subject to challenge
and I don't know I imagine many
of the folks are defended by
public defenders.
And if that's so what kind of a
budget as a public defenders
have to be able to hire experts
to to look at this I have a
suspicion it's limited and if
it's limited then you're opening
up a defense later on an appeal
that they didn't have affect of
assistance of counsel because
they don't have access to the
tools that they need to be able
to challenge the forensic
interview so I you know I just
want to highlight that for you
because I think I think hundred
percent this is all designed and
appropriately so it to be as
supportive of the child as
possible but there could be some
unexpected outcomes in the
effort to do that and I think
I'm echoing some might.
input in terms of that it's
definitely well intended but
concerning and in terms of some
of the vagueness and so on
and lastly I was concerned
about.
This alternative testimony and I
didn't I'm trying to understand
how that plays out use the video
as the alternate testimony in
the attorney didn't wasn't able
to participate in the forensic
interviews so I don't get that
so what's an alternative
testimony.
Madam chair department.
Madam chair they're two
different
Two different pieces of this
bill one is the existing
legislation that addresses video
deposition video depositions and
that's that's done under
Maryland versus pregnant state
Supreme Court case and there are
multiple provisions in New
Mexico law that allow for video
depositions is our current
priest procedural there's
another statute and the section
addressing from the sexual
penetration that allows a and
and this is the third one
prosecutors often don't use them
as Representative re uh
mentioned because.
I mean for one thing yes we're
trying to protect children from
trauma but we're also as as I
think Representative Chasey said
we're also trying to secure a
conviction which helps these
children as well and their their
testimonies more impactful than
video deposition but that those
are separate pieces of this bill
madam chair and so the the
admissibility of a of a forensic
interview is separate from a
video deposition that would be a
substitute for testimony so the
the.
section four on page six.
Section eight
that subsection requires that
the child testify.
Before the forensic interview
can be admitted in court.
under this under this provision
and so that that's a separate
thing and then if you if you
move over to
Section.
Section seven which is on page
nine standards for determining
whether there can be an
alternative method for testimony
that has nothing to do with
forensic interviews and so
that's about that's about trauma
from testifying in court or
trauma from testifying in the
presence of the defendant and
their special special procedures
that have to be put in place in
order to allow video deposition
or for example live remote
testimony which could be allowed
under Maryland versus correct as
well but those are those are
different issues and so the the
alternative testimony doesn't
involve a forensic interview at
all okay so is the defense
attorney present during this
alternative testimony then other
yes they are they are present
and they are able to cross
examine and they are whether the
defendant is present in the same
room depends on whether the
trial court finds that the child
be traumatized by being in the
presence of the defendant
only if there is that finding
maybe would be the defendant be
in another room.
Okay but the defendant would be
able to list watch and listen
and communicate with defense
counsel regards okay all right
thanks for that clarification
well I think you have gotten
some feedback
Just a little.
But we appreciate your efforts
in this regard and I'm sure if
you have any questions of any of
the folks who are commenting on
what you feel free to reach out
to them and and provide
additional guy is yes speaker
chair real quickly that there
will be a group of people that
are gonna be getting together
immediately after the start
working on the subject to with a
lot of the suggestions that were
made
and will we'll be in touch to
make sure that that happens
thank you thank you thanks
thanks for your time and
participation appreciate it so.
Of house bill one fifty three
before we start I want to say
that
House Bill three ten was ruled
at the request of the sponsor.
So will after one fifty three
will go to to.
Two twenty nine it's time
permitting because I know that
we have to break I bet six.
Yes all right.
Public folder.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee thank
you for your my bill this
afternoon madam chair members of
the committee there is a floor
there is a committee substitute.
What the substitute did was
address some of the concerns
that were
voiced during the house ag in
water committee joining me today
is Mr Taylor booty he is the
chief of staff for the turning
general's office and also Mr T.
colder is still he is the
livestock producers I know we
have lots of people here that
are anxious to hear this bill.
Madam and I hope everybody has
had a chance to look at the
committee substitutes what's the
two oh two number two two five
three one zero point one.
The someone want to move on.
Okay for discussion okay we've
got it for okay and madam chair
the main risk areas of the.
Meals that are changed or start
on page three.
Line nineteen okay.
Livestock means any domestic or
domesticated animal or animals
that are used are raised on a
farm or ranch and exotic animals
in captivity and includes horses
**** mules cattle sheep goats
swine by and poetry ostriches
the muse ray is Campbell it's
have a farm service.
The day.
Server that does not include
canine or feline animals.
The second change the.
Critics of the built ins on page
four continuing on page five
when it was talking about the
value of the stolen livestock.
Two thousand five hundred
dollars or less is guilty of a
third degree felony.
For the value of the stolen
livestock greater than two
thousand five hundred dollars is
guilty of a second degree felony
provided that if multiple
livestock crystal with the
cumulative value greater than
twenty thousand dollars that the
debates livestock show
constitute this separate pants
up to three charges per currents
and those are the main changes
madam chair members of the
committee.
Thank you Representative let's
go to the audience of those we
wishing to speak in opposition
to the bill please raise your
hand if you're in the audience.
All right anyone anyone online
wishing to speak in opposition
to the bill please raise your
hand.
Those wishing to speak in
support of the bill please raise
your hand are right we'll start
over here and then move in that
direction so then.
You raise your hands.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee from
all of the car loan on the
executive director for the New
Mexico livestock board as an
agency we do support this bill
the reason being is that we
believe that serves many
variables when it comes to the
theft of livestock for example
all use cattle as an example
you know we feel Carroll you
don't just feel what have you
just steal all the years to see
if you're in the capitol earlier
that.
the state level you know you
don't additional W. sale still
all of our all basically all
seem and that he'll be providing
to provide faster in the years
to come.
So dealing with life's our and
it is entirely different we also
think that this was trying to be
fair across the board that you
can have many variables and live
far because she mentioned there
from the poultry which is very
different than stealing cattle
so we think this is providing
more of a fair and even support
and justice for the producers
that they have stolen animal.
Thank you thank you.
yes ma'am families often I'm
happy because.
Are you still have limited
capital which can be up to fifty
or sixty head you still get the
one charged but yet you're
having more of a cat and for me
and living as close to finance
to Texas and there's a lot of
instances when cattle go from
New Mexico into Texas illegally
and there are still that way if
there needs to be at a higher
incidence of of of punishment if
you're still.
Thank you anyone else on the
side okay over on this side the
woman in the back and then we'll
come up this way.
Many years are registered
lobbyists for New Mexico farm
and livestock bureau of the
standing strong support for one
fifty three.
Our culture production which
includes wrenching a large role
in our state's economy according
to the latest New Mexico AG
statistics counting cattle are
valued at just over one million
dollars the purchase of
livestock is one of the largest
expenses that are entering for
livestock theft is no small
matter and I think you and can
cost producers thousands of
dollars we stand in support of
the spirit of this legislation
of which looks to increase
penalties for selling a
lifestyle.
Thank you yes Sir go ahead.
Committee members money was
brought to court on your
representing the New Mexico
cattle growers I would like to
stand in terms of for but I was
the one fifty three it gives our
livestock for teeth whenever it
comes to that of our livelihoods
our livelihoods are are we going
to give him standing in for the
district attorney
is in support of this is going
to give him a direction to move
towards and and prosecuting
these cases.
One thing that I would like you
to understand is not all horses
or horses not all horses are
about the same while our mate it
right now does not have any
value and if somebody was to
come in and take a bunch of
horses is doesn't cost you
anything but one good rental got
just fifty thousand dollars.
And that's that's just for one
and so I would like you to
consider that a lot of these
ranchers have bands of courses
that run you know we don't have
just one and if somebody pulls
of the further dig through for
these horses that's our
livelihood is and so it needs to
stand as a separate dental.
Thank thank you anyone else over
on this side yes Sir.
Committee I get that from
produced from the southeast part
of the state and us for.
Anyone else yes Sir.
Thank you producer from Colfax
County instead of supporters of
thank.
There's a gentleman over here
okay.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name here on top on
on the record for Rio Arriba
county reason Taos County Rio
Arriba county and someone
chemical rental and I had
several instances that the my
family's cattle you into this
year and will certainly would
support this bill.
Thank you anyone else wishing to
speak in support.
Okay that concludes our.
Public comment piece
Representative madam chair thank
you very much and I appreciate
all the people that did travel
up here to support this bill at
this time I would like to have
my expert witness
Mr but we speak on why this bill
is impaired.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee the committee
substitute that we were asked to
assist with from the original
bill sought to.
Take some of the committee from
the Supreme Court opinion
Torres the New Mexico state The
New Mexico we Torres and
addressing the concerns raised
there are primarily bringing
over the definitions that
specifically from the livestock
code into the criminal code so
that's a little bit more
specific as to the animals were
talking about and to I think
really addressing the concerns
raised last committee concerning
possible exposure defendants
would face under on a per animal
punishment and the Supreme Court
noted in that case of those a
per animal entity the defendant
would face up to fifty four
years in prison of which would
threaten to trigger eighth
amendment and article two in the
state constitution issues hence
why we adopt an idea that we've
had in discussions concerning on
child **** to put a cap on the
number of individual charges to
cap out and and exposure
involves Precourt didn't give us
a number that would trigger
anything Mendon issue if we're
working with addicted at fifty
forced to high we thought this
would be a nice medium towards
that path that gave the statute
some teeth while still
respecting the distinction that
the statute gives towards
livestock protections.
Thank you.
I've been reminded that there
are a couple people online
wishing to speak to spend
support
severly.
Fixing Everly briefly please.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I'm
Beverly it's in guy executive
director of dairy producers of
New Mexico we strongly support
house bill one fifty three in
the past we've had individuals
on the areas that affect newborn
calves as males when they were
females do not have to work a
lot more in the dairy industry
than males are this added up to
a great loss to our dairy
farmers and for these reasons
and the others already stated we
support HB one fifty three and
thanks the sponsors for bringing
it forward thank you thank you
Leri Sonntag good to hear from
you Larry.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee thank
you for taking the online
testimony I'll be very brief
speaking on behalf of the New
Mexico business coalition in
support of house bill one fifty
three.
Just to comments that are
previously B. may have in
support I just want to add that
theft of livestock is a crime
that specifically targets part
for the New Mexico farmers and
ranchers who rely on inventory
they've invested heavily and for
their livelihood it's
unimaginable that the same
penalty applies to a criminal
who stole a twenty head of
cattle that applies to a single
path we urge you to support New
Mexico's ranchers and farmers
and say yes to house bill one
fifty three thank you for taking
my comments thank you all right
let's go to.
Representative McQueen.
Thank you madam chair
Madam chair Representative in
the posture possibly Mr pre
but I always look for the summer
statutes there's a chart which
lays out the term of the
punishment for the felonies I
can never find it can you tell
me what how many years a second
or third degree only is.
Madam chair representative
McQueen at thirty with felonies
three years a second degree
felony would be up to nine
years.
Okay madam chair.
Representative Ezzell Mr we I I
because I have some questions on
the wording of the in the
committee seven
On page five line to.
The value of each stolen
livestock is greater than two
thousand five hundred dollars.
Me each sounds like.
Each animal.
It is that is that with each
means in that context.
It is.
Madam chair representative
green.
That is exactly the intent.
That.
If the total value of the stolen
livestock is less than twenty
five hundred.
It's.
Third degree just the same as as
existing law if the value of the
stolen livestock is greater than
twenty five hundred fifty Bucks
up to a to a second degree and
that was the way the AG's office
intended.
So so madam chair representative
experts if.
If the package truck up to the
ranch and the steel three prized
horses and a borough hops on the
truck as well that's only worth
a thousand dollars is this
condition met.
Yes.
But the per it's is is this each
mean every does that mean all.
Thank you
madam madam chair Representative
McQueen.
It is the value of each and each
stolen livestock goes to the
right.
So it if I if I don't want to
myself with some deals for
animals and three year worth
five thousand dollars each.
In one is worth a thousand.
Thank each animal isn't worth
twenty four hundred only some of
the animals or animals madam
chair representative we've only
some of the animals are and it's
still just one count.
He has committed theft he or
she.
Has committed theft larceny of
livestock.
And that provision under your
fax situation.
The crime it is a single count
of third degree felony.
But this language says secretary
calling.
Sorry the madam chair.
Representative McQueen the value
of the stolen livestock is
greater than two thousand five
hundred dollars is guilty of a
second degree felony.
You're looking after the
provided however.
Which use the prosecutors the
ability to use multiple counts
when.
The value of the of the
livestock stolen is over twenty
thousand dollars and that's what
bump that up.
To a second degree felony if
multiple last and and if
multiple livestock were stolen.
Then.
It is a separate offense for
each panel.
With a limit of three can't
Madam chair representative
expert I I'm kind of okay with
the second closets the first
close in the third class and at
struggling with in the first
close on page four if you took
out the word each.
Thank.
I.
Nibert okay.
It seems to me it seems to me
what we're trying to do two
years right so if the value
livestock is under twenty five
hundred it's a third degree if
the value of the livestock is
over twenty five hundred it's a
second degree and if it's over
twenty thousand then you get
separate events.
What.
To venture.
So Representative that is the
sponsor content okay.
So I'd.
I understand the intent.
I'm not commits a language
reflects that intent.
Because I don't know what the
word each means in that
sentence.
Because.
Madam chair representative great
thank you I think you're right I
think we should drop the word
each from the second provision.
Of what made I update I think
we're looking at page five line
for.
after the word after the words
the value of try to each it in
chair Representative Ezzell I
livestock I believe is one of
those words that's both singular
and plural okay.
It would be the value of stolen
money is that what you're
saying.
Okay
and that would parallel both
this provision for that and then
the rest of life questions
statute.
The representative how I know so
I think that would help the
first change sentence and then.
Provided that if multiple
livestock or stolen with the
cumulative value.
The.
So.
If someone steals from one
resource.
It's worth fifty thousand
dollars.
Flexibility.
Madam chair representative look
we would just be the second
degree felony charge.
Okay.
Madam chair representative clean
instead of striking each and
leaving it the value of stolen
livestock so it would track
better with the the paragraph
right above it would make more
sense madam chair and
representative state under page
five line for the value of the
stolen livestock.
That would track just the same
as with the paragraph above.
I think Madam chair
representative so I think that's
that would be good okay okay so
if it's if.
The.
This is for.
Okay so now I'm looking at sort
of the third clause.
Okay so provided that multiplies
soccer so in with the cumulative
value greater than twenty
thousand.
The theft of each livestock cell
costs to the separate offense.
Up to three charges per
currents.
So again I I okay so.
The the example is
Still three horses tour worth
fifteen thousand dollars each
one is worth a thousand.
Thank.
Is that three secondary felony
offenses.
Even though the thousand dollar
our doesn't even reach the
threshold.
To trigger if it was stolen
along.
Chair representative quickly do
that the numbers again sorry so
math is not.
Madam chair representative with
even three three three three
animals fifteen thousand fifteen
thousand and one thousand.
Is that three three second
degree felonies or just to would
be Madam chair representative we
can would be three for the three
of animals that are fifteen
thousand.
There are only two.
The the cumulative.
But.
Representative the the attorney
general's office put that in
we're always of that's where the
that's why the word cumulative
is before value.
As.
If you look on the before and an
existing all.
The.
The twenty thousand is the
trigger point for all other
types of property the subject to
be stolen.
For for kicking it from a set of
third to a second degree felony.
This language was just intended
to be consistent with existing
penalties for the set Feb of
other types of property.
So madam chair of presented
excerpts I I get what you're
getting at and I'm I'm I think
I'm okay with it I'm just having
a hard time with the language
with the structure of the
language I mean usually.
You know if you steal widgets or
whether it is you know that you
are the value the widgets and
get the different levels and you
don't trigger this this multiple
charges but you for triggering
multiple charges it seems to me
that
Who we need to what we think
about the trigger because it's
an example I just gave you chair
representative experts if you if
you have a fifteen thousand
dollars to fifteen thousand
dollars and a one thousand
dollar course and that probably
shouldn't be three secondary
families yeah should be two
seconds grease and other.
Because the thousand dollar our
even if it's.
I am it's just.
I think you need to work on
language.
And I think it is I think you
agree to at least on the first
one yeah I'd be I'd be.
I think happy might be an
overstatement willing to work
with you on the line which
because I just think it needs in
these better structure.
Well we have our other.
With us Representative night
Burt who wants to comment he
might have some help here.
If I may madam chair up online a
page I after the word livestock.
The intention is to only.
Tell the.
I started greater than twenty
five hundred dollars you can
insert after livestock valued
greater than.
Two thousand five hundred
dollars per and twenty five
hundred dollars close program.
Which would get to your point
that you would be to.
Second degree felonies in your
example.
And I guess you would have the.
Thousand dollar our building at
a.
Third degree felony.
If that's what the sponsor
intends.
Madam chair could I get
representative Nibert to restate
that.
That give me the line line a
okay and the word livestock.
Valued.
Greater.
Then.
Two thousand five hundred
dollars.
Perrin.
Numeral twenty five hundred
dollars close program.
And.
So in the example that was
given.
In that case you would have.
I potentially two counts of a.
Second degree felony and one
count of a third degree felony.
You would not have three counts
of third degree felonies
Committee simple given.
Thank you.
Madam chair okay I'm going to
read this back.
Okay so I will be starting on
line six.
Right after the semi colon
provided that if multiple
livestock or stolen with the
cumulative value greater than
twenty thousand dollars the
theft of each livestock valued
greater than two thousand five
hundred dollars show constitute
a separate offense up to three
charges per occurrence.
Do I see smiles from the
committee.
Madam chair I think that that
fixes it.
So I don't hold up the bill
so.
It's been suggested to me that
we could.
Approve something called a
house.
Judiciary Committee sub point to
thank that's okay that's cool
all right so let's make sure we
know what that committee so
point to this gonna look you
know if we're all on the same
page okay so when I heard it
suggested and I believe accepted
by the sponsor and.
Currently consistent with are to
colleagues here on line for you
gonna strike each and insert the
right okay and online eight
after livestock one question I
have is should there be a common
there Representative Nighbor
life dot com valued greater than
twenty five hundred dollars and
then Farrand the actual twenty
five hundred dollars and then
come again.
The complaint my and I just want
to get it right for everybody
thank you need to know don't we
don't need any commas okay more
I just wanna make sure okay so
what it is going to be.
Need we need to solve when you
bring it to the floor it's going
to be House Judiciary substitute
for Bob up and it's going to be
a point to the there's going to
be each stricken and it's going
to be of the law and then online
eight it's going to read values
greater than twenty five hundred
dollars and then in parentheses
the actual numbers right now and
that's after livestock right
madam chair when my expert
witness has a comment to make
regarding that okay Madam chair
representative library I know
we've never disagreed under
language for but.
If.
If I could use Representative
McQueen.
Simple style if you stole.
Fifty.
Fifteen hundred dollar.
Helpers.
It's still just one can't.
And that's not the intention
that's wrong.
in the court of appeals in state
V. torrez bags of the
legislature to give them some
guidance and.
I think the court of appeals
decision was better reason than
the Supreme Court decision but
at any rate the Supreme Court
and the court of appeals in
state the Taurus said we need a
specific legislative intent in
order to make it multiple
punishments for single act.
And that is the crux of this
bill.
It gives our prosecutors the
ability.
If you have three felony counts
against you whether they're
second degree third reading are
prosecutors will be given a
whole lot better opportunity to
get a conviction all please.
But because they can kick a
couple of felonies.
And the perpetrator of the crime
will still face adequate
punishment.
Well.
Sounded like we had a solution
but we don't have a solution.
I know because we do want to
Representative get this out of
here we really do so I just I
think we're a little bamboozled
here at this point I don't know
what you with mentors so I I
just to.
Thank god I was going to try to
it it is but I don't have access
to the committee so because it's
not online yeah like I said
willing to work on it and maybe
we could just bring it back
Wednesday for a quick if we it
worked out for a quick vote for
it we're gonna have to do that I
we of we're trying to help the
on the fly but it looks like
it's a little madam chair to the
members not get a copy of the
committee so no we we have it we
have gray we have this is not
online and he ended it okay
since your initial.
It may concern no.
We remain changing yes in the so
the only problem manager that
we're seeing right now is the
verbiage on line a at the end of
it because as the example that
was pointed out if you still
still fifty hit of about fifteen
hundred dollars we still have
problems.
Yep okay Madam I'm sure that
Representative McQueen would be
happy to work with you and New
Mexico can help you sort this
out.
Maybe it's the sea seems to a
volunteer.
And if not to the legislature.
Okay yeah.
So.
And madam chair I would like for
the attorney general's office to
have a say in this matter
assistance is there like we have
okay absolutely so later I have
to Taylor if you could work with
McQueen Representative McQueen
if that works for you all.
Twenty two yes will come up so
I'm afraid as much as we tried
we're gonna have to roll this to
win okay and we'll have a point
to substitute okay all right
madam chair members thank you
very much appreciated though
thanks.
Well.
If this.
Plan that six is that about
right.
the speaker.
Our race.
We need to be worried speak.
The rate just give me a madam
chair just yet they won't.
Okay
I see you we have our
Presenter how long do you think
this is going to take because we
have
we're plan we were planning on
adjourns.
Very short okay you guys up for
it okay it would be nice if we
could finish this agenda.
I have built okay two two nine.
Right very very brief please.
It's hard to think it's going to
be reform we have four people at
the table.
Staff some experience.
Okay.
All right quite.
Settle down.
Thank you madam chair good
evening and giving committee
members I'm here to introduce
house bill two twenty nine
insurance adjusters Bond
requirements with me is my
expert witness from the office
of the superintendent of
insurance Jennifer contentious
interim superintendent of
insurance and staff of the OCI.
We just please this is Lillian
borrows she's our special
licensing expert the HSD and
this is Victoria Bach of the
bureau chief for company and
producer licensees who are
responsible for identifying the
issue.
Thank you madam chair I bring
this bill to you today at the
request of the agency to assist
with the cleanup and modern
modernization statutory language
regarding independent adjusters
apartment that they file a ten
thousand dollars surety bond
with OSI independent adjusters
are covered at a greater
contractual amounts by the
insurance companies that employ
them and to date agency has not
had any to call upon any sure to
fund this unnecessary
requirement to not only account
for thirty hours a week of staff
time to process and manage the
fifteen thousand plus bronze but
it costs HSD approximately
twenty five thousand dollars a
year in postage in return bonds
just additionally the agency
will be able to utilize staff
expertise in compliance areas
needed and would save thousands
of pages of paper here freeing
up much needed office space
madam chair with that stand for
questions.
Well let's go to the audience.
Here no members of the public to
speak in opposition is there
anyone online wishing to speak
in opposition to this bill.
I see no hands raised I don't as
anyone online wishing to speak
in support since there's no one
here in the audience.
No hands raised all right so any
final points you wish to make
Representative chair I would
let's my expertise close Sen.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you for having
us tonight this was an identify
issue among staff as something
that was an efficient and costly
to the agency that's not
necessary it cost us money we do
not collect money for this fee
and we replaced a lot of space
staff figures they can do other
compliance issues that are more
important and will safeguard
consumers at a better rate than
taking the time for this issue
great thank you committee
members any question.
Yes.
Motion.
do pass.
Of Martinez and I think it was
seconded by Representative
Nighbor so
Would you call the roll please
thank you madam chair calling
role Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane.
Yes.
Mr speaker yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert yes.
Representative read yes.
Representative Rehm yes ma'am.
Representative kanske yes.
Madam vice chair.
Madam chair.
Yes.
Madam chair with nine it yes is
you have a do pass on house bill
two twenty nine great well thank
you and you are right I don't
always believe.
Thank you of the past we are
adjourned.
