Okay.
Representative Townsend.
Thanks.
Madam chair.
Representative Alcon is here yes
okay did you get him.
We don't have a quorum.
All right let's get started
here.
The first is that.
Three yes madam chair I am here
playing the part of Senator
Cervantes today and if you yes
and I think I hope that is just
as Bacon if it's not she can
tell us who it is that should be
speaking to this because they
wanted me to quickly turn it
over to them.
R. let's see if that's right
yeah there we go yeah I mean
she's in the attendee list I
see.
Yes House or handout just will
begin her appearance a panelist.
Thank you.
Someone else might take have
taken care of that okay.
Just as bacon are you there
she's here on the panel no okay
so let's see here needed in New
and maybe get just as bacon I
was just saying to them to the
committee that we are and gas J.
R. three and that I think you
were going to speak to it I
hope.
Yes madam chair yes
Representative I think we are
both Representative Eli and I
are can shooting at the moment
but this should not be terribly
complicated Senate joint
resolution three is part of this
bigger picture that we have been
promoting this year about how do
we deal with recruitment of
judges and what this bill is
designed to do is delay when a
newly appointed judge or justice
has to run and be on the ballot
so it's not overnight it delays
by a year which does a couple of
things a I think it
helps ease people into that
process judges in here we are
not very political I'm too and
what's the community get to know
who the judge is before they
have to say this is who I'd like
to vote for in the general
either in a primary or general
election and then also all
judges in the state of New
Mexico this is very unique to
New Mexico are eligible for
public financing and that's a
fairly involved process of
gathering five dollar
contributions and and the like
and it takes some time so this
allows for that to be more
robust for both the appointee
and anybody who wishes to run
against the appointee frankly so
it has I kind of secondary
effect of continuing to promote
the public financing of judicial
races so that's the the impetus
behind joint Senate joint
resolution three and I'm happy
madam chair to answer any
questions that I can.
Madam chair with that we will
conclude our presentation and
turned back to the committee.
Sure.
Let's go to the those in
attendance and give them the
twenty second opportunity to
weigh evidence support or
opposition to Senate Joint
resolution three so we can put
up a quick little poll here.
Everybody is invited to attend I
need to wait in spruce.
Is it is it going out.
I don't see a tiger.
Madam chair I know that the
judge Franchini is out there but
I think she's attending as a
future panelists socialite able
to to vote.
Okay.
It looks like we don't have any
wouldn't weighing in on this
particular measure let's see if
there's anyone who wishes to
speak on it.
I see just to come also from
COVID costs go ahead Jessica.
Go ahead hello can you hear me
now.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Jessica
Wilson and I'm the campaign
manager for the fair courts
initiative at common cause New
Mexico we support we thank the
sponsors for bringing this bill
before the committee we are in
support of this bill and believe
that it will allow the
electorate to be well informed
of judicial behavior on the
bench prior to an election and
this information will enable
voters to make an educated
decision on retention thank you
for allowing me to speak thank
you very much.
Your system only hand.
So let's go now to the members
of the committee.
Six.
Representative.
Your first.
Trying to find my item mute
buttons.
madam chair thank you and I just
have one or two questions and
and that is to get the.
Timing down right.
Page four.
I'm looking at the amendments.
Contact so it's toward the end
right before section through it
says.
The person appointed shall serve
until the first general election
following one year after
appointment so that I understand
how this works in real terms if
someone were were appointed and
this was law now and say they
were appointed in December of
twenty twenty two as I read this
the first election that they
would stand in would be November
of twenty twenty four is that
accurate.
madam chair Representative yes
that is accurate.
And so we would not be putting
judges and the Election with
respect to the other entities
under our new law that has been
the odd numbered years
The other.
Many governmental entities that
we've.
Want to gather for those
elections it would be the first
one that basically on the same
cycle that the.
Representatives are on.
Madam chair representative you
are correct okay thank you
that's all the questions I have
madam chair thank you justice.
Thank you so much let me see if
I have other questions.
What's the pleasure of the
committee madam chair all moved
to pass.
second that motion
Representative local did you
want a second order you want to
discuss.
I just wanted to make one
comment madam chair.
The only comment I have to make
because I think this works
because one of the things that I
found out when I became a
magistrate judge especially was
that that takes awhile
especially for the bar to get to
know the judge and I we did they
try not only do they try you
they try everything in order to
figure you out so District Court
judge who are those about live
using they're going to go to
that same process to the takes a
awhile to even to people around
you to get to know you so I
think this works really great
and I would second that motion.
Well I think.
Thank you madam madam chair that
was my fault I should let the
judge make the motion.
Okay so we have a motion and a
second and I'm going to let the
clerk called the roll.
Representative Alcon yes.
Representative Armstrong.
Representative Chandler yes.
Representative Cook.
Mr speaker.
Hi.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative McQueen.
Representative night we're.
Representative night but I
didn't hear.
Yes.
Representative Rehm yes ma'am.
Representative Townsend.
Thank.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Yes.
Thank you by a vote of eight to
zero we have a due pass on S. J.
R. three as amended.
Thank you very.
We.
Senate bills to.
Madam chair is well
representative Ely yes I think
the owner she still on as an
attendee so I will quickly turn
it over to justice bank.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative for
Stepping in for Senator survive
just on Senate bill two US
Senate bill two is a bill that
is largely going to be familiar
to you all because you past oak
upon several of the kind of
standalone pieces of this as
bills are sponsored by
Representative Hochman Vigil
came through the judiciary
including the judicial pay
raises.
So I won't belabor I'm kind of
the the purpose and point of
this bill
I will stand stand for questions
know that Senate bill two covers
both judicial salary which is
something that you all
considered the in house bill one
forty one I'm it also covers
minor some minor I I shouldn't I
shouldn't use that word covers
changes to judicial retirement
not as robustly as you all
passed out of this committee by
this particular bill has the
larger kind of what I call head
of steam
the important feature of Senate
bill two for your purposes today
that is slightly different than
the three standalone bills that
came straight from the house is
what we refer to as the
decoupling of the magistrates
I'm happy to talk about that
briefly or it links either way I
will let the body no madam chair
that to the this the Supreme
Court has met with the
magistrate court judges
association and any magistrate
wishing to participate on this
topic we met with them over
almost a year ago on this
particular subject the
decoupling piece of this meeting
that the Supreme Court justices
salaries Senate acts and then
the other the court of appeals
the trial court metro where
they're all set as a percentage
of that this would eliminate
that process for them the
magistrate court judges
the magistrate court judges have
a very very different set of
requirements to serve as judges
and so it at a certain point
becomes unworkable for the
magistrate judges to be tethered
to the Supreme Court we met with
the magistrate court judges.
Station at length during the
inner they support the bill they
they understand why this this
needs to happen the president of
the association has Rick
repeated there were faint
refrain that the association
which is the the kind of voting
governing body of the
magistrates supports this bill
you spoke in support of the bill
if you Senate finance and the
internet Senate Judiciary.
And so that's.
Just a brief history this
particular necessity I'm happy
to answer any and all questions
about Senate Bill to I'm and
I'll stop talking because I know
you've already heard a bunch
about it and I'd rather hear
your questions.
With that madam chair again we
will stand for questions.
Right let's let's see if there
are people in the participants
who would like to weigh in for
Oregon on Senate bill two so
we'll put up a quick call to see
how that goes.
Please indicate your preference
if you are attending it was to
weigh in on this bill.
If we were the committee room I
would just ask you to raise
rates.
So what we're doing.
Okay looks like we don't have
anyone.
Weighing in however I'm
concerned yes I'm not a co host
so I may not be seeing what
ordinarily see.
I don't know if people voted or
not.
Can you tell me if there was
anyone who participated yes
seven out of seven voted for
okay and could you please do me
a co host I did okay right.
Okay let's go to the see if
anyone needs to speak to the
attendees.
Jessica Wilson.
Did you wish to speak on this.
So you're.
Just go ahead I can I'm sorry
can you hear me yes thank you
again I'm again my name is
Jessica and I'm with the
airports Campine for common
cause New Mexico and we once
again wanted to just the ex
express our support of this bill
we recognize the compensating
judges in New Mexico adequately
is is the best way to maintain
our current justices as well as
encourage other people to seek a
judicial a position within our
state thank you to and madam
chair members of the committee
and the Sanchez.
Thank you I have great Trujillo
from P. R. eight go ahead great.
Yes thank you madam chair
greater U. S. P. R. E. you've
heard of components of this bill
so won't be labor rate of a
parent does stand in support and
I will stay on the line if there
are any questions thank you
madam chair.
Very good thank you for being
here today all right let's go to
the committee and first I have
Representative read.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative Eli
I've
spoken to Representative
parchment being ill.
I don't I don't believe that the
coupling is a good idea.
And the reason why I don't
believe it's a good idea is
that.
But we're going to have if you
will well the the district all
the way up to Supreme Court are
gonna be tied to the federal
magistrate and then we're we
will have the magistrate judge's
if you will every year fighting
the legislature to go ahead and
and get their their rates I
think and what I proposed was.
Let's take the federal
magistrate judge salary take a
percentage of a that is equal
to the current magistrate and
make it walk in that way and so
whatever whatever moves moves
and then move in a uniform
manner and I think that would be
a better solution I could be
more fair to the overall process
I know that the court has
according to Representative
Hodgman B. hill.
It is not.
Favorable to that they want to
totally do Google but I see this
is all one court system.
You know I'm here we see stuff
going to magistrate the comes
the district I think the they
will be tied together forever
anyway I don't know if you have
any comments on that are just as
they can if you want to talk
about it
I
Anyway I'll be quiet for.
I had just as big I thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative repayment this
this is that a good idea or a
topic that is been a long time
coming and I can appreciate
Representative your concern
about on tethering the
magistrates I will point out
several kind of things that have
come about during the time we
had this conversation at the
Supreme Court and with the
magistrates first magistrates
are not unhappy with their pay
that's what I think of really
important items here they are
also getting rate raises this
year assuming that house bill
two passes they are getting a
seven percent raise along with
all state employees that will
take the magistrate court judges
salary to a hundred and five
over a hundred and five thousand
dollars a year.
And I emphasize that because the
the requirements for the
magistrates are vastly different
than they are for the the lawyer
judges that there's no eight the
age requirement is eighteen
years old as opposed to thirty
five years old there's no
requirement to have a law
license
and so that's an important
distinction here that makes that
that of the ring more and more
complicated over the course of
time.
so that that's one of the the
other topics that we had lot
longer conversations with the
magistrates about the this this
body is the legislature's
judicial compensation commission
will still continue to do its
work.
And so the the magistrates are
not being kind of floated out to
sea by any by any stretch
they will still have the
recommendation of the
independent compensation
commission also have the full
support of the Supreme Court we
appreciate that magistrates are
very important to the judiciary
we have three counties in New
Mexico that don't have a single
lawyer residing in them.
we have an additional bundle
counties where you have you know
a handful three to five lawyers
residing there and so we
understand the importance of the
role of the magistrates
it's just it's time for this the
separation to occur occur in
order for
the the other pieces of this
compensation bill to pass in
addition when we focus on Senate
bill two it's really to
encourage recruitment.
I know you all heard from the
Chief Justice on this but you
have a vacancy in Los crucis a
month ago three people apply.
You have a vacancy for a federal
magistrate position in New
Mexico in eighty people apply.
The and the magistrates don't
suffer suffered the same
recruitment problems.
We don't have a lack of
individuals seeking to become
magistrate judges so that
recruitment piece isn't the same
as it is for the the trial court
judges in the appellate judges
so it's it's almost it's.
An apples and oranges type of
comparison we think about
recruitment challenges for the
for the different layers of
courts.
Madam chair with that'll stop
talking.
And madam chair what Ellis to
say over and over again is that
if you don't have people
applying it is generally a an
issue of salary and so that's
what this is intended to address
and with that madam chair
I hope that answers
Representative wings questions
but if not we're happy stand for
more questions.
Madam chair and just bacon but
you know I I hear what you're
saying and see I think that I
haven't heard a complaint from
the magistrates about pay.
So we take the five hundred and
help me its hundred seventy
something hundred ninety that
you just magistrates are making
is what the Supreme Court
justices are going to make we
take that number and we take a
percentage of it and we come up
with a hundred and five and we
go ahead we tie it in that way
and now we don't nobody has to
deal with the pay it just flows
along and Madam chair and chief
justice are there any
magistrates in the state who are
attorneys.
Madam chair representative there
are a small number that are
attorneys but it's a it's a very
small number
and while I appreciate what
you're pointing out
Representative that you know why
don't we just continue to tend
tether the magistrates a long
we've we've hit I think.
Pretty high ceiling on what
magistrates are are going to be
paid and what they need to be
paid they they receive the
benefit of the seven percent
this year
but before that was on the table
they were content with the
salary that they already have
so I I think it's you know it's
it makes it complicated to add
the magistrates so that they
continue their salary continues
to expand but their
qualifications are not changing.
It makes it complicated
calculation Representative
three.
Madam chair and it I have just a
couple comments it sounds like
there is some magistrates who
are attorneys who probably ought
to be coupled because it sounds
like we're going to create a
fraternity and the fraternity of
lawyers will be Google but the
rest in the court system will
not that's that's my comment I I
think that is unfair to a select
group in your
in your judicial of in number of
office of the courts and I think
that we should have them coupled
so we don't have to deal with
that down the road anyway with
that I'll stop talking now.
Thank you just thank.
Representative Akan.
Thank you madam chair and.
Representative and just judge I.
A couple of questions number one
is right now in statute it says
that the magistrate judge their
salary is X. amount of dollars
is that correct.
Madam chair representative the
the statute right now said that
the magistrates our experts
centage of the Supreme Court
justice salary.
And so madam chair and justice
that so basically that is in
statute right now.
Right now yes Sir so this will
take that out of the madam chair
this will take that out of the
statute recently.
Madam chair representative yes.
So Madam chair so basically at
do I see everywhere where it is
amending that section of
statute.
Bear with me madam chair.
Representative but yes I know
that that lady with that
language is modifying.
And looking for it as quickly as
I can Representative okay I
think you would produce more
update your wordpress chair
you madam chair Representative
is there and it indicates that
the legislature will continue to
provide for the salary of the
magistrate judge's thank you.
Correct me if I'm wrong but this
was in the house bill ninety two
that's now on the speakers table
they had gone through this
committee to House
Appropriations yes reminded
committee we are we need to
discuss this madam chair of I.
I hope I'm wrong but I remember
hearing that and and
Representative Hochman hills
bill I remember that that part
about the magistrate judges in
there was a and my wrong.
I think it was all in.
Unless there was a change in.
Madam chair this is the one
feature that is different.
What you heard before I want to
be very very honest with with
you all Senate bill two is
slightly different in that one
respect the magistrate part yes
Sir.
Okay thank you think anything
over a judge I'll call thank
you.
Madam chair I I was hoping I was
hoping that I had missed
something okay.
Remotely I'll just keep quiet
developed not sure.
Okay so that's the general the
other problem is the only other
problem is that last year up
madam chair justice did not
Representative Eli last year we
took the magistrate judges out
of the administrative office of
the courts and handed the the
administrative part of the
district judges.
The District Court.
They're not would be covering
the magistrate in this sense
well we're still haven't died in
the District Court judges.
How does that.
I guess I don't know how does
that come out how does it even
now.
I'm not Madam chair
representative I'll call on the
the magistrates were correct in
their individual districts are
now aligned underneath the
District Court judges there are
still a presiding magistrate
judging each district that has
managerial
power in control within the
magistrates but they are then
responsive to the chief judge's
Senator responsive to the New
Mexico Supreme Court the
magistrate judge's Association
is still a voting member of the
New Mexico judicial council and
has that voice has has several
voices in in fact and so they
have not been you know pushed
out of kind of the the
leadership role in the judiciary
it's it's a structural change
the magistrates didn't
particularly care for being
under the administrative office
of the courts.
And so this was this was the
shift so that we still have that
the structure in place
but it's it's a different set of
strict structure we're judges
are being responsive to judges
rather than judges being
responsive to an administrative
body.
Thank you thank you does this
make it at one time I wanted to
do something with the district
attorney's just like that I had
four do not.
People in the state that wanted
to personally hanging cause us
thinking that way but that is
one of depression and I think
long time ago anyway this is the
only other thing other thing
that okay then there's the other
thing.
Right now there is money in the
budget to take care of that the
money that is that back in about
the.
But there for the retirement
fund.
I think there is a good we're.
Okay thirty five million to the
digit good additional funding
ten million to the magistrate
retirement fund on the budget
twenty million madam chair and
representative or in house bill
two we did not we were not
successful in persuading the
finance folks to give us the
extra questions that we needed
but twenty million is in house
bill two.
Thank you okay and they're just
one other thing madam chair that
I and I know I can change it but
I wish that we would be working
in multiples of eight years
instead of ten the judges will
run on a four year terms madam
chair and justice and the the
the end of the the judges terms
run accordingly do for for the
well used in like normal people
but that I don't think that
continues that right now and but
I think it was something that
should be thought about thank
you madam chair I I rest my
case.
Thank you
Mr speaker.
Thank you madam chair all movie
do pass it has already been.
Done.
And I do have a question for the
justice to it let's get the
second on the record here
Representative.
Second set I'm very important
question for the justice.
I'm a better day court I'm
curious Water candle saying.
madam chair Mr speaker my law
clerks you gave me that candle
earlier today and it says all
will be well.
Okay right.
What.
Actually that is that's a good
message especially today thank
you I think they knew that.
Is there for the discussion
Senate bill two.
The clerk to call the roll.
Representative Alcon yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Chandler.
You'll.
Representative Cook yes.
Mr speaker yes.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Lewis.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert.
Representative rain.
What yes.
Representative Townsend.
Thank.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Yes.
By a vote of eleven to zero we
have a two passed on Senate bill
two is amended.
We.
Senate bill forty one
Representative surely with the
co sponsor you put in the bill
on.
Yes madam chair I am prepared to
put on the bill I do have an
expert witness with me change
you you he is in your office
there yeah okay.
All right thank you so much
madam check share this.
This bill is intended to fix a
gap in state law and the
problem that we're addressing is
the fact that there are some six
hundred and more employees who
work at the university of New
Mexicos Santa New Mexico Mexico
Medical Center.
And that Medical Center is
organized.
Under a law I had never heard of
before.
Known as the city research park
and Economic Development Act.
And that act authorizes the
university to create something
called a research park
corporation and the Santa UNM
Sandoval Medical Center is
organized under that act and
there's a gap in the act in that
it says that this the center is
not a public entity or political
subdivision of the state except
for the right for under
procurement law.
And let's see
also risk management so they get
the benefits of our procurement
system thank they all and they
get the benefits of the tort
claims act which you know is a
very important statute but it is
not permit those employees to
organize under people.
Public employees are getting
hands
and I somebody has their my
contact
so it does not allow their the
employees of the of the hospital
target organized under the
public employees bargaining Act
and this amendment to the state
statute fix that
that outcome I would also point
out that contrary to some
arguments that the university
has made those employees are
also precluded from organizing
under the national labor
relations act so you're in a
limbo where they're not
permitted to organize under
state law and they're not
permitted to organize under
federal law there by being the
only hospital employees in the
state you cannot organize a
union as is it should be there
right
madam chair and with that'll
stand for questions and I do
have saying you'd soon to now is
the stuff inside and out madam
chair.
For questions right.
Yes madam chair okay all right
let's go to the audience first
is twenty.
Madam chair your muted.
Thank you.
Myself.
Not a good listener so this
okay so we have nine in favor
and three in opposition so
seventy five twenty five let me
see first those from who wish to
speak in opposition would you
raise your hand if you wish to
speak in opposition if you're
attending so in opposition taker
here down here in favor okay in
opposition first Terry Cole go
ahead Terry.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee I'm
Terry Cole and I'm the president
and CEO for the greater aba
curfew chamber of commerce we
oppose this legislation because
we don't believe it's necessary
it's not solving a problem
employees at research parts do
not need their organizations to
all of a sudden be deemed a
government agency in order to
form a union he is the only path
and in the case of research
parks it's not the right path
research parks are important
unique entities and there are
very good reasons why our
research parks don't operate as
traditional state agencies we
remain concerned by the
disruption that could occur and
critical health care facilities
in our area as well as the trail
of potential consequences that
come with changing her research
parks are situated and treated
under the law for these reasons
we ask that you oppose this bill
thank you madam chair for the
moment our to to talk.
Thank you I will
Read locks.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Rhiannon lax and I met charge
nurse in the ICU Santa regional
Medical Center I'm here today
because I do not supported you
as our State as an employee of
this hospital I feel that the
leadership has always had an
open door policy when it comes
to hearing concerns or issues
that arise.
During the pandemic the
leadership regularly rounded on
the units asking for feedback
from off frontline staff
attempts to remedy many of the
various hardships that resulted
or were exacerbated to the
pandemic have been made in a
timely manner allowing us to
feel heard staff members were
redeployed throughout the
hospital in order to make
critical needs while limiting
lay out.
Additionally travelers have been
hired to try and remedy the
current staffing crisis and
allow for safe staffing ratios
we perceive both retention
bonuses as well as retention
rate leading us to feel valued
as employees in closing I want
to thank each of you for your
time and consideration I am
grateful to have had a chance to
speak to you today and I would
be happy to answer any questions
you may have.
Thank you.
Jamie Silva Steele.
Go ahead.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Jamie Silva Steele I've been
a nurse for thirty six years and
I'm currently the president and
CEO at Santa regional Medical
Center having been there for
nearly nine years I first want
to say that I'm grateful to our
staff for all that they
sacrifice during the almost two
years of the pandemic R. sixty
bed hospital is treated over a
thousand COVID patients and
unfortunately seen over a
hundred and twenty of them die
in the last two years every
processes change within the
hospital and our staff retired
having given a thousand percent
of themselves during this time
I'm here today because I want to
ensure our staff have a voice in
the process of unionization
should it move forward just as
I've had throughout the pandemic
I've communicated to them over
the last seven months and weekly
town halls well this issue has
been in litigation that we are
not opposed to unionization but
we are opposed to the state
jurisdiction where the petitions
were filed verses the national
labor relations board in closing
I'd like to thank you for all
all for your time and your hard
work and I'm here to stand for
any questions that you might
have thank you so much.
Thank you Scott solder.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I am
Scott solder I'm the deputy
university council for health
sciences at the university of
New Mexico
I too am here to speak in
opposition however I would like
to reserve any comments if any
of the members of the committee
have questions thank you.
Thank you bush.
You need to undo.
Thank you I apologize madam
chair members the committee my
name they can push I'm in terms
of government relations officer
of the university of New Mexico
thank you to.
You all on the committee for
hearing our concerns thank you
to the bill's sponsors
Representative Chandler and
Senator Stewart for their long
term support of higher education
we do have quite a few concerns
as I believe you're going to
hear from
during the debate today.
Most importantly university
research parks are organized as
separate and independent
nonprofits and those are
separate and apart from each
other and also from the
university of New Mexico they
were originally conceived to
help with things like financing
of operations for research parks
and medical facilities in rural
and underserved parts of New
Mexico we respectfully ask that
this legislation be held over to
the interim we we do believe
there's number of flaws here
specifically related to the your
pita statute saying that these
entities shall not be considered
public entities including for
personal purposes thank you very
much.
H. Z. K..
Mr business unit and it was the
sorry can you hear me now yes
thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Harriet
Smith I'm the agency based
educator and charge nurse on the
fifth floor inpatient unit at
SMC I've been here for nearly
five years and over that time
I've grown in my career I've
been recognized for
accomplishments I've had face to
face conversations with our C.
and now CEO and other members of
the administration and I have
always felt heard in these
conversations I do not support
SB forty one I believe each
employee should represent
themselves individually in a
free election I do not agree
with the deceptive allegations
that are being created and
negative images that are that
the organization is facing I
believe resolution can be
achieved through meaningful
conversation as it has in the
past and not three spare
campaigns I thank you for the
opportunity to speak and
participate in this hearing.
Okay I'm going to go now to
those who wish to speak in favor
please raise your hand if you
wish to speak in favor.
Whitney Haaland go ahead.
Excuse me just this call and
wait wait wait you can can the
speaker saying the clock.
So to go with the one minute
time frame for some reason I'm
not seeing it so I want to be
sure everyone else sees it.
Okay.
Calling people by native.
Okay we're on what in Holland
and be sure to start the clock
over thank you honey.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Whitney
Holland president of the
American federation of teachers
New Mexico I'm here to stand in
strong support Senate bill forty
one which provides a technical
fix to recent changes made to
the public employees bargaining
Act we support Senate bill forty
one because it will remove the
loophole currently being used to
deny hard working frontline
healthcare workers the ability
to join together as public
employees and for me you I
believe that all New Mexicans
should have this right and state
statutes should not stand in
their way I want to thank the
sponsors for bringing this
important piece of legislation
for and on behalf of all of New
Mexico workers and urged
committee to vote yes thank you.
Adrian in Hans.
Good afternoon committee
Representative madam chair and
committee members my name is a
burning house I'm a frontline
nurse at Santa regional Medical
Center.
I appreciate your time today I
appreciate the sponsor I stand
in support of SB forty one it
has been.
Unconscionable the way we have
not been allowed to unionize
eighty percent of the nurses and
the tax at the hospital have
signed cards and that chart
clearly states that they want to
you under the statute about of
the public sector unions.
We cannot file under the NLRB
because we are public employees
and that was established a long
time ago by this this nation
Supreme Court so the frustration
of being told we can is
mounting.
The two people who testified
earlier had said that they
didn't want one they didn't send
a card so they don't have to but
everyone else wants to you and
we're looking for your support
to help us navigate this thank
you very much for your time we
appreciate very very much.
Thank you.
The long.
Good afternoon madam chair can
you hear me OK.
We can.
Thank you ma'am good afternoon
madam chair members of the
committee my name is actually
long president directing
business representative of the
international association of
machinists and aerospace workers
local eight seven nine four we
would like to thank our sponsors
for their commitment and work on
this legislation along with the
a team New Mexico president
Whitney Haaland we would like to
lift up the voices of health
care workers on the front lines
at University of New Mexico
Santa regional Medical Center as
many many of them wish they
could have been here with us
today as long as sister in house
mentioned eighty percent are in
support of getting recognized
for their you that being said
getting breast getting down to
brass tacks additional those two
things this is conflicting law
and insurers the health care
workers gain you recognition
under you under the public
employees bargaining Act with
that we ask you to support
Senate bill forty one a measure
that has bipartisan support of
Senate and house of
representatives thank you.
We.
Representative of the sheet
metal workers local forty nine
we stand with frontline work
healthcare workers at the
reasonable regional regional
Medical Center
we believe that everybody should
have the right to unionize and
under these current changes that
would give those folks an
opportunity so with that we ask
this committee to support SB
forty one thank you.
Thank you madam chair members of
Canadian journalists youth with
The New Mexico federation of
labor are we stand in solidarity
with our brothers and sisters
who are looking to unionize our
we believe that this is our to
be honest a free choice master
measure we've heard testimony
from the opposition claiming
that workers at this Medical
Center are able to organize
already under the NLRA we
believe differently and
unfortunately the Supreme Court
does as well or the federal
court as well if these workers
were able to unionize they would
be unionized at this point and
that is simple logic at least
there would have been and a vote
to do self so this is about
choice this is about fairness on
all workers should have a right
to collectively bargain and the
fact that these six hundred
workers in the state somehow do
not have that right just seems
very unfair so for that reason
and many others we strongly
support this measure and thank
the sponsor thank you.
John Baker.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name's John
Baker I am the political affairs
director for you a local for
twelve that's the plumber and
pipefitters union we stand in
strong support of SB forty one
and stand in solidarity with the
other unions and with the
workers that at the Santa
regional Medical Center for
their right to unionize we ask
you to vote yes on SB forty one.
Patrick.
Are you still there yes.
Okay good afternoon chairwoman
and committee members my name is
Patrick Kane I am a respiratory
therapist at Santa regional
Medical Center I've been out
respiratory therapist for thirty
years I've also been a
member of a.
Sandoval County for about the
same amount of time and I'm
advocating simply that you
support Senate bill forty one
today thank you for your time.
Thank you Larwood Toya.
You madam chair learn I am a
resident of Santa Fe County in a
former elected official I lived
down the street from SR MC and I
believe that everyone should
have the right and choice to
unionize especially our
frontline workers and I stand in
support of this bill thank you.
You.
This Alvarado.
Can you hear me madam chair.
Yes.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Vince Alvarado I am the
president of the New Mexico
federation of labor and for the
reasons stated before we are in
strong support of Senate bill
forty one and I urge all the
committee members to vote yes in
adopting this measure and I
thank you for your your time
thank you.
Okay.
Zoom user you will have to
introduce yourself when you
speak.
Well my name is Dominic Connor
can you hear me yes.
I am I think you missed me I was
actually an opposition for this
bill in my free to speak now or
would you like to call me okay
madam chair and members of the
committee my name is Dominic
Tanner and I'm an anesthesia
tech at Santa regional Medical
Center thank you for your time
to hear my point of view on this
matter I've been with this arm
C. for six years and over that
time I've had the opportunity to
help treat patients who find
themselves in our operating room
needing our services at one of
the most vulnerable times in
their lives the environment we
strive to achieve as a caring
one truly focused in that moment
on them any positive outcome I
am honored and proud of serving
my community alongside every
other health care workers just
aren't C. and in this great
state however I do not and
cannot support having a you just
arm C. for a few reasons and I
believe I have a unique view
point of hospital based you with
my experience in the field prior
to my employment just arm see I
work for five years as an
amnesty to tech at the
university of New Mexico
hospital which is unionized I
serve another four and a half to
five years in the U. N. M. H.
system as the anesthesia manager
I've been on both sides of the
union fence and based on my
experiences I can tell you that
bringing a you into a hospital
should not be a decision taken
lightly my experience has been
that unions in the healthcare
setting inject a thick layer of
unnecessary politics into the
hospital whether you want them
to or not and let me be very
clear there is no room for
politics.
Hi Nicole Vince Alvarado.
Forgive me if.
It's
good to call budget before Vince
have you spoken.
The call.
Go ahead to call.
Hello my name is Nicholson cada
I have spent a nurses Santa for
around four years now and I
believe that we deserve a voice
and I believe that the union is
going to help us come together
and receive the proper treatment
and
nurse patient ratios that we
deserve so I ask that everyone
will support just be forty one.
Thank you very much and I think
we've got all of the comments
here now.
Let's go to committee members.
And first I have Representative
Nibert.
There's still I'm sorry I'm
sorry I forgot three oh nine
please go ahead.
You madam chair and committee
members my name is Jennifer
Weber and I'm here on behalf of
the New Mexico chamber of
commerce in opposition to Senate
bill forty one.
In twenty twenty one the chamber
published driving New Mexico's
future and economic
competitiveness analysis of the
state an action plan to jump
start our economy post pandemic
one of the fourteen factors we
found in our study things that
New Mexico must do to build a
more equitable and diverse
economy is to continue to grow
and strengthen our state's
innovation capacity.
Appropriations under Peter have
contributed to this needed
innovation and we believe that
of the forty one what have
unintended consequences the
chamber understand that
employees.
Organizations formed under pita
like we have the right to
organize under the N. L. R.
eight we ask for you not to move
Senate bill forty one out of the
committee thank you.
Is there anyone else in three oh
nine to speak.
There is not.
Thank you okay.
Put yourself back on mute please
and let's go down to the
committee representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair
I do have a number of questions
and I'm.
A little bit puzzled by the
statement Madam chairman of
that.
The employees of this in the can
cannot unionize under existing.
wall okay can you explain.
Why.
There's state believe
Representative that cannot be
done.
Madam chair and representative
yes I can and then I'll refer it
to my experts but people has
been in Representative.
We ate accord .
Corporation that is not covered
by many public laws except for
the does that appear to give it
some advantages
and it also is precluded from
employees are also precluded
from organizing on under the
NLRA and I will ask my expert
Shane needs to expand on that he
has relevant case law and the
light madam chair and
representative.
Madam chair representative
Nibert yes the United States
Supreme Court decided this
question fifty one years ago and
and all our be versus Hopkins
county decision that decision of
the U. S. Supreme Court was
actually applied to New Mexico
case in which the state bar
center employees attempted to
organize and following the US
Supreme Court precedent the
court ruled that if something is
a creation of the state but is
an arm of the state and it may
not organized under the national
labor relations act UNM Sandoval
is part of the UNM health system
and they have made explicitly
clear that they are on arm of
the state so as a consequence
the employees can at organized
under the national labor
relations.
Madam chair and and
Representative Mr use that case
essentially help of the state
bar was expressly for by statute
and by judicial rule to be an
arm of the New Mexico Supreme
Court in this case we have an
express statute and I'll read it
to you
Twenty one yes twenty eight dash
seven so as a research park
corporation shall not be the HSD
public body or other political
subdivisions of New Mexico
including for purposes of
applying statute the law
relating to personnel or
etcetera the only two exceptions
are one the the representative
referred to in her opening
statements and so I don't
believe that that fifty year old
Supreme Court case has anything
to do with the ability of
employees to unionize under the
N. L. R. B. R. in the present
situation and if they choose to
do so then they will have their
free choice as described by
Senator the commenters what it
seems to be what seems to appear
before us is that
this effort is to do an end run
around a pending court decision.
The madam chair and and
Representative are you aware
that there is pending litigation
involving this issue before the
courts right now.
Well madam chair and
representative yes I am.
M. Madam chair representative
how do we get around.
Article four section thirty four
of our constitution.
Are you referring
Representative to the fact that
we can't legislate to affect
pending let legislation pending
litigation.
Like I said just that is exactly
the question I'll guide you
clarify that I'm glad I had that
in my little brain cells madam
chair and representative this
does not affect pending
litigation.
That lawsuit can proceed under
prior law this law if it's
enacted will not impact that
lawsuit.
Yes.
Madam chair representative if
this if this measure becomes law
and that matters still pending
it will be came to move what it
not.
It will be.
Thank well I can't predict what
the court's going to say but it
will give the employees a clear
right to bargain and organize
under people so I would think
that's a good thing
representatives that we and
madam chair that we're
clarifying what the public
policy of the state is instead
of relying on the courts to do
so.
But the public policy of the
state in this case is that.
These.
Organizations these research
park corporations are not deemed
to be an agency of state
government.
Not a political subdivisions.
J. M..
Employees can choose to unionize
under the NLRB and go through
those procedures should they
wish if you bring in a.
These research parks in to
the.
Number all of the state your
overriding other portions of
the.
That you and you complicate and
possibly undermine the very
purpose for which is research
parks are are incorporated and I
think that was the concern that
was expressed by by Senator
So I I really do not believe
that the case cited treatments
the.
Employees to choose thank you
under the act or be if they wish
to proceed in that manner and I
think.
And
Madam chair
we have a couple people comment
from that institution Scott
slaughters one of all and I
think you would concur with with
this statement and that is.
There would be no pushback from
the from the research park
corporation of this circumstance
to allow that you activity to
Percy and if you would like we
can hear directly from the
horse's mouth madam chair if
you'd like to make you know my
panelists.
Here madam chair I would like to
have my expert respond if you
choose to have Mister solder but
I would point out madam chair.
That we are now getting into
litigating the case with the
university and this is a matter
of legislation that will be
prospective and we and
litigating the matter by having
the universities I guess council
participating I think is
inappropriate madam chair and
representative.
Madam chair of the decision as
do you would you like Mr Sater
to to answer my question or
would you only allow the X. for.
Attorney for the other side to
present.
M..
Representative Chandler it
sounded like you were saying you
like to ask your expert about
this but I'm I'm gonna ask you
as the sponsor here
Representative Chandler would
you like to have this question
answered by the other person in
the audience madam chair I
believe I have the university
has had its opportunity to
participate the of the public
process and I believe at this
point the discussion has moved
back to the sponsor and her
experts would prefer that we
maintain that the protocols that
we have some time madam chair
thank you.
Madam chair representative let
me just state explicitly of the
discussion that I've had with
where are you the person at this
University Park Corporation are
indicated explicitly.
That should be employees desire
to form a union under the NLRB
that that they would not stand
in their way and that would be
there right and and they can do
that if it's a matter of three
choices have stated so so that's
not the argument the argument is
whether or not you want to
change the University Park
corporations into a state agency
which is contrary to statute
it's contrary to the existing
statute and it undermines the
very purpose for which the
University Park corporations
were established it will
complicate such things as
happens such things as
intellectual property and other
things that that these research
parks are supposed to be
developing for the good of.
All in the in the state and they
were to to
allow these universities to
perform these organizations to
be another mechanism to be able
to secure innovation.
Not just for that university but
for all and several of our
colleges universities around the
state have taken advantage of
the state
Representative madam vice chair
or a I'm sure is familiar with
one down at the New Mexico state
the the arrowhead center there's
there's other universities that
have done that I think CNN has
one as well as a maybe New
Mexico highlands so.
We we we are being asked to do
something that has much broader
implications than just simply.
What.
Causing the of unionization of
public or.
We have to find creating a
public employee making the
research corporation a public
employer for purposes of the
report public employee
bargaining Act
Broader implications in that and
that is another line concern
that I think the university
hasn't in this case
The.
The concern
I thank you is is well founded
and this ought to be something
that we step lightly on not only
because of section thirty four
of article for the constitution
but because a lot of time and
effort was spent in crafting
the.
Statute to create these our
research park corporations I
have many years of twenty plus
years of experience with these
research parks and.
They have have a modicum of
success it affects some of that
bright success in accomplishing
the purposes for which they were
were intended and so now we're
going to Kirk about in one
instance
of an exception that could
undermine the whole thing and I
think we need to be very careful
in going down that road
particularly since this is just
you issue those employees have
the right to to pursue those
signs so.
Share at this time.
The couple more months but at
this time I would like to move.
An amendment.
This particular member I believe
this is so.
With the committee and the.
Two or two number.
Point two two two.
Seven three zero point two.
Thank you Representative Nibert
I'd like to clarify do we have.
a motion to discuss this
ammendment.
Yeah but I I just made them
motion to move this ammendment
yes then it for discussion thank
you.
can you please repeat the to to
to number and the chance to pull
it out of.
Point two two two.
Seven three zero point two.
Madam chair I'll second that
motion.
Thank you Representative Nibert.
I'm gonna give a committee
members a chance to pull this up
on the share file.
Myself included.
That I can.
Explain it pretty simple
representative Nibert please
explain your amendment.
Okay I'm looking at the
amendments and context version
of the bill and so it's on page
two paragraph be.
To.
And basically what this
amendment would do it it strikes
all the stuff the
Senate program and so what the
Senate's would right a public
employee employer for the
purposes of the public employee
bargaining Act.
One after may eighteen twenty
twenty two so basically of what
it would accept obviously of the
Santa facility and then anything
formed after that date with
Yes we're changing the
of activity.
Public employees.
that is to try to keep the
status quo at least with respect
to the existing research parks.
Okay thank you for that
representative Nibert having to
go back to the sponsor
Representative Chandler is the
friendly amendment
madam chair it is not a friendly
amendment the status quo is not
acceptable because there are six
hundred hospital employees in
state who have no ability to
organize either under state or
federal law and this would
continue that unfortunate
situation madam chair thank you
sponsor sponsor Representative
Chandler I'm going to go to the
committee on this ammendment
speaker it off and
Representative had gone I do see
your hand raised on the bill I
believe so I'm gonna ask you to
just put down your hands for a
minute I have your nations
figure Egolf and Representative
I'll go in and now on the
amendment committee.
Please raise your hand if you
like to discuss the amendment.
Seeing no committee members on
this ammendment I move to table
madam chair in the second that
gave the motion from
representative Ely
eight please call the roll.
Yes
Representative all.
This.
Representative Armstrong.
Yes.
Representative Chandler yes.
Representative Cook no.
Mr speaker yes.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative night bird.
Noted.
Representative rain no ma'am.
Representative Townsend.
Yes.
Madam chair.
To table.
In a vote of eight to zero to
table the bill I mean all the
amendment.
There were some negative votes.
We're gonna I'm sorry a vote of
eight to three to table the
amendment yes to clarify on a
vote of eight to three this
amendment has been tabled
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair
Madam chair representative.
Would you be amenable to an
amendment that would deal with
the issue
If the efforts go through all
these one by one excuse me we
still have the.
We just had a staff person
unmuted I'm gonna ask them to
mute excuse me representative
Nibert.
Thank you thank you madam chair
I was asking the representative
she would be amenable to looking
out whether or not.
We could.
Allow the public employee
unionization to occur only if in
L. R. B. determines that.
It would lack dearest diction
another words get over that hump
if if indeed it found that it
could you eyes and that your
statements are are incorrect
that
The.
Efforts to unionize under the N.
L. R. B. would not be allowed if
you are correct them
we would be
Amenable to that but if the.
Efforts to unionize under the L.
R. B.
were to occur four it was
allowed then it would continue
to be a private organization.
In terms of the of the statutes
are would not be doing that
alarm of the state is that
something more that you would.
Consider.
As the.
Would like to look at because I
I have no desire to go through
these one by one as somebody
said
two to see if they're
acceptable but that would be a
middle ground road that
basically said that
if fits your personnel are be
can you are as the workers
should bear desire
Then we can proceed in that
fashion it continues to be a a
non
public entity
well the state of New Mexico
thank you guys if they wish if
we are.
If I am wrong and they cannot
use that method of unionizing
them
thank you guys under the public
employee bargaining Act.
Madam
chair and representative I
appreciate the suggestion but
let me plan a couple things out
to do that could take years you
and I could those be retired
from the legislature by the time
the NLRB got around to making a
determination and I think it's
unfair to the employees who work
at the the more than six hundred
employees to work at the
facility to hold them in limbo
while one waits for that
determination so for that reason
now and I do want to correct one
thing we keep saying it's not a
public entity well it is and it
isn't because in paragraph one
it is an agency or other
political subdivisions of the
state for the purposes of
applying statutes and laws
relating to the furnishing of
goods and services to the
university that operate set and
the risk management fund it also
provides protection protections
to the board of directors under
the tort claims act and its
employees and so on and so forth
so this would be just one more
exception giving the employees
right the rights that they
should have as employees of our
other what sometimes public
entity and I think that's more
appropriate madam chair and
representative.
But as reported out by your car
about those two exceptions we.
The overarching concern is that
the reserves or is not a
political subdivisions of New
Mexico is not a public body it's
not an agency it is a non profit
Corporation justice any other
nonprofit corporation to do so
We may.
Do that on the floor amendment
because I do think that that's
kind of the middle middle
ground.
There's a.
Given the.
Workers are opportunity you eyes
and and while you and I may not
be representatives at the end of
this year
I think that the should the
workers decide to you guys that
does not state that many years
to do so I'm not as familiar as
your expert is Madam chair
representative with the it seems
to me that when a group of
workers get sufficient number of
votes to unionize those St from
the don and masterly problem
fashion not five years down the
road
The
The real concerns yes
Are the far reaching effects
that this legislation may have
on not just Senator regional
Medical Center but on average
research park corporation the
the that is because.
If it's Sir gonna be good for
for.
Health care facility it's
probably gonna be good for for
for the others and that could
have tremendous impacts on the
ability of the state to secure.
The type of.
HM and that type of the.
Knowledge and.
Yes.
Allowing technology to them be
of.
Utilize in other sectors that
are produced in these
Research parks to.
B. utilize that certainly
complicates I think the ability
of a.
Our reserves to keep
intellectual property and and
some of the cabins are more
secure from of being being
private and maybe go over into
the the public arena as well as
the open it up to another but
other issues so that the
concerned public entities that
would not be
generally applicables to
nonprofit corporations as as
this year
Madam chair of the
Representative.
I know we can go round and round
and we.
Talk about a lot of servers I
think we're just gonna have to
agree to disagree I do think
it's it is.
Unsettling it's going to cause
an unsettling of this law it's
probably going to have some some
affects on the universities are
created these and I think that
is not in the best interest of
the universities four of the
state.
Thank you madam chair thank you
for.
Thank you next to Mr speaker.
Thank you madam chair moved to
pass.
I'll second that motion.
Okay thank you we have a
depressed motion from
Representative speaker on SP
forty one with the second from
chair Chasey.
Committee is there for the
discussion before we go to
local.
Representative Alcon it has had
its hands so seeing further
debate will go to Representative
on going before we go to the
thank you madam chair I just
have one comment only thing this
does is allow the people that
were there to decide if they
want to join the union that's
all it does our.
The only said this before and
I'll say it again the only
companies that get a you are the
ones that that.
So these regional Medical Center
whatever it is our earns a you
that's because that's who they
are.
So with that madam chair I am
good with billion devote.
Thank you see no further
discussion let's go to a roll
call vote please.
Representative Alcon yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Chandler yes.
Representative Cook.
Hello.
Mr speaker yes.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative night we're.
Representative green no ma'am.
Representative Townsend.
Thank.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Yes.
Eight two three we have a due
passed on Senate bill forty one
is amended.
Thank you Mr vice chair.
Click over now if you'd like
we're on Senate bill one fifty
nine.
And
Senator Ingle and worries and I
believe somebody is presented
but I'm not sure.
Who the committees that Mr
speaker is that you.
Madam chair is actually going to
be the leader Townsend that I am
joining this bill today is a co
sponsor.
so I can I can and I also have
an amendment that is a friendly
amendment the.
And so have members with this
bill does madam chair is it
adjusts.
The factor by which.
Legislative.
Diem rate is multiplied when
calculating the benefits are
paid pursuant to the P. E. R.
A.'s legislative action plan
number two.
I believe every member of the
house except that you know there
might be the right one or two in
the house almost every member of
the legislature participate that
participates in the pension plan
participates in legislative
pension plan number two.
The budget for the legislative
retirement currently you
multiply the highest per diem
rate.
Which right now is two hundred
two dollars by eleven percent.
You then multiply that number by
sixty.
The product of that
multiplication is then
multiplied by service credits
that's a number of years.
A certain legislature in in that
calculates the annual budget to
legislature's.
Senator Ingalls legislation
takes the eleven percent it is
our eleven percent of the
premium rate and raise that to
fourteen percent of the per diem
rate.
so that the annual budget
increases somewhat for members
who have left the legislature Mr
speaker yes I apologize but
Senator Ingle is the attendees
and would like to join
okay great.
You should be up here.
Ingle I see their Senator I was
just wrapping up my explanation
of your bill hopefully I didn't
screw it up it would be just
fine okay on okay good
it's a madam chair this raises
from eleven percent to fourteen
percent that.
Of the the in use at the as the
initial factor in calculating
provided retirement currently
the legislative legislature's.
Retirement plan is funded the
funded ratios almost one hundred
forty one percent funded so it's
over funded if this changes
enacted the P. E. R. A.
actuarial stop staff calculate
the legislative pension will be.
Still over funded but at a
hundred twenty nine percent
instead of one hundred forty one
percent
And madam chair I at this time I
would like to move for
discussion purposes.
the amendment.
If anyone second madam chair I
will go and share file to.
I need to replace SO.
We go.
The amendment madam chair has a
two oh two number.
triple two six five two point
two.
Apple two six five two point two
I said like to move that please
for discussion purposes.
I don't know if you need a
second on discussion I just I
don't I don't think so so let's
let's hear what the the
amendment does.
so what this does is this this
repeats a policy that we enacted
several years ago I believe is
twenty seventeen madam chair
Senator Ingle what we did in
twenty seventeen was
we're we're making other changes
to the legislative retirement
plan.
We opened up a window for
members who had failed to enroll
in the legislative retirement
system to enroll.
it we had a few members of the
time that wish to participate
but miss the initial read of one
hundred eighty days after
provided service starts of the
PR rules require that you elect
to participate more in the
muscle like to participate
legislative term it with one
hundred eighty days of your
legislative service beginning
with a couple members who missed
that window wanted to be
included we did that
there was a at least one member
of this committee and they did
they took advantage of that
opportunity are there it I
believe to Senator she took an
advantage of that opportunity
there may have been more what
are the members madam chair that
we had hoped would have been
able to take advantage of that
was former representative Roger
Maddalena Amos Pueblo
he was aware of the window
having been reopened
I understand that there's
another former member former
Republican representative at
Brad Cates who has been an
analyst on this committee for
number of years so my amendment
is identical to the one that we
passed several years ago
increase the temporary provision
in the law allowing former
members of the legislature from
either chamber to enroll in the
program.
They have to make a contribution
equal to what they would have to
make.
If they be contributing all
along.
So you see a page one.
The minute madam chair for every
year service.
Prior to the year twenty twelve
they would have to the former
member would have to pay five
hundred dollars for every year
from twenty twelve to twenty
eighteen six hundred dollars and
then for every year after twenty
eighteen one thousand dollars
for each year of credited
service plus interest
interest accruing B. any on
December thirty one two thousand
four so it's not a small amount
of money to be paid but it's
enough to make the the payments
plus interest are enough to keep
the fund hole and give
opportunities for members to for
whatever reason were unable or
or did not enroll and this gives
them an opportunity to enroll
and I think it would be.
Significant and meaningful for
for some of those for members to
be able to get back into the
retirement that it it seems to
me Madam as a matter of fairness
since we did it on a bipartisan
basis a few years ago to re open
that window to let the last year
meeting members who wish to add
to participate.
Other questions on the
amendment.
I should also say Madam did it's
my understanding from Senator
Ingle this is a friendly
amendment amendment and I
discussed it with your Townsend
who is the primary sponsor in
the house and it is a friendly
amendment from his perspective
as well on move adoption of the
amendment chair.
It will second that.
So.
We have to just eight thirty
objections we will have to call
the roll thank you.
Dr if you all.
Call these Representative Akan
all.
Representative Armstrong.
Thank.
Yes sorry about that.
Representative Chandler yes.
Representative Cook yes.
Mr speaker yes.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative night we're.
Yes.
Representative Rehm yes.
Representative Townsend.
By Jessica Benham.
Yes.
Madam chair yes.
So.
Opted by a vote of what eleven
zero eleven to zero okay.
Chairman and madam with the they
do pass as amended.
Is of
They're no more that it's
needed.
Right yep madam chair Senator
Ingle had a version of this
ammendment and make Dorsey from
my office I got touch with the
appropriate lawyer and if the
staff at the P. R. A. to make
sure that this amendment that
we've just adopted as
comprehensive and fix the
problem that I just discussed.
Okay so we're ready for the due
process as amended and comment
was that you Mr speaker made
that motion or with the effect
if I'm allowed
I think it was like I think
somebody said it.
Is it Representative Eli.
So madam chair was actually the
speaker proposed it I did okay
madam chair they do pass and SB
one fifty nine as amended very
good we have a due pass by the
vice chair and also a second
from the former vice chair.
Representative Eli.
Is there for the discussion.
Casey the clerk to call the
roll.
Representative Alcon.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Chandler yes.
Representative Cook yes.
Mr speaker yes.
Representative Eli Los.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative night prayer yes.
Representative Rehm yes.
Representative Townsend.
Vice chair Cabana.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Yes.
Ten two zero we have a two
passed as amended on the Senate
bill one fifty nine.
Thank you very much.
We're right next.
Thank you.
Eighty percent madam madam chair
Senator thank you for your good
work there Sir you're working
hard good for you Senator.
Recognize that Senator.
Okay we've got Senator Padilla
has with us to and no I was
waiting we let me make sure that
we could elevate him really fast
his bill R. one three is our
next item.
Has been elevated already no I'm
not finding you justice
secretary.
You just went in okay very good
here is.
Senator welcome we're ready for
your
Senate bill one oh three.
Hello madam chair I'm here
Senator.
Those.
Okay I think I am on the delay
madam chair let me close out the
other okay.
I'm hearing some background
noise and can identify any other
microphones how's that Senator
very good I can hear you in real
time not thank you madam chair
and vice chair members of the
committee Senator Michael
Padilla think about everybody
here essentially Senate bill one
oh three and and what that sue
Meister if you could let
secretary Ricky Serna into but
we may need to have I don't know
if we will or not but did a lot
of work on this on the Senate
side madam chair so essentially
workforce solutions was going
through an audit as I was
working with them to turn their
call center around earlier this
year our early last year to in
the summer for free full
disclosure completely for free
and we fixed a lot of things
that by working with them and
but while they were in that
audit they did discover that the
taps the tops program excuse me
that brings in quite a bit of
money into the state they have
about twenty five employees
madam chair that are have access
to I arrested and so in that
audit they were notified that we
were out of compliance and so we
need to do something about that
by getting a fingerprint and the
criminal background check for
all of those employees.
so we basically we send the
fingerprints over to do PSD PS
since that part they they do the
fingerprinting and then they
sent off to the FBI to
background check and then
everyone goes along their merry
way we did amend the bill answer
we did staff introduced
substitute and Senate
judiciary before I get to that
are with few things we wanted to
do there but essentially the
agency's going to handle the
cost of these background checks
we don't have an appropriation
here that's over come straight
to you there's about twenty five
employees so the first year will
run about eleven hundred dollars
to get these checks done and
then about three hundred eight
dollars every year there after
because you have to check them
about every five years
But this really does help the
state in a really big way to
continue that funding stream to
to to New Mexico the amendment
outside the substitute to
introduce basically struck all
the language related to how if
somebody didn't receive the job
or wanted to file a complaint or
to they were gonna have not
received the job offer.
Because all of that's already in
in policies and regulations
within the department and their
human resources practices as it
is so that's really what the
amendment did I'm sorry the
substitutes are what you call
you to the members I'm sure but
that's basically what it is
that's that's all I've got for
you today that's my show.
Secretary need to say that.
I'm if he's not in already I
think I've covered it and we did
work on the site we feel very
good about it Madam.
Let's go to the attendees and
see if anyone wants to weigh in
we do a short call Senator
Padilla so we'll do that first
Justin twenty seconds I think
there's anyone wants to weigh
and
For or against.
You got to pull up yet.
There we go.
Okay see if anybody is here for
a very good system.
Looks like this didn't drop a
lot of interest Senator
thankfully.
That's a good thing all right
let me see if there's anyone
with hands raised in the
attendees would like to speak.
I don't have that either we go
to committee members.
Representative okay.
Thank you madam chair I have one
question Senator why do we have
to do this by legislation like
and they do it just in the house
viral.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative and chairman
hi I thought the exact same way
when they brought this to me
instruction we work would you
mind working on this this is
that something that the Feds
require that it be done through
legislative action I ate I I
found that very odd myself but
that's the requirement that they
have with these audits when they
conduct.
Thank you I'll take your word I
believe
thank you madam chair.
That is welcome back to
Representative for them to to
just ask question Representative
right.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative video I'd like to
take you to page two and
Winds ten or eleven.
What we're looking as a record
of convictions and arrests of
the subject and there's a couple
things that come up.
Let's assume that this
individual was.
Employed at a business where you
know he was entrusted with money
or something like that anyway
you are he's allegedly embezzled
the money.
The case was prepared it was
sent to the district attorney's
office and and there was never
any filing.
So there's a police report but
there's never been a conviction
there's never been an arrest and
unfortunately analysts work at
second judicial district if it's
not an investment over fifty
thousand dollars they're not
going to prosecute the case so I
think there you need to be a
little broader and I make any
suggestions for amendments for
the floor as I don't have the
language on fly here.
That you need to look at any
criminal referral to the DA's
office as well
Anyway I don't know if you have
a comment on that.
I appreciate that madam chair
and and Representative Rehm but
that the the the statute of the
I'm sure the federal requirement
calls out simply what the FBI
would would find in there in the
data that they get back so if
this was something that wasn't
actually prosecuted or there was
not a judgment of any kind that
wouldn't come back and that
would be something that the
department would would not be
aware.
Madam speaker and Senator do
that you're exactly correct but
I think we want to that these
people to make sure that they
are
They're going to be worthy of
looking at this information
without having any problems so
we've got an NCIC records that
was talking about and this with
the outside is that record I
agree but in here we talk about.
Contacting the local law
enforcement.
That would be in the realm of
the local law enforcement.
More are madam chair and.
Senator let's move to page three
point twelve we're going to go
back up the last five years.
Well I think that period of time
is too short I think it should
be extended almost all our
statutes to deal with and in
criminal law look at a ten year
window the last ten years and
then I'm gonna ask one other
thing how does expungement fit
in there.
Well thank you madam chair and
and Representative we developed
the department developed the
legislation based on what the
federal audit requirement was
and that was five years so
that's why we left it at that on
expungement if the person is
able to go through the process
and successfully receiving
affects management and it would
not show up on the FBI report
the or or and a background check
then that's not something the
department would be able to take
into consideration.
Madam chair and senator we're
going to go the bottom of page
three one twenty four so talks
about entering into contracts in
the part of age Ford says.
Perspective contractors or
subcontractors we're gonna do a
background on them.
That.
But what about you you receive a
contract.
Now you don't have any language
in here about my employees.
Well the contract that would be
developed madam chair and
representative with the the
contracting company would have
to meet the requirements and
that's why they're called it is
called out as
Perspective contractor or
contractor so the prospective
contractor would have to meet
and and and agree in the
contractual agreement they have
with the state of New Mexico
that they would meet this
background check for the
employees that work for them.
Okay.
Then I noticed on the FY are
there's a.
List of.
Areas of they're going to look
back that would be a you know
considered.
Subject to.
The
background check that would be
disqualifier sample on page
three have you seen those.
Our test and so in the
substitute did you look through
you're looking at the substitute
your reference to Google those
items madam chair and and that
representatives we initially
used the language of moral
turpitude
but instead yet we took that out
because you know that was
yes I just wanted to you know
make you feel comfortable on
that but the department has all
of the items listed on the page
three of the FY are as the items
that would disqualify so those
are already in the policies and
procedures of the Representative
rex of the department.
Madam chair and Senator Padilla
I would suggest the state auto
update those policies to
important burglary larceny and
shoplifting.
But you can make those
recommendations to them or their
policy.
With that madam chair I'm all
finished thank you.
I'm sorry madam chair burglary
larceny and shoplifting I will
because I think some of those
well all right thank you I will
suggest that to the Department
that's that's for their decision
making.
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair just
really quick wanted to affirm
what Senator Padilla said about
requiring legislation I've been
engaged and a lot of legislation
around background checks in the
area of health and Human
Services and that's also my
understanding that for the Feds
doesn't require it necessarily
for the state and local but for
the fans to do it they need to
have it and legislation so
that's it thank you madam chair
chair representative.
Thank you Representative
Armstrong.
Next I thank representative
about the promotion.
All right.
Let's let's get somebody else
the opportunity.
Madam chair okay Representative
Chandler is a do pass second one
second Representative Armstrong.
Is there for the discussion.
Okay seeing the clerk to call
the roll.
Representative Akan yes.
Representative Armstrong.
Yes.
Representative Chandler yes.
Representative Cook.
Mr speaker yes.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative night we're.
Representative Rehm.
Representative Townsend.
Madam chair.
Representative remove the screen
did you hear how voices vote no.
You didn't hearing now
Representative Rehm did you want
to go.
Here we go over the budget in a
diverse yes Reem yes okay sounds
and yes.
Okay.
Okay I don't think we heard any
of those so I'm glad I asked
the thank you.
Thank you know you're just
waiting for me right
yes.
Madam chair I will yes to this
is because okay.
Overwhelming this wall so by
about twelve to zero we have do
you passed on committees of the
Senate bill one of three.
Okay thank you very much thank
you all very much have a good
rest today.
Our last agenda item is Senate
bill thirty five the appointment
of temporary guardians the
Sanchez
the Senator Sanchez
Representative Joe Emrick
Representative Ferrary and I'm
not sure if she is with us
waiting to come in.
Yep she was her up.
Representative Ferrary Senate
bill thirty five.
We have should Bacon we need to
move you up again all righty.
Just as big.
Thank you it right.
All right here we go we've got
everybody we need.
Go right ahead Representative
Ferrary thank you madam chair
and I'm not sure if director
Alice clay is in the audience.
Let me see.
I don't see her.
Raise your hand if because it's
easier if they do then they
moved to the top of the list.
Thank you I wasn't sure if she
was going to be joining us
today.
Representative Ferrary
thank you madam chair
Senate Bill Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill thirty five is what we're
presenting today for your
approval
many families and their loved
ones have suffered the
consequences of the guardianship
that went wrong and some of them
were secluded and exploited as
the alleged of incapacitated
person and stolen from their
friends and relatives their
independence and their quality
of life and some of those people
affected by an angry just
guardianship where do and Torrez
in Los crucis and do was a
retired lieutenant colonel in
chief stated in public and was
taken to a local hospital and
when they asked about her family
she was thinking of her deceased
partner and she had no children
so she was put under court
ordered guardianship and has and
as friends and relatives tried
to help her there was a
restraining order issued and no
one can see her or talk to her
without the guardian's
permission her relatives
couldn't move her to Ohio to be
by the end and she died two
years ago and it was the only
way that she was free from the
guardianship and Doris was
seeking a power of attorney for
her son to take care of her and
while seeking advice the
internet appeared before the
court to have her need to
guardian ad light and and was
given to you designation and the
power to hold up doors as bank
accounts and have her removed
from her home and taken to a
dementia unit where after two
years she's finally able to
visit her son at her home on
weekends and is seeking total
independence for the from the
oversight of the Courts.
And in the twenty twenty one
regular legislative session H.
B. two thirty four created the
working distance
interdisciplinary
network of guardianship
stakeholders known as wings
which included a broad range of
guardianship experts policy
makers and individuals affected
by the guardianship system and
one of the primary purposes of
wings is to propose legislation
for guardianship reform and this
bill is the first legislative
work product of wings.
And the important changes that
judiciary substitute for House
Senate bill thirty five will
bring to the guardianship
program will help us to better
protect the interests and
desires of some of our most
viral bowl and to ensure the
courts take the path of least
restrictive.
Options and it limits and
narrowly tailors the use of
temporary guardianship
proceedings to only true
emergency situations where there
is serious immediate and
irreparable harm to a person's
health safety or welfare and I'd
like to recognize Justice bacon
judge Franchini and also co
cosponsored Representative
Daymon Ely who have all been
champions for guardianship
reform for our state for many
years.
So with that I'd like to have.
Just as they can or just just
and or a judge thank you need to
speak.
Is.
Madam chair I think judge Frank
he is has not been let or been
promoted to a panelist yet.
My apologies I thought I had
accomplished.
So I don't know what I did maybe
I find somebody else in there.
And there now is with us now
okay great
judge Frank he's going to speak
first initial talk briefly
about how we help things occur
now.
And then I will go next and talk
about the difference between the
existing statute and the statute
that's being proposed here today
judge Frankie thank you madam
chair.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you all representatives we're
here today to talk to you about
Senate bill thirty five which as
Representative Ferrary RT said
is dealing with temporary
guardianship and conservatorship
and just because it'll be easier
I'm going to only say temporary
guardianship when I mean both
just so what's not to worry so
what happens today under today's
laws is that I will receive a
petition for for full
guardianship or conservatorship
with the request for an
immediate appointment of a
temporary guardian if I end up
appointing the temporary
guardian it is done without
notice to the alleged the past
decade it person I mean the
court does not see the light in
the past decade it person and
does not have a hearing for at
least sixty days there's no
court oversight during this
period of time and there's no
reporting done by the temporary
guarding during this time.
This leads to abuse the system
and it can getting kicked down
the road before a full hearing
is held on whether a full
guardianship conservatorship
should be appointed.
We have found that this is
relate excuse me created uses in
the system specifically by
something we call her thing
which is when I Hospital files
for the payment of temporary
guardian to appointed a
temporary guardian who then
we'll get the person out of the
hospital so because the person
is not able to pay the hospital
for the room that they are in
this is an inappropriate use of
temporary guardianship
additionally we know many of you
probably have heard this story
before we are aware of the case
here in New Mexico not one of my
cases we are aware of the case
here in New Mexico where a
temporary guardian was appointed
and the temporary guardian never
saw the the person under
guardianship until after
department regarding was put on
notice that that their lives in
the past in person and died if
you've never seen the protected
personal lives she's just should
really just never happened and
so the purpose is Senate bill
thirty five is to tighten up the
current law that we have and to
provide more direction in a
timely manner to both judges
lawyers and parties all together
thank you.
Madam chair representative as I
indicated I'll talk about some
of the changes that are
highlighted by the US Senate
bill thirty five as as amended
the Senate bill thirty five
requires an expedited hearing
within ten business days of the
filing of the motion for
temporary guardian this forces
the judge eight to have a timely
hearing and be actually lay eyes
on the alleged past two person
to assess whether they actually
need it temporary guardian or
not.
I'm that position party also has
to clearly show that serious
immediate and irreparable harm
will result in a health safety
or welfare of the alleged
incapacitated person before that
hearing is held.
there are features of this bill
would also allow for the
dissolution I timely dissolution
of a temporary guardianship so
that it can't kind of Mullingar
if one is unnecessarily
appointed.
I need a L. as appointed with
the tuition for temporary
guardianship this file currently
under the current system no
guardian Adlai item this is
appointed at all and it leaves
the judge with an adequate
information frankly to decide
whether a temporary guardian is
necessary or not.
Requires the jail to file a
report to with the court two
days before that ten day hearing
is held so gives the judge some
information about the condition
of the alleged incapacitated
person it also requires the
guardian Adlai item to inform
the judge of what the alleged
incapacitated person's position
is do they object why do they
have jacked and that's presented
the court there's no such
requirement in the statute right
now.
This also limits the ability to
extend the duration of the
temporary guardian right now it
can be under the new law it can
be in place for thirty days and
you can only it be extended
after hearing we're good cause
is shown to extend the temporary
guardianship for an additional
sixty days and that can only
happen one time.
Right now there's no hearing aid
for the extension it's a simple
motion and there isn't a lot of
that after two adversarial
conversation about whether it
should be extended or not.
Personal service shall be
effectuated on the alleged
incapacitated person and the
alleged incapacitated persons
attorney if if there is one
within twenty four hours after
the appointments.
And I think this is a
particularly important feature
of this bill the temporary
guardian is prohibited from
selling or disposing of any
property or changing the housing
works placement of the alleged
incapacitated person without
specific authorization from the
court.
so gives the court oversight so
that if there is a need to take
money out of a bank account Pam
mortgage or pay rent or
utilities that can happen but
there has to be some oversight
over that right now right now no
such requirement exists and
temporary guardians can step in
and move somebody to facility
out of their home they can spend
their money and there's no
oversight.
And there's no current reporting
requirements for what the
temporary guardian does during
this time frame and Senate bill
thirty five requires that the
temporary guardian must file a
report within fifteen days after
appointment and within fifteen
days after termination of the
temporary guardianship and this
creates a paper trail both for
the court and the white sticker
passed to that person and
anybody stepping into the shoes
of temporary RT.
so it's just Franchini said we
believe that this is a really
important next step in the
evolution and reform of the
probate code and with that I
will stand along with judge
Franchini for any questions
thank you madam chair.
Thank you very much I'm gonna
give the
attendees C. R. audience members
an opportunity to weigh in
please indicate yes if you're in
favor of this bill and now if
you're not will have a twenty
second all.
Schools.
Okay looks like everybody who is
interested is in favor of that
seven out of seven people and
let me go and see if anyone
there with you.
State
Secretary quite we had.
It's not secretary though is it.
It's.
Madam chair okay director
director record we were going to
promote new panelists but go
right ahead and and speak this
time.
Go ahead.
Director quite.
Hi can you hear us you to undo
it.
Yes can you hear me now yes this
apologies for that good
afternoon madam chair members of
the committee I am Ousley
require executive director at
the New Mexico developmental
disabilities have Council which
houses the office of
guardianship I'm also speaking
on behalf of price Pittenger CEO
of the behavior health
collaborative who could not
attend.
The DD Council and behavior
health collaborative are both
members of the working
interdisciplinary network of
partnerships stakeholders or
wings and we support Senate bill
thirty five as at yes as a.
Do this ministration work to
establish wins last year New
Mexico law so that experts
policy makers and people
affected by the partnership
system including people under
guardianship and their families
to collaborate with the courts
as we all work our state's
guardianship system is built a
small but important step toward
protecting the most vulnerable
to exploitation we do we hope
that the work of wings will
result in greater works sense of
legislative proposals next year
and are grateful for the
judiciary for unwavering
commitment to guardianship
reforms thank you madam chair
members providing.
Thank you very much Jim Jackson.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee this is Jim
Jackson on behalf of disability
rights New Mexico we've been
involved in individual case work
as well as systems change
activity related to guardianship
for a very long time on behalf
of the persons with disabilities
and.
Here to support the so changes
proposed in Senate bill thirty
five temporary guardianship
really is intended to apply to
emergency situations but it has
occasionally been misused to
simply try to get to court first
or speed up the process or lock
in the selection of the guardian
and the this bill will address
that it's I think the most
important thing to remember is
that point ment of the temporary
guardian is it is essentially an
ex parte of process so a
guardian can be appointed based
solely on the allegations of the
petitioner and their
testimonials without an
opportunity to rebut that so
this would this bill would limit
the authority of temporary
guardian expedite the hearing
and require report from the
guardian Adlai item and those
protections will be really
important for people with
disabilities so for those
reasons we encourage your
support thank you.
Thank you.
J. Rick.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Jane
Hamrick I'm a volunteer advocate
with a A. R. P. New Mexico.
A. A. R. P. New Mexico is an
appointed member of the New
Mexico weightings stakeholder
group that has endorsed and
supported these important
reforms to closing loopholes in
New Mexico's temporary
guardianship and
conservatorship provisions for
nearly a decade A. A. R. P. New
Mexico has been in the forefront
of guardianship reform advocacy
and will continue to fight to
protect vulnerable older adults
relying on legal guardians and
others to help them make final
decisions we strongly urge your
support thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Ellen pine
speaking on behalf of the
disability coalition as justice
bacon said this bill is the next
step in the legislature's
ongoing and very important work
to improve and strengthen our
guardianship and conservatorship
loss of at and it will increase
oversight and protections for
alleged incapacitated persons so
we do support it the bill will
tighten up the time friends
increase requirements for
notices reporting and US
standards for these proceedings
that should be used in
emergencies and are
significantly over used in our
guardianship system I do want to
highlight something that justice
Bacon referred to about limiting
the changes that can be done by
a temporary guardian without
court authorization.
Assets can't be disposed of and
the person's residents can't be
changed it's very important that
these permanent types of changes
not be done an emergency
proceedings and we appreciate
that oversight and we urge the
committee support thank you.
Thank you Patsy Romero.
My and muted now you are go
ahead thank you madam chair
members of the committee thank
you for your time this afternoon
and for your consideration of
this important piece of
legislation I'm representing the
National Alliance on mental
illness I am the co chair for
the legislative committee and we
stand in full support of all of
the guardianship reforms that
were attempting to implement
here in New Mexico madam chair
and I believe that this piece of
legislation is is setting us in
the right direction in New
Mexico and so for all the
reasons that have been stated
before me madam chair we do
stand in full support and we
think of Representative Ferrary
for bringing this to the table
and for justice Bacon on her up
eloquent description of how this
is going to help vulnerable New
Mexicans thank you madam chair
and members of the committee.
Thank you and I still have that
but I think you have spoken and
Jean Hambrecht.
Okay
hands down all right let's go to
the committee now.
Just a moment here let me get
by.
You changed.
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair with
immense gratitude to the working
group I happily move would do
pass.
We have the most rigid past
representative Armstrong.
I will second that motion.
And we do have some further
discussion Representative read.
Yes madam chair and I'm glad you
gave it to pass I want to really
command.
Representative Ferrary and judge
of bacon on how every year we
tweak this a little bit better.
Couple questions and madam chair
and probably this would go to
judge Bacon if we could go to
page two on one eight so we're
appointing the guardian the
number why Adam and they have no
longer than two days prior to a
hearing to file a report and I
just think that is not giving
the parties enough time to
respond prior to a hearing
as you know the.
The attorney may be in in court
on let's say the second day
prior to and he doesn't have
much time and I would I think
you ought to look at maybe
extending that period.
I don't know if you want to
comment on that or not.
Madam chair just briefly we need
the guardian of light a report
before the tend to hear.
So it there's no getting around
this deadline and guardian ad
light items their role is often
different than an advocate type
of attorney and so they're
accustomed to to tight deadlines
as I'm sure madam chair can
attest to.
Madam chair and judge bacon I
understand that what I'm saying
is is if there are parties
needed time to bring in their
expert or something else it
really is short right but you
all figure out when work if you
think that's good that's good
when we get over to page three
madam chair and
Judge one of the things I see
the guardian and wide emptively
an emergency situation they want
to limit
Visitation but I I think that
you know until they have a
hearing unless the court rules
there should be a limitation on
hearing yeah I mean on
visitation and I don't see one
region here that would.
The guardian of light M. from
limiting or restricting some
visitation.
Madam chair representative
you're correct that that
limitation doesn't exist often
times that limitation on
visitation as what precipitates
the emergency guardianship
proceeding and we are giving
notice sent to many people and
the ability for interested
persons to step in and object on
this is such an expedited
proceeding that we don't believe
that that restriction is
necessary unlike the plan you're
you're full guardianship process
where that limitation does
exist.
Madam chair and judge bacon so I
I understand it hearing then the
judge would go ahead and limit
that that visitation but I think
if you're gonna do of an
I needed a temporary one
probably the facts before the
court at that time even though
it's expired today R. it would
probably be better for the court
to make the limitation that the
guardian that what are.
That doesn't.
That removes the guardian and
white and from being an
adversary to some of the parties
and makes the court as to one
who are determined the
limitations.
Anyway that's that's my thought
on that let me
madam chair and.
Judge bacon so when we get over
to the conservatory of the
temporary conserver R. I don't
see they are required to
statutory requirement for the
conservative to have a report
before each year right and I
think it would be good to have
the conservative by statute
prepare a report for each
hearing although I realize that
more likely the court's going to
order that but I just think we
ought to put that.
And righty.
And again there's the issue of
what it if the.
Our Garnier wanted district
restrict
of visitation and I you know I'm
just wondering if if you should
put that in there just to
clarify some of the stuff.
I'm Madam chair representative
it's not the guardian Adlai item
that restricts limitation I want
to just clarify that it's the
temporary guardians that that
does that on the conservatorship
side conservatives not going to
be making determinations about
association meeting somebody can
visit and the reason we don't
have a report within eight days
in Act eight days after
appointment or two days before
the hearing is the concert that
temporary conservator isn't the
one providing the reports the
guardian Adlai item providing
the report I'm in the
conservative would not have time
to do a complete report before
the ten day hearing that
conservative is required to file
a report within fifteen days
after appointment so gives two
weeks for that to happen and
then another report fifteen days
after the termination so there
is reporting is just on a
different cycle than the
guardian of items report.
Thank you.
Really command the court the
group or type in the state on
I've had issues with my district
where they've come to me and
we've heard issues I heard the
issue that Representative
Ferrary brought up and then of
course we had several of them
and that in the Albuquerque area
that we're traveling and madam
chair with that that's all the
questions or comments I had in
the have we all all support this
thank you.
I'm glad you asked those
questions Representative and I
just want to thank it's been
many years since I did a
guardianship case and I
generally did children with
disabilities who were becoming
eighteen years of age.
But I'm kind of surprised at all
the work that late senator white
did and Representative Ely
helped with and that justice
bacon when you were judge Bacon
worked on that we didn't.
Find for a restriction on the.
Seizure of property or the sale
of property but we did that big
reform because that was that
that was a large part of why we
ended up.
Looking at the.
This problem and I'm just I
think what we're we're about to
get it right it seems.
Thank you all for your work we
appreciate it what what more
COVID you know Mr chair in in
your exactly right one of the
issues that I saw you know or
was reported to me in my
district was the co mingling of
money you know taking the
incapacitated person's money and
moving it in through that family
and so yeah I think it's a huge
issue thank you very much so.
So I see no further discussions
are ready for the clerk to call
the roll.
Representative Alcon.
I'm here yes.
Representative Armstrong.
Yes.
Representative Chandler yes.
Representative Cook.
Mr speaker.
Yes.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative night
Representative green yes.
Representative Townsend.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Check and make sure that you
heard.
It all of I am in Townsend okay
yeah your voices were a little
bit faint I just barely there
okay yes I do have a due pass
that let Lisa give us the vote
hello by a vote of eleven to
zero we have to pass on
committee substitute for Senate
bill thirty five.
Very good thank you madam chair.
What Representative Ferrary
justice Bacon judge thank you
very nice to have you up with
this today.
So we actually finished our
agenda before it's time to go to
the floor that's rare we are
going to meet tomorrow at nine I
realize that there may be a
conflict for a couple of you but
we're going to get started on
the election bills tomorrow we
have one forty four and Senate
bill six and other non election
bill that we didn't get
ready for today and that is
Senate bill one fifty eight I
think I would probably a fairly
simple bill and so members I
will see everybody who could be
here at nine and.
And we will also if we're not
finished will come back at one
thirty after the floor session.
So is you know the last three
days got a.
Get our work and thank you all
for today appreciate it bye bye.
