Let me make some announcements
at the outset here the first
item on the agenda house bill
thirty four Representative
Matthews has an expert witness
who's not available today and
she asked that we here at on
Wednesday so that will be on
Wednesday.
We already get our schedules.
House bill seventy four which is
money I ask that we roll that
over to Wednesday to because
have some fairly minor
amendments that we want to when
I'm in.
And I think also the committee
analysts found a couple for one
thing that they would suggest so
that will be Wednesday.
So this is the Representative
Matthew McQueen show.
Although I'm if it turns out
that Representative my S. dust
is finished with his.
The at that point in time he
will come into the criminal
justice reform subcommittee
update for this committee only
if that all works up.
In our students workers did it
I'm orchestrate session so
at this point let's go ahead and
go to Representative McQueen.
And we're like to begin.
Thank you madam chair we
beginning with the the
prescribed burn bill or the jury
duty bill it's totally up to you
what we do the prescribed burn
though I think that was first on
the agenda and I have experts
who are probably in the
L. the waiting room thing so
Laura McCarthy the state Forster
and Cheryl beta who is counsel
at their G. minerals and natural
resources department.
They could be promoted to being
panelists.
Can you repeat the second name
please sure I'll be to be a
ninety day thank you.
Madam chair I can probably go.
I see here in the attendee list
potentially as the beta.
Without Sheryl spelled out if
that might be easier to look for
that we Georgia I see a C. beta
the attendees.
Thank you.
Madam chair she's heard The
presentation before so Meisel
begin House Bill.
Fifty seven.
The dresses.
A change in policy that's really
a hundred years in the making so
we're we're getting away from in
eighteen eighty two statute.
So a territorial era statute
almost hundred forty years old.
But in you know a policy of fire
suppression in our force
that we were getting away from
that is as a as a whole for
years we've suppressed fire in
our forest even though in the
southwest we are.
In ecosystem adapted to fire and
as a result of suppressing the
fire.
We have overcome force we have
small diameter
Trees densely packed and we have
devastating forest fires so we
we do have a fire you to to
stand replacing fire it it all
the trees die of the ground is
barren you know bad things
happen instead healthy natural
fire which should be lower
intensity largely carried along
the ground not opened at the
canopies of trees and so we have
a lot of work ahead of us to get
our forced back to a healthy
condition so we can avoid these
massive forest fires and we we
do this by treating the forced
thanks for selectively and
reintroducing fire in in areas
where it's appropriate but we
have this eighteen eighty two
statute on the books in eighteen
eighty two statute is actively a
strict liability statute with
double damages.
So if you start a fire you're
responsible whether or not you
you were negligent and as you
know the lawyers on the
committee and no it no
negligence is is the typical
standard for liability you're
not responsible for something
less you had made some sort of
mistake and so we're we're
trying to get back to that and
what this bill does is create a
training program of the it the
Celtics that so there you
creates a two tier.
Liability.
formula if you go through the
training.
And
certified burden chair or if
your lender in you hire a
certified teacher.
You it's a negligence standard
in you're liable for actual
damages not double damages.
If you do a prescribed burn on
your land and you haven't gone
through the training you may
still be liable for those double
damages but it's still a
negligence standard instead of a
strict liability standard and
then we we thought about
repealing the eighteen eighty
two statute but we're concerned
that that might have some
unintended consequences or leave
a gap in the law so we've left
that in place in we've got to
you know.
There's some changes to it
cleaning up the language which
as you know the Legislative
Council was once say when
they're with their amending
statute modernizing language
just a little bit but then
adding the exception that
doesn't apply with the
prescribed burning Act does
apply so if if you're not doing
a prescribed burn your burning
trash or tennis what else you're
still subject to the eighteen
eighties that but if you're
doing a prescribed burn.
You're gonna fall under a
negligence standard and
depending on whether or not
you've done the training you'll
be socially libel either for
actual damages resulting which.
I would like to turn over to our
state forester or McCarthy who's
been doing a lot of work on this
with a lot of stakeholders and
she's gonna tell you more about
that.
Madam chair and members of the
committee so I just want to add
a few key points one is that
this bill is really focused on.
Expanding the use of prescribed
fire on private lands.
And that's because the state and
federal land managers are
actually doing a pretty good job
of accelerating prescribed
burning on those plans and as
you all probably know the
prescribed burning from twenty
nineteen in the Santa Fe
National Forest is what
protected our Santa Fe ski basin
from having the experience of a
catastrophic fire so we know
that prescribed burning works to
protect the things we care
about.
I also want to share with you
that this bill is based on over
a year of study that was
initiated with House memorial
forty two in twenty nineteen
also sponsored by Representative
McQueen my agency conducted that
study in partnership with twenty
five agencies and organizations
these were experts from across
the spectrum including Senator
County fire managers and people
from interest groups ranging
from Sierra Club to cattle
growers as well as some experts
in prescribed burning people who
actually like those fires and
we feel that we have in this
bill captured the essential
elements to accelerate
prescribed burning while also
keeping it as narrow as possible
to achieve the objectives and
then finally just want to say
that both my agency and the and
as you walk out of the extension
services we have the resources
that we would need to implement
this bill and we look forward to
doing so if the legislature to
pass it.
Thank you madam chair and I
think that's it for the
presentation we of course would
be happy to answer any
questions.
Thank you very much and I think
that I was doing the technical
for us this.
Session.
I think maybe it maybe we're
able to do it Representative
Cook it sounds to me like he's
in the attendees instead of
participants adolescents on what
if you could be switched.
I'm sitting there.
Okay.
Thank you.
Okay good deal we got
Representative taken care of so
let me see
In the participate in the
attendees group would give you
an opportunity to see our way in
for or against this measure.
So do we have a poll ready for
the the
House bill fifty seven.
Perhaps we don't do we have one.
And no one may I can get one.
Okay.
Is that.
So we're all getting used to
this but ordinarily at the
beginning when we're there in
the room and also have who is
president in favor of this
legislation people raise their
hands and then who is it present
in opposition so since we can't
do that we've got the little
pool and.
Care is on the screen and I
think it stays open for about
twenty seconds.
If you with that miss to
support the bill vote for in
favor and if you wish to speak
not you have to speak but if
you're opposed to the bill you
vote in opposition so let's
start that now.
Okay everybody here.
Voted in favor of the bill so I
guess we have no opposition so
let me go now to the
Those who wish to speak and if
you would keep your comments
brief we don't have opposition
so it sounds like everyone's a
friend to get this resolved let
me begin with Lauren Patterson.
Very unmuted and then you can
speak.
I I need somebody who's doing on
needing to do that madam chair
if someone were to make me co
host that I could do that as you
called me.
But I'm not currently made a co
host okay your.
I need to be a co host to
because that would have.
Thank you.
Madam chair this is Lauren
Patterson with New Mexico cattle
growers association we proudly
Act support this that
legislation going forward we
believe in Alaska established a
negligence standard for
prescribed burning on private
lands it creates a certification
program for New Mexico State
University.
And also at will allow and
provide incentives for the
contractors and landowners to
get training to do prescribed
burns in the proper method for
those reasons we probably
support this ministry this
legislation we think the sponsor
for bringing it forth.
Thank you next I have a phone
number no name.
Four six six eight nine six four
would you introduce yourself
please after unmuted.
Yes good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee I'm
curious to see Mr I'm
representing the New Mexico Rio
Grande chapter Sierra Club and I
was a member of the house
memorial forty two working group
did research to develop some of
the recommendations in the house
they'll we strongly support the
prescribed burning Act and as
mentioned before it will
establish a negligence standard
and reduce of the liability and
risk for private landowners
it'll create the training and
certification program it will
create a model burn permit for
New Mexico counties to use and
with the new Henrik and then
then it will require prescribers
to follow the smoke management
guidelines of the New Mexico
environment department and all
of the statue needed to promote
safe and effective burning on
private land so we hope you'll
approve additional thank you
very much madam chair.
Thank you
Next
we can go.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee thank
you so much for the opportunity
to speak again my name's Nina
Conco and I'm the director of
external affairs for the nature
Conservancy in New Mexico we
strongly support the spell and
we urge the committee to support
it as well thank you for your
time.
Thank you joy is sparse and.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee this is joyous
person on the deputy executive
director for New Mexico
association of counties we like
to applaud this effort brought
forward by New Mexico state
forester they have done an
outstanding job of keeping us in
the loop as house memorial forty
two was that it gave us a chance
to weigh in on the
recommendations we have a
particular expertise we manage a
grant program with bureau of
land management for wildfire
risk reduction and since two
thousand four we've administered
over seven million dollars and
roughly three hundred projects
we see this initiative as a
comprehensive approach to
complement those efforts and to
give us more resources in New
Mexico in our tool box and with
that we stand in full support
thank you.
Thank you Adrian I'm gonna live.
Thank you madam chair and
committee my name is a turning
glow I am deputy director of the
New Mexico wildlife federation I
know that there isn't any
opposition to the PO here today
but I will just.
Say why The New Mexico wildlife
federation strongly supports
this bill we recognize the
scientifically proven fact that
prescribed burns are effective
management tools.
our mission includes protecting
public lands waters and wildlife
prescribed burns support all of
that and our mission here at the
New Mexico wildlife federation
so expanding emphatically side
by side with kind of growers in
the other diverse coalition here
in support of the bill we thank
the sponsor and we think this
committee for your time.
Thank you.
Thank you just.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee and thank you for
the opportunity to provide
comment today I'll be brief the
mystery appears public lands and
wildlife advocate for
conservation voters New Mexico I
am here representing CDM shifts
on support for H. B. fifty seven
we have to the committee
approved this bill which
provides a highly effective tool
for fire forced system
management New Mexico's works we
urge our support and passage of
this bill you for your time.
Thank you Tiffany they ran a.
Madam chair members of the
committee to near of our
registered lobbyists for New
Mexico farm and livestock bureau
we stand in support of house
bill fifty seven this afternoon
as prescribed burning is an
integral part of land management
we appreciate the work that the
sponsor has done on this bill
and the ability to continue to
utilize this in the state of New
Mexico thank you.
Thank you
Secretary.
Camilo rematch role metal.
Go ahead thank you madam chair
committee members Camilleri with
the New Mexico State Land Office
Land Office strongly supports H.
B. fifty seven which will help
reduce barriers to the expanded
use of prescribed fire on
private land clarify liability
and establish a certification
and training program well
managed private lands within
share landscape and Watership
benefits not just private land
but also state trust lands
because of the unplanned buyers
also threatened surrounding
ownership HB what that would
expand opportunities
collaborative the plan and
implement prescribed fires
across boundaries with the
responsible expended used to
prescribed fires in the right
place at the right time land
managers can reduce hazardous
fuels the store fire dept
ecosystems and increase
resiliency of our vital forest
grassland watershed and
community Furthermore these
beneficial outcomes preserve our
ability to generate revenue and
Stewart state trust land for
future generations the trust and
fisheries thank you.
Thank you I'm Judy common.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my
names Judy common and I'm The
New Mexico policy director for
the Audubon society and Audubon
recognizes that in addition to
preventing catastrophic effects
of wildfire prescribed fire is
also an essential tool for
wildlife habitat management both
on private and public lands and
a variety of bird species
benefit from an including
popular game birds like Turkey
and quail as well as some
species of conservation concern
like the pinyon Jay and the
lesser prairie chicken so I'm
have over thirteen thousand
members in New Mexico we urge
you to support the bill thank
you.
Thank you and next I have Xander
Evans.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is a talk
chrysalis gimmick deputy
director with the far Stewart
skilled New Mexico based
conservation organization and
we are also practitioners of
prescribed fire and so we
actually put fire on the ground
on private land in New Mexico
and I can I urge you to support
this initiative which were the
first words kids supported.
The development in the H. M.
forty two working group and the
passage of this bill will help
Landowners and contractors more
readily use prescribed fire for
the benefit of watersheds and
forests and also help landowners
and.
Contractors obtain insurance for
the practice thank you.
Thank you very much Debbie here.
Yes Secretary members of the
committee thank you very much my
name is Debbie Hughes executive
director for that New Mexico
association of conservation
districts we also served on the
task force and we appreciate
state forestry working with us
and especially clarifying that
there are some instances where
farmers and say yes you so
judge burning stops crossfire.
Still have a little bit
concerned about the doubles
liability to private landowners
we appreciate that it's.
Estrange ed we also appreciate
state forestry and look forward
to the soil and water
conservation district being able
to work with state forestry Act
help provide some equipment for
prescribed fire for those people
who do become certified.
Fire managers that that the salt
water conservation districts
work very closely with private
landowners through a lot of our
bill programs that provide
resources to do this having that
training as well as some of the
equipment needed for those
private landowners is very well
so this bill is long overdue and
we appreciate the sponsor thank
you very much.
Thank you very much and I think
that is the end of our public
comment so let me go to members
of the committee.
Madam chair your muted I'm not
sure how.
You know when I sent to.
I'm trying to turn my phone off
of my mind sound off because my
phone was ringing
okay here we go Representative
Armstrong thank you madam chair
and thank you Representative for
bringing this is not my usual
air of it area of expertise
except for my family my son is a
firefighter with the a wildland
firefighter with the US Forest
Service Santa Fe forest I his
father before he retired was a
fire chair responsible for
prescribed burns on the Santa Fe
forest for many years and so I
have viewed a prescribed burn
areas where a wildfire has right
through and skipped over that
prescribed burn area that's
protected it so I it's pretty
seen some pretty dramatic stuff
and also now do a listen to
issues around prescribed burns
it got out of hand and I know
the kind of training that they
have gone through for being able
to do prescribed burns so I just
want to thank you for bringing
it forward I think this is
really important particularly
offering the the training and
prescribed burning is one of the
best things that we can do to
control the spread of wildfire
so thank you and that I don't
have any questions I just I
would be remiss and in trouble
with my family I didn't speak up
so thank you.
Thank you representative
Armstrong.
Representative Eli
thank you madam chair
I'm like representative
Armstrong thinks this bill is
long overdue I do however have
an amendment
and it really is just to make
the our bill consistent because
what we're doing is adding new
material and then changing all
statutes and I just want to
correct one thing I have talked
to the sponsor about this and
I'm hoping is so friendly a
proposed amendment but I would
be on page seven of the bill
line six.
after the word person it would
say or that person's that so
singular possessive property so
I would just add it's for words
or that person's property what
that's intended to do is not
immunize or at least exclude as
damages would be the better way
to say at properties
so we cover both we cover both
in the new materials and because
the new materials refer to both
this section that's the
antiquated section should be
consistent with the rest so with
that I would move the adoption
of an amendment page seven line
six after the work person or
that person's property.
Thank you madam chair.
Second that emotion and is there
question Representative created
I'm assuming that's friendly
not.
Yes that's federal.
Sister discussion on the
amendment.
Is there any objections to.
Drafting the amendment.
Same amendment will be adopted.
Let's go.
Tom and I at okay Representative
Nighbor.
Thank you madam chair
I too am pleased to see this
come forward but I do have some
probably
questions that involve maybe my.
Why your restore call knowledge
on on this subject.
Madam chair representative you
your indicated that there's a
nineteen eighties statute that
provides for for in essence
double damages and I see that
you know the definition of
prescribed burn that we have
created some exceptions in those
exceptions are basically for
agricultural tried burnings I
read it correctly.
And my question is.
If those are accepted are those
burnings subject to the old law
or do they get created
favorably as well.
Mentors and divert that's a
great question and the answer is
the hi being X. card out of this
law they're still subject to the
all.
And I personally think that once
people search I just the slide
understand its impact they're
gonna want to be covered by this
law because this law is better
than all we talked about this
when the request was made to add
that language
in we we thought about trying to
encourage them to be covered but
and I can let.
Or courtesy addresses to.
It is a lot of work to repair
this bill and they thought just
adding in ditches and other ag
uses and Siculus without doing
that reach to the stakeholders
would be in the state.
So madam chair Representative
Nibert you want surprise me if
we are back in the year two.
With with new information and
the opportunity to expand the
reach of this law.
Yeah we're not we give up the
state for server Christine
opportunity to respond as well.
Members of the committee on the
at the very first meeting of the
house memorial forty two working
group we read that the
description of the memorial and
have that discussion to exclude
agricultural burning for crops
and orchard production as well
as a check yet to gauge
forwarding from our point of
inquiry and so we would be
wholly unprepared at this point
to make that magnitude of the
change without really study what
the impact would be and
understanding exactly how to
target it in a way so that it
would succeed however we would
absolutely be prepared to do
that in the future if we were
directed to do so.
Madam chair and representative
Representing a very large
district that has been involved
in some very catastrophic fires
due to
Over growth over vegetation of
the forest as well as a
significant agricultural
producing area of this bill now
it's both ways and I'm.
Concern that the agricultural
community stood up in favor of
this where it's not providing in
the real protection for what I
would consider.
Common burning practices on on
farms and
we certainly
personally familiar with the
with the cost orchards and and
the need to of.
Burn lambs and what have you
because if you don't burn those
when piles you get yourself are
inundated with the with
and and and things that you
don't particularly want around
your your your residences so
it's an important aspect too to
not only control the the
Extra would that that is
produced from a from an orchard
but also to keep down
the population of rodents and
other things that I like to
inhabit those
Piles of of Williams or what
have you and of course the
burning ditches and and burning
stubble as is commonplace and
the he is our an active part of
our agricultural management and
so I'm a little bit concern that
We're providing an exception
which on its face I think the
average person the average
farmer would say oh good I'm not
subject to this act not knowing
that.
Lone behold there are strictly
liable and subject to double
damages under the eighteen
eighty eight eighteen eighties
our act and that concerns me.
It concerns me greatly frankly
here hi I was just here to try
to get some explanation and
out of concern
the second the.
Question I have is.
I presume that you kept the
double damages for the people
that do not get the
certification just be consistent
with that old act would that be
a correct assumption on my part.
Mentors present Representative
number that's correct we we feel
a bit constrained by the
existing act
yeah I I personally think double
damages is pretty harsh penalty
but we want to get this in place
and create the framework and
create the the training in the
certification
hopefully we can build on this
in the future.
Yes strict strict liability and
and double damages is is related
care to active in my in my
opinion and all right.
I have some concerns with our
with those provisions I I think
it's important to encourage
people to go through that
process
I really feel like you're the
punitive nature of of the
provisions of double damages if
they're not certified.
The the next question I have is
regarding the certification
I have my past aside Larson's or
under the extension service.
And for those people from New
Mexico state the deal with that
would the certification process
that you envision be similar to
the the cast aside
from licensing requirements that
they have in place to get the.
To get the ability to treat
certain.
The sides and herbicides or on
property.
Madam chair representative I'm
good to for to stay for solar
cars dean sushi can answer that
question because I cannot.
Representative night birch the
answer is yes regarding
certification would be similar.
And if I recall correctly of
math madam chair and miss
McCarthy
my pesticide license goes for a
number of years and then I have
to take so many hours every five
years to maintain that licensing
in good standing would you have
some re certification process
with respect to this fire
management the process or
certification.
Madam chair representative
number yes we would there is a
rulemaking process and in that
we would work out the details of
the time interval for renewal
and the standards what what kind
of re training if any would be
required part of our one of the
general principles is to make
this Sir training and
certification program doable for
the private land owner.
Madam chair and members McCarthy
since that was one of the stated
goals was to encourage may be of
the year so far management tools
on on private property I I would
assume that the certification
process would be related to well
landowners and you know you
don't need to be a train fire
professional to school to seek
and secure of this type of
certification would that be
accurate.
Madam chair representative
absolutely.
What my final question anymore
Madam chair of.
What I truly believe that the.
fire.
Fire is an important tool
particularly and and
a statewide garters that is
subject to
wide swings and in in rainfall
and we certainly are have good
years when the undergrowth the
does quite well and then we have
years of our drought like we're
in right now where the
undergrowth.
Dries out and causes would
change catastrophic your budget
so I really like this I am
tremendously concerned with we
are.
The exception for some of these
common agricultural fires and
their exemption from this bill
then throws them into a strict
liability component and frankly
I'm I'm surprised that the
Senator the people that spoke
from the agricultural community
our.
Are greatly in favor of this
year in light of that fact in
fact the
I certainly would like to see
the potential for amendment
maybe on the floor to address
that specific concerns so our I
sure would like to see the
cattle growers and one of your
co sponsors on this bill
is active in that organization
and in some of the others that
may want to weigh in on that
because I think we we probably
do need to move to maybe
eliminating that eighteen
eighties our bill all together
in trying to provide some cover
to our agricultural producers
and two other private landowners
and take advantage of the
certification process because
otherwise are they are
hung out to dry if indeed it is
a strict liability standard with
double damages are madam chair
that's all the.
Requirements are have in Europe
that the Sanchez may be amenable
to looking at that issue right
yes it moves forward in process
chair Representative I reckon I
make a quick response so that
certainly madam chair so it may
not work I I just want to
emphasize the board and keep in
mind once being made worse off
by this bill you know we're
we're still trying to get away
from that eighteen eighty two
statute we're doing it in a
measured step in one that the
state forestry has done a lot of
work to prepare for and make
sure they're doing it right I
absolutely think they're
interested in looking at
additional steps but potentially
those additional steps are
premature at this point but we
are certainly sympathetic to
your point of view we're just
not quite there yet.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for the response.
Madam chair on that point.
Okay on that point.
madam chair and Representative
McQueen I really appreciated
Representative neighbors
perspective and and and line of
questioning here as someone with
a grudge and coupons I certainly
had resonance with his example
about how we end up with lots of
wouldn't have to figure out what
to do with it and our process is
usually to go through our small
town in our our fire marshals to
get that permission to burn and
I appreciate madam chair
Representative McQueen this
intention that this will be a
multi phase process and we're
certainly not causing further
harm but I just wanted to hear a
little bit more about the
conversations that were had in
order to to decide and make a
decision that R. AG users
weren't also part of this room
to get to more beneficial spot
or or this this attention to get
people closer and and reduce
that liability so madam chair
representative if I could I'm
I'm getting some community
medications from ad folks at
home.
About the conversation they had
actually don't think that is is
appropriate right now because we
want Representative queen has
indicated a sympathy to move on
to address that but it's not
ready to be part of this
legislation because it doesn't
address
the needs are different if I it
my understanding correctly
waiting.
But I think district manager and
that the bill does address our
users that of course include
rangeland for slang but yet the
the hearing aid act it it just
it just beyond the scope of the
work that has been done so far.
Okay next Representative Cook.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative McQueen
I.
Heard nothing but good things
about the bill and I and I and I
appreciate you bringing it I did
want to mention though not
though but I did want to mention
that
You know what Mescaleros in my
district in the Senate heck of a
job for ever taking care the
forced
and so I reached out to them and
and they have provided me with
some comments say they don't
take any position on the bill
and and I think it's good bill
and they don't want to get
involved or anything but
you know I just ask them because
they are experts in the field
with what they thought about
that the provided some feedback
that I won't go into here
because I don't think I fully
understand have a.
Productive conversation but I
wonder if I could forward you
some thoughts that they had in
this kind of awkward you and I
could I had this conversation in
the hall where in the chamber
whatever but since we are we we
all right and that I think
minute in our meeting is
intended to ask if I could maybe
have a an offline conversation
about the feedback I've gotten
from them.
Madam chair of Representative
Cook certainly and are you know
of course Michael nation would
be to include.
our state force during the
conversation yes definitely has
more expertise and I do yeah
absolutely and again Mescalero
didn't want to get involved here
you know I I don't know that
they really wanted me to.
You know talk about.
Then getting involved it's just
that you know again they're
expertise.
S. with what they don't to
forced and they work hard to a
to be good neighbors to reduces
our cut us a preview her
willingness so thank you thank
you madam chair.
Thank you.
Representative.
Your.
This up.
Representative David M..
Did you have another.
About previous question my
apologies okay our.
Okay Representative Eli you
madam chair I I don't see any
further discussion and if
there's none I'm prepared to
propose a motion on the bill as
amended.
And I don't see any so on madam
chair I will move.
I'm not sure if I got the bill
number.
If you are in seventy nine.
K. two thousand seven as amended
do not pass all second house
bill fifty seven as amended.
Okay.
It is the further discussion of
the bill I don't see.
Representative director Abbey
still up and says Representative
Eli that I think you're finished
right okay
let's call roll please.
Representative Akan yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Cook yes.
Mr speaker.
Representative Eli yes.
Representative those.
Yes.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative night brother.
Yes and I'd like to explain more
of a.
Representative rain yes.
Representative Townsend.
Yes.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Yes.
We have eleven Ford.
And Representative night were to
explain his spoke okay that bill
passes by a vote of eleven to
zero and I have Representative
night part.
To explain his bout.
Thank you madam chair and.
I certainly commend the sponsor
for the bill and will support it
the throughout its path really
would appreciate we have
community
stepping forward because they
are important scent of a
landowners statewide that have a
bearing on the very efforts that
they are trying to be engaged in
here and and I think having them
accepted or many management
practices being accepted from
prescribed burn actually does
not get us where we need to do
so I think they better take a
look at it there may be why an
audit and if it's not the this
year certainly next year the
year following we need to
rectify that thank you madam
chair.
I think it's pretty shocking
Representative not ever wants to
you know hurry in a hurry and
Amanda eighteen eighty six
statute is that well under what.
You know we might want to give
a little fun this kid okay
Representative McQueen you're on
the next bill as well.
Thank you madam chair and I am
an expert on this bill as well
Matteo page with the
administrative office of the
courts hopefully he's in the
waiting area.
In could be permitted to the
panelists.
Chair.
The.
You know it's a it's a running
joke that we also a this is a
simple bill
yes this is a simple bill it
what it does it doesn't actually
change jury duty requirements in
any way it doesn't affect
whether or not.
People seventy five and older
can or will Crispian juries it
only affects the paperwork
requirement that allows them to
request exemption there
currently it requires Act an
affidavit.
affidavit it's our belief needs
to be notarized so if you have
an older person who wants to be
exempted maybe they have health
issues maybe they have mobility
issues instead of simply
requesting to be exempted they
now need to go find a notary and
get their affidavit notarized
and submit
I think that's unnecessary I
think it's unnecessary in
general it's particularly
unnecessary until the pandemic
in this bill actually passed
both chambers unanimously two
years ago and for unknown
reasons didn't get signed.
so the administrative office of
the courts approached me about
running it again it seems so
easy and straightforward that I
can't resist.
that be happy to answer any
questions we do have until page
with us
I'm not sure if they want to add
anything or we just save them
for any questions that might
come up.
Mr page.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee
Representative McQueen thank you
very much for sponsoring this
bill and committee members thank
you for your consideration this
afternoon
it I I agree with everything
that our our sponsor has said I
would also add that
as Representative McQueen said
that an affidavit is unnecessary
and I I do want to add that a
court staff are able to
independently verify through
public records of potential
jurors age which they in fact do
so having a notarized affidavit
where someone's where's to their
date of birth it is an
additional burden
that is unnecessary that we keep
but are residents who were
seventy five plus from
exercising their right to ask
for a permanent exemption due to
age and of course as the
judiciary we we encourage and
welcome all qualified
participate qualified residents
could be jurors of course many
do seventy five and older but as
the sponsor mention their
reasons health reasons for
example why injure may not want
to serve
when they're seventy five or
older and and many there are
thousands of of of residents
that do exercise that right
every year and up this is a to
improve our customer service
with with those who wish to.
Ask for the exemption and
especially now during the public
health emergency of it would
make sense not to require them
to a juncture that additional
but that burden to ask for their
the exemption one it can be
easily up of requests and online
through the court the of process
and and no need for
The affidavit when courts can
independently verify a person's
date of birth thank you.
Thank you let me go to the
audience now if that is that are
you ready for that.
I think I'm having connectivity
problems.
Can.
Can we put the call out and say
the the number of folks who are
present who are in support of
the legislation and if there are
any opposition.
If you are in favor of it please
vote yes and if you are in
opposed to the bill please mark
now looks like.
We've got it going.
Internal.
Looks like everyone there has
voted in every once in favor so
let let me see who wants to make
comments.
At this time.
In the attendees the first
names are Terry and Roger Greer.
If you would like to go ahead
you're on mute it.
Terry and Roger Greer.
You need.
Thank well now you are okay
madam chair and members of the
committee my name is Roger
career and I'm the volunteer
state president with A. R. P.
New Mexico.
Hey R. P. New Mexico supports
house bill one eighty five
because many of its members
including myself are in the age
group and for many reasons is
difficult to sit for long
periods of time.
Would like to thank
Representative McQueen for
bringing this bill forward thank
you.
Thank you.
It looks to me like I don't have
any other of the attendees who
wish to just be.
So speak now or forever hold
your peace okay let's go back to
the
Committee for questions
are Representative not part.
Thank you madam chair Madam
chair representative.
Some parts of our state our.
Our retirement communities and
have a significant portion of
our population you are.
In the age group that would be
affected here yeah I was just
wanting to know yes there will
be any any thing that the courts
could point to that would
potentially drastically because
a change in the jury pool if we
get this.
Number so all I'll defer to
Mister page see if yes that data
again I want to know though
we're not changing the law in
terms of being able to request
exemption just you know need to
get the first.
And so he like again.
Just being rude needing a
notarized in order to be able to
do it I will not just just
happened recently so I I live in
a small village and I got a call
from a neighbor in.
You know this is someone that I
know where he lives
entertainment for like twenty
five thirty or six on Friday.
In that he apparently slipped
and fell and hurt himself as
driveway and for some insurance
claim he needs to get his claim
that arise in the call because
you are as a lawyer I'm not an
ordinary but he you know he just
need this extra effort in order
to file some paperwork it is
kind of a pain that we're just
trying to fix that so
Mr page chair Mister page but
you may knowledge about jury
pools especially in retirement
areas.
Thank thank you madam chair of
Representative neighbor I I
don't hands.
Statistics on its first jury
make up of how members of the
jury jury panels are but we we
don't anticipate this having
much of a change in the
composition of jury pools as I
mentioned up many residents who
are seventy five and older
actively participate in jury
panels
But there are some who who do
request to be excused this would
just make it a less burdensome
on them to seek that seat that
exemption
and
But but now I'm sorry I don't
have the the exact statistics
for you on on the make up of of
age but we don't anticipate this
having that much of a drastic
changes in ages of the jury
pools.
You madam chair my experience
having served on several jury
pools last ten fifteen years is
that in Roswell we we tend to
have older jury pools the number
which would be subject to these
age limitations by having.
A procedure in place to to you
know require some formalities it
makes it less likely that the
that person is going to engage
in and taking the opportunity to
get exempted whereas if you
change it to make it easier such
as just simply signing a letter
which is not as you may result
in you're more of people in that
age group taking advantage of it
and your all your potentially
could change the the jury pools
particularly in areas of the
state where there are higher
concentrations are to our
retirees and elderly populations
that's that's that's my only
comment on I'm going to support
it.
I do think that we could to have
some effects on the jury pools
and some areas of the state
thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative Mr page
did you have something else you
wish to say at this point.
Thank you madam chair I just in
response to Representative line
for I do know for the fifty
additional district we're
Roswell is located and again in
fiscal year two thousand
nineteen five hundred and twenty
seven residents requests the
exemption for being seventy five
and older so just to give you an
idea of the number of of folks
in your area that have have
exercised that right thank you.
Representative Eli.
No madam chair I do not have my
hand up.
I can't hear you.
Representative Akan.
Madam chair you know of course
that one and then this vehicle
to go to seventy instead of
seventy five with that first.
You know at least three times
I've gotten letters to go
I'll be selected for the jury
pool
judges I know that I'm not going
to get selected but I do all of
down to our house I had to sit
there for an hour an hour and a
half two hours until the judge
flies only looks at me and
excuses ring.
I just there's just no easy way
to do this well.
So I I support Israel like I
said I wish it was seventy and
that was that it would say a
judges please no bother coming
due to jury selection is you're
not going to be at
selected you going excuse no
matter what.
And the.
I support this legislation madam
chair that just a call the day
just.
There's just this does because I
know a moment to drive all the
way to read someone that since
there were other long time it is
a way for the judge to I only
look at me and kindly ask the
hotel on there now.
So what we're saying is thank
you madam chair.
It's called role.
But the role.
Yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Cook.
Mr speaker.
Yes I'm happy that
Representative dot com Bill
number.
Representative.
Representative queen.
Yes.
Yes.
Representative Rehm yes.
Representative Townsend.
Yes.
Mr speaker.
I hope Representative Louis.
Representative.
Thank.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Yes.
Out of ten.
Thank you at ten thousand four
and ten zero the negative.
Okay okay Representative McQueen
you have to do pass on house
bill one eighty five and we have
heard from
Representative mom I asked as
his Cherry House commerce and
economic development and he's
not going to be able to make it
today so we have completed our
agenda which is really nice this
is awful the eight.
Only sure day you're going to
have this week just to for
warning but thank you all very
much for a good meeting and I
look forward to.
Seeing you all on the screen.
Thank you madam chair.
