My vice vice chair.
Reminded me.
Representative Abeta.
Representative Chavis here.
Representative Hall here.
Representative Hochman V. Hill.
Representative Martinez.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen.
Representative Reeb.
Leader Sapansy.
Madam Vice Chair,
Madam Chair
We have a corm
All right, referee, you do have
the floor. OK, thank you, madam
Chair, vice chair, um, and
members of the committee.
Um
Hospel 104 is a bill that um
basically uh allows, well, it
tells you what the enumerated
victims are the numerated victim
crimes are under the victims of
Crimes Act and what the bill
does on page 3 is add um.
22, 23, 24, and number 25.
Uh, which are the crimes against
peace officers right now, um,
law enforcement officers are not
victims unless it's a murder and
so with this bill allows is, um,
officers, Madam Chair to receive
the same rights that any victim
would under 31, 264, which is
the victim, she'll have a right
to be treated with fairness and
respect for the victim's dignity
and privacy throughout the
criminal justice process, kindly
disposition of the case,
Rely protected this notification
of court hearings, the right to
attend all public court and
confer with the prosecution,
make a statement at sent,
um receive information about the
case, restitution things of that
nature, and they're they're
listed all under there, they go
down A through M.
And right now, law enforcement
officers don't have any of the
rights of what a victim would
have. And so what this bill is
doing is is allowing law
enforcement to be an enumerated
victim so that they are allowed
to participate in the process
like any victim would under the
victim's Crimes Rights Act and
um.
I have an expert here. She's the
district attorney district
Barbaromo, who I'd like to
introduce expert on this spill.
Thank you, Madam Vice Chair and
committee members.
I, I just want to start like I
said to the last committee I've
been trying to get this bill
passed for 10 years, um.
And I, it really shouldn't be
that hard, I know that you all
have a lot of very difficult
controversial bills that come
before you, but this should not
be one of them. This bill does
not have any fiscal impact.
It doesn't affect the rights of
the defendants or the accused.
And to me, it's it's
unconscionable that we don't
give the same rights to the men
and women who are sworn to
protect us that we do to
ordinary citizens.
And you know, we tend sometimes
to look at him as just people in
uniforms. Well, they are still
people, and they have families
and they have thoughts and they
have um trauma, just like
anybody else does.
And in a way, it's worse for
public safety when they don't
get taken care of because.
They're human
If I'm I'm a police officer.
And I run towards danger every
time. If the last time I ran
towards danger, I got shot.
and was severely injured and
then the case went through
without my participation and
nobody seemed to care what I
thought.
I might think twice before I ran
into danger again.
I mean, it doesn't, it doesn't
make any sense.
And I asked you to look at it
this way.
Consider this
If any one of these fine law
enforcement officers that are
here before you.
If they're on the job.
They get shot
They don't die. They have no
rights.
But if they die, they get
rights. That makes absolutely no
sense.
Law enforcement officers are the
only group that is not covered
under the victims of Crime Act.
And there really is no reason
why I've heard people say, well,
It's their job, that's what they
should expect. Well, first of
all.
It's not their job to get hurt
and killed. It's their job to
protect you. They understand
that that's what could happen.
Keep in mind they also have
family members.
And their family doesn't know
from one day to the next, if
they're gonna come home, if
they're gonna come home
paralyzed in the wheelchair,
they own up.
And
I say this analogy. I don't know
how close it is, but I know a
lot of people.
Have dogs or dog owners, right?
Sometimes we get him as to to as
guard dogs sometimes not.
Pretty much all dogs.
of that instinct to protect you,
right? They want to protect you,
they want to protect your
property, that's what they're
gonna do.
So if your dog is protecting you
or your family and someone comes
and shoots them.
hurts them
And the response from the person
or society was just, well, it's
yeah, but that's his job, it's
his job to to protect you, and
if he gets hurt, well, that's
what he, he knows he's that's
his job.
It's just, it's just
fundamentally unfair, and I, I
will say that I, I have gotten.
A ferments from CBRC that they
are in full support of this
bill.
As well as the Department of
Public Safety.
Um, I talked to Secretary Bowie
and he is very much in support
of this bill.
So with that I will stand for
questions.
All right. Um
Your representative expert, um,
we'll go to the audience. Is
there anyone in opposition.
Um, online, is there anyone in
opposition to House Bill 104
audience, is there anyone in
support of House Bill 104.
Great, if you'd like to speak on
behalf of the bill, we will
offer you one minute, um.
to speak, please don't uh repeat
anything and just.
support. We'd love to hear it,
um, and we'll go.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Marco
Serna, former district attorney
of the First Judicial District
and career prosecutor. Uh, I
would just like to read
reiterate.
Um
For you all to consider the
families of of these officers,
any type of trauma that may
happen to them, I can guarantee
you the trauma is happening at
home with children, with their
spouses, with their loved ones,
and even extended family,
although that doesn't apply to
them, but the immediate family,
I want you to consider them,
especially the children, uh,
because there are services that
are provided to them with CBRC
funding. So I, I appreciate your
consideration. Thank you, Madam
Chair and committee members.
And the chair members of the
committee, Carter Bundy would
ask me, we stand in strong
support of this bill we
represent police officers and
sheriffs in certain
jurisdictions like the city of
Espinola, Taos County, Grant
County, Luna County, so, uh, we
urge your support for this bill
and thank the sponsor.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Christopher Williams,
Chief of Police in Portalis and
vice president of the New Mexico
Association of Chiefs of Police.
The association of Chiefs of
Police strongly supports.
for all other reasons.
The DA and
Representative, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, uh, on
the sheriff of Curry County is
Michael Brockett. I just wanted
to express my concern and the
difficulties we're having in
rural areas and recruiting law
enforcement currently I'm down 9
deputies out of 32, it's hard.
It's very difficult to get
people to want to do this
profession, and I think this
would be a great step in moving
forward in supporting members of
the committee. My name is
Bennett. I'm the chief public
defender.
I
I'm
The binary choice about whether
to testify and support her in
opposition to something is kind
of difficult, so we are not
opposing this bill. I will tell
you as a public defender, I
don't necessarily know all the
ins and outs of how law
enforcement officers have to
deal with this. I'm
Interested in whether the um
victims compensation is in
addition to workers' comp or
other benefits that they have.
And if not, I, I see how uh Ms.
Romo shaking her head now, and
just pointing out that law
enforcement officers are
different because they're often
the ones filing the charges. So
that that is different from most
other victims or witnesses in
this, and, and finally seeing
that if there's going to be an
expansion of victims' rights or
all witnesses then it may be
different for law enforcement.
So something to keep in mind in
the future. Thank you.
Go online, um,
Raise your hand if you are in
support of House Bill 104.
Uh, Larry Sontag, uh, go right
ahead.
Thank you, Madam Chairman and
members of the committee. It's
Larry Sontag here on behalf of
New Mexico Business Coalition.
And on a personal note, I am a
retired Albuquerque police
officer that spent 2 years
running towards the danger as it
was mentioned. I encourage you
to support this bill and listen
to the expert witness who's been
trying to get this passed for 10
years. It truly is
unconscionable that police
officers do not have the same
rights as an ordinary citizen
when it comes to being the
victim of a crime.
Passing this bill would send a
strong signal to officers that
they do have support.
And as the sheriff and others
have mentioned, morale and
recruiting is a significant
problem right now. So this would
be one step that you could take
as a legislative body to send a
positive message to those who
serve and protect.
Thank you. Thank you.
Go ahead, give a minute.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
committee members, um, Enriqueel
for the Greater Albuquerque
Chamber of Commerce and strong
support of House Bill 104. Uh,
this bill is simple but is very,
is a critical bill. It's all
about ensuring that our law
enforcement officers have the
same rights as all other New
Mexicans. Law enforcement is a
tough job on a good day, on a
bad day, they're often subjected
to attacks, or subjected to
being battered or assaulted, and
they need to have the same
protections that other crime
victims in our state do. We
think the
sponsors for bringing this bill,
and we do urge you to pass it.
Thank you so much.
Thank you.
I think that's it for um.
Support online, Madam Chair, the
only thing I would add is um as
far as additional compensation,
the officers would receive pro
and my understanding would be if
it didn't pick services from
that, um.
From CBRC, um, but it also would
provide for counseling he does.
And generally when an officer is
injured, um, on one of these
crimes very often another, even
if you are a law enforcement
officer or any victim, you
generally are with any case you
have anyway, so just to address
some of the concerns with that
uh representative Chavez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative.
Um, I, it's just troubling to me
that it's.
10 years and we haven't passed
this bill. Um, so thank you for
bringing this. I'm honored to
co-sponsor with you. Um, I just
want to put it in perspective.
If we were, uh, you know, a
victim of violent crime, we
would be able to talk to the
district attorney. We would be
able to talk about plea
agreements, we would be able to
get information about our
attacker and the fact that we
are not allowing our police
officers who serve and protect
us to do this.
the same
It is very disturbing, um, but
from a mother's perspective, um,
you know, I, I went through CBRC
victim of violent crime. My kids
were able to get reimbursed for
mental health or behavioral
health for their counseling and
um we should be doing the same
for police officers' families
for their wives, for their
children. Imagine your spouse,
your mom, your dad, um, being
at getting attacked in the line
of duty and then.
Of course they're going back
because they are brave men and
women protecting us, so they're
gonna go right back to doing the
same thing and um, for their
children or or spouses to have
to work through that knowing
that they almost died already
once and they're going back out
to protect us.
We need to be able to give them
the same behavioral health that
we are all wanting for community
members of this state, so, um, I
stand in full support and thank
you.
make a motion for a due pass,
Madam Chair.
Uh, thank you, we have a motion
for do you pass from
Representative Hall. It's like a
high representative.
Um
I just wanted to say thank you
for bringing the bill again, um,
if we had said that we passed
this bill about 10 times in 3
years, so really appreciate
continuing the.
Representative of Beta.
Representative Chavez. Yes.
Representative Hall, yes,
Representative Hochman V. Hill.
Yes.
Representative Martinez, yes.
Speaker, Martinez.
Representative McQueen, yes.
Representative Reeb. Yes.
Leader Supansy.
Madam Vice Chair.
Madam Chair.
Um, with the, uh,
Ask yes votes of 8 to, you have.
Great. Next up, referee we have
House Bill 101.
firearm at pulling place for law
enforcement.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um.
Gospel 101, um, kind of goes
back to the bill that was
addressed previously, um, about
firearms and polling places and.
I I'm sure many of you remember
on the floor I did try to bring
an amendment, but I'm sure that
allowed for commissioned
officers to uh be able to carry
um in these polling places or
nearly says on page 2 is it
makes an exception or a
commission law enforcement
officer, um, as you know, um,
commission law enforcement
officers are, uh, can be
commissioned up to a year and
they had the same arrest powers
and they can do what any other
officer can do and it's becoming
a problem in our small
communities.
Um, where they're trying to they
their buildings are located near
polling places, um, they're on
duty with an officer and they
need to respond to a polling
place where maybe what the
bill's intent was is to prevent
threats at the polling place
that officer could not go in and
respond, um, if he was with
somebody, he would maybe have to
go get dropped off even so uh
we're trying to make this bill
uh specified that a commissioned
officer can carry out a polling
place, um, and with that I have.
Sheriff, um, rocket with me from
uh Curry County, and I would
defer to him with the specific
issues he's having in his county
with this bill.
Madam Chair Representatives of
Curry County, New Mexico is a
very rural and very uh.
It's, it's a big county with a
lot of smaller communities in it
that were responsible for
protecting, um,
That being said, with our
shortage in staffing, we, we're
constantly.
and trying to get our, our
numbers back up, which requires
our new people to go through
training and through field
training as a part of that field
training their commissioned, but
they're not certified. It puts
them on the road with a field
training officer learning how to
do the job, um, in that
situation, should we get a call
at a polling place, uh, our
field training officer would
have to drop off the the trainee
somewhere before responding to
the call in order to comply with
the law, um, that's obviously a
problem because now our our
field training officer.
Can't train the trainee on how
to handle those types of
situations, but it also is, is
creating problems for us and
supporting our county clerk and
that once again, uh, with our,
our dispersed county, we assist
the county clerk by collecting
ballots on election night.
And our staff, our commission
staff, they're not certified.
Can't pick up that task and so
now we're having to send our
certified deputies to pick up
polling place numbers and and
that's really creating a problem
with us trying to answer calls
for service and juggle those
tasks at the same time.
Do you have any
Manage also, I'm sorry, uh, uh,
I'd also like to touch on the
fact that the Curry County
Administration Office is also
serves as a polling place. In
fact, our commission chambers is
used as a pole area, that's also
the same area where our HR human
resources, and many county
offices operate out of so once
again it prevents our
commissioned personnel from
visiting HR or handling business
within Curry County without
violating that law.
OK, we'll go to the audience,
um, is there anyone in
opposition?
Go online
Coming back to our audience
live, is there anyone support?
Thank you Madam Chair committee.
Christopher Williams, Chief of
Police and Portales, New Mexico,
also vice president of the
Mexico Chiefs Association.
In Portalis, we have a municipal
building that uh.
Acts as our primary polling
location for the city of
Perelli.
Inside that building is also my
agency's training facility.
So it means every new hired
officer.
Who has to be commissioned
before they can even go to the
academy as it's one of the
requirements.
Get trained in there.
So that would mean we would have
to forego training during the
election period, once that is
established as the polling as
well as everything else with it
and our county also shares the
same issues that Sheriff
Brockett does.
Whereas our county of they also
have.
Armed transport officers that
are not certified because they
do not execute law enforcement
duties, but they do do
transports of prisoners.
can't take directions, sorry.
Um.
Madame Beer and commission
members as a member of the we
did discuss quite a few of these
bills, um, especially these that
we're discussing today with
Make a motion for a due pass
Madam Vice Chair.
Uh, we have a motion for due
pass all
I represented.
Representative of Beta.
Representative Chavis. Yes.
Representative Hall.
Yes.
Representative Hoffman V. Hill.
Yes.
Representative Martinez, yes.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen.
Yes
Representative Reeb.
Yes.
Leader Spanky. Yes.
Madam Vice Chair
Um, yes, and.
You need to circle back.
Oh, Representative of beta. Yes,
thank you.
With a vote of 9 and 0, you have
a due pass on Bill 102.
I'm sorry, 101.
Now we're on 102.
Uh, the 102 violent felonies
for.
Madam Chair, um, my expert is
actually in a jury trial, my
expert, but um what House Bill
102 does.
It deals with, um, serious
violent offenses, um or um
notorious deductions, which is
the good time law and what
happened?
It's back in 2000 and and just
so if the committee I'm sure
knows this, but Madam Chair, if
you are classified as a serious
violent offense, you, you serve
85% of your time, um, otherwise
it's a normal good time crime
and so what this bill does is it
lists the crimes on page.
page or page.
Page
A bottom of page 7 starting, I
guess number 4 line 9, serious
violent offense means, and it
lists all the things that are
already in statute, um, section
oh, though, however, is what we
call the catch all section,
which is where, um, if one of
these offenses are committed,
um, the judge has to make a
finding that the nature of the
offense and the resulting harm
are such that the court judges
and when you turn to page 9 on
line 14, which is what we're
trying to take out.
in 2016 is when uh the
legislature raised the penalties
for DWI, um.
Uh, for homicide by a vehicle,
so before 2016 homicide bye was
a 3rd degree felony, whether it
was committed by a DWI or by
reckless, which are the two ways
you can have vehicular homicide
and the legislature enacted it
as a discretionary serious
violent offense, um, in this
section, um, in 2016, the
legislature made DWI homicide
and reckless driving homicide
separate crimes, but what they
failed to do is, is they went
ahead and left the reckless
driving.
3rd offense as a catch-all where
the judge can make the finding
but left at the higher fence of
DWI. So we're ending up having a
problem, a a case came out,
State v. Montago, I believe it
was that stated obviously it was
not the legislature's intent to
include a higher crime of DWI,
um, even though they said it, it
didn't, it was very uh.
Like an arbitrary deal that they
thought it was probably a
mistake, um, that we had the
lower crime of reckless
homicide, which is a 3rd degree
felony, and then we left out
DWI, um, which is a 2nd degree
felony, both causing death or
great bodily harm. And so what
that case said is the
legislature needs to go back and
fix that if the intent is to
actually include that higher
crime of DWI, um, second degree
that kills somebody or causes
great bodily harm, uh.
The reckless homicide, so we
just um changed it in the bill
on that line, uh, to stay home,
I believe we put homicide by
vehicle, but let me just double
check.
Uh
So we basically took out 3rd
degree homicide by vehicle or
great bodily harm, which would
then include the DWI homicide 2
and the reckless homicide, which
would already be in there, um,
so that the court could have a
discretionary um.
Situation on that, we've had
cases already this year where
prosecutors have told me that
you might kill somebody, Madam
Chair in a DWI and then you
might cause great bodily harm,
um, to another person and they
don't die, and the court can
make a finding on the great
bodily harm that it's a serious
violent offense, but they can't
on the one that they actually
killed somebody, so I think it
was a mistake and I think the
legislature just didn't catch
that when it when they enacted
and changed the DWI laws, and so
that's correct.
and and make it, I believe how
the legislature would have
wanted it to be, um, when we
upped the DWI penalty, so that's
the essentially the this what
this spill does and with that
I'll stand for questions.
Uh, thank you, representative.
There's just a question, um,
online from our um analysts, um,
the.
And I'm Leis website is listing
an amendment. I saw this bill in
the previous committee. I don't
recall having amendment, um.
You just want to clarify whether
or not.
Errors online or.
In the process.
I don't remember doing an
amendment or even discussing an
amendment on this bill with the
same that same committee Madam,
we just wanted to clarify that,
make sure that we weren't
missing anything, and there's no
amendment proposed today, is
that correct?
OK.
Um, thanks for letting us know
about that. Um, OK, so we'll go
to the audience, um, is there
anyone in opposition to House
Bill 102?
Um, OK, we'll go a minute each.
Good afternoon, Madam Secretary,
members of the committee,
Courtney Montoya with the ACLU
of New Mexico. The ACLU stands
in opposition to HB 102, the
earned meritorious Deduction
Act.
serves a crucial role
incentivizing positive behavior
and maintaining safety within
our prisons by allowing
incarcerated individuals to earn
reductions in the authorized
programming.
This system promotes
accountability, personal growth,
and successful reintegration
into society.
HB 102 threatens to undermine
these objectives by reducing
opportunities to earn good time
for certain crimes, stripping
away the, limiting good time
does not make prison safer. It
does the opposite. With
meaningful incentives,
incarcerated individuals have
fewer reasons to engage in
positive programming or maintain
good conduct.
Increasing risk for both staff
and those incarcerated rather
than weakening a proven tool for
rehabilitation, our policymakers
should focus on expanding access
to effective programming and
encourage rehabilitation.
Hello, Madam Chair's members of
the committee. My name is Bennet
Byron I'm the chief public
defender, following up on what
the representative from the ECLU
said, but from a little bit
different perspective. I visited
somebody in prison who was
convicted of vehicular homicide,
DWI and I can tell you it's a
terrible place to be, and this
person and others I have known
convicted of this crime, none of
the people that I knew
personally, their cases had ever
been charged or convicted with
any other crime.
There's a lot of people. This is
a non-intent crime, tragic,
people should go to prison in
our system, but I've been around
the legislature 25 years
inexorably we have ratcheted up
prison and punishment, and this
is a time perhaps to say.
Let's stop the ratchet and
really look rationally at our
system. I don't think you
necessarily have to keep on
ratcheting up. This might be the
time to stop and think about it
a little more. Thank you very
much.
Thank you. Um, we'll go online.
Is there anyone in opposition
to.
Spill
102
You could state your name.
It will go to the audience in
person.
Um, is there anyone in favor of
House Bill 102 that speaker.
Just line up
a minute
Good afternoon again and again,
I'm, I'm speaking on behalf of
the New Mexico District
Attorneys Associate the victims
of anyone else, and understand
that, but I do other programs to
get their sentence reduced.
Aside and apart from the
meritorious deductions that are
automatic.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
committee, Christopher Williams.
Chief of Police Portales and
vice president of Mexico Chiefs
Association, the Chiefs
Association strongly supports.
Madam Chair Representatives
Michael Brockett, Sheriff for
Curry County, is a 24-year
veteran law enforcement, I've
had the unfortunate.
duty of responding to many DWI
crashes and fatalities
throughout my career. I do feel
like this would be an important
deterrent in.
Reducing our numbers and then
protecting our, our residents
from DWI crimes.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair. Man
chairs. I'm a major with the New
Mexico State Police. Uh, the New
Mexico Department of Public
Safety asserts that
reclassifying homicide and great
bodily harm by vehicle as
serious violent and fences may
deter dangers. Dangerous driving
behaviors and reinforced the
state's firm stance. Again,
thank you, uh, Madam Chair, um.
go online if there's anyone
who'd like to speak in support,
um, we see Larry Sontag.
Good afternoon, Madam Vice Chair
and committee, thank you for
taking my comment. I'm speaking
on behalf of the New Mexico
Business Coalition.
This bill
Clarifies important information
that needs to be changed. New
Mexico Business Coalition
recently did a survey of New
Mexicans.
Overwhelmingly across all party
lines across all races and
ethnicities and age groups.
New Mexicans want something
significant done about crime in
New Mexico. Contrary to the
testimony you heard that this
bill would undo a program that
is now effectively
rehabilitating people. uh, that
is not what the general public
is feeling at all right now.
This bill limits the opportunity
for early release by reducing
the number of meritorious
deductions, serious offenders
can earn, preventing dangerous
offenders from re-entering
society prematurely. We urge you
to support House Bill 102.
Thank you.
Next, we have diverse IT.
Hi, yes. Can you hear me? Yes,
we can hear.
Yes, good afternoon, Madam Chair
and members of the committee.
I'm so sorry. I was trying to uh
get online to oppose this bill,
but I was not able to, um, may I
still speak? Um, if you'll just
hold on for a moment, we'll,
I'll come back to you. We we're
in um support right now.
OK, thank you.
Uh, Enrique now.
Thank you so much, uh, Madam
Vice Chair, members of the
committee, uh, once again,
Enriqueel on behalf of the
Greater Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce, uh, the chamber and
their members supports House
Bill 102, which seeks to repair
what many believe to have been a
legislative oversight, murder is
murder, and the punishment has
to fit the crime. Uh, we do hope
that the legislature will fix
this oversight, and we do urge
you do pass on House Bill 102.
Thank you.
Thank you. um, just because of
the IT challenges will go back
to um.
IT and support.
I'm sorry, in opposition.
Yes, thank you so much. This is
um Madam Chair and members of
the committee. This is Diana
Croson. I'm with Mills for
Prisoners, and I am definitely
in opposition to this because
there are so many people who
have completed all of the
courses that have been in um
designed for them to take off
time, but if they are convicted
of a violent felony, it doesn't
count. They don't get the good
time, and there's
There's no reason why someone
who made a mistake, even if it
was a violent mistake shouldn't
be allowed the, the opportunity
for rehabilitation and shouldn't
be able to be rehabilitated. And
I, I, so I am in, in opposition
to this bill and thank you so
much. Thank you, Diane.
OK, that concludes public
comments, and we've represented.
Thank you, ma'am. Thank you,
madam Chair. Ma'am chair and
read.
Um
I was listening, uh, in
particular to the.
The comments and support in the
opposition.
Um
I am
skeptical of some of the
comments in sport in particular.
Um, the idea that this should be
a deterrent.
I think there's good evidence
that.
The level of punishment for a
crime is not a strong deterrent.
Um, I certainly think we're a
step beyond that.
We're not talking about the
level of punishment. We're
talking about.
Good time once you've been
convicted.
You
You think
People are thinking, oh, I'm
I might be drunk, but I'm gonna
drive because.
Right now I can get the time if
I get arrested, I just seems
like a stretch to me.
Um, Madam Chair and represent
McQueen, I think maybe some of
the comments are kind of missing
the boat a little bit of what
what's trying to happen here,
um, first of all, um, you're
already convicted by the time
this happens, this is a
sentencing issue. Um, it's not a
mandatory, you know, serious
violent offenses, so Section 0
is a finding, so that's all the
ones that the judge has to make
a finding, the facts of the
case, they look at that
arguments are made and then the
judge would have to decide, is
this a serious violent offense.
Or not what this is doing is
fixing what I believe was just
something the legislature just
messed up on, basically, um, it
makes no sense that you can.
Have two people in a vehicle and
you're, let's say DWY um, Madam
Chair Representative, and you
kill one person and then you
hurt the other, and the one that
you hurt.
And you can be charged, you can
be in the catch all and judge
could make a finding it's a
serious violent offense, but for
the one that she killed, the
judge doesn't have that chance
to make the discretion because
we didn't put it in the
legislature did not put it in
there, um, and when you read the
case law on it, which brought
this to light, which we're
seeing happening in our um
districts is that.
It's, it's come out that in the
case of that, oh, the
legislature probably just.
Made a mistake, but they need to
fix this because we have to go
with exactly what's in this
statute. Um, so it's not so much
saying we're trying to punish
people or deter crime. We're
fixing something is that.
Basically, the legislature
messed up. I, I really believe
and it's, it's very obvious when
you would have a a reckless
homicide that's a 3rd degree and
you kill somebody and that's in
the catch-all, but a second
degree DWI where you kill
somebody isn't. That doesn't
doesn't flow, so I'm not saying
it's a deterrent, I'm just
saying it should be in that
catch all under the case law and
under um all the research we've
done and the arguments we've
been making in court on this.
They want to see this fixed by
the legislature, so I agree with
you on that um representative
McQueen.
Madam Chair, I'm not saying it's
a deterrent. I'm saying we just
need to fix this to where this
is properly what it needs to be,
if that makes sense.
Uh, Manches and, I appreciate
that answer. Uh, let me ask you
another question, um, again,
based on the comment, I, I heard
murder is murder.
And I'm pretty sure murder is
not murder. We have different
degrees of murder.
And what we're talking about
here is a violent death, but
it's
non-intent
crime. Is that correct? uh,
Madam Chair, yes, and
Representative McQueen, that is
why murder is a serious violent
offense, and this is separated
as in the catch all where the
judge has to make certain
findings, um, and so if he
doesn't make the fines or she
doesn't make the findings that
it falls under that catch-all
offense, which there's arguments
for where you can see the whole
list of crimes with reckless
homicide as one of them, um,
yeah, there's different degrees,
obviously there's murder and
then there's vehicular homicide.
Vehicular homicide is in the
catch all murders in the
mandatory serious violent fans
for good time, so it's not by
any means mandatory, the judge
is gonna find it, but depending
on the facts of the case, um.
The judge could make that
finding.
Just as I could under the
current law with a reckless
homicide that causes great
bodily injury or, or basically
death.
But they can't. Thank you,
ma'am.
Du pass
Second.
Uh, we have a
Um, from representative.
I played reaction. But.
I did hear and I had some of the
similar questions to McQueen,
Representative make sure that my
questions were answered
thoroughly.
Before I ask
We heard from some of the.
They're concerned about
rehabilitation.
Effort spent on that a little
bit more.
If someone is found.
During their sentencing, are
they still eligible for?
Madam Chair and Representative,
so.
If the judge made the finding
that this was offense um then.
They, you know, good times, this
is by statute, so 85% you get 4
good time days a month. Um, if
you said no, it's, I'm not gonna
find this is a serious violent
fence 50/50, you know, there's
mandatory time for killing
somebody with a DWI. Um, and so
they're gonna go to prison
anyway, um, and when they go to
prison, um, they have the
ability to participate in
whatever programs they want to
participate in, um, there's
there's programs that deal with,
you know, being an alcoholic,
there's, uh, you know, just any
kind of program you can think
of. I've seen.
c er t ific ate s from it from
uh prisoners, um, coming out of
prison and on probation and
parole, so.
You're still gonna have the
ability to do that if you're in
prison, you're gonna go to
prison anyway, um, on a serious
violent offense, um.
Most likely, or if you're ever
in prison later and it will be
determined if serious violent
offense. Let's say you got
probation, um, on an aggravated
battery that's listed as a
serious violent events, and you,
you get probation, um.
Then if you ever imprison later,
you don't complete your
probation, it will be considered
a serious.
This is under the discretionary,
but when you have a vehicular
homicide uh DWI, um, there's
mandatory time on that, I
believe so you're gonna go to
prison anyway, um.
And so
I don't know if that answers
your question, but the programs
are up there, it's just I think
people are getting too hung up
on going back to good time when
that's not really what this is
about. It's about fixing, um.
What is a discrepancy in the
levels of vehicular homicide, if
a 3rd degree vehicular homicide
isn't the catch-all. Why isn't a
second degree vehicular homicide
in the catch-all, and that to me
and according to the case law,
Madam Chair and Representatives
saying, and you can look at the
FIRs and they're saying that
needs to be fixed. Doesn't have
anything really to do with
whether we should allow serious
violent offenses and and take
away good time, that's already
in the statute. We're just
trying to make this.
The way it should be
structurally, if that makes.
And, and on that.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
It's just a fix and.
You're saying now that.
There's a catch all and you gave
a scenario earlier.
If one individual dies on.
One has
Mandatory sentence.
11, Madam Chair, I represent one
is where the judge can make the
finding, the 3rd degree reckless
homicide, but the second degree
DWI, um, is not in the
discretionary, so, um.
If you if you so if you go back
and you look, let me go back.
So if you go to um.
Section 0.
And you go to page 9.
Um, on line.
13 to 14.
Um, or 14, it says 3rd degree
homicide by vehicle or great
bodily harm by vehicle is
provided in 668101. So if we
take out 3rd degree, that's
gonna cover every, uh, that's
gonna cover both DWI and and uh
reckless kill somebody or cause
great bodily harm by vehicle.
They will both then be in the
discretionary, the higher degree
and the lower degree, so, um,
that way, um, we're able to, uh,
I believe, do what the
legislators intended to do when
they changed the DWI statute to
be a higher degree crime than
the reckless back in 2016.
That makes sense or that helps.
Representative Chavez. Oh, it
was on the point as a coast for
rehabilitation.
I, I could talk to her, OK, uh,
all right, so we have a.
Oh
Yeah.
Go ahead, uh.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair, and thank you,
Representative. So, um, going
through the fiscal impact report
here, it's confusing to me, um,
because usually when we have um.
Pieces of proposed legislation
that could impact sentencing,
there's a fiscal impact to that
and it therefore, the bill
usually goes through House
Appropriations and finances, was
this bill assigned to HAFC as
well.
No, I know a madam chair
representative, no, we, um went
through CPAC and then.
OK, um, thank you very much,
Madam Chair Representative, so
that kind.
Helps to me that lends more
credence to the argument that
this is more of a fix rather
than we'll have a
Um, large impact on someone's
jail time or the the sentencing
that a judge.
For their discretion can assess,
um.
Because if it really were about
decreasing the ability to earn
good time. I think that this
would.
Would have had to go through
HAFC. I'm still, I'm still
making my mind up on this, Madam
Ta representative, but that was
just a point that I wanted to
make. Thank you, thank you and
Madam Chair and Representative,
I, yes, I don't see any fiscal
impact, um.
Any, anything that would be
different, um, cuz you're when
you kill somebody with a DWI or
you have a minimum issue.
Man.
So we have a do pass motion.
Right, OK.
Um
I will go ahead and
Representative of Beta.
Representative Chavis. Yes.
Representative Hall, yes.
Representative Hoffman V. Hill.
Yes.
Representative Martinez, yes.
Speaker Martinez, Representative
McQueen, yes.
Representative Reeb, yes.
Leader Spansky.
Yeah.
Madam Vice Chair.
when you do pass.
We have House Bill 123 uniform
cohabitants Economic Remedies
Act.
It's one of the I cheated.
OK.
And Representative Little you
Madam Chair, members of the
committee.
Thank you. I am here. I am
representative Charlotte Little,
I am here to present a House
Bill 123.
Um, the uniform cohabitants
Economic remedies Act.
Briefly, a summary as it does is
provide a mechanism to address
property interests when
cohabitating couples break up.
It changes current law both to
permit a cohabitating party.
To enforce implied agreements
and to allow a court to consider
equity.
Or fairness in division of
assets, including consideration
of the value of a party's
non-financial contributions to
the couple.
I will mention, I would like to
present to this bill first, the
first committee was House
government and let me note, uh,
it passed, uh, um, my expert
here.
Uh, I don't know if we're
picking you up on the audio.
Sorry to interrupt.
I'm sorry, I forgot to turn it
on. That's all right.
If you could start over.
My name is Sarah Bennett.
I have been a practicing
attorney or I just almost 50
years, but my family law
specialization for the more than
last 20.
Brings me to the conviction that
this is a very important bill
for New Mexico to adopt.
Because of it's um.
Uh, there's a very, uh, a
significant group and growing
every year of.
and they break up, have no
remedy at all.
Or um
Perhaps many years of living
promises.
I'd be glad to answer any
questions.
So
We'll go to the audience. Is
anyone in opposition of um house
bill.
Go online, um, is there anyone?
OK, back to the audience. Is
there anyone in support?
will go online.
Um
For those in support.
OK,
moving quickly, um,
representative McQueen.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
Uh,
men and little, is this the same
bill you had two years ago?
Yes, Madam Chair, it is with uh
one change.
And ribs inville, what was that?
Uh, the um.
With permission, Madam Chair and
Representative McQueen.
Um
The, the change was to provide
that it does not expressly
provides it does not create an
equitable lien.
Um, and it's, I may be able to
find it quickly.
And that that's OK.
Um
Uh, Mans and little.
Does the cohabitation have to
have um minimum term.
In order to
this claim.
Um
Madam Chair and Representative
McQueen, there is no um minimum
term.
The this this bill was created
by the Uniform Lass Commission.
And um they debated, of course,
that issue among many others
determined, most people know if
they're living as a couple or
not.
Most people, um, in very short
relationships don't accumulate.
The kinds of claims that are
addressed in this, uh.
Um, Bill, but in many cases, a
short period of time could give
rise to.
Um, implied agreements that can
be demonstrated and significant
contributions to a couple, um,
and so the uh.
The remedies should be available
in appropriate cases which we
would be decided by the courts.
Madam Chair,
a little, um,
I might come back to that, um.
But so
Hope cohabitants agreement.
But the agreement
Um
And
We're not talking about
Probably not talking about a
written agreement.
We're and we're
We may not even be talking about
an oral agreement.
We may be talking about an
implied, is that correct?
Madam Chair and Representative
McQueen, yes, often an implied
agreement is made particularly
when there are contributions
over long periods of time.
In uh in a couple's relationship
that um implied agreement.
Can be enforced by anybody else
in New Mexico.
Other than a cohabitant.
We are, uh, by including implied
agreements where a
Well
The bill
Permits
A cohabiting couple to uh reach
agreements like everybody else,
written agreements are always
enforceable.
Um
The chairs and little um.
Expert. I, I, um, I voted
against this bill in judiciary
two years ago. Um.
I'm
I'm concerned about the
vagueness.
I'm concerned about the
potential.
Uh, for using this as a method
of harassment.
Um, that, you know, a couple
that lived together for 6 months
or 3 months.
Uh, and
Um
And, you know, it could go.
Is there um
These could be same-sex couples
or, you know, not.
Following typical gender
stereotypes, right?
Um
But someone gets thrown out of
a.
Uh, apartment
And chooses to sue.
Um
Their former party.
Uh, and
I just, uh, I'm concerned about
that, especially since there's
no further threshold.
So, Ma'amch and little an
expert.
You know, the situation where
You know, couples lived together
for 20 years and
You know, the, the, uh, the
spouse or the non-spouse is.
Left with nothing, like, you
know.
And I, I've actually uh.
I got a call from a constituent.
Um
Uh, her partner,
Who she was not married to, uh.
Made suicide.
And uh her partner's children
were throwing her out of the
house.
Um
I mean, those situations are
Heartbreaking and should be
addressed.
But, you know, someone who's
lived together for 3 or 6
months.
Uh, you know, it seems to me
there ought to be some threshold
above which this kicks in.
Um
You know, so what I mean, we
talked about the extreme cases,
and that's what motivates us,
but.
The the bill is written broadly.
And
Me chair
Um, representing an expert.
Can you address that?
Go ahead.
Um, Madam Chair and
Representative McQueen.
There will be cases there are
now.
Uh, people living together for
the example that you raise,
somebody gets thrown out of the
house, those can go to domestic
violence courts right now.
And um
Some do, some don't.
Um, there are uh.
a, a large number of issues that
come up in family and non-family
relationships which we can't
really spell out or put edges
around Family law is a very uh
amorphous.
World and family court judges
and family court judges have
been authorized to uh examine
these cases, um.
If there's nothing, uh, first of
all, everybody in family court
gets referred for mediation and
other kinds of dispute
resolution services.
Immediately
Um, so I view this as
Giving the rules.
Uh, 2 people so that they can
see.
What things they could claim and
what things they could not
claim, what you're entitled to
and what you're not entitled to,
so that cases can be resolved
easily so you don't have to go
into court in order to get
things.
Um, resolved completely now
there will always be.
Difficult relationships of short
or long periods in which people
say things and dispute them, and
of course there's gonna be some
kind of case like that, but it
is going to be much less with
the rules established.
And uh the kinds of things that
you can claim and what you need
to come up with.
agreement or an implicit
agreement has to be part of it.
And an implicit agreement would
usually be part of a longer
running.
series of compromises and
contributions.
OK, ma'am Cha represent an
expert.
My question is,
Just let me, I sort of boil it
down.
Should there be a minimum
threshold in this bill, should
you have to cohabitate for 3
years or a year or something
before these protections kick
in.
chair and Representative
McQueen.
I believe that the uniform laws,
uh, the, the parties who came
together.
Uh, drafted this so that it
could uh cover.
All the circumstances that can
arise, and I do not believe any.
Artificial one, I mean, one year
is artificial, it may be.
It may apply in many cases, but
not in every case, and I think
it should be up to the court to
determine whether
They qualify as a couple,
whether they qualify as a, you
know, authorized to make a
claim.
And that is something that
family courts are very
accustomed to doing, so I would
suggest, uh,
Any specific arbitrary line
would make it worse.
chair and I start 11 more
question, um.
If I recall my bar prep uh
correctly, uh, New Mexico is not
a common law marriage state, but
we recognize common law
marriages in other states.
I believe the period of time for
Kamala marriage in Texas was 7
years.
To guess, but like if we have
something, if we have a period
of time for common law marriage.
I mean, we can draw a line if we
want to is, is.
Madam Chair and Representative
McQueen, yes, we can.
Uh, draw lines, uh.
I'm not an expert on Texas. I'm
only doing New Mexico, but I've
heard.
That it's 10 years or
Any amount of time if you're
holding yourself out as husband
and wife.
Call me Mr. and Mrs. Jones, so
There are exceptions even there,
uh, every state that has a
common law marriage has
different rules on that we
prohibit it.
And this does not
create anything like that, it is
a way to um uh really the
primary focus of this bill is to
prevent grotesque unfairnesses.
Which occur regularly, and they
can occur pretty quickly.
Um, but
It wouldn't be worth it in a 6
month.
A relationship unless you had.
Really contributed significant
assets.
Or um value of a sort that would
be beyond, you know, washing
last night's dishes in order to
make a claim.
This creates a mechanism that
helps people understand what are
appropriate claims.
Ma'am, um.
Representative expert.
I certainly appreciate that.
The protection on the extreme
cases.
Um, I, I think we could take
steps to
Um, limit the harassment
potential.
Uh, for the shorter term.
That's, that's remains a
concern. Thank you, ma'am.
Representative Hall.
Madam Chair, Representative
expert witness, um, I have a
couple of questions and I'll
start off with.
This is gonna sound weird.
What about these, there seems to
be a new trend of polyamorous
relationships.
Where you have more than 2
people in a house and.
Having relationships.
I know it exists.
Thank God, not with me, but
How would that address this,
Madam Chair.
Go ahead please.
Adam Chair and Representative
Hall, it does not address that
situation.
You have to be living as a
couple. I think the definition
of a couple is two people, so I
don't think we're there.
Although I do recognize those
situations exist.
It is possible that in that
polyamorous relationship, there
are two people who are actually
living as a couple.
Uh, and that's, you know, not
beyond my, you know,
imagination.
Having seen what I've seen in
family law, but um, this does
not address that.
And Madam chair and
Representative expert witness.
So when
Under the, the other thing I had
a, I was looking I'm
to forgive me, but section 11,
which goes from the bottom of
page 7 beginning at line 23 to
page 8 through line.
5
is confusing. Would you mind
explaining that, ma'am, Madam
Chair.
OK
Yes
Represented uh Madam Chair and.
Representative Hall.
Um
One of the benefits of the
uniform laws commission is the
availability on all the drafting
committees of experts and local
and international law.
Uh, as it relates to families.
this uh particular, I can't tell
you.
Uh, chapter and verse of
electronic signatures and global
and national Commerce Act, but I
can tell you that it does
require that each state or
authorize each state to opt in.
Or out of those requirements,
and this bill.
Um
Both, uh, federal laws permit
these opt-in and outs, and this
does this so that in the event,
which happens sometimes in
family law that you have to do
things in international.
Uh, contexts
You would know
What you were supposed to do.
But I can't tell you exactly
what it is. It's, it's, it's a
way to procedurally arranged for
these kinds of agreements.
In international law.
Thank you, um, Madam Chair, and
Another, another question I have
here. So, explain.
I, I know you said there's no uh
Limit of time, but
So a young
Couple's gonna move in together.
The young man buys a house.
His girlfriend moves in with
him.
She makes no payments.
But it's only there a month or
so. Does that?
That intimates that if the
split.
They or she or however you want
to word it, have a right to take
this to this through this
process, is that what I'm
understanding?
Madam Chair, well, she'd have to
have some kind of a claim.
Oh
Pardon me
Um
Madam Chair and Representative
Hall.
She would have to have some kind
of a claim, I mean, um.
There's no, uh, if he buys a
house in his own name.
Um, that's separate property.
Um
What could she have contributed?
Uh, that would be a value
sufficient. What if she gave him
$100,000 for the down payment.
you know, that would be.
Kind of thing that she ought to
be able to if it was an implied
agreement.
But
That is not the likely scenario.
Like uh that gives a remedy to
that person who, you know,
tossed in an extra huge amount
of cash and could make a claim
back.
In most cases, there would be no
claim there.
And
Madam Chair, uh, representative
expert witness.
Statue of limitations on this
is.
So from the time, let's say they
split and there's no.
Action
Immediately, how long do they
have before they
And file one or
Do they run out of time, Madam
Chair expert witness.
Madam Chair and Representative
Hall.
Um
On a written contract.
The statute of limitations, I
understand, is 6 years.
On an unwritten contract, it's a
shorter period of time.
Um
And
Uh, if you don't have a written
contract, then you're in the
shorter period of time.
Um, and it runs from the day
that the cohabitation ends. One
of the ways cohabitation can end
is by marriage.
So that statute of limitations
runs during the marriage.
It is hoped
That you would resolve any
differences or misunderstandings
at the time we got married, but
if you don't.
Uh, you're gonna have
Uh, 4 years.
To um
Act on your claims of unwritten.
Of implied agreements.
Um
And a way that could come up.
is during a divorce.
Uh, if, and I've seen it happen
many times. People lived
together for 20 years, get
married and get divorced a year
later.
So they could make both claims
in that same proceeding. It
could be a
Joint
Thank you, Madam Chair. That's
all my questions. Thank you.
Thank you
representative
you, Madam chair.
Miss Bennett.
Excuse me
Uh, thank you for bringing this.
To us, it's very intuitive and
I.
understand it.
The need for this because I
practice family law for a little
bit in my district and.
Lots of scenarios.
And right away when I was
reading the stuck out to me.
we said
people are not married and then
the next page goes in two
persons who cannot lawfully
marry and who are married to
other people. Yeah.
And could you expand on that?
Thank you. um.
OK, Madam Chair and
Representative Abeta.
Um
OK, there's a lot of scenarios
like this, uh, one scenario is
one person forgot to get
divorced, OK? Or they didn't
know it was a real marriage
because it was in Las Vegas or
something.
And then they marry somebody
else.
And could be married 30 years
and then die.
And then that person, the
innocent person, the thirty-year
wife.
is not a wife.
She is a cohabitant.
And she has no remedies.
And it happens in uh.
And uh
Um
Estate
Uh, litigation that this comes
out, so that's one scenario. Two
people who
For whatever reason.
If you're married.
If each of you is married to
somebody else and you start
living together.
I'm gonna assume you know about
it.
So your cohabiting.
And um if you do things.
And you lived together for a
long enough period of time that
value gets exchanged and that um
the contributions are different
forms and then you break up and
you, you can't, um.
Resolve those agreements.
You could have claims under this
act.
But if you're um
If you're um
Uh, a, uh, you know, a young
person living with your aunt.
This does not apply to you.
Um, that's what that, uh.
On page 1 and 2 that you
referred to.
Is referring to
I hope that answers your
question, Madam Cha
Representative.
And
In family law. So thank you for
clarifying that and um, well.
I do agree with some of
Representative McQueen's
concerns and.
Appreciate Representative Halls.
scenarios as well, and I'm still
looking to to see how it.
I appreciate that there's a need
for it to do. I want to support
it.
All right. Some ways to help.
Thank you.
Thank you Chavez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. This is
such an interesting bill and
everything we're going.
through as far as section by
section, but I guess I just have
a question and I know I'm one of
the few that are not attorneys
at this committee.
Um, I know a lot of times the
reason people don't get married
is to protect their properties
and their financial assets. So,
what would somebody have to do
to protect themselves then if
they're not getting married, I
know when they do get married,
you get a prenuptial agreement,
but.
How would somebody protect
themselves.
From then having an exx try to
take away all of their assets or
property while they were in a
relationship and made that
decision not to get married for
those specific reasons.
Madam Chair and Representative
Chavez.
Um
The first thing to say about
that is, of course.
You should, you should write up
a written agreement about your
relationship. That's.
Absolutely the rule for
everybody, that should happen
for all separate property.
Um, and, uh, even in community
property when you acquire a
deed.
That deed represents your uh
contract, your written contract
as to how you have ownership of
that, so that's the best rule,
unfortunately, it is uniformly
and
Statewide ignored people don't
write up their agreements, so.
For example, in a, in a, in a
situation where you would like
to protect your separate
property for your uh children
because you have children from a
previous relationship.
Um, keep your property separate.
your bank account separate
remain self-supporting. Don't
have implicit agreements that
one of you will do all the work
while uh at at earning the money
and the other doing all the work
of maintaining a household,
taking care of kids, doing all
the work that's required if you.
Yourself in that.
kind of a situation, you're
developing implicit agreements.
And if you don't, if you just go
ahead and keep your bank account
separate and um and both of you
have jobs and you support
yourselves or you agree when
you're gonna spend money on the
movies or whatever.
You're perfectly safe. That's
not.
Who this this bill is
addressing.
And thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
thank you for that. So if
People remain to live together.
They don't get married.
They don't sign each other onto
each other's deeds for their
property, but they've been
living together for 10 years.
They keep separate bank
accounts.
You're saying that
One or the other then could this
would not apply.
Well,
um
Madam Chair and Representative
Chavez, it.
I in family law, as in any kind
of litigation, any kind of case
anywhere.
can make claims. This bill does
not address the situation that
you described, Madam Chair,
thank you.
I think you're represented.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair. Thank you,
Representative. Thank you
expert. Um, so I'm trying to
wrap my mind around specific
circumstances that this would
apply to, so, um, Madam chair
representative.
Can you tell me what if we were
to.
Uh, create this.
Cause of action.
What remedies would this create
that are not already available,
and let's say contract.
Or
You know, to, if it's, what are
we looking at spousal support?
What is, how is?
Madam Chair and Representative
Harman Vijo.
Um
First of all, there, there is no
support or alimony kind of
situation that is created by
this bill at all. There is no
obligation to support.
Um, and it does not change
anything about written
contracts.
However, under New Mexico law,
which was formed by the Supreme
Court, New Mexico's Supreme
Court at a time when
cohabitation was a crime.
Um
2
Very important, um, parts of
that ruling were.
You cannot enforce.
Basically any unwritten
contract.
Or agreement between the two
parties, so if
You know, she says, oh honey, we
don't need to get married. I
have plenty of money and so he
doesn't work and he contributes,
you know, taking care of the
rental properties and back and
so on, and that's kind of just
implied as part of what's done,
um, that's not a recognized
agreement.
It is not allowed to be.
And secondly
Contributions that are
non-monetary or prohibited from
being considered light if you
took care of.
If you know the the woman took
care of husband's mother.
While she uh had dementia for 5
years. That cannot be
considered. It is not allowed.
And this permits in appropriate
circumstances, the giving of
equity to the two parties based
on their contributions.
If you can't even if you don't
have an agreement of any sort,
and let's look at what everybody
did and see how that contributed
to the.
The, the couple and the
relationship.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
thank you, Representative and
expert. I'm, I'm starting to
understand this a little bit
better now. So essentially,
Right now in the law, there is
a.
People are penalized for not
choosing to get married and it
kind of leaves a void in the law
for those couples who do
cohabitate or, you know, make
significant contributions to the
relationship and so there's no,
it sounds like there's no legal
remedy available to them at all,
so if they were to sue one
another in court.
Let's say 4.
Reach of
Uh, breach of contract or not go
through.
kind of action that could be,
but we're to sue each other in
court.
Those, those suits are just
dismissed.
family court, what happens?
Um
Madam Chair and Representative
Hoffmanville, uh, recently one
went all the way to the Supreme
Court.
I mean, you know, parties can
sue in various ways, uh, there,
but, but, um.
Again, the law was reiterated in
the most uh recent Supreme Court
holding that you can't talk
about in, in, um.
Implied agreements and we cannot
look at non-monetary
contributions.
Well, this woman.
Uh, the plaintiff in that
particular case was also suing
uh for.
Um
Agreements about the business
that they formed together.
And the holding was, well, if
you actually worked in the
business for a period of time
and didn't get a paycheck. Let's
look at, you could, you could
get compensated for those hours
you worked.
But not, we're not gonna look at
uh the agreement because you
were cohabiting.
It was not a written agreement.
It was an implicit agreement
according to her.
Um, of course, there are
differences, you know, positions
on.
Whose facts are correct, those
things have to be worked out in
court, but to have no remedy at
all because you're a cohabitant
is the difference if you're not,
if you live down the street from
each other, you can make
implicit representative,
um,
Madam expert, thank you very
much. It is that uh helps me
quite a bit, understand the
necessity for this law, um, in
concept, I am in agreement with
you. However, I also share the
concern.
that my colleagues have voiced I
am extremely concerned at the
breath.
Of this law, um, and the ability
for this to not only be used as
a harassment mechanism, but also
could overload.
Um, our family.
Courts, um, so, Madam Chair,
representative, I'm, I'm not
quite sure where I I am with
this right now, but um, I would.
Love to see just some.
Minor guardrails we put on this,
it just kind of help flush out
the scope, um, if it were to
advance.
Thank you, Representative, uh,
Representative Reeve.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
And um representative and
expert.
Are there any other so can you
kind of explain, Madam Chair and
Representative Reeb, New Mexico
would be the first to adopt this
particular uniform law.
Um
that working?
OK, um
However, I would like to talk a
little bit about the uniform
laws commission.
Which is um comprised of the
delegations from all 50 states
and the other uh political
entities that are part of the
United States. It's Puerto Rico,
um.
And uh they're all lawyers.
and law professors and um very
uh experience in the people who
drafted this law, uh, were from,
uh, it's nonpartisan it has to
be in order to get the consensus
of the uniform Laws commission
to recommend it.
And um they considered these
questions and particularly the
one about how long you have to
be together or what uh living
together as a couple.
Means
And this and decided that if you
put.
False parameters and then.
be litigating on those issues.
And uh for most of us.
You know, if you're a couple or
not, uh, so that'll take care of
most of the people that's been
in my experience. People don't
come to you for remedies if they
already had their agreements in
place, uh.
It's um
The question is,
When you should be able to get.
A remedy for a serious
unfairness. That's what this
addresses and the unfairness
could develop in the 1st 6
months, um.
I can imagine a scenario because
I've seen plenty of strange
things in family law, um, but
it's not going to be the likely
one in the in the likely case,
it's gonna be people who are
arguing over what
You know what is a fair
division.
Of these assets, it doesn't give
you a claim to real estate, for
example. It gives you a claim to
fairness.
Um
On the part from the other
person.
So
Expert, so.
No other states have passed
anything like Madam Chair and
Representative Reeve, I believe
it's been proposed and there is
being proposed now in two other
states. Remember, there's lots
of states that for various
reasons don't need it.
Uh, we need it because we have a
prohibition.
Against enforcing an implicit
agreement if you coha it and
because you cannot, uh advanced
uh as a claim of fairness that
you contributed, you know,
enormous labors that benefited
the community. Those two things
make us unusual.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair next
day.
I'm just kind of concerned.
of what my colleague said is
about the increase in
litigation.
As she stated, flooding the
courts. I, I, I can see that um
I don't do this type of law or
anything, but.
Uh, I'm still listening. It's
interesting, it's real
interesting, um, but I, I wish
we had some other states that
were doing it so that but but
that was my only question.
Uh, thank you, Representative
Hansky.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
representative, um.
I really uh love that you
brought this bill forward and
appreciated hearing some of the
comments from Representative
Abeta about how much this is
needed, um, having reviewed a
lot of uniform law commission
bills in my time. There are pros
and cons to uniform law bills,
um.
You know it having the breath
of.
lawyers practicing in different
states does mean that you get a
variety of scenarios and people
who really have insight into uh
how these laws can be applied in
many different ways, however,
sometimes the laws end up a
little bit overly broad and also
with a few.
don't really know how to
characterize the maybe barnacles
that that may be really
important for specific states
but are not really customary to
the way that we draft laws here.
Um, so, uh, so my questions are
specifically sections 8 through
11.
Um
And I just did, I did not
understand section 8, so I'll.
my questions and I love for.
Um, I do not understand section
8. sections 9, 10, and 11 are
just something that I've really
not seen before and.
Um, I don't know that they are
needed for a New Mexico law and
it sort of strike me as
something that that may be
necessary in a different state,
but is not really specific here,
but I'd love to hear your
responses on um sections 8
through
Madam Chair and Representative
Chipansky, uh, first about um.
Section 8
Um, this bill provides that a
cohabitants claim against
The other cohabitant.
Uh
Is a claim of a general would be
a claim of a general creditor.
Um
take a circumstance, I think is
the best way to explain this,
Madam Chair, and Representative,
um, if you have
Um
Let's take a man was married.
As a young man
Forgets to get a divorce.
And Mary in a formal ceremony.
Someone else.
Um
And it lives with a woman for 30
years.
And dies
Um
Wife number one if she makes a
claim is the wife and is
entitled to all the community
property. Let's say he died
intestate.
So she's entitled to all the
community property.
However
That man was accumulating a
whole bunch of separate debt.
Uh, because it was not for the
benefit of first wife, and it's
The obligations that he owes to
his cohabitant.
He actually has promises that
were made during a marriage, but
he's not married.
to the second wife, so.
Claims would be only against.
His half of the community
property because she is at.
Uh
A general creditor
And it would be a separate
property claim.
That's one example.
But uh in any case, uh, you
know, however long the
relationships and so forth, uh.
If there's community property
that's owned by uh one person
and somebody else, the uh
couple.
Claimant can only make claims
against
Um
The uh
A separate property or the.
the community of the the husband
share of the community.
Thank, thank you. I, OK, I I
think I understand that. Do you
know if there are other
references to these terms.
In New Mexico state law general
creditor.
Good faith purchasers secured.
Predator
Um, yes, represented, uh, Madam
Chair and Representative
Shipansky. Yes, there's a, a
large body of law in New Mexico
and we made this consistent.
As a general creditor. OK,
great. Thank you.
Would you mind, um.
Just explaining, so section 9.
Does the principles of law and
equity supplement.
This act, except to the extent
inconsistent with this act.
Um
It just
I'm not sure of the meaning of
that.
Mm
Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative Shipansky, um,
yes.
This
Changes a little bit of the law
because the law has been
developed by case law, and it
prohibits.
Any, um
Um, equity.
For cohabitants, so we've
changed that, otherwise we're
consistent with the rules, and
they're mostly rules.
Um, at, uh, of how equitable
claims can be brought, uh, in
court, those kinds of things.
OK, thank you. And then section
10.
Um
Why is this implying that the
court that in New Mexico court.
Should consider.
As it considers a claim in this
law.
this is being applied in other
states.
Madam Chair and Representative
Japansy, um, yes, in family law
particularly.
We have several uniform laws,
the uniform child jurisdiction
Act, um,
child support collection, um,
and it's a standard provision
that uh courts will at least
take into account how the courts
of different states have already
interpreted this, uh, the goal
is consistency and in family law
it's really important to have
consistency so you don't have
lawsuits going in two states
back and forth over whose
law is going to apply when we're
doing the child support
calculation or the custody
calculation or any of the other
things that happen, and in a
fluid mobile society like we
have, Madam Chairman, um.
It's very important that you at
least take into account what has
already been said about this
particular language and how it's
handled, so it's a commitment
that uh actually reduces
litigation for us.
Uh, significantly and uh permits
us to develop um.
A way to treat people who found
themselves in very difficult
circumstances like these.
Thank you for that. That's super
helpful, um, and then section
11, I know that you already
explained what that was, but
it's not.
Is that really necessary for
this act.
Did you
Could you explain maybe why?
Why that is necessary.
Madam Chair and Representative
Spansky.
I cannot explain those laws to
you. I, what I would say is that
I have had experiences where I
had to um comply with.
Uh, international law and order
to get um.
My documents, uh,
You know, enforced in another
state.
For example, or uh all the
things that happened, people
live in different states and
countries and have these kinds
of, of issues and in the federal
in these two federal statutes,
there is a requirement that you
opt in or out.
So it's been
Thank you, thank you very much.
Representative Speaker Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative and expert, thank
you for being here. Um, I've
been listening to the debate
quite a bit, and I think that
there is some.
It's, it's, it's not a long
bill, but it is very dense and
it's hard to understand.
I was looking at the vote
counting government and it was
unanimous.
And then I remember this is the
judiciary Committee, so we're
gonna go line by line, word by
word, um, your, if this bill
passes, you're on the floor. Um,
timing, I think you're just
fine. I'm gonna recommend with,
with your, with your blessing
representative that um we rolled
it and you can work with some of
the folks that were asking some
really good questions.
Um, to see what kind of
amendments we can come up with
to get this out of judiciary. I
just, I myself feel a little bit
confused, um, and I know how
hard you worked, you've had this
over the interim, you've been
working on this, um, so I want
to make sure this gets um out
and it gets out in the right
way. I mean I know you heard
some really good feedback from
some of the members to to to
help your bill get out. So I'm
going to recommend that with
your blessing. Thank you.
I'm just gonna make a few uh.
um
Confusion, um.
Just on the idea of cohabitant,
and I know we've talked about
this over the years and I've
forgotten, um.
But on um those so.
On the issue of cohabitant, and
just on the overall frame. We're
talking about people in general
perhaps colloquially like a
romantic.
This doesn't deal with roommates
or and I I.
Just as roommates, or is that,
is that, is that part of the?
Madam Chair
Um
In response to that.
Yeah
It takes
The sexual relationship out of
the equation, very specifically
and a little bit later, um.
Um
Provision. Ah, it's
Down on line 21.
Um, so,
I, on page 2.
Line 21
Does not include sexual
relations for the uh con
contributions. It's not
intended.
To address uh roommates. It is
assumed that living together as
a couple means something in the
uh.
Common lingo, but it could.
In the right circumstances
include roommates if they
decided to live together, pool
their resources, and live
together as basically a couple.
So it doesn't require romantic
relationship.
Thank you for that. I think the
comment on as a couple.
is what
Draws in confusion because some
of my best friends in the whole
world I may want to live with
for the rest of my life, um.
You know, in thinking about
buying furniture together, all
those, you know, proper based
decisions if we are making that
decision to be roommates, I
think we should be clear about
that, and I think as a couple
confuses that.
Um, if we are talking solely
about other.
Comment on
Analysts, um,
After a another family member of
the other cohabitant, um, I
think it was the intent about
just having a child in.
Or of the other
So that way, if we're talking
about enough.
Madam Chair, I'm not certain I
understand your question, um.
Another family member could be
um grandma.
Of the other party, you know,
people in long term
cohabitations do all the things
married couples do, take care of
each other's uh.
Mother and when during her
declining days, you know, manage
the, uh, chickens out back,
whatever the things are that are
important in your family, so.
Uh, I, I think
It could be a child in common or
it could be.
Um, the other part's children.
To be included in there
I'm sorry.
OK, um,
uh.
Um, I, I know in another, um,
Statutes we have defined family
member or the level to family
that we would go to again.
For, you know, leaving that
unconstrained, um.
I would just be concerned that
we, you know,
What's allowable.
Madam Chair
This is not
A reduction
Of the things that could be
included. The um
The uh
It is
Uh, a requirement that you could
include those things in.
contributions to the
relationship.
Whatever the contributions are
in that particular relationship
may not be listed here and a
court could consider it an
appropriate circumstances if it,
if the court determined that
that was part of administering
equity.
If there is some kind of a
contribution to the relationship
that was part of an implicit
agreement or uh any unwritten
agreement as a practical matter.
Um, that could be considered.
These are just examples, and
these are the things that
changed New Mexico law because
up until now, you can never
consider those things in a
cohabitation.
I, I hear that. I think we're
trying to.
Narrow, the broadness a little
bit, just so that there are some
clear understandings as to what,
and that's just this is just a
recommendation. And it was, it
was flagged by our analysts as
well as to.
What is, how are we confining
when any family member, you
know, we can bring that into the
conversation. I hear you say
that I'm just also concerned
that.
These causes of action on any
given fact pattern, you know, as
we develop a case law around
this as well that
It may, um,
You know,
As we're trying to to figure out
what, what are we bringing in,
if there was a definition, um.
I'll just, I'll move on from
that, um.
I think the other concern that I
have, and I think now that I'm
circling back in my brain to
previous conversations.
when you have an imbalance of
cohabitants that, um.
One
Um, and I, if I'm the, you know,
supplementing party to that um.
relationship or whatever.
Um, and I don't have.
Of a means to defend myself in
these relationships if they're
making claims that.
I get all of these. I get all of
this property, and they have the
means to hire an attorney, etc.
I didn't know that I even have a
relationship by moving in with
somebody.
And now I'm uh
At risk of, you know, not having
the means to defend myself and
my property.
Being in that cohabitation
relationship.
How do we, how are we equitable
on both sides for these.
Madam Chair
More than 80% of everybody in
family court is unrepresented.
There are many um many uh power
imbalances a much more frequent
power imbalance is the um
person that you've described,
the one with property and money
and the ability to hire an
attorney.
Simply saying
I don't know what agreements
you're talking about in our 30
years, all you did was wash some
dishes.
So that's the imbalance that's
trying to be corrected here, um,
the imbalance of a person, uh,
there's nothing to claim from.
That person who
Uh, that's the reason there is
this, this, this, that's the uh
imbalance that this bill is
designed to correct is the
person who doesn't have the
money to hire an attorney did
not earn the make the earnings
during the uh relationship and
is now left with nothing and and
is prohibited from claiming.
For the contributions that were
made.
Uh, thank you. Can you explain
where in the bill it shows that.
Uh, how someone can self help.
Like this cause
I don't, I know that like in
certain like for divorce claims,
etc. we have those causes of
action.
Uh, provide for some help or
supplementary, um, legal aid,
etc. to be able to
Navigate the type of claim.
indigent or.
Madam Chair, there's nothing in
the bill that provides for that
in family court.
Um, I mean, there uh there is no
attorney that you can go to in
most cases, uh, fam uh, legal
aid can't help most people, um,
people in family court are often
self-represented represented and
the Supreme Court has been very
favorably supportive of all of
the.
A forms that have been prepared
for litigants to represent
themselves in family court.
this uh bill when passed would
um.
Very likely be.
If you could just
Am I, yeah, it's just the
breath.
Oh, I'm sorry.
OK.
Would, uh, permit.
Um
Uh, uh, the appropriate prose
forms so these things could go
forward.
Uh, thank you. Um, I think, I
don't know how that operates in
like um.
As to
Whether or not that needs to be
stated, or that we could direct.
you know, that opportunity to be
provided for as well, given
that.
Would potentially require
staffing or whatever. I know
there's no FIR attached to this
that says say but.
Um, if there was we knew how to
lead the public because of this
cause of action, whether they
needed to defend or uh perhaps
apply for support, um.
We just love.
Madam Chair, the Supreme Court.
As volunteer committees of
attorneys and one is a family
law.
Uh, committee that's uh staffed
by and they refer these uh
requirements whenever they need
prose forms, they seek it from
the appropriate committee in the
family, uh, last standing
Committee of the Supreme Court.
I'm getting the name wrong, um.
Adresses these issues. I serves
for divorce.
Um, this would be an additional.
item
And I guess just the question
is, do we?
have to direct the judiciary
within the law or within the
statute to be able to promulgate
rules or however.
But they
Able to um,
Madam Chairman, no, um,
there uh independent body.
And um they provide their own
rules, uh, and so, uh, I don't
think it would be appropriate to
direct the Supreme Court to make
those rules, the Supreme Court.
Um, nosy.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Yes, I
have greatly appreciated that
would like to roll this and that
very much. Thanks for the great
discussion, um, and with
that, uh, we're adjourned.
