Yeah.
Representative Martinez.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen.
He
Representative Reeve here.
Leader Sapansky.
Madam Vice Chair.
Madam Chair, Madam chair, you
have a quorum.
Alright, so just a couple little
housekeeping things. We have
rolled 311, um, we got a sub,
but it wasn't within our
timeline, so we're rolling that
till Wednesday, um, and.
Representative Herndon has to be
are going to take um second item
on the agenda, House Bill 243
representative Matthews,
Interstate Medical licensure
Compact. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Hello?
No.
If you're ready, yes, thank you
so much, um.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee.
Compact. I know that this fills
this, this uh session, this one
is for physicians.
Um
And um
Uh, it, it, uh, it follows the
national compact.
Format and so forth, um, it, uh,
uh, I just.
I'll just mention that um there
was some issues.
Uh, regarding, um.
Uh
The protection of, of abortion
in the state and the doctors
involved with abortion and uh
that I think should more than
satisfy everyone.
Um, and so, um, we have in the
last 5 years lost a number of
physicians.
We are now 334 short, just a
primary care physicians we're
also short of specialist.
Um, and
Um
40, 40 states plus the district
of Columbia have this compact.
In effect,
And uh it would help us provide
more access to physicians for
the people of the state of New
Mexico and with that was Thank
you representative.
Let's go to the audience, those
wishing to speak in all please
um step up behind the gentleman
with the microphone.
Those in the on.
Um, those in the audience
wishing to speak in support,
please um line up, we're gonna
limit it to 5 people, 1 minute
each.
Madam Chair, the, uh, Richard
Romero representing the New
Mexico Medical Board. We support
this bill as it stands.
Adam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Megan Dela
Rossa on behalf of the New
Mexico Military Base Planning
Commission. We stand in full
support, um, as this bill is
beneficial for military spouses
and families. It reduces
employment barriers when
relocating and improves their
access to stable careers by
joining the compact New Mexico
not only supports healthcare
professionals and their
employment opportunities, but
also bolsters its economy and
enhances the well-being of
residents. It's a win for all.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, Linda
Siegel for the Greater
Albuquerque Medical Association,
and we support this bill. It
will allow physicians to have
pretty much one license if they
um come to another compact
state, it makes that ease for
actually coming and going from
to and from New Mexico. Thank
you.
Madam Chair Chandler, members of
the committee, my name is Fred
Nathan. I am the executive
director and founder of Think
New Mexico. Just a few quick
points were in total support of
this bill. This is one of 9
major interstate compacts that
New Mexico does not yet
participate in, there'll be a
bill on every one of them this
session.
Uh, in fact, we're one of only 5
states that participates in only
one of the 10 major compacts.
Um, New Mexico is at a major
competitive disadvantage in
attracting doctors to our state
because we are not part of this
compact. All of New Mexico's
neighboring states are a part of
this compact, Arizona, Colorado,
Utah, Oklahoma, and Texas as the
FIR notes states that joined the
compact see an increase in
licensure. States keep joining
this, this compact and
None of left. This is a strong
vote of confidence in the
benefits of this compact.
Joining this compact is the
single most impactful thing this
legislature can do to
immediately begin addressing New
Mexico's doctor shortage. Final
point is that both the
conference of Catholic.
Appreciate it.
All right, those online has been
my practice.
Um
Danielle Duran.
Um, good afternoon. I'm Madam
Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Danielle
Duran. I'm the intergovernmental
Affairs manager for Los Alamos
County, and we stand in full
support of this compact and
thank the sponsor as well as
those who helped make the
amendments. Thank you and I urge
you to vote for this bill.
Thank you. um Jerry Dotson.
Jerry.
Jerry Dotson.
Yes, you just unmuted me. Thank
you, uh, Chairman, uh, and
members of the committee. My
name is Cherie Dotson. I'm an
advocacy volunteer for New
Mexico. On behalf of the
240,000 AARP members statewide.
We support the interstate
licenser compact to help
alleviate some of the workforce
shortages that often impede
access to quality care,
especially for our New Mexico
aging population and those who
care for them. We urge you to
pass Bill.
Uh, uh, HB 243. Thank you.
Thank you and one more, Jack.
Jack.
Jack
Thank you, I'm unmuted now. Good
afternoon members and thanks for
the opportunity to testify. My
name is Jack Teeter. I'm the
director of government affairs
for Planned Parenthood, Rocky
Mountains. We provide care to
approximately 100,000 patients
and we support New Mexico
joining the compact in which our
clinicians in Colorado and
Nevada already participate.
We're seeing provider shortages
in every area of healthcare,
including and especially in
reproductive and sexual health
care. It's a larger crisis, we
can only assume it's going to
get worse under this federal
administration. Unfortunately,
we're experiencing the impact of
the shortage and how to make the
difficult decision temporarily
close our Santa Fe Health Center
for an undetermined amount of
time.
New Mexico lost 30% of the
state's healthcare providers in
2019 and we still have not been
able to recover. I like you to
join the Interstate Medical
Licensure compact once off all
of these infrastructure issues,
but we do believe it will help.
Thank you.
Thank you.
All right.
Back to the sponsoring.
Um, madam, uh, chair, members of
the committee, I would just
introduce uh the uh my expert
with me, Christina so we have
Rick Maestas Masters, I'm sorry,
and Marshall Smith.
They are the general counsel and
ED of the compact, and they're
available also to answer
questions, OK, and they're
online is that they're online
and tell me those names again so
we can ID them. Rick Masters and
Marshall Smith. OK.
And it maybe if they would put
their hands up, so if we have to
grab them, then we can find them
easily.
Um, all right.
Members, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative for
bringing the bill, um, full
support. Just a quick question.
The comments were made that we
lost 30% of our doctors in 2019,
which I think we've heard a lot
about losing doctors through
COVID or nurses through COVID.
Um, and
Having a difficulty bringing it
back. Can we just help me
understand what happened.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
so the, um, statistic on losing
doctors comes from a group
called the Physician Advocacy
Institute, and they do a
nationwide survey of billing
physicians. They found between
2019 and 2024. So that five-year
period, the number of physicians
billing nationwide increased by
44,000, but the number billing
in New Mexico decreased by 248.
So we are the only state that
saw a decrease in physicians
sort of submitting bills, which
indicates they're actually
practicing rather than just a
retired MD living here.
So Mountain chairs
representative. It's just a
billing issue. It's not a loss
of doctor.
It's a loss of doctors providing
care. So the question is, um,
doctors not just that hold a
license and may not practice
because you may retain a
license. Um, I don't practice
law, but I keep my law license
active kind of a thing. Um, so
they're looking for how many
physicians in your state are
actually billing for services.
So they're saying, I am actively
providing services and so
nationwide that went up in New
Mexico went down.
Um, representative Sapansy.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um, and
thank you, Representative
Matthews for bringing this.
Legislation forward, um.
And I just wanted to appreciate,
I see uh a little bit of
language in here that ensures
that if a physician is providing
reproductive healthcare, other
healthcare that is legal in this
state.
Um, that they are.
Uh
OK
License is not necessarily
automatically revoked based on
behavior in another state that
is illegal in that state, but
legal here. Um, I just wondered
if you could just point to me, I
see some language on lines 2
through 8. I just wonder if
there's any additional.
protections in here for a
physicians that might practice
uh across states that have
different, um, uh.
Different restrictions in the
law around medical practice.
Madam Chair Representative,
thank you for the question. In
addition to look at page 12.
Um, lines.
73 and then also.
Lines 22 through the additional
protections.
Great. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, this was a major issue the
last time this bill was
considered in the legislature,
um, and at that time everything
was very, very new, it was a
rapidly sort of evolve evolving
situation, so I appreciate and I
also appreciate the inner, uh,
the interstate medical compact
board for also taking the issue
seriously, um, and doing the
work on their end as well, so
thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, Representative Martinez.
Thank you Madam chair.
Thank you, Representative, um.
How many states are part of this
compact now?
Madam Chair, 40 plus the
District.
And when, if this passes this
year.
When does, when do we become
part of the.
Madam Chair, Representative, it
would take effect. It doesn't
have an emergency 25th is the
date.
That everything will become
effective that we pass it
doesn't have it up.
Well, Special provision, Madam
Chair Representative, so we
don't need to.
We just automatic
Member state
Madam Chair, Representative, I'm
gonna let my expert answer that.
Sure, Madam Chair
Representative, I believe there
are some sort of procedural um
pieces that need to be put
through the representatives that
we sent to the commission come
from our state medical board,
um, and the, the ones from other
states similarly come from their
state medical board, so that
would need to be done. So there
may be some pieces there, but it
would be. Thank you, Madam
Chair, representatives of the,
the
The commissioners from New
Mexico, they would just
Um
establish the rules and
procedures.
What rules and procedures are
they gonna?
So Madam Chair Representative,
essentially the rules that, that
talk about sort of how the
compact is, is implemented, so
things like what um
Representative Sapansky was
bringing up when we say, OK, you
know, now we have a real
difference in, um, practice and
what's allowed in one state or
the other state, how would we
handle that when we have, uh,
adopt on rules that relate
specifically to implement.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative.
So, um, Christina, you had
mentioned.
Um, counting billings, so how
does one count billings when
doctor works for a hospital cuz
I think close to 50% now, how
does that, how is that counted?
Um, Madam chair, Madam chair,
um, uh, essentially what the
physicians advocacy Institute
was doing is looking at sort of
number of physicians that are
submitting billing invoices. So
even if you're working for a
hospital, they're still billing
for your care, for your
services, um, and so, again,
it's an apples to apples across
states, um, if anyone is
sort of missed the New Mexico,
they would be, you know, missed
in other states for the same
reasons, but I believe that they
have a way to, to count folks
that are working for for
hospital, we believe that, all
right, um.
On the issue of
I want to understand how the
licensure works cause I've,
we've looked at others. So
there's a home state license in
other compacts. There is there a
home state license works
differently. So
the, the medical compact
different from other compacts,
you actually are applying for a
license in each of the states.
The main thing the compact does
is streamline that process. So
essentially, once you've gotten
a license and one of the compact
states, you can essentially send
your license packet as a whole
to that other compact state and
say,
You need to either accept or
reject my packet as a whole. You
don't get to go back to my
medical school and ask for the
transcript again, ask for my
disciplinary proceeding. You
sort of accept that, um, as a
whole. So it streamlines that
process, but you are actually
applying for license in any
state that you want to practice
in.
OK, cuz that that's really
helpful cause I was looking for
that provision in here, I was
like, wait a second, this, I
couldn't find it anywhere. I've
seen it and.
The other compacts where there's
a home state and then there's
the compact state license and
it's a little confusing, so we
have doctors here who, um, will
get a compact license, no doubt,
since there seems to be
interest, um, we know doctors
are leaving the state, so once
they get a license through the
compact, they can go anywhere
they want without any additional
um administrative barriers in
that state. Is that what you're
telling me?
Christina, so Madam Chair,
essentially if we join the
compact, then, um, a doctor here
could apply for a compact
license in any of those other
states and a doctor in any of
those other compact states could
apply for a license here, and it
would be this streamlined quick
process. And so, um, you're
absolutely right. With the other
cats, you have a home state and
you're licensed there. And then
you get a privilege to practice
elsewhere, and you're taking
your home state license
elsewhere. In this compact, you
are actually getting a license
from any other state. So if you
have a Colorado doctor based in
Durango and they'd like to
practice in Farmington too.
send their packet to the
Farmington board and say, I'd
like to practice in New Mexico
and our state medical board
would say, yay or nay.
And if there's a doctor
practicing Farmington that wants
to practice in Colorado, they
can do so very easily. Is that
all right, Madam Cherry would
facilitate cross-border
practice. Absolutely it will,
um, and the question is, will we
gain, I've had this conversation
before, it's gonna be
interesting to see whether we
actually gain because of the
ease by which our doctors can
now who you all their contention
is are leaving the state and now
even leave more easily, but.
I know we don't want to have
that conversation, so we can
move forward and it will be very
interesting to see and then
we'll find reasons why it really
wasn't the compact that provided
for that, but it was some other
reason. So, um.
Yes,
Madam Cha over do pass.
243.
a second?
Uh, motion by thoses. Do you
call the roll, please. Yes,
thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Abeta. Yes.
Representative Chavez
Representative Hall.
Yes.
Representative Hoffman V. Hill.
Representative Martinez.
Yes.
Speaker Martinez, Representative
McQueen.
Yes
Representative Reeve.
Leader Sapansky, Madam Vice
Chair.
Yes. Madam Chair.
Yes.
Madam chair, you have a do pass
on House Bill 243.
But do pass.
On House Bill 243.
Um
I don't see Representative
Herndon in the audience.
Thank you there you are.
You're welcomes the committee.
Representative Herndon.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, uh, it
is my pleasure to present to you
House Bill 217 and House Bill
217 is uh
Enters the state of New Mexico
into the counseling licensure
compact. The purpose of the
compact is detailed in the bill
is to facilitate interstate
practice of license professional
counsels, counselors rather,
with the goal of improving
public access to professional
counseling services. The the
compact allows members, states
to preserve regulatory authority
and to protect public health and
safety through implementation of
its licensure procedures. The
compact
To establishes flexibility for
counseling licenses in member
states to obtain compact
privileges for a licensure in
member states. And Madam Chair,
members of the committee, I have
an expert online and if you
would recognize her.
Um, if I could get her name, I
will.
Her name is Nahali,
uh Cafu. OK. Now Holialfus.
Holly
Do wish to add something, um.
Yes.
Yes, Cha Chandler, if you don't
mind, thank you so much, Chair
Chandler and, uh, members of the
committee. Uh, I'm here as the
attorney for the counseling
compact commission. We are a
slightly different model from
the IMLC and in that we are a
mutual recognition model. It
doesn't really work that
differently in form and function
other than what is issued uh
through the IMLC is a license
through an expedited licensure
process. What is uh issued
through a mutual recognition.
model is a privilege to
practice, which works just like
your driver's license and that
you have a license, you have a
home state license in good
standing and that essentially
punches your ticket to
participate in the other member
states so long as you meet all
of the uniform criteria for
entry and so long as you um
abide by the scope of practice
in those states. Same thing goes
for IMLC and that you abide by
the scope of practice in states,
that's true of all of the um
compacts regardless of model and
uh of course,
The majority are the mutual
recognition model. My
understanding is that in the
IMLC you provide a primary state
of practice, whereas in the
mutual recognition models, many
of them it's a home state, some
of them it's a qualifying state,
but in this particular one for
you today, it is a home state
and I'll be respectful of your
timeshare and available to
answer any questions.
Thank you.
All right, let's go to the
audience, those wishing to speak
in opposition.
Please, please, uh, line up
behind the gentleman with the
microphone.
I don't see anyone.
Those wishing to speak, don't
see any hands raised, those in
the audience wishing to speak in
support, please line up to 5
individuals, 1.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. I am
Quindi Otero with the regulation
and licensing department, to
which the counseling and therapy
practice board is
administratively attached. We do
not speak in favor or against
the proposed bill. We wish only
to point out that the operating
budget impact contained in our
FIR a $56,000 was not included
in our current submitted budget.
Therefore, if the bill is passed
an authorization or
appropriation will need to be
made to allow the boards and
commissions division to carry
out the mandate required by
the bill. In addition, if the
bill is passed, we are
requesting an extension until
January 1st, 2026 to initiate
the rulemaking process, obtain
approval and implement the
mandates federal background
checks and fingerprinting
requirements as well as update
our NM plus licensing system.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, and Christina
Fisher, associate director of
Think New Mexico, we strongly
support this compact along with
all the others, um, this
session, one of the big focuses
of the legislature is to try to
rebuild our behavioral
healthcare system, and this
compact will really help us do
that. Counseling is, um, uh.
Profession that we can really
provide a lot of care via
telehealth, and so by allowing
counselors to do that from the
other compact states of which
there are 37. We can open up,
uh, more care to our New
Mexicans, so we hope that you'll
support this compact as well.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Megan Dela Rosa on
behalf of the military-based
Planning Commission, the
counseling compact greatly
benefits military spouses by
offering greater flexibility in
their employment opportunities.
Over 30% of spouses in the
workforce hold a professional
license by allowing counselors
to practice across state lines,
it creates more job options for
spouses, enabling them to
maintain steady careers despite
fre frequently relocations. This
compact helps military families
achieve financial stability
while supporting their
well-being. Thank you.
OK, um, those online wishing to
speak and support.
Please raise your hand, um.
Ellie Mae Douglas.
Good afternoon, Chair Chandler
and members of the committee. My
name's Kelly May Douglas.
For the United States Department
of Defense, um, just, uh, wanna
provide just some additional um
comments to what was already
stated as far as benefits to
military spouses and that the
secretaries of the military
departments have made the
importance of military spouse
licensure explicitly clear as
they consider the availability
of licensure reciprocity when
evaluating future basing or
mission alternatives in the
state in 2018, the secretaries
of the services issued a policy
memorandum to the National
Governors Association.
they will consider whether
reciprocity of professional
licenses is available for
military families. This
consideration was codified by
Congress in the 2020 National
Defense Authorization Act.
Department of Defense is very
appreciative of New Mexico's
ongoing commitment and efforts
to support military members and
their families. Thank you.
Thank you. See, Sherry Dodson.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, again, uh, I'm Sherie
Dotson with AARP uh volunteer
advocate, and, uh, as with the
other, we support uh
Uh, HB 217 for the New Mexico's
aging population to help improve
mental health care outcomes uh
throughout New Mexico and we
hope you'll support this bill.
Thank you.
Name me
I'm sure I mispronouncing that,
which I assume is the name of an
organization.
OK, um, let's go to Doctor
William Lang.
I'm sorry.
This, this was Nami Santa Fe?
Yes.
The uh the National Alliance on
Mental illness. OK, go ahead.
This is Betty Shore, the
executive director of Nami Santa
Fe. I'm here representing Nami,
New Mexico.
Um, house Bill 217 aligns with
our efforts to enhance the
access to mental health services
across the state. Therefore, no
in New Mexico is in strong
support of this bill. And thank
you to Representative Herndon
for sponsoring this bill.
Thank you. All right. Um, let's
go back to the representative,
um, anything else before I go to
committee? No, madam Chair, we
stand for questions. All right.
um I have representative
Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative.
Um, on page 39.
Um
Lines 8 through
Well
Compact shell come into effect
on the date on which
The compact statute is enacted
into law by the 10th member
state.
I'm gonna, how many member
states are there now?
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I'm gonna have my
expert respond to you.
Thank you. I think if you've got
the answer, rep, we're happy to
hear it. We don't need to go to
somebody online. So if it's 35,
it's 35 digress. OK. Thank you,
Madam Chair, Representative, so.
Since we're past the 10th member
state.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, June 20th, 2025.
You're welcome. Anyone else?
Want to make a motion. Motion
for a new pass,
Madam Chair.
OK, so we have a motion for a
due pass on House Bill 217 made
by Representative Hall, seconded
by Representative Romero, um,
would you call a roll, please?
Yes, thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Abeta.
Representative Chavez.
Representative Hall.
Yes.
Representative Hoffman v. Hill.
Yes.
Representative Martinez, yes.
Speaker Martinez, yes.
Representative McQueen, yes.
Representative Reed.
Leader Sapansy.
Madam Vice Chair, yes.
Madam Chair, yes, Madam Cheer
you ever do pass on House Bill
217.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair and members of the
Um, next we have House Bill 323.
Engineer licensure.
And the um member.
Sponsors are Sanchez and.
Pettigrew representatives.
I don't see them.
Are there any um.
Advocates um that are behind
this pill in the room.
are working on this. I don't see
them either.
So, um, why don't we go to the
next.
Person, which I guess is me
unless representative Padahon
is.
OK.
Um, why don't, yeah, OK, let's,
why don't I, I hope hopefully
the bill I have but who knows.
You, Madam Chair, um.
This bill is um.
In a way, a cleanup bill. The uh
Attorney general has broad civil
invest and in the statutes now
there are statutes that give the
Attorney general.
Parameters as to how he or she
is supposed to proceed. Some of
them allow simply an issuance by
the Attorney General. Others
require the attorney to get, you
know, the um civil demand
approved and so this bill adds a
level of consistency and
clarity, we hope, so that in all
general has a clear pathway and
the public knows and the court
in terms of obtaining a civil
demand and a civil demand.
Is something that is served on,
you know, I think probably
mostly companies and it could be
an individual where um there the
the attorney general has a
suspicion that and probably my
experts gonna correct me on that
terminology that there's a,
there's an issue and that that
they want to ask informa, get
more information to have a
better sense of whether or not
there's a kind of case against
that entity.
So they have the option, so what
they will do is ask for
information and it's
documentary, it's not deposition
testimony that they have the
ability to seek. They're looking
at documents or questions that
us lawyers, that's the essence,
I think of the bill, and I hope
I haven't offended my expert,
um, who is Julie Meade, the
general counsel for the Attorney
General's office and she can
certainly provide more this
happens, um.
Good afternoon, members of the
committee. Thank you for having
me. I think, um, Cha Chandler
did a fabulous job, um, the
civil investigative demand is a
useful tool for the Attorney
General to investigate cases. It
allows us to gather evidence
prior to filing a lawsuit.
It's very helpful in clarifying
and potentially narrowing issues
of a lawsuit, it also
contributes to determining
whether a case is even viable.
Um, and evaluates, evaluate the
merits of a case before it, it
is really useful and helpful in
limiting um wasteful judicial
resources in filing a complaint
and waiting till we go through
the discovery process to make
these determinations, um, and as
the chair indicated right now,
we have this authority. It is
scattered through various uh
separate statutes that give the
Attorney General enforcement
authority.
This bill takes them out of all
the individual statutes, puts it
under his general authority and
um.
Makes a one streamlined
sufficient process for issuing
CIDs.
Thank you.
All right, we'll go to the
audience. Is there anyone in
opposition?
Um, is there anyone in online
position to house spill 62.
Right back to the audience live,
is there anyone in support of
this bill?
If you would like to speak
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Denali
Wilson. I'm an attorney with the
ACLU of New Mexico. And New
Mexico has a long history of
high profile civil rights
concerns involving government
agencies from police misconduct
and federal oversight of law
enforcement to disparities in
the criminal justice, education,
and health systems. Recent cases
involving, including the DWI
scandal involving multiple
police departments and issues
involving
CYFD highlight ongoing
challenges and accountability
and oversight. HB 62 proposes a
structured investigative demand
process which if it applied
appropriately would serve as a
tool to identify and address
systemic civil rights
violations. While the use of
government investigatory
authority must always be
carefully monitored. This bill
could provide a mechanism for
ensuring state level
accountability.
And help shape a trajectory that
strengthens civil rights
protections in New Mexico.
We appreciate you anyone else in
support?
We'll go online
Uh, back to the city.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um.
And Madam Chair, um, I just have
some questions I'm trying to
understand this though, um.
So, Madam Chair, expert and
Madam Charity.
What are the other statutes that
currently are separated from
Allowing the AG to just, you
know, go in and.
Do this on its own without the
court oversight, I understand
that.
Adam leaders so um.
They're
The
The statutes where there's CID
authority that does not require
approval to issue or the passing
out terrible solicitations Act.
Currently, the unfair Practices
Act, pyramid promotion schemes
Act, False Act.
The statute that currently has
CID authority in place that does
require a sacked.
OK, so just so I'm
understanding, how many
statutes?
Are we trying to encompass and
Madam Chair, Madam Leader,
um, there are, well, currently
there are 12, 38.
That we are uh consolidating uh
with this, but there are several
statutes that give the Attorney
General, uh, enforcement
authority, however, are also
silent on civil. OK. And
I'm just trying to make sure,
Madam Chair, um,
And representative or not sorry,
Madam Chair, Madam Chair, an
expert.
It seems like this is a very
broad like we seem to over, um,
the years have given the
authority for certain things and
now we're gonna encompass it all
in instead of having the
legislature decide each one.
Individually, each statute
individually is my understanding
that correctly.
here.
Um, I'll take a stab and I'll
let my understanding as the
Attorney General has broad civil
investigatory authority without
necessarily having a specific
statute, uh, in place that
authorizes him or her to do so,
um, and I'll ask the Attorney
General.
Chairs representative, that's
correct. We have broad uh uh
enforcement authority, which
includes investigative
authority.
This would give us investigative
authority in the process for all
the areas in which. Right. And
so, Madam Chair, Madam chair and
expert. So I know you're saying
they do have broad investigatory
power, absolutely. But it seems
like with this bill, you're
trying to sum it up that they
absolutely do.
Have that authority. Is that
correct, Mo chair?
Um
Madam Chair and representative.
I, I don't think it creates any
new authorities that um going
beyond what they already have,
what it does is, which I think
is a plus for this is it's clear
uh that there's one process, not
multiple different processes,
and I would think that um many
of us would be comforted by the
fact that the per the attorney
general has to go to court to
get the um get approval because
they have to prove up at least
they have an adequate basis.
to pursue a, a, a potential
case, Madam Chair and
Representative Madam Chair,
Madam Chair, I, I like that
there's some court review of
this, um, but it seems to me
it's very broad authority like
pretty much um the the AG can. I
mean, well, let me backtrack it
because it says at the end of
the bill.
Um, that it's repealing.
Section 47-6-20. Tell me, um,
Madam Chair expert, what is that
statue
I just the, the very last page
of Madam Chair, Madam Chair, 13,
Section 5 repeal section. What
are these sections? Um, I'll
ask, uh, Ms. Mead to handle
that, but my suspicion is it's a
list of um laws that she.
Madam Chair and Representative.
Beam Cha and representative
that.
It's 57 and.
And I think that's it. And then
not actually a repeal because
investigative demand from those
33 and 4.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair, and
expert. So that's what I was, I,
I don't have that 47 6 25.1, but
I feel that had to do with
something with that allowing
district attorneys or the
attorney general to investigate
some of these matters, and I, I
might be off on that.
Madam Chair Representative, I'll
have to double check that, but
I'm, I thought that was the
subdivision act, but might be
totally right. I'm just gonna
ask just this question.
OK. Um, I just wanted to, I'm,
I'm whether no matter who's the
AG, whether they're Democrat,
Republican, whoever it is, I
just want to make sure that
What you're trying to do, madam
chair, Madam Chair, I.
I don't want it to be used as
some political motivation to go
into every alternative, like
whether it's an election
violation, whether it's all
these different things, it seems
like it gives the AG power to
investigate. I understand
there's that court check on it.
The AG power to basically
without legislative involvement.
I'm just kind of like the bill
we did the other night, the
border of Regents, you know, we
had that whole issue and we were
clarifying that, Madam Chair,
Madam Chair, an expert, uh, I
think to make it very clear that
the AG would have that power,
um, to do that, so are you
concerned at all about the
broadness of it and that it
could be used as some type of
political weapon to serve an
agenda for anybody, you know,
who's in office without the
legislator, you know, so my my
apologies, um, Madam Chair and
Representative.
Um, in my discussions with the
Attorney General and Ms. Meade,
uh, there is a constitutional
basis for their civil authority.
So
That's the first order. There,
there's exists currently a broad
authority under current law. Um,
so I would like to think that we
should take comfort that unlike
on the federal level, where many
investigations may be brought
without any check or balance.
This we are providing such an
opportunity for the courts to at
least weigh in, Madam Chair and
Representative before any such
civil demand will issue, so that
means the Attorney general will
have to have thought out through
his pleadings, what exactly
they're trying to.
pursue and in much detail as
they can, and there is of course
an appeal process if the person
served with the document doesn't
agree that.
You know, etc. So I think this
is strengthens um our approach
in terms of making sure there's
a check on the power of the
attorney general and his
investigations, Madam Chair.
OK, um, Madam Chair, Ma chair
expert.
heard of this, and I, it kind of
bothered me the other night too,
cuz I know what you're talking
about where some of the statutes
say file a district court, some
say file in Santa Fe, this
specifically says Santa Fe, so
you're talking.
Any cause of action or
investigative action that occurs
in.
across the state, Curry County,
Lordsburg, wherever it might be,
is gonna get filed.
According to this in Santa Fe,
um, Madam Chan.
I have great concerns about that
with the political forum instead
of it being where this actually
is being investigated at and
also in addition to that, I I'm
an expert, the idea that we're
gonna have to bring witnesses
from across the state into Santa
Fe, specifically because it says
Santa Fe, um, and I know it's
not clear in a lot of the
statutes because some say
district court, some say.
I mean last the other night we
did district court and we had
the amendment district court in
which the institution, you know,
is located.
That's kind of a very big
concern for me because I, I
think it, you know, we have so
many different areas all over
the state so far and to know
that we're gonna have to bring
everybody to Santa Fe and.
I mean there also is political
issues, forum shopping, you
know, that everything's in Santa
Fe. Um, it's very different than
the eastern side of the state or
where you would want, Madam
Chair, Madam Chair, and expert,
you know, um,
Possibly eventually jurors or
whatever judges that are, you
know, in your area where you're,
where you're getting judged by
jurors of your peers, basically,
and so if it ultimately got to
that, I don't know if that
addresses that, but why Santa
Fe, I guess is my question, and
why not in the district court
where the person or the action,
Madam Chair Representative,
first, this is just for once the
CID is approved by the court and
issued, we are either
required to go to the location
to copy and inspect those
records, or they can send them
to us. Um, the idea of choosing
Santa Fe was for efficiency sake
because you are two companies
that are out of state. OK. OK,
thank you and Madam Chairman
chairs that that relaxes me a
little. So if ultimately this
resulted in a some type of cause
of action, it would be where?
In the jurisdiction where I'm
sorry, where the, the company
resides and I assume if it's an
out of state company, it's in
Santa Fe, correct.
OK, that relaxes me a little bit
on that issue. I was, I had some
concerns about, about that.
OK. I, I will listen to the
arguments I and a lot of broad
power. I understand they have
broad power. I do like to check
on it, um.
But, I mean 10 and things tend
to go one way a lot here in the
state of Mexico and so I just I
want to make sure we're on an
even playing field and um, I,
you know, good friends with the
AG and I understand, you know,
trying to make this, you know,
simpler, but I just, um, it's
just like sitting with me.
And Madam Chair, just a couple
of quick questions, verification
in my head.
Madam Chair Representative.
Does this
Just deal with the Attorney
generals.
Because some of the
The
Statutes that were being
repealed on the last page.
have to do with the Attorney
General and District attorneys.
I'm kind of confused.
Is it just the attorney
General's office?
Madam Chair Representative, yes,
we are just removing the
Attorney General's CID authority
that is combining it and putting
it under the attorney General's.
Uh, plenary or general authority
statute.
Madam Chair Representative, so
you're just compiling all those
into one.
section.
Madam Chair Representative, yes.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you.
Uh, Speaker we do pass on House
Bill 62 as amended.
Uh, thank you. Um, just a couple
of questions just on the
administrative piece, and I know
it was discussed, but there, um.
It just looks like this district
court in Santa Fe County will be
taking on a lot.
Um, analysis, can you speak to
that?
As far as that being the only
venue.
Or not
I thought that analysis would be
hard to say, but if you wanna.
And chairs representative, um, I
don't know how many, so this is
not for the actual cases this of
our petition or um which should
not be very many, um, so I don't
know what the courts, I suspect,
not, not much at all.
Thank you. Um.
Yeah, I didn't hear from Santa
Fe County at all on this, I just
saw that only county implicated,
um, in which case I just.
Assume that they're not in
opposition, uh, nor support that
we're also not worried about it.
On that, um,
We have a due pass motion.
Speaker Martinez.
Uh
you
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Abeta.
Representative Chavis. No.
Representative Hall.
No.
Representative Hochman V Hill?
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
No.
Speaker Martinez, yes.
Representative McQueen, yes.
Representative Ree.
No.
Leader Sapansy. Yes.
Madam Vice Chair, yes, Madam
Chair. Madam Chair, you have a
due pass on House Bill 62 as
amended.
Not to um claim any privileges
here, but you see represent
Sanchez.
Representative Sanchez, you.
Thank you Madam Chair,
committee.
Whenever you're ready.
We're ready, representative.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
committee, so what, uh,
Hospital 320, 3 does is it and
does what a rep Pettigrew
thought he was.
Or not what he thought he was
doing. He, he sat by me in the
last committee and he said he
screwed up.
He admitted that he didn't
intend to uh change it and we're
here to fix what he did. So
basically, uh, yeah, we have a
lot of that going on, don't we,
representative,
so basically,
right now co ops uh or any
utility, um.
They don't require professional
engineers to stop their designs.
Uh we have uh standards that
have been around for 80+ years
and uh they're constantly being
updated and approved. Uh, these
are, uh, RUS standards which are
national standards and um the
purpose here is to fix this. Uh,
I think the
The professional board of
Engineers is uh
Taking the interpretation that
uh as a result after uh
Pedigrew's uh chains that we do
need to uh start stamping these
uh these designs, a lot of
co-ops don't have a licensed PEs
on board. Uh, so what this is
gonna do, um, for fortunately,
I'm a PE engineer. Uh, I have a
professional engineer that works
for me, but I also manage a
large co op. There's majority of
the co-ops don't have licensed
engineers that work for the.
But they do have a license
linemen who work to build these.
Lines, like I said, our standard
designs, so, uh,
I now stand for questions, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Representative. Let's
go to the audience, those
wishing to speak in opposition,
please um approach the gentleman
with the microphone.
Alright, I see it someone one
minute per person, please.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, Perry
Valdez, the executive director
with the New Mexico Board of
Engineers and Surveyors.
Over the past 10 years, the
board received questions,
comments from the public
regarding the additional
exemption in 2021, we leave, we
received a letter from NTSB
recommending the reduction of
the scope of industrial
exemption based on the natural
gas explosion in Massachusetts
in 2018.
2022, a rule change was made in
2023.
As stated by Representative
Sanchez, the change was made to
the Practice Act. The intent of
the rule change was never
intended to be limited to any in
one industrial activity.
It was just it was intended to
address all activity that might
occur from unlicensed practice
with easements and right of
ways.
That affect the public.
Uh, we, as far as drawings go
for standards.
We don't have to have all the
joints stamped by a professional
engineer if they're already
stamped, that they can be used.
It's only when there are changes
that we request that
professional engineer be uh
there to.
Sorry, just don't
Thanks. Yeah.
Hi. Emily Dolman, I'm the board
chair of the New Mexico Board of
Professional Engineers and
Professional surveyors.
And we feel that this bill is
too broad. Um, we've had many
utilities.
Request at a time to get their
standards in order and they have
done that and they have also um
Secured licensed engineers by
getting their engineers licensed
or by hiring licensed engineers,
and they have um done that.
And then, um,
We had hoped that we could do
that same work with the co-ops.
But have not been successful
with them.
And I also like to state the
importance.
Of um utilities and in New
Mexico having professional
engineer.
Utilities located in or near
areas access to the to the
public.
Provide a certain added risk.
Just think of transmission lines
or electric lines along
roadways, crossings, gas
pipelines. I think we've heard
of a lot of incidents, not in
this state, but elsewhere else
have happened.
Thank you, ma'am.
All right, um, those online
wishing to speak in opposition.
We're in opposition.
I, I see two hands raised.
Carl
Tom Tom Merle.
Yes, Madam Chair, uh, Carlton
Ander, I'm an engineer in the
state, uh, as well as an NCAS
board member, uh, HB 323
represents an increased risk to
the public, simply unnecessary.
The board of licensure met with
the cooperatives a year ago and
provided a path for them to have
their existing standard drawings
reviewed and approved once by
New Mexico PE. Doing so would
have been a de minimis cost that
could have been shared by the
co-ops and would have eliminated
any future project delays. The
board also provided the
additional 12 months as Perry
described.
The RUS standards used by the
co-ops are not intended as final
designs, but rather minimum
standards to access funding. The
RUS bulletins themselves state
that the standards may require
modification and that users
still need to ensure proper
design of their systems.
Lastly, the language proposed in
HB 323 extends well beyond the
exemption of rural utilities.
Property damage, injuries, and
loss of life in New Mexico have
all been attributed to design
and operation of systems that
would be considered exempt from
licensure should HB 323 be
passed. Thank you. Thank you,
Elizabeth.
McNally. Hi, my name is
Elizabeth McNally, and I'm also
on the licensing board. I'm the
chair of the professional
engineering Committee, and I'm
an environmental engineer based
out of Farmington, and I just
want to say that I concur with
the opposition to HB 323. Um, I,
I feel like it will, uh,
decrease the level of public
safety, public health and safety
that we want and expect for our
citizens and our
public lands
And private lands as well, where
there might be an easement or
something going through. So, um,
that is my main comment. Um, I
don't think this, this bill
benefits uh the citizens of New
Mexico at all.
Thank you. um, let's go to the
audience, those wishing to speak
in support.
Please um
Approached the gentleman with.
The microphone.
Up to 5 people, 1 minute each,
please.
Hey, good afternoon, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
I'm Vince Martinez. I'm the
interim CEO of the Mexico Rural
Electric Cooperative Association
and senior government advisor.
Tri-state generation and
transmission association. The 17
member cooperatives of NRECA
stand in full support of House
Bill 2323. As you know, the
rural co-ops are not for profit.
We serve 80% of New Mexico's
land mass, but only 20% of the
population. We provide reliable,
affordable electricity parts of
New Mexico that the the
for-profit utilities would not
serve.
As while investor owned
utilities serve up to 500 and
100 people for a mile of line,
our average is a little over 3
people for miles of line.
Our systems must be designed,
built, and maintained.
Following USD rural utility
service engineering standards
and adhered to the National
Electric Safety Code.
The need for an engineering
stamp or survey for routine
maintenance and changes or
extensions to our utility system
within our right of ways as
unnecessary and burdensome costs
and delays to projects, which is
ultimately passed on.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, with
deep respect, my name is Scott
Lopez, and I am the founder of
Va Mayor Capital and a
registered lobbyist.
We are a
located at the Pueblo and
Espanola. I have a professional
background in utility
construction and was the vice
president of business
development and government
affairs for Kelly Cable, a
statewide New Mexico
construction firm. I can
personally attest the electric
cooperatives, telephone
cooperatives, and utilities
would immediately welcome any
administrative and financial.
belief caused by burdensome
regulations that did not exist
two years ago, regulations that
are layered onto current onerous
permitting workforce and supply
chain issues, Madam chair
cooperatives and utilities keep
New Mexico communities heated,
electrified, and connected by
passing HB 323, we can make it
easier for them to do business.
Thank you for your support and
consideration, Madam Chair and
committee members. Scott, can
you clarify you went um through
a list, are you lobbying for a
particular entity in this when
you just spoke to.
Private citizen. OK, thank you.
Well
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the of the committee and uh
good afternoon everyone. My name
is Clementa Sanchez, and it's
good to see a lot of you again,
Uh, I represent uh Canal Divide
Energy and Telecommunications
cooperative in West Central New
Mexico and we're in support of
this bill as the statements that
were put forward before we agree
with them and thank the sponsor,
Sanchez, so no relation. I don't
play a sax like he does either
and uh I just uh thank you and
uh we support this.
OK.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. Uh, my
name is George Dodge Junior. I
am registered lobbyist for the
New Mexico Rural Electric
Cooperative Association and
Western Farmers Co op.
Uh, GNT, I am also the uh vice
president of Farms Electric Co
op, uh, based out of Clovis, New
Mexico on the east side of the
state. So, you know what, Madam
Chair, um, uh.
I don't want to repeat what the
representative said and our
other ones, our other supporters
said, but I do want to say one
thing and, and I'll, I'll read
it here directly from.
From our, our bylaws and and our
uh
Legislation special larger
projects, transmission lines
substations, breaker stations,
interconnections are all
designed by New Mexico State
licensed PEs. So all we're
talking about here is uh our
lines and poles that are on our
property.
OK, so we're, we're our right of
way, so you know what, we
appreciate your support on this,
and um it's a cost saving
measure for our co-ops because
we do not employ a professional
engineer. So thank you very much
and we appreciate your your
vote. Thank you.
Those online wishing to speak in
support.
Please raise your hand and I
don't see anyone online. I'm
back to the representative.
Anything you'd like to add
representative? Yes, madam
Chair, I'd just like to
indicate, uh, cops have been
doing this for 80 years, uh, the
reference Project in New England
was a gas line transmission
project. It's pretty sad when uh
something like that is uh
dictating how we do business
here in New Mexico, uh, knock on
wood, uh, we haven't had issues.
I hope we don't have any issues,
but, uh, what we've been doing
has been working uh for first
to do this, uh, this could drive
up cost 10 to 20%. Some of the
co ops located in rural areas
have to hire PEs for their
bigger projects out of uh Texas.
Uh, I also want to mention, uh,
The people we serve are poor.
This is gonna cause costs to go
up. It's also gonna cause delays
in getting their projects done.
Examples of the Navajo Nation. I
know we're working diligently to
get power to places that don't
even have electricity.
Uh, these are examples of the
things co-ops are doing to uh
help our everyday citizens, so
I, I'm here to ask the committee
to pass this. I know, uh.
The professional engineers would
probably like to have more
workload on their uh their
plates as a result of this and
uh
I guess while we're at it, why
don't we get the, the attorneys
to sign off on that too. I'd
watch it there.
But
I, I joking aside, uh.
Madam Charles, joking aside, um,
Well we've been doing has been
working and uh all this is going
to do if we don't fix this, it's
gonna drive costs on uh the poor
people of our state and it's
gonna cause delays on people
getting electricity. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Uh thank you, representative,
I've represented McQueen.
Thank you, ma'am. Chair. So the
attorneys have questions about
your bill.
Um,
So I remember uh representing Pe
Grew's bill a couple of years
ago.
And I debated it on the floor
and I asked some questions about
it.
And in my opinion, he couldn't
explain the bill a couple of
years ago.
So here we are, um, the bill
passed when the law.
Uh, could you, uh, Madam
Chairman Sanchez.
Clearly
state
What was wrong about his bill
and what's different about this
bill and I'm
I've read this over and over
again. I'm trying to understand
exactly what you're proposing to
do. So, Madam Chair, I was not
here when you passed that bill,
but the results of the language
he put in in this section have
given the, the board to take the
interpretation that we have to
get PEs to stamp our designs. So
what I'm doing is I'm changing
the language, which is going to
take us back to where we were
before that happened, where we
can do stuff like we've been
doing for the last 8 years.
OK, and um
Ma'am, sure Representative
Sanchez, is there a
Is there a threshold? Are you
just doing
Short connections or is because
I, I don't see any threshold. I,
I.
It looks to me like it's
exemption for anything. So,
Madam Chair, uh, right now,
If there's an RUS spec for it,
uh, we just use that spec, uh,
if it's something that's
complicated like building a a
substation, there's no way
alignment can just go build a
substation. We have to hire a
licensed PE to go do that and
design that. So, uh,
Madam Chair, this is to uh
change to the status quo as it
was before that allows us to uh
continue to build distribution
lines on our right of ways, uh,
continue to build line
extensions to people's homes.
Uh, that's, that's the intent of
this change, Madam Chair.
I'm sure Sanchez, is there any
limit on the length?
That you can do without a P.
Madame chair, uh, I guess I
don't understand your question.
I'm sorry. Can you clarify it? I
mean, are we talking miles and
miles of line, or are we
talking, you know, 40 ft to
someone's home from an existing
line. Not I'm sure we're talking
about all of the above, uh,
right now when we build
distribution lines, they could
be miles, uh.
Those are done pretty routinely.
We do reconducting, we do pole
replacements, uh, what we do
every day is line extensions. We
tie to an existing dis
distribution line.
Uh, as a result of the
The interpret interpretation
that's come up as a result of
the change in legislation we are
now.
Gonna have to be required to get
PE stamped on all this stuff
that we've been doing, like I
said, for the last 8 years.
Ma'am shares and Sanchez, I, I
guess I.
see a difference between, you
know, connecting someone's house
and, you know, building a line
that.
processes multiple counties.
And I'm, I'm concerned there's
no distinction in this, um.
Men er and Sanchez.
Uh, some of the testimony from
the public are are former
representatives was describing
this on our property.
And yet the the language of the
bill includes property that's
leased.
right away, which, you know, he
is owned by someone else,
easements or law lawfully
operates. That sounds like
Uh, pretty much anyone's
property, so Madam Chair, uh,
right now, an example is we have
tribalismments that we pay for
30 years at a time. So those are
our lines on those easements, we
own them for the long term.
They're not going anywhere,
those, those lines actually
serve tribal members unless they
want to lose their electricity.
So we don't technically own the,
thee man so we pay for those
easements. So I think that's
what that means. Also, uh, when
we build the line to a person's
home, we don't own that
property. We just own the
easement to that property where
our line is. So we have access
to fix that line if there's an
issue.
And Madam chair, Representative
Sanchez, is this limited to
co-ops?
Madame Cher, no, it's not, and I
think uh someone mentioned that
uh the IUUs for a billion dollar
companies have come into
compliance because they can
afford to hire PEs.
And uh they're able to do a lot
of stuff we can't do, uh, that's
not the case for most of the
co-ops, uh, they, they can't
afford that. Anything we do gets
passed on to the ratepayers. We
don't have a base where we can
pass those costs into our, our
investors or, or profit margins
were nonprofits.
Ma'am chairs and Sanchez, did
you consider a bill with more
targeted language, something
specific to the co ops and maybe
uh limitation on the scope. Uh,
Madam Chair.
I could, we could discuss that,
but like I said, uh, we haven't
had issues in the past. That's
not to say, uh, knock on wood,
something wouldn't ever happen,
but we have 80 years of
demonstrated experience and you
say, uh, you don't feel
comfortable with miles and miles
of line, but basically, uh, this
distribution lines, they're,
they're sticks with poles on
them, pulls, uh, with lights on
them. There's a National
Electrical Safety Code which our
guys are trained to do our, our
stakers who actually designed
these are, are trained to design
these.
polls, so they understand how to
interpret these codes, uh, I
know, uh, you have to take a
test to be a PE, but we do have
people that, that have many
years of experience that are
designing these things in a lot
of cases uh when they are built
to get our loan funds back from
the, the federal government from
RUS, uh, many cases we do have
to get these lines expected by
inspected by a, by a PE after
the fact. So, um, but they do
that, uh.
Randomly they check things and
sign off, so they do spot
checking. So that, that check's
going on already.
But Madam chairs and Sanchez,
that's not in this bill.
I mean, you wouldn't have to do
that under this bill, right? Uh,
Madam Chair, under this bill, we
would have to get a PE to stamp
the design to run those miles of
lines that you mentioned, you
had a concern with, which I just
mentioned we've been doing for
80 years.
Uh, Madam Chair, and I'd like to
say this is by rule, this is the
interpretation that the, the
board has taken. It's not, the
law doesn't specifically say
this. This is the role that the,
the board has taken.
OK, Madam Chair, um,
Representative Sanchez,
representing the group, you
know, this is a broad exemption.
It's not targeted to co-ops.
There's no scope limitation. I
know, um,
Uh
Power lines have been implicated
in some of the major fires
across our country, uh, the
campfire in California a couple
of years ago, I think one of the
deadliest, uh, the Altadena
fire, uh, just this year.
Uh, I don't think that's
happened yet in New Mexico, but
we certainly have lines crossing
forested areas.
Um, and
I, I understand what you're
saying. I'm sympathetic to what
you're saying. I would be
supportive of a bill that was
targeted to what you're
describing, but
This, this isn't that, this is a
complete exemption with, with no
limitation on scope. Madam
Chair, I'd like to clarify that
those fires are caused by trees
that are due to rights, they're
not due to PE designs of our
lines. These are due to uh
clearing right of ways of trees
that are falling on the line. So
I'd just like to clarify that.
Madam Chair, Rosanna Sanchez, I
appreciate that. I don't
disagree. I'm just saying that
this is
Um
Uh
This is something we should be
careful with.
And I, I would prefer to see it
more narrowly.
Drafted bill thank you ma'am and
Madam Chair, if you don't mind
if I respond? we don't do a lot
of that here so.
Um, Robert Hoffman V. Hill, did
you have a question? Uh, yes,
you do, Madam Chair. Thank you
very much. Um, I too am another
confused lawyer about this bill.
So, um, Madam Chair
Representative, just kind of
trying to go through this and
figure out exactly what the crux
of the problem is, so you have
language in law here that are.
Already allows for an exemption.
For architects to sign off in
place of a PE.
Um, in certain contexts. So
that's in law. Looks like the
language that was put in
originally by representative
Pettigre, Madam Chair
Representative was pertaining to
the property owned, leased or
lawfully operated by the
business entity or an affiliated
business entity that employs the
engineer to me and we're
crossing that language out and
we are trying to replace it with
this new language that seems to
be more exact and and makes it
more apparent.
That the business entity or an
affiliated business entity that
employees engineer owns, leases,
has an easement or right away on
or lawfully operate. So is that
language, Madam Chair
representative, the language
that you're telling us limits
this exemption to just the
easements and right away rights
away that co op owns like this
is only in in.
Within
The boundaries of your own
property.
That you're allowing for these
exemptions, yes, that's the
case, uh, like I said, we're
just trying to take it back to
it was where it was before 2
years ago, um.
As a result of the language
change, uh,
And the red pedigrew is here
now. He can talk a little bit
more about that, but uh we're
trying to get it back to where
it was, uh, so we don't put, uh,
additional costs on our
ratepayers, uh, cause that's
what's gonna happen anytime we
run a line extension, those
costs are gonna increase, um.
Uh, but yes, we are.
Precisely
stating we're only gonna do
Or uh get exempted on work
within our control or right of
ways are within our control, our
properties are our properties,
so it's everything within our
precise control, I'm sure. Thank
you, Madam Chair and
Representatives. So does that
include?
Properties that are owned by.
Other citizens that are serviced
by your co op.
I'm sure that would include the
easements to a person's house.
So for example, if you live
somewhere, um,
And there's a line.
Going from a transfer to your
house, it's either gonna be
overhead or underground. The co
op hasn't that he's meant, you
give it to them when you agree
to have electricity so that we
can work on that line.
To make sure we keep your power
on. OK. And now that he's here,
Madam Chair Representative, one
last question. Representative
Pettigrew, what, what were you
trying to do?
What was the point of the first
return to that.
I'm gonna answer this as
carefully as I can. Um, when we
originally looked at this bill,
House Bill 411.
This was in the language that
was put together was really
dealt with things from a marine
perspective.
Trying to keep things within
their, their purview.
Unbeknownst to me at the time.
Rulemaking had already been
done.
That
Then became in effect
afterwards. We actually debated
this and Socorro and
Um
Tried to get
RPE board to change their
perspective on this, and um.
They extended it, but did not
stop it.
So what we ultimately ended up
doing and I'm an engineer that
that.
could do this, some of this
work.
The intent was never for me to
be able to get more work out of
this. The intent for me was
never to be able to um do design
work.
With respect to this, this
enacted.
Policies
And, and rules.
That
We never in place in the state
of New Mexico. Thank you.
And so, um,
And I have several different
letter letters here with respect
to the industrial exemption on
this, so the intent was not to
do what this has done,
does not only impact impact.
The co ops and impacts do it.
It impacts the gas companies.
God bless you, um, it impacts
any utility out there.
To not full follow to to not be
able to follow national
standards and have to do PE
sales on simple expansions that.
Um, in the past were never
required because there's a
national standard on.
Hopefully that answered your
question, madam. I'm sorry, one
last quick question, but I'm
sure, um, representative, when
you did this original amendment,
did the um.
The opposition stated today have
the same.
Opposition and that they feel
like it's the unqualified
that you have architects
practicing engineering,
essentially.
Madam Chair, if that was opposed
at the time of 4/11, I don't
recall that. I did not hear the
opposition today, so I can't
speak to that.
With respect to this, this is
very specifically allowing our
utilities to do work within
their easements and expansions
within their easements.
That follow a national standard
instead of requiring a PEI.
In Lee County, it's not gonna
have an impact. We have PEs on
staff.
You know, for Lee County
Electric, they have PEs on
staff. They can do this work.
Not every co op has that. Do it
doesn't have that. It will
expand in, and I don't have the
numbers with me, Madam Chair and
representative, but what I can
say is that.
This will have a huge impact.
Undo it in the do it expansion
with respect to broadband.
Thank you Madam Chair.
Thank you.
Thank you, madam.
And I'm sure I think I
representative uh Aman B Hill
got, I was very confused, but I
think she laid that out well for
me, so thank you, um,
Representative Romero, uh, thank
you, Madam Chair.
The, the last bit of confusion
because I was.
Current staff
And it does say that.
On July 1st, 2030.
Um
Also part of the confusion with
this bill generally.
Um, that the exemptions that
currently exist for
Madam Chair and Representative,
let me look and see if I have
411 in here.
And I'm chairing representative,
I do not have the language of
411 in here. I can pull it up on
my phone real quick
um, representative, so I guess
just with the sort of I'm.
We're looking at engineering
except what's already in law.
I share the same concerns.
Just what all, what's on the
other question, Madam Chair,
it's a delayed repeal supposedly
as what the,
um.
Time, but, um, is there any
Opportunity right now to think
about revising this or.
to this committed to this
version. Like I said, uh, what
was there two years before this
was working fine, uh.
We didn't have an issue until
the law got changed.
And uh the board.
took it upon themselves to uh
develop rules that are now
Potentially or they are gonna
cause us to uh hire PEs.
Thank you, um, Representative
Sapansy.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representatives, um.
It's a very interesting and very
specific issue, um, and I'm just
wondering, I just had a few
questions. Um,
One of which is, does this
change? What, what would happen
if a if a line.
Like if the co op.
Did not design the line
correctly or there was some kind
of engineering problem, this
doesn't impact that is that, is
that right?
Madam Chair, when we build the
line, the line gets tested, we
test them, uh.
To make sure they're working
properly. So we do have our own
uh tests after that, so, uh,
that's gonna be done regardless
uh of PE design uh a line like I
said, which we have national
standards for that's not.
That's not going to cover the
testing. We're already doing
that on our own, so by you
requiring a PE to stamp, that's
not going to require us to go do
quality control.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and,
and.
You know,
What would happen if it was
designed incorrectly, would that
be, would that be caught at the
testing phase, or is there an
inspection or or you just walk
me through what.
What would happen if, if
something went wrong. Not again,
we build to a standard designs
that have been around for
probably 80 years, uh, in
special cases where we do need
uh to design something that
would be, we hope it gets
caught.
Again, uh, I run a co op if we
build something and something
bad happens, we get sued, right?
So why would I be here try to
increase, increase liability
when I could put, put it on a PE
licensed engineer like I
wouldn't do that because that's
gonna bankrupt us, right? So.
Uh, I just wanna say that. Thank
you.
Thank you for that, uh,
representative and Madam Chair,
um, you know, it strikes me I
heard testimony this morning on
a different bill that was all
about recruiting accountants,
um, and what a shortage of
accountants we have in this
state, um, and as part of that
discussion, the shortage of
engineers also came up and, and
how difficult it is for us to
have an adequate supply of
engineers for um, construction
projects and so um.
You know, Madam Chair, I um.
I understand the intent of this
legislation and it seems to me
it's kind of a real practical
application of.
Um, uh, some of the challenges
just that we have in staffing
and getting qualified folks to
um
fit into all of the roles that
we need them for, so, madam,
thank you, representative.
Thank you, madam I'm sure, I'd
like to move a do pass. I'll
second that.
Um
Perhaps to co-ops, but.
is
Let's see what you call the
roll, please. Yes representative
Abeta. Yes.
Representative Chavez. Yes.
Representative Hall, yes.
Representative Hoffman v. Hill.
No.
Representative Martinez. Yes.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen, no.
Representative Reed, yes.
Leader Sapansky.
Madam Vice Chair, yes.
Madam Chair
No.
Madam Chair, you have a do pass
on House Bill 32 Committee.
Thank you.
Um
Last item is.
House Bill 290.
And um we have everybody's
lining up to present the bill,
it looks like.
It
Oh, OK.
OK, go for it.
There were 3 people lined up to
take care of this bill.
I.
We had 123
yeah
I'm so I'm, I'm hurt. Nobody
asked me to put it on.
OK.
We have public account
requirements, uh, and Madam
Chair, you have a committee sub.
Yes, we do 256 8.2. Yes, we do,
and there's only one, amending
the definition does somebody
wanna move um discussion of the
committee. All right, we have a
motion to consider the 0.2
version of the committee sub.
Yep. So we're just uh a mending
and otherwise all of the adopted
changes were in the previous
committee, Madam.
Do you wish to add something,
Mister Haran. Madam Chair, on
the committee itself, yes, that
was just a clerical oversight by
adding accounting to go with
experience, which is now a
defined term in the bill that
was caught as we went between
committees so clearly just a
clerical error.
Um, you wanna talk about what
the whole bill does before we go
to the audience, not just the
little tweak, Madam Chair, 1999
Public Accountancy Act, so we
haven't done that for 26 years
now, making it now consistent
with the current changes to the
uniform accountability or
accountancy that's required,
Madam Chair. Mr. Haran, do you
want to add anything? Madam
Chair, just briefly again like
Reverend Sanchez, I'm actually
correcting an error by the
previous lobbyists for the
Mexico Society CPA's Tom Harran
when he passed the requirement.
Uh 25 or 21 years ago to add the
additional 150 hours requirement
for education for CPAs. Just
very briefly, this changes the
the education requirement to
give different access to folks
to get cer certified as CPAs. It
does not lower the standard,
just gives different pathways.
It also allows for test results
to last for 30 months rather
than 18 months as they take
different parts of the CPA exam.
And the third thing it does is
very briefly it ensures that
other CPAs coming into New
Mexico must meet those same
accounting experience
requirements and education
requirements and we have Laura
Beltran Schmitz here from
Clifton Larson Allen that that's
actually impacted so she'll make
a very brief statement.
Yes, uh, thank you, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, uh, as
mentioned, I'm here as a
principal with Clifton Larson
Allen CLA. I was directly
impacted in this when I was in
school, in 2004, ready to
graduate, the rule changed, uh,
impacted me. I needed to take
out a loan, so financial burden
in order to get that additional
education requirement when I
would have met it without that
additional schooling. Appreciate
the, uh, looking at this. So
Madam Chair, we'll stand for
questions and she does have a
payment plan from this.
to repay her loans. I'm
surprised we're not hearing a
proposal for the bar exam
or the accounting exams, so we
need a compact that will take
care of everything. We'll get
more accountants here.
I just gave him an idea for
that.
All right.
We're getting silly, I guess I
am, so um, let's go to the
audience, those wishing to speak
in opposition to the bill,
please step forward to the.
The lady with the microphone.
All right, um, I don't see any
opposition in the audience,
those online wishing to speak in
opposition.
I don't see anyone.
Those in the audience wishing to
speak in support, please, um.
I'm up behind the um young lady
with the microphone and please
limit your remarks to about a
minute.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, my
name is Jeannette Contreras, and
I'm the president CEO of the New
Mexico Society of CPAs. I'm here
today on behalf of the Society
in support of House Bill 296 are
association works extremely
close with New Mexico accounting
firms and New Mexico
universities, we are certain
that the passing of this bill
will positively impact the
future of the accounting
profession in New Mexico. Thank
you for your time and
consideration.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Richard
Anklem. I'm president executive
director of the New Mexico Tax
Research Institute. However, it
is not in that capacity that I
rise today. In fact, I don't get
to rise for anything during my
day job. Uh, it's more in my
former capacity as chair of the
CPA Society. This has been an
issue for my entire professional
career. We're losing qualified
applicants, you can talk to your
own agencies, um, um.
floor leader
Pamsky mentioned earlier that
dearth of accountants, it's
everywhere, and I think we
inadvertently made it a little.
worse than we needed to with the
150 hour requirement. We also
made it more expensive, you
know, our students are not
wealthy, and giving them a few
more options while keeping the
standards high is important. It
looked like RLD, the the board,
um, others support this as well,
so for those reasons, I ask you
to do the same. Thank you.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
committee members. I am Melissa
Salzar, director of boards and
commissions with the regulation
and licensing department to
which the Public Accountancy
Board is administratively
attached. We do not speak in
favor against the proposed bill.
We wish only to point out that
the operating budget impact
contained an RFIR of 50,000 was
not included in our current
submitted budget.
Therefore, if the bill is passed
an authorization or
appropriation will need to be
made to allow courts and
commissions division to carry
out the mandate required in the
bill.
In addition, if the bill is
passed for requesting an
extension until January 1st,
2026, to initiate the rulemaking
process, as well as to update NM
plus. Thank you.
tested by RLD
OK.
Makes sense. All right.
Um.
a motion for a due pass.
Not all tired out on that
engineering thing.
So,
so motion.
Or a dupe.
Oh, it's, oh yeah, so sorry.
You're right, do this right, and
I apologize, Madam Chair, uh, I
make a motion for do not pass on
866.1.
And I do pass on 56 8.2.
But
Right
Do not pass on House Bill 290.
6, but I do pass on House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House commerce and Economic
Development Committee substitute
for House Bill 296.
Yes, ma'am. And made by
Representative Hall of
Representative Chavez.
All right, um, would you call
the roll?
Yes, thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Abe.
Representative Chavez. Yes.
Representative Hall.
Representative Hoffman v. Hill.
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative Reeve, yes.
Leads of pants, Madam Vice
Chair.
Madam Chair, yes, Madam Chair,
you have a do not pass on
Let me read it. House Judiciary
commit I do not pass on House
Bill 296, but a due pass on
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Commerce
and Economic Development
Committee substitute for House
Bill 296, and I can't wait for
this, so, um.
Thank you. You're welcome.
You're welcome. Um, before
everybody takes off, I just
wanna let you know this is real
brief. We have kind of some
heavy agendas coming up in part
to try to accommodate some
members who have build
priorities on both sides, you
know, I've worked with
representative um Reeve, so
whatever you can do to to be
understanding of that, I'd
appreciate it. So it's next few
days will be a little tough I
think.
Yeah, it was. Although we would
have been heavier if we hadn't
had a bill even so.
Yeah, that would have been
longer, so anyway, thank you
everybody as always appreciate
it.
