First bill on our agenda is
House Bill 586.
Leads Sapansky.
Yes, so, um, just to kind of set
the scene here. Um, this is one
of our
Emergency bills, um, many of you
saw 0.4, but the 0.5 is minimal
um changes, substantive changes,
and we've conferred with the
ranking member on hearing it. So
it has been passed out and at
the um 202 number last three
digits are 26.5.
OK.
for yours, Peter. Uh, good
morning, Madam Chair and
members. Um, I am very pleased
to present the Healthcare
Consolidation Oversight Act.
Which uh ensures that there's a
fair review process to protect
the interests of patients in
communities where New Mexico
hospitals have a change of
control. Um, so what this bill
sets out is a process by which
uh the healthcare authority may
review transactions that focus
on uh mergers, acquisitions
where there is a change of
control in a hospital, um, or an
organization um that is uh uh
acquired by an organization.
affiliated with a health uh
insurance.
Provider.
Um, so until last year we were
one of only 11 states in the
nation that had no oversight in
all these transactions and the
members may remember we did pass
a Senate Bill 15 last year, uh,
last session, which uh was, was,
um, uh, a great negotiating
effort with the hospitals and
all the stakeholders and uh was
intended to only last for one
year to allow us to have time to
uh come back with a more
comprehensive piece.
of legislation. Uh, and so,
House Bill 586 is that uh piece
of legislation, I really want to
thank the hospital association
and Presbyterian and Loveless in
particular, um, as well as uh
the entire hospital association
team for working with us very
closely on the uh this draft and
what we have done is we have
taken Senate Bill 15 from last
session at
said, uh, whistleblower
protections, added a public
comment community comment period
and enforcement authority, and
we have also relocated uh the
oversight from the office of the
Superintendent of Insurance to
the healthcare authority. Um,
this act does not have a sunset,
um, so this is intended to be a
long-term framework. I have Gina
De Blasi who is uh uh DOH.
Secretary as well as longtime
advisor to the governor on all
matters of healthcare policy,
um, I don't know Mr. Blasi, if
you'd like to add anything, I
would welcome it.
Good morning, Madam Chair, um,
members of the committee, um, I
really don't have anything
additional to add other than
just the one thing to say is
that this, this uh legislation
is really important. It's really
about protecting access to care,
um, in New Mexico and
particularly for a rural
communities in New Mexico, um,
so, you know, for that, I think,
you know, the, um, we stand for
questions. OK, um, let, let's go
to the audience, those.
wishing to speak in opposition,
please approach the gentleman
with a microphone and limit your
remarks to no more than one
minute, roughly a minute.
I don't see any opposition.
Those online, wishing to speak
in opposition, please raise your
hand.
OK, I don't see anyone online,
uh, those wishing to speak in
support, please limit it to
about 5 people, no more than one
minute, please.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. Larry Heran
registered lobbyist for
Presbyterian Healthcare
Services.
We're actually neutral on the
bill for that awkward position
where there's not a neutral when
to stand up, but we appreciate
the work that's gone into this
piece of legislation, started in
the interim, continued in the
Senate with a bill that was
introduced in the Senate. Um, we
appreciate the sponsors also
Senator Du Hagan, the
superintendent of insurance
working with us and Mr. Blasi,
um.
It's been a collaborative effort
to get us here. We think this
gives us the predictability.
And the timelines and a
reasonable amount of oversight
for these transactions, and once
they're, so we appreciate the
committee's work and the sponsor
legislation. Thanks.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Troy
Clark, uh, president and CEO of
the New Mexico Hospital
Association and we too wish to
express great things to uh
majority floor leader uh
Representative Sapansky and
Secretary of DOH Mr. Blasi, for
their efforts to sit down to
bring us to the same point of
neutrality on this bill, where
we have found a balance between
the needed oversight, but also
the protection of our uh
hospitals, especially in our
rural areas to balance the
access to care that we have.
Thank you.
morning, Madam Chair and
committee. My name is Ray Ray.
Oh my gosh, allergies. Um, I'm
here representing Bold Futures.
Thank you, sponsors Sainsky for
continuing the work for
community oversight of
consolidations in the state and
listening to the community's
most impacted by mergers after
last year's legislation. Old
futures began the journey with
consolidation, community
involvement when Christus merged
with Gerald Champion in Otero
County, Community members were
not notified and they went
widely unheard. These
included Mescalero Apache Tribe,
Holloman Air Force Base, and
those with differing
documentation statuses. We did
not want that repeated in other
parts of the state. We
appreciate the commitment to
make space for comment and
community forums in HB 586 and
we look forward to continue
supporting the bill and working
with the sponsors and secretary
de Blasi to ensure.
But it's
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Dan Najar
representing Lovelace. I'm
echoing the comments of the
prior speakers from the
hospitals, but I think it's
important to mention that
tremendous amount of work has
been done in a very short time
by majority leader and
secretary.
We greatly appreciate the effort
they made during a very busy
period of the session.
Thank you.
Morning, Madam Chair, members of
the committee, Lena Weber,
policy director with the ACLU of
New Mexico. Um, we're very
excited to support HB 586 and
really appreciate the work of
the majority floor leader, the
secretary, and all of the others
who have put so much work into
this important initiative. We
deeply appreciate all the work
that went into this over the
interim and especially note, uh,
the importance of the, the clear
mechanism for community
engagement, um, this is crucial
because we know that those
community members who are
directly impacted by the cost,
quality and access to care
available to them, um, as well
as changes to employee
conditions and benefits, their
input into this uh transaction
system ensures that transactions
improve access to care rather
than decrease it. Thank you so
much. Thank you. Let's go
online.
Those wishing to speak in
support, raise your hand.
Going to limit it to 3, up to 3.
OK.
Um, I see one hand raised.
Our
Erica Sanchez.
Good morning to members of the
committee. My name is Erica
Sanchez. I'm an attorney and
healthcare director at New
Mexico Center on Law and
Poverty. We support House Bill
586 and we appreciate all of the
work of the sponsor to listen to
a broad range of stakeholders to
develop this bill. We believe it
balances public notice and
engagement with oversight and
the confidentiality of the
hospitals. And we also
appreciate that it considers the
effect of proposed transactions.
hospital employees and
healthcare providers. And we
urge the committee to vote in
favor of House Bill 586. Thank
you. Thank you. Um, back to the
sponsor, anything else before we
go to committee? No, madam, we
stand for questions. Great.
Questions, comments from the
members of Representative
Martinez.
Thank you, Madam chair and thank
you. um.
Madam floor leader. I, I, I
think I understand what you're
trying to accomplish here and
uh.
I just have a couple of
questions, um, on page 2.
Uh, line 14.
Can you tell me?
Can you give me an example of
what other procurements.
would be
Madam Chair represented
Martinez, this language is
placed in here because what we
see, uh, many times, um, in
these uh mergers and, um,
acquisitions is related
transactions, um, reIs will come
in.
The facilities may uh or the the
um owner of the of the hospital
may sell.
The hospital uh facility itself
to a real estate, um, income
trust.
And what ends up happening is
you deplete the assets of the
hospital. That's why this
language was put in here.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um,
For leader and secretary, so if
If one of these small community
hospitals.
wants to buy an MRI machine.
That has to be reported to you.
Um, humanitarian representative
Martinez, so, um, if you look at
the rest of even that
definition, it has to include so
uh line 16 and 17, it has to
include all or substantially all
of the assets equity or
operations, and so, um, Madam
Chair, uh, representative, I'm
glad you brought this up because
this was one of the challenges
in crafting this was not trying
to interfere with the day to day
operations of the hospital or
Um
Uh, make it so difficult that
they wouldn't be able to, you
know, enter into.
not a floor leader.
Um, on page 3.
I'm, I'm just, I'm curious
about.
Um, why it, it expands
everything to include dental
service organizations.
In any other organization that
contracts with health insurers.
So are we seeing like a lot of
Outside
Equity firms buying up dental
practices.
Um, Madam Chair.
Representatives, so.
Healthcare provider
organizations are only included
if they are
Uh
If you look at the top of page
6.
Which is the definition of it
it's the last part of the
definition of a transaction.
So the only healthcare provider
organizations that are included
are those that are owned or
affiliated with a health
insurer.
Um, and that's basically just
when you have a health insurer
also providing health services
just an extra, um, level that
you want to make sure that um
the patients are also doing uh
uh
Getting the, getting the right
amount of services, so
It's only gonna be in a very
small number of cases that you
would have. So for the dental,
the dental, uh, services
organization would have to be
owned.
by a health insurer, and then
this review.
Would apply.
I think man
floor so.
If it's just an independent
dental office, this wouldn't
apply to them.
Mapresentative correct.
And Madam Chair, Madam floor
leader.
I, I was just curious when I saw
dental services and not like
Poptometrists, ophthalmologists,
something like that. Is it, is
it along the same lines that
Most of them are not owned by
insurance companies.
Madam Chair Representative,
that's correct. And so,
Um
Thank you.
But
Are we at an impasse or are you
done uh representative, I
thought you, I thought this
was gonna add to that. Uh,
let's, let's move on to
Page 4
Um
On the definition of an
independent healthcare practice.
So line 13 at the end says
individuals.
Um, and
Provide the healthcare services
through
Healthcare provider
organizations.
Is it, is it the same idea of
the insurance companies or
Because
The way I read that, it would
be.
Like my
Primary care is
Independent office.
Not owned by anybody but him and
his.
partners
Would they be included in this?
Me and chair representative uh
Martinez same issue, yes, and um
again, it's, you know, if
there's an affiliation with the
health insurer, um, what ends up
happening many times is then in
those practices move on then
you're removed from other
networks and the help ensure
controls that network, so it
limits access to care.
Um
Page 5.
curious
why they need to report a
mortgage.
If they are gonna buy the office
building where they're at?
They take out a mortgage, why
would that be necessary to
report.
Madam Chair and Representative,
one of the reasons that the um
these kinds of things that apply
to physical assets like a
mortgage or a lease um is
included is because one of the
things that we have seen in
other states that we'd like to
prevent from happening here is
um a
Uh entity takes over a hospital
and that is wholly owned
previous to that acquisition,
and then they may actually
Try to sell the either the land
or the physical building or some
combination thereof or lease it
out to a different entity, and
so it's just
Trying to understand, for
example, if we had like a county
owned hospital with a new
operator. We just wanna make
sure that
We know what's happening with
those assets, and they're not
being sort of sold out from
under, uh, the community, um,
and so that has occurred in some
other states where it's sort of
like a strip and flip kind of
thing, and those are the kinds
of folks that uh we wanna make
sure we're looking at.
Madam Chair, Madam floor leader,
so it's simply transparency.
Um,
Madam represented but um.
minority whip Martinez, yes. OK.
My last question, Madam Chair.
Madam floor leader on page 7.
Um
Online 2 it talks about length
19 and 20.
It talks about notifying the
parties in writing.
If the notice is complete what
parties are we talking about?
Madam chair and with Martinez.
So those are the parties that
are part of the transaction.
So, so basically the process is
they would file the notice with
the healthcare authority to say
we're entering into this
contract.
And then, um, the healthcare
authority has 30 days to examine
all the documents and let them
know that they're complete and
that is important that we have a
limitation on that timeline
because then the clock starts
for the healthcare authority to
complete its review.
Thank you, ma'am Chair, Madam
floor leader, so it's just the
parties.
Involved in the transaction.
Correct.
Thank you Madam. You're welcome.
Um, Representative Chavez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Leader
Spowski. Oh my goodness, too
early in the morning. I'm so
sorry. My first question is, and
I just want to verify, we did
end up, it looks like taking it
out of the insurance co section
2. I don't see it anymore. Is
that true
Madam Chair and Representative
Chavez, yes, so, um, you also
noticed like if you look at just
the first page.
Um, lines 23 to 25, that's where
you, where you will see that
it's being moved from section
59A, which is the insurance code
to section 24A, which is the
healthcare code.
OK. Thank you so much. And Madam
Chair, um,
Leader, how does this bill
affect independent healthcare
providers.
That are not affiliated with the
hospitals or large healthcare
organizations.
Madam Chair and Representative,
it would only impact an
independent healthcare provider
if they were acquired by a
healthcare provider organization
that is owned or affiliated with
a health insurer.
So, Madam Chair, representative,
if they wanted to sell and if
you had an independent clinic
that wanted to sell to a a
larger company or something like
that that.
This unless that larger company
was also an insurance company.
So,
Madam Chair Representative, that
would be like um
Optum Healthcare when they
bought ABQ Health Partners,
Optum Healthcare is owned by
UnitedHealthcare, that would
qualify, but a Duke City.
Healthcare provider group
wouldn't fall under this cause
they are not affiliated with the
health insurance organization.
Is that correct?
That's that Madam Chair
representative. OK. Um, and then
I guess my next question is, I
think page 15
when you get to a line 9 on the
wages.
How will this bill impact
ability to adjust.
The wages and benefits to remain
competitive in the healthcare
market. What, what flexibility
do hospitals have in order to
modify the compensation
structure to align with their
operational needs.
Madam Chair Representative
Chavez, um, great question.
This, this does not impact their
ability to change unless um
there was a concern that wages
would not be competitive or
something like that, then the
healthcare authority could have
um the uh as one of the
conditions in a transaction to
say, you know, your wages need
to remain at the same level that
they were before the
transaction, for example, that's
a possibility, um, but it's not
intended to
Reduce the wages. So that uh
definition is or that section.
Subsection 8. Those are just
part of the things that the
healthcare authority are is
reviewing when they're looking
at a proposed transaction. OK.
So they're they're gonna be.
Safeguards cause I'm, I'm just
reading through this, trying,
trying to read through the new
one. Safeguards just to ensure
that the staffing decisions
still remain under the hospital
control while complying with the
employment requirements in this
document, yes, the, the hospital
is still very much in, in
control of, of their staff.
With contracting employee
contracts, all of that. Madam
Chair Representative, yes.
Um
Madam chair, I think those are
all the questions that I have.
Thank you, Representative, uh,
Representative Ree then Romero
and then Hall. Thank you, Madam
Chair Representative. I just
have a few questions. I heard a
lot of people comment on how
this is gonna be good for a
rural communities and hospitals,
and could you elaborate a little
bit more on that.
Madam Chair representative Reeb,
um, one of the things that came
up in the meetings that we had
over the summer, which were um
around the state, um, was that a
lot of times the local community
did not know what changes were
happening at the hospital. So
until, unfortunately,
An individual needed that
service, and then all of a
sudden they realized, oh my
gosh, the ICU is closed at this
hospital or they don't do labor
delivery anymore and now I'm,
I'm pregnant and I need these
services. Where do I go? Um, so
the, it's one reason why the uh
notice for to the public and to
the affected community is so
important, um, and I think it'll
be really good for the hospitals
as well because I don't, I don't
think they realized, uh, we had
really positive conversations
with a lot of the CEOs attended
the meeting.
And I'm not sure that they could
even realized how little was
known about what was going on in
terms of service delivery, um,
but also this will protect, you
know, the assets that every
single hospital that we have is
really precious to that
community and really important
to the whole surrounding area.
And so by making sure that we
have a uh proper review of these
transactions, we can ensure that
um the, the
reduction or elimination in
services is is either known or
is, is not going to happen that
we can really focus on
availability and accessibility
and quality of the healthcare,
just staying the same and um
while we do want investment, we
don't want it at the cost of
patient care.
OK, thank you for that. So they,
uh, Madam Chair representative
the community hospitals were
definitely brought into the
conversation on this and seemed
to be understanding and OK with
it. Yes, madam Chair
Representative, are mostly
through the hospital association
is, is who we've been working
with, um.
Uh, for the last few days and
then, of course, over the
interim as well.
OK, and um, Madam Chair.
The whistleblower section, um,
I'm trying to understand how
that would function in this
situation if, if you don't mind
that um representative kind of
explained that.
That's new section a little bit.
Yes, Madam Chair representative,
um, and originally actually when
um this was
Written, um, it included
Uh, a broader set of folks and
what we in conversations with
Um, all of the, uh, entities we
knew that there are other
protections in the law for
patients and the like, there's
federal protections for
patients, um, and consumers, and
so this is focused on um staff.
So if you, if you see um.
Uh, top of page 21, there's a
definition of whistleblower and
um it's really every entity
that's uh participating in that
particular uh uh hospital
that's, so it's not meant to
incorporate.
You know, some random person
from another community across
the state. It's, it's for people
who are um actually providers,
officers, employees of of the
hospital or the entities that
are merging, and the reason we
put this in, Madam Chair
Representative, was because in
these community meetings, um,
there were at every single one
of them, there was at least one
healthcare provider that didn't
want to say their name or
Who they worked for, they just
had, they had very specific
comments, but they, they were
very anxious um about speaking
up in that way and so we just
wanted to, you know, allow this
uh for frontline folks who who
may be seeing issues to be able
to come forward and share that.
OK, thank you for that, um,
Madam Chairman Representative,
and so it's kind of lastly, um,
I know SB 14.
You kind of mentioned that a
little bit and I'm, I'm looking
just at kind of at the comments,
you know, from the, they seem
the people that were in
opposition now seem to have come
in support of it. Um, and so
that's great. It look, I, I
appreciate you working with
everybody, but just briefly, um,
can you just list the
differences in the two bills, so
I understand that I, I
understand you moved it to the,
the, the healthcare authority.
There's the whistleblower
section, um,
And, and just what else was
there briefly another one much,
but
Yeah, I think probably the
biggest change is that we
started with last the law that
we passed last year is the base,
and then we added the
whistleblower protection, the
public comment community
notification piece and the
enforcement.
And then move the entire thing
from OSI to the healthcare
authority. So those are, um,
those are the biggest changes,
I'm afraid I'll.
twist my brain into pretzels
trying to explain the difference
between this and what was.
Introduced in the Senate. No,
that's OK. It kind of just kind
of one of the major, major
issues. OK, thank you, uh,
Representative, and thank you
Madam Chair. Thank you, um,
Representative Romero. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative, um, secretary,
um, I just have a couple of
questions. One is just I'm not
entirely clear. I know there are
a number of sort of clinical
operations in our community.
Um, I don't know actually the
difference between, say, like a
Southwest care center or
Um
Something like that type of
network versus a hospital
network. Can you just describe
what the difference is and how
they might be affected.
Madam Chair representative
Romero, so, you know, the
hospitals themselves,
particularly like think about um
Presbyterian, right? So they
have, they have their own
clinics. There's affiliated with
Presbyterian and Presbyterian
also was an insurer.
They have an insurance company.
So if you were to think about an
independent practice, for
example, and if they were gonna
be bought by a Presbyterian or
an optum who was owned by United
Healthcare, they would be
subject to this, um,
notification and oversight. If
they're independent such that
and it's another independent
provider that they wanna merge
with that would not fall under
this, under this act.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. So on an
entire sort of network and I
know that when we're looking at
some of these transactions.
Um, you know, there's a, say
like a, a nonprofit clinic. Um,
Network.
Would they fall under that
definition or
Of, of that sort of hospital
network. I guess I'm just trying
to think more specifically to um
some of the clinic networks that
have multiple locations around
the community. They may not be
statewide, but there's certainly
um regional.
Would they fall under the
purview of this as well.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
so for like a lot Failia or a
Southwest Care Center, they are
nonprofit and unless they merged
with the hospital or were
acquired by a hospital, um,
And uh that
With a uh insurance company.
Um, they would not be in this
cause this is, this is really
just looking at, um, and it's
all really in the
Transaction. That's really what
comes down to who's in and who's
out. Um, which is, I think, page
6.
And
I'm sorry, that's, oh yeah, page
5 and 6. so,
So this is only um merger of a
hospital acquisition of a
hospital and then change your
control of a hospital.
Um, the first numbers 3 and 4
and then the only place where
any kind of independent clinic
comes in as if they are as an
item 6, which is where they are
acquired by a.
Healthcare provider organization
affiliated with an insurer.
So if
Um
Presbyterian or Optum or United
Healthcare, Blue Cross Blue
Shield.
You know, I had an entity that
then acquired La Familia or PMS,
for example. Um, but otherwise,
there's no, there there's
nothing um in this bill that
relates to them.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
thank you for that. I, I had, I
hadn't quite put the health
insur component to that, so I
really appreciate the clarity,
um, and then just another
question on, you know, we have
this framework now of
Through this pill on the
acquisition, if those
disclosures are not made on the
acquisition, what are the
penalties? I see that we get the
Department of Justice involved
potentially on whistleblower
protections and other
situations, but what is the
What is the overall sort of
scope of
When, when, if and when this
type of transaction is
occurring, what is the notice
provision and should they not
meet that.
demand what happens.
Yes, Maic chair, uh,
representative.
Romeo, it starts at, um, it's in
the enforcement section which
starts on page 17, but um,
The
Uh
There is a uh structure. So if
It on page 18 line 12, in the
event of a failure to provide
the required notice of the
transaction, um, they will, uh,
require the notice.
Determine if it's subject to a
review and if they determined
that it was willful and
intentional failure to provide
the notice, they can impose an
administrative fine of not more
than $15,000 per day, starting
on the date that the notice
should have been, um,
Uh, provided to the healthcare
authority. So, um, you know,
it's, I think it's one thing
and, and I should also say this
bill has a pre-notice
conference, uh, option, so that
entities could come in and say,
hey, we're doing this
transaction. Do we need to go
through this process and learn
that from the healthcare
authority. So we're trying to
make it easy, but then if you
deliberately do not file the
notice, there is this penalty in
there. Thank you, madam chair,
and that's pretty standard.
as we understand with mergers
and acquisitions for any other
sort of corporate or business
entity, um, on for shareholders
and
Stakeholders, is that right?
Madam Chair Representative, I
believe so, we looked at um a
lot of the origins of this pill
was looking at what um current
uh regulatory scheme is around
insurance companies because it
just did start in the office of
the superintendent of insurance,
and so, um, it just mirrors the
the antitrust issues that they
deal with on insurance
companies.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I
really appreciate this and all
the work put into this, uh,
madam chair, you know, as we've
been through sessions learning a
lot about where private equity
owned hospitals come from and
Certainly that New Mexico has
the highest proportion. I, I
I didn't know if that was good
or bad. All I knew is that these
were um really as I've learned,
you know, when we're looking at
quality of care that there are a
lot of studies showing that when
this these transactions do
happen, um, it does affect um
the community greatly, um, and
negatively. And so Madam chair,
I just, I really, really
appreciate the thoughtfulness
and, and the opportunity to
revisit a lot of these um
transactions perhaps in the
future and how we oversee.
them and certainly what the
outcomes will be here.
Thank you, uh, Representative
Hong.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Leader
Savansky, um.
When
The state becomes involved with
these.
Types of transactions.
And I'm, I'm pretty sure I
Thanks to everyone else's
questions.
I get what, what's going on
there. How does this affect
though?
Like
Between Farmington and
Albuquerque's Cuba.
And they have a little clinic. I
have no idea who owns them, just
as an example.
And let's say um one of these.
Um
Bigger insurance owned uh
medical outfits wants to buy it
because they're failing.
For their having
There's money issues.
Is that
With this
Would this create an overreach
by the government and
potentially cause.
Problems actually providing
service to a small community,
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, uh, and
Representative Hall, uh, we
think we've struck the balance
in this bill between making sure
that patient care will still
continue in a consistent way and
not be impacted in terms of the
quality, uh, or accessibility
but still allowing for
transactions to occur. So there
are 3 options for the healthcare
authority after they've
completed the review, which is
approved approved with
conditions, uh, or disapprove.
Um, which doesn't prevent the
entities from reformulating the
deal and coming back and saying
this is actually what I want to
do, but the healthcare
authorities is limited in what
they're reviewing for, you know,
they're reviewing for this
patient care quality,
affordability, accessibility
gonna continue, um, are, is the
healthcare workforce and going
to be neutral or positively
impacted by this. So, um, it's
not trying to reach in and say,
you know, is this?
That are the financial terms of
this deal, you know, appropriate
or anything like that. We're
just looking at how is this
going to impact the
Manarian leader just as a, as a
follow-up. So the healthcare
authority would
Be involved and could assure
To an extent, obviously, just to
an extent that this small entity
wherever it may be, but I always
think of that as I drive through
people coming here, um.
Then
They're not out
That neither side is out to shut
them down because that's all
some of these.
Communities have in the
healthcare authority under this
uh proposed bill could, you
know, this would be a working
thing, no one would be panicking
about being shut down or closed,
madam.
Madam Chair Representative, yes,
if, if, if the transaction fell
into the definition of
transactions in this, that's
exactly how this would work.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. I'm happy to
entertain emotion.
Madam Cha like to move a do pass
on committee substitute for
house bill number.
86.
I'm happy to second that, but I
think we need to do not pass
motion.
For the
Do not pass on House Bill 586.
You're right. OK, do not pass on
House Bill 586 and I do pass on
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill 86.
OK.
So we have a do not pass on
House Bill 586, but it do pass
on House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 586
made by Representative Romero,
seconded by Representative
McQueen, which you call the
roll, please. Yes, thank you,
Madam Chair. Representative
Abata. Yes.
Representative Chavez.
And I'd like to explain my book.
Representative Hall.
pass.
Representative Hoffman v. Hill?
Yes.
Representative Martinez? No.
Speaker Martinez, Representative
McQueen, yes.
Representative Ree? No.
Leader Sapansky, yes.
Representative Hall.
No, no, I, no.
Madam Vice Chair, yes.
Madam Chair, yes.
Representative Chavez to explain
her vote.
Madam Chair, leader, um, I just
have some hesitation on
overreach. I've, I've been in
healthcare for 26 years when
Saint Joseph's, um, before it
was Loveless, ABQ Health
Partners before it was Optum. We
have Oak Street who has Humana
now and all of those were very
good changes, not just to the
community but to the workforce,
so I think if that hadn't have
taken place, if this may
be a barrier that disturbs me
just a little bit, so that,
that's my only explanation.
Madam Chair, you have a do not
pass on House Bill 586, but I do
pass on how it's judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 586.
have it to pass. Thank you.
All right, Madam, I'm on the
next two bills as well. Oh,
great.
Well, sit tight.
Oh, that's great.
All right, Senate Bill 57 is
next medical provider patient
IPRA info.
leaders of pans carried ready.
Yes, yes, Madam Vice Chair. Um,
so I have here a Senate Bill 57,
um, which addresses the
inspection of public records Act
with uh the University of New
Mexico, um, to ensure that, um,
personal identifying information
or sensitive information related
to medical providers employed by
public bodies, um, who perform
medical services related to
abortion, um, are not required
to disclose um some very, uh,
Critical information um that
present can present a danger to
them, um, and I am here with
Doctor Eve EB of uh University
of New Mexico, and I would love
for her to make a statement as
well. Thank you so much. Good
morning, members of the
committee. Thank you, Madam
Chair, for the opportunity to
come before the committee. My
name is Eve Espe. I'm a board
certified OBGYN and have been
providing full-spectrum OBGYN
care in New Mexico for 34 years.
I'm here as an expert
on SB 57, a bill to create a
narrow exception to IPRA.
I also want to acknowledge the
important role that Ipra plays
in transparency and open
government, the point of SB 57
is not to hide records, but
rather to prioritize safety and
to protect people from being
targeted for potential harm.
Our team of OBGYN physicians has
been subject to continuous
random and essentially
anonymous uh IPA requests from
out of state PO boxes.
For large volumes of documents
in the last few weeks, I
received a request for all
emails to and from Eve Espi from
September 2024 to the present,
uh, that's thousands of emails
that has to be reviewed by our
team.
But the major problem with IPA
that this legislation would
address is safety. Abortion
providers already face
increasing violence and
disruption, um, some of which I
personally experienced.
And I worry most about my
trainees and colleagues, um,
particularly from from uh
restrictive states. So documents
responsive to IPRA, uh, contain
enough detail for targeting,
like names, personal
information, clinical schedules,
travel details,
and calendar information, which
feels very unsafe.
IPRA requeststers have the names
of trainees, staff, and
colleagues across the state and
the country, and although we
make a major attempt to redact
personal information, the sheer
volume, and the limited scope of
the exceptions creates a
dangerous situation.
We are really grateful to New
Mexico legislators who who put
into place many other
protections for clinicians who
provide reproductive healthcare,
uh, including abortion care, and
this bill addresses a gap in
safety of providers, trainees,
and colleagues by extending
those important reproductive
health protections into IPRA.
Thank you.
Thank you. All right, we'll go
to the audience. Um, is there
anyone in opposition to this
bill, if you'll raise your hand.
OK, we'll go online. Um, if
there's anyone in opposition.
To the Senate Bill 57, please
raise your hand.
Doing online right coming back
to the audience live. Um, is
there anyone in support of
Senate Bill 57.
OK, great. We'll limit this to
5, folks who want to speak
please feel free to stand up and
do a minute each. Go ahead.
Madam Chair, members of
committee. My name is Juliano.
I'm the registered lobbyist for
Planned Parenthood Rocky
Mountains, and we support this.
Thank you.
Thank you. Good morning, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Jennifer
Raphael Goetz. I'm the director
of the New Mexico Commission on
the Status of Women. I speak to
you today in support of SB 57. I
believe in transparency in
government, but I think we can
all agree that in our attempt to
be an open government, we can
create some logistical
nightmares, because an IPA
request can be filed for almost
any reason. This takes time that
these medical providers can't
spend with their patients or
doing the work they have been
trained to do. I want to speak
for a moment
moment about safety for our
OBGYNs. While I appreciate
diversity of opinion, and I know
everyone has their own opinion
on women's reproductive health,
medical providers deserve to be
safe in the workplace. We have
heard about how safety is at
stake based on these IPA
requests, and I urge you to
consider the safety of the
medical providers in our state.
Finally, I want you to know that
when we do our regional events
around the state and speak to
New Mexico women. They tell us
their biggest struggle is
finding access to birth workers.
For these reasons and others
stated, I ask you to stand with
the commission on the Status of
Women in Sporting SB 57. Thank
you.
Thank you.
Good morning chair and members
of committee, Kat Sanchez with
Bold Futures, please excuse the
congestion.
In ensuring community leaders
and lived experience, we are
keenly aware of the time that
we're living in where people's
personal information is made
public.
In addition, uh, people's
logistics and other uh
activities are tracked and they
can be targeted and triangulated
for nefarious reasons.
We know that individuals
providing reproductive
healthcare in New Mexico could
have their sensitive information
released as part of an IPA
request.
And while there is a balance of
transparency via IPRA.
We know the reality for
individuals providing care, um,
needs to be balanced for the
privacy they need to keep their
patients and themselves safe. We
urge you do pass on 5, excuse
me, SB 57.
Thank you.
Right we'll go online, um,
please raise your hand if you
are in support of this
legislation will take up to 3.
I had my cash?
Yes, good morning, uh, chair and
committee. Um, I do really
appreciate the protections for
providers, but I have a daughter
who lives in Austin, Texas. And
if she or one of her friends
should need abortion care and
come to stay with us. I am
concerned that somehow their
information could get leaked
along with the provider's
information. If this isn't
passed, and I fear for her
safety living in a state where
she would be criminalized. Thank
you.
Thank you.
Anyone else
Alright, uh, back to our
sponsor. Anything else you'd
like to add?
No, Madam Chair, thank you.
Uh, Representative Ree.
You, Madam Chan represented. Um,
OK, so, um, can you explain on
the IPRA just in general, I'm
not talking about what we're
trying to do here, what
information if someone IPRA's a
hospital. I think you guys were
talking like you and M through
email or whatever it might be.
What is the general information?
The abortion issue aside, that
you are required to provide out
a chair.
I mean the the emperor law is
quite expansive, and so there
are a few exceptions, for
example, for trade secrets, um,
FERPA, uh, the, the, um, PEPA
protects medical student names,
so those can can be redacted,
um, there, there are certain
academic products like
unpublished manuscripts that
would not be able to be
published if they were, you
know, published elsewhere
before, um, so.
So the exceptions that apply to
the to the the documents that
are requested from us are
extremely limited.
So thank you for that. So that
you take out probably, do you
take out names and dates of
birth and things of that nature
generally, I'm thinking HIPA and
all the different things you
know that apply, Madam chair.
It
Madam Chair, uh, representative,
um, the we are only allowed to
redact names of medical students
under FERPA. So otherwise, uh,
name and and personal
identifying information cannot
be redacted, um, under the
current IPRA exceptions. OK, and
so what you're trying to do is
I make an exception for um
Uh, patients who seek
reproductive care or abortions
and also my understanding, I'm
sure staff.
Staff members too who might be
Performing these abortions, I'm
sure.
Yes, madam chair and
Representative Reeves, so, um,
if this is focused on the
practice of a medical provider,
so, um, and can include things
like um
Uh, emails that might indicate
shift scheduling, clinical, uh
supervision activities, um, the,
uh,
The safety issues around travel
plans, um, and it can also
include um other medical
providers from uh the private
sector who are not subject to
IRA, um, because you have
referrals and things like that
going from uh the, the UNM to or
other uh public healthcare
providers to private uh
healthcare providers as well.
And did you say um
representative, there's because
you kind of estimate the
The amount of problems you're
having with, I guess like rats
or people being tracked down at
their home so I can get a better
understanding of what the volume
of of this is balancing it with
transparency.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, um.
We have had a number of uh uh
people who have been protested
at their homes, uh, we've had,
we regularly receive through
regular mail, um, threatening
letters, uh, and, and we don't
know the extent of who's
actually receiving those, but
certainly some of our trainees
have received those we have
received those, um.
And we've also had situations
where people have yelled insults
at some of our trainees as they
walk across campus, um, in ways
that we, we don't know how that
information would have gotten to
them other than, for example,
with IPR requests.
And um your knowledge, madam
chair representative, has there
been any like
Injuries or, you know, I
understand there's been some,
sounds like some harassment. We
see that in every demonstration.
You know, across the state, it
seems like people yelling things
at other people, but um have you
uh do you have examples of
actual
Like
Bodily injury or, or people
coming and, you know, really
I understand the harassment
part, but like any injury
examples that she can.
Provide by
So we don't know the extent
because when when we comb
through these thousands of
emails.
Um, there are many, many people
whose names have been revealed
and oftentimes, you know,
details about their schedule or
their travel, uh, we don't, we
don't collect information from
them to see if they've
experienced bodily injury, so,
so I don't know the answer to
that question.
OK. And so when you say Madam
Chair and representative and
expert details of their travel.
Are you meaning the, the
patient's travel, or you meaning
the doctor's travel, so I
understand that a little better,
but.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, um.
The, the patient information is
protected by HIPAA. So this is
not these this exception does
not uh include
Material that is already
protected under the HIPAA
statute. So these are, you know,
people who correspond with us,
those travel schedules, those um
curriculum schedules.
So, are you reading the not
patients but like people
performing.
The uh performing the abortion.
Thanks to your representatives,
um, I mean, the, the, not
everybody who corresponds with
us provides abortion care, um,
but certainly, right, so
reproductive, um, I guess I
should rephrase that I like
reproductive assistance or
information or that type of
stuff exactly. And, and, you
know, much.
um, or, or
Um,
are for people who are
requesting information,
therefore people from
restrictive states were
requesting information, for
example, about uh doing a
rotation with us to, to learn to
get training and reproductive
health.
OK, and so it, so it seems like
it's more, Madam Chair, aimed at
the staff.
If I'm not mistaken, cause I, I
know that um,
There was a, a clinic that was
busted for uh like kind of in
like uncleanliness and, and I
think it was Lee County
somewhere and when they went
through the files in that every
pretty much patient was listed
under a uh
Jane Doe name and so there was
no way to to look at that. So
I'm assuming um that the
patients at least can be
treated under that type of
confidentiality, um, still down
in chair representative as a
Jane Doe, so no one could get
their information.
Um, madam chair and
representatives of this, uh,
this only addresses the
providers providers, OK.
All right. Um,
I guess my only issue, um, that
obviously I don't want anyone to
get hurt is is a bless you, is a
transparency issue, I mean.
I understand the tre it it's
almost like
We want to be transparent. It is
balancing issue. I understand
what you're saying, but
Transparency is transparency,
and so I, I'm just concerned
about us like starting to carve
out groups that um and medical
providers that uh don't have to
be transparent for Ira, but um
I'll listen to the debate and
thank you for answering this
question. Thank you, chair.
Thanks, Representative,
uh, Christine Chavez.
Thank you, Representative
Leader, um, Representative Ree
asked the exact questions that I
was gonna ask regarding HIPAA
cause I know.
We have to protect their name,
date of birth, address, all of
that is protected. So this is
clearly about providers. So I
guess my question is on page 3
where you have sensitive
information related to practice.
How is sensitive information
defined and who defines that?
Madam Chair and Representative
at.
So the sensitive information,
um is
is data that that could cause
harm if compromised. Um, and so
the things that this.
Uh, the experience of the uh
medical providers that brought
this legislation forward.
Really related to some of the
things I just mentioned, which
is travel plans, trainees, other
individuals that are, you know,
applicants, uh, for positions,
activities and locations and
residents and of the activities,
um, increase from students,
trainees from other states, um,
uh, counterparts from other
states that also work on uh
provide similar types of care.
Um, and
out of chair uh representative
in and the reason that
This is
So, so these are things that
would never be subject to public
disclosure if they were private
clinics.
However, given that it's a
public clinic, it still need,
they're still reporting on all
of the services that are
provided. There's certainly
Um, copious amount of reporting
on the uh funding, the revenue,
the, you know, patient insured
population, uninsured services,
all of that is reported to the
legislature and certainly
available from you and him as
well. So this is really not
about wanting to um put any of
those services, you know, behind
a curtain. It's about
Making sure that the providers
can save them, so that, so
that's why we did there's not a
specific definition of sensitive
information with this because we
didn't want to impact all of the
breath.
in inserting a uh definite,
specific definition of sensitive
information, um, which is why
it's so specific to medical
providers providing a certain
type of services at a public
body.
OK, so I, I can see how certain
records from public disclosure
could
Undermine transparency and the
principles, um, especially when
public funds are involved, I
think that citizens do have the
right to know where their tax
dollars are being utilized. Um,
I think I would just feel better
if you had sensitive information
to find because really you could
then use this bill stating
everything is sensitive
information instead of address,
date of birth, um,
Flight times you could really
put everything there and then
the citizens are telling us that
You know, we created a bill that
is now
Exempting all the records from
IPRA. That's, that's my only
concern.
Thank you.
Uh, thank you, representative,
uh, Representative Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair and Madam
floor leader.
Doctor.
First of all,
It's important for me to say
that anybody who would
crossed the line.
Into
Um
Personal physical threats.
Or
Stalking or anything like that,
no matter what your stance on
this issue is
Um, I, I completely condemn that
type of
behavior and activity. I think
it's wrong.
I think it's
Ridiculous and it has no place
in a civilized society like
ours.
Uh, so it was important for me
to say that.
Um, I do have
Um, some questions.
The only thing you're adding,
Madam Chair, Madam floor leader
is section L.
to existing law.
Madam Chair and whip Martinez
correct.
So,
Those of you that know me know
that I've had the occasion to um
is it
Quite a few doctors in my
rear, um, is that information
With that information be
available to the general public?
If I
You know, when I went through
surgery on my leg.
My shoulder
my other shoulder.
Are, are those?
Is that information available to
the general public?
Madam Chair and whip Martinez,
no. Those would be protected
under HIPPA.
Maam Floor leader.
So wouldn't, wouldn't.
Reproductive care be covered
under that also?
Madam Chair and with Martinez
for the individual patient, so
any
Any type of patient medical
record would not be subject to
the breath.
Um, this bill is focused on the
providers, um, to ensure that
they
Their personal information is
not being uh disclosed so that
they are not subject to
harassment or, or anything
worse.
and chair of Manaflo leader in
that.
That information isn't currently
covered under.
The upper laws
Madam Cha and representative,
so, um, what what
Uh, their personal, their
individual address cannot be
disclosed, however, uh, because
of the sheer volume of requests,
certainly and for their
about travel.
About activities, about uh work
schedules, etc. those that kind
of information is currently um
subject to IRA.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Madam
Flo Leader, um.
So my, my.
Surgeons work schedule.
Where he does business, that's
considered common knowledge.
I, I'm, I'm trying to wrap my
head around what information
you're trying to
Protect
Um
I mean, I can give some
examples, so.
You know, my trainees regularly
email with me as do trainees and
medical students and colleagues
from around the country about
Issues that I would consider to
be sensitive.
So their personal information,
um, their clinical schedules.
Now their travel information,
although that may not seem
sensitive because abortion is
such a polarizing issue and
because there is so much
violence and disruption, which
we have seen increasing, um,
You know, Mike and one of my
concerns is, for example, if I
receive an email from a trainee
from out of state who's looking
to me to to arrange a training
opportunity that if that becomes
common knowledge and is put on
and uh and and and a website,
uh.
Of people who don't agree with
this kind of care that
particularly in restrictive
states, people can be targeted,
but it certainly happened in our
state. And, and I really
appreciate your, your sentiment
about about violence, um, and
thank you for that. Um, I have
received death threats and, and
although that is not physical
violence, it the, the threat of
that violence is, is
is very scary.
And if I think, you know, one of
my trainees or a medical student
or somebody from out of state.
Could, you know, that that
information being accessed could
result in those kinds of letters
to those people.
That causes me grave concern.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair.
Um
floor leader, it, it does bother
me.
I, I
I've always been.
Life and, and that's a
That's the stance that I choose.
Because you disagree with me or
you have a different stance.
Should never allow me to.
attack you personally or
threaten you.
It, it, it.
That for some reason that just
it really gets.
Under my skin.
You know, I can, I can protest.
I can
You know, have a discussion with
you and
Show you my stance, but
Cross over
Sure.
Violence or even threats of
violence. That doesn't prove
anything.
That that that
It, it, it bothers me. I, you
know.
It's
I don't think that's gonna
change.
How you feel about the issue.
Just becomes more and more
polarizing all the time. I've,
I've been harassed. I've been.
Threatened
I don't think it's OK for
somebody to attack me for my
stance.
Or, or
My boats
You know, but I signed up for
this.
I, if somebody threatened me, it
would uh.
It wouldn't be OK, so I don't
think it's OK for you. Um,
But I'm, I'm, I'm going off the
rails here. Um,
Madam Chair.
Madam Floor leader.
The sensitive information, I
agree with with Representative
Chavez, I think needs a little
bit more fleshing out.
Can you tell me again why it's,
you're leaving it just
General term without.
A little bit more definition.
Um, Madam Chair, representative,
uh, with Martinez.
The, the reason that that was
not defined is because there was
a in doing the research on IPRA
itself.
To put a definition of this into
Iro would impact some of the
other.
Um
clauses that are within IPA and
so the decision was made to, to
keep it this way.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Madam
Floor Leader. One last question,
um,
The way that the way the IR law
is currently
I can put in an anonymous
request for this information.
Is that correct?
Madam Chair, and with Martinez,
you have to provide some way to.
Uh, return the information to
you.
So whether that's an email
address.
Um, uh,
etc.
chair
Male leader, so I can make up an
email address.
And that's, that's sufficient.
For for a request.
I'm sure with Martinez might
understanding is that you have
to put a name, but the name is
not verifiable.
Um, are we get requests from
Blanca White, their LPO box
addresses from out of state. So,
We believe these are
Um,
That that are used by people
with out of state PO boxes.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Madam
floor leader.
That
think it's
ridiculous if you're brave
enough to put the request in,
you should be.
Brave enough to tell people who
you are.
All right, thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, madam floor
leader.
Thank you, representative, um.
Peer Martinez.
that chair I move uh do pass on
Senate Bill 57.
second.
Uh, we would do pass motion
motion for Senate Bill 57.
I couldn't call it all. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Representative
Abeta. Yes.
Representative Chavis? No.
Representative Hall? No.
Representative Hoffman v. Hill?
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
Pa.
Speaker Martinez, yes.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative Reed.
No, and I like to explain that.
Leader Sapansy, yes.
Representative Martinez.
No
Rippers, uh, Madam vice chair.
Yes.
Madam Chair
Representative Reeve to explain
her vote.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair
Representative, um,
I voted no because I also would
love a definition of that term.
And also, if somebody is getting
threatened and harassed, I, I
guess I believe you should be
calling law enforcement and
that's how that should be dealt
with and I believe in the
transparency of it also, that's
why I voted no. Thank you much.
Thank you, Representative. Thank
you.
for being here today.
Did you want to
go ahead and see the Madam do
pass on Senate Bill 57. Thank
you.
OK, we're, um, on to Senate Bill
39 as amended at classes to
prior authorization drugs.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um, and
members, so this legislation
deals with individuals who um
are experiencing a rare disease
and ensuring that medications um
that are both on label or
off-label, uh, used, but our FDA
approved.
Um, do not have to go through a
prior authorization process or
um uh medical review. And I have
with me someone who is familiar
to many of you on Zoom is former
House Health and Human Services
chair Debbie Armstrong, uh, who
is my expert witness and um I
think she'd like to make a, a
brief statement as well.
Uh, Representative Armstrong,
can you hear us?
Yeah. Can you hear me now? Yes,
we can hear you.
All right. Thank you. Thank you,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. It's nice to be, um,
before, uh, you, my former
committee, he sat on. Um,
So I thought it would be um
helpful to put a name and face
to what the problem is with rare
diseases.
Last year,
I was diagnosed with a rare um
autoimmune disease called
necrotizing myopathy.
And um in the bill, we define
rare diseases consistent with
federal law as um under 200,000
cases across the country. My
particular uh disease is
Um, there are less than 10,000
cases across the country.
Um, this disease, uh, caused my
body to kill off my muscle
cells.
So that by the time I eventually
got treatment, I was almost
completely dependent.
And thinking that I would have
to um change my living
arrangements, which include
taking care of my 96 year old
mother because we weren't safe
to be um alone together. Um, in
the condition that I was at.
But my path to get there.
Involved a lot of um
Uh, fighting with the insurance
company through multiple denials
because there was not a drug
that was specifically approved
by the FDA for my condition.
And um the problem is to have
FDA approve a drug for a
specific condition.
There needs to be clinical
trials to back it up for that
condition.
But there aren't enough
individuals available to do
clinical trials when you have so
few that are affected.
And so even though the current
law said that autoimmune
diseases were exempt from prior
auth. It was not clear that that
included um the off-label use of
drugs. So I was still denied
even though I had an autoimmune
disease, but also a rare
disease.
So what this bill does is
Um, also, um, you still have to
prove medical necessity, but,
um, takes out the requirement
for prior auth.
Uh, for, uh, or step therapy.
For persons with rare diseases
and clarifies the ability to use
off label. I will tell you, I
went through multiple appeals.
And um
I'm someone who knows how this
works for 15 years, I've run a
health insurance program.
I've chaired the Health and
Human Services Committee. I've
sat on your committee. I um
understand the process. I
understand how to do appeals. I
can call the CEO and did of the
carriers cause I know them.
And it still took me multiple
appeals, um, to, um, to get the
um treatment that I needed.
And if that happens to me,
When I know the system and I
know how it works and I know
what to say, and I know who to
call. Just think of those who
don't.
And that's um that's why this
bill is being brought um forth
and it is um I, I do wanna tell
you I'm doing infinitely better
once I got treatment, the
treatment that was um common
treatment and accepted treatment
in clinical practice, good
clinical practice around the
country for persons with this
disease, it's just not FDA
approved specifically for the
disease.
And um I'm completely
independent again.
I'm not my normal strength or
energy, um, but I am completely
independent and safe, um, and
can be the caregiver for my
mother again. So it was exactly
what I needed.
Um, but it was, I was getting
worse every, each and every day.
As I was going through, um,
Extended appeals.
So, um, with that, Madam Chair,
I'm happy to stand for
questions. I've, I, I did not,
um, I failed to tell you in the
beginning that I am representing
the governor's office on this.
It's a governor's bill and have
the authority of the governor's
office to um to answer questions
and, and stand and support.
Thank you.
Uh, thank you, uh,
Representative Armstrong, always
lovely to hear from you.
Um, we'll, we will, if there's
anything else from the sponsor?
OK.
Uh, we'll go to the audience,
um, for those, um, in opposition
to Senate Bill 39, please raise
your hands.
It will go online and the
opposition.
to Senate Bill 39.
Uh
Jonathan.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Jonathan Buxton with the
Pharmaceutical Care Management
Association. Uh, we respectfully
are in opposition to this bill
and had some great conversations
with Representative Armstrong
about some um administrative
issues with the current draft.
We would like to see some
amendments to make it workable,
um, you know, patient care and
safety aside, the cost aside
that you see in the fiscal note,
the, the, the way, the way prior
authorization is currently
working in New Mexico is there
is a whole bunch of
Standard processes and
protections in place for
patients on timeliness, and I've
not been able to find the same
protections for medical
necessity determinations and we
think it's really important that
if medical necessity is going to
be involved that we have the
same protections in place that
exist for prior authorization,
typically medical necessity
happens as part of the prior
authorization, so we'd like to
see some amendments to make sure
this is workable if it were to
pass. Thank you.
Thank you.
All right, no one else in
opposition online, um, all
right, for those in favor in our
audience live, the Senate Bill
39. Any anyone in favor?
Right, we'll go online. Any
anyone in favor, please raise
your hand.
OK, great. Back to the sponsor.
Thank you, Madam Chair. With
that, we'd stand for questions.
All right. Um,
first on our list is
Representative Chavez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, leader. I have just some
questions, I guess, um.
Well, I understand that these
drugs are, are very much needed.
Who,
who's going to pay for these
medications because
Health insurance companies
can't.
Cover drugs or Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid won't
cover drugs that are not
approved by the FDA and if this
bill is supposed to cover drugs
that are not approved by the
FDA, I guess, who picks up the
cost for that.
Um, madam, uh, Madam Chair and
Representative Chavez. So these
are FDA approved drugs, but they
may not be specifically approved
for that specific condition.
due to the fact that it is very
difficult to
Um, as Representative Armstrong
mentioned, be able to run a
clinical trial with 10,000
people when there may be only
10,000 people with a particular
illness, um, in, in this case,
um, and Madam Chair
Representative, this doesn't
change the insurance
reimbursement requirements, so
they're typical um
Uh, policy would still and and
explanation of benefits would
still apply. I don't know if uh.
Former Chair Armstrong would
like to add to that.
Yeah, um, Madam Chair and
Representative, it um it
It allows for the off-label use
of an FDA approved drug, which
is common practice among all
sorts of, of um diseases. Um,
it's just that this, um,
Uh, specific, um, uh, in rare
diseases, it's often denied
because it's not approved
specific for the disease.
Um, you won't have that.
If you don't have enough people
to do clinical trials.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um,
leader and representative. I
guess I
We, we know of Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid as I know
you've been in the insurance
world for a very long time as
well. Uh, my question is then,
How will the insurance companies
get reimbursed through CMS,
especially for our, our Medicaid
and Medicare populations, um,
Medicare Advantage plans or the
medi
through the state.
states doing this currently or
have any other states done this?
Um, madam Chair, and our
representative, I'm not aware of
other states, but this does not
apply to Medicare. We have the,
as the state don't have any
jurisdiction over Medicare.
It only applies to that which we
have juris it doesn't apply to
IPRA plans either, for instance,
or federal um plans. It, it only
applies to what we have
jurisdiction over, which is
Individual and group insurance,
um, uh, public employees and uh
Medicaid.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair,
leader, and representative. So
this is only going to be for the
commercial plans and individual
products and then like retiree
healthcare employees and state
Medicaid, yes.
OK, so state Medicaid still
falls under.
CMS and federal guidelines.
Are we gonna be able to or I
should say our insurance
companies can't be able to
Get reimbursement.
From CMS for Medicaid, or are we
gonna be relying on just the
state funds budgeted from the
state without the federal funds
backing us up.
Madam Chair and representative,
um, Medicaid is this federal and
state um program and there are
all sorts of services that we as
a state have elected to provide
that doesn't exclude it.
From, um, from Match from
Medicaid. Uh, the state is able
to add additional benefits, um,
beyond that, which is mandated
in federal law.
Thank you, Mountain chair, uh.
Leader representative, so
We're, this is gonna be coming
out of the state funds for
Medicaid reimbursement instead
of relying on the matched
federal dollars then, is that
correct?
Madam Chair and Representative
Mat would still apply.
Match is not excluded just
because it's an additional um
state benefit.
And Madame Chair Representative
Travis, I would also.
Say that this
Some of these meds may be
covered by the plan. Some of
these meds may not be covered by
the plan. This is simply
changing the process by which
they allow access to it. So for
example, if your policy.
Uh, if it's a private policy and
it says, you know, that, that,
um, your, the insurer will pay
80%, the consumer has to pay
20%. That still holds. Um, this
is just changing the prior auth
process, basically, to allow for
the medical necessity and
determination.
Madam Chair and representative,
the same applies to Medicaid.
These would be drugs that are
already in their formulary. It's
not adding new drugs to their
formulary. It's the process for
how you allow it, certain
patients to have it.
Madam Chair, leader
representative. So this is, and
I see this on page 9 now. We're
just removing the entire step
therapy requirements.
Is that correct?
Madam chair and representatives,
so we are.
Adding, I believe it was last
year, there were exemptions
provided for autoimmune
disorders, and cancer, substance
abuse disorder. So we're adding
rare disease or condition to
that list.
OK. I think I understand a
little bit more. OK. Thank you,
Representative, uh, leader and
OK.
Thank you, Representative.
Representative.
asked and answered. Thank you,
Madam Chair. OK, great.
Um, any other comments from the
committee?
OK, uh, we'll entertain emotion.
that
fuck it.
Uh, we have a do pass motion
from Speaker Martinez, seconded
by Representative Abata.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative Abeta. Yes.
Representative Chavis Pence.
Representative Hall.
Representative of Hoffman B
Hill.
Representative Martinez.
patch
Speaker Martinez.
Yes.
Representative McQueen, yes.
Representative Reed, yes.
Leader Sapansky.
Representative Chavis.
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
No
Madam Vice Chair? Yes.
Madam Chair.
Madam chair, you have a due pass
on Senate Bill 39 as amended.
Thank you, members.
Thank you, um, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. Thank
you so much, Representative
Armstrong. Great to hear from
you.
Thank you.
Right, we have a DuPontson
Senate bill.
39 as mean.
Next up we have uh Senate Bill
36 of amended, uh, sensitive
personal information, non
disclosure.
Great to see you, Senator. You
have the floor.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
this way.
This bill does two things.
It creates a new section in
chapter 10 called the
Non-Disclosure of Sensitive
Personal Information Act. This
would create a new, a uniform
policy across state agencies of
how state employees must handle
our personal sensitive
information.
This part of the bill was passed
in 2021 with bipartisan support.
What it does is it establishes a
list of categories of sensitive
information, not to be disclosed
to outside agencies, as well as
enforcement mechanisms and civil
penalties. It also contains
exceptions to when this
information can be disclosed.
One exception is of sharing
information as part of the
function of the state agency or
if the individual New Mexico.
Consent
The second part of the bill is
what we learned since um the
last bill got poet vetoed.
We learned, uh, it, what it does
is it adds safeguards to win
information within the MVD
database and its potential use
to enforce federal immigration
laws.
In order for our government to
function properly and to ensure
public health and safety, it
must collect sensitive
information and data from its
citizens.
And New Mexicans have a
reasonable expectation that this
information is safeguarded and
that there are clear rules on
when, how, and with whom they
are shared. Some of this data is
sensitive information and if in
the wrong hands could put
vulnerable New Mexicans at risk.
Um
With that, I, I don't know if
you would like me to explain
more about the bill. I'd like
for I have two experts here who
know more about this issue that
anyone I know. One is attorney
Gabriela Ibanes, uh, and the
other one is Marcella, um
I was gonna say about, um, um,
uh, Marcela Diaz, who is from
and both of them are from Somos.
And, and so would you like to
say anything?
OK, we're um ready to um stand
for our support and, and then
questions. Thank you, um.
Senator, so we'll go to the
audience and I understand
there's going to be
interpretation for some of the
um folks that will be speaking
today. Um, we'll go ahead and
start with opposition to Senate
Bill 36.
Please raise your hand if you're
in opposition to Senate Bill 36.
We will go online or is there
anyone in opposition to Bill 36.
Sorry, no one online. OK, we'll
go back to the audience here.
Um.
Anyone in support of Senate Bill
36, please raise your hand.
Uh, we'll do 5 speakers, um, and
we'll go ahead and
Pause for translation.
needed.
We'll have a minute for
everyone.
the 5 to speak.
Hola buenosia, sit errica
Martinez so remember
centrotaravalimirante organisa
noses incluendo eddie
and Lee.
So no
sociola for salalal Mexico.
Ramos grandparro tengo res
publica
comunidades inescuto queen
foracion venda terceros
perjuicanos
acromigras and illa portacion
letspioquebo tempores a vegani
gracia.
Go ahead.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Erica Sanchez. I am a
member of Somos Superlo Unido
Worker Center, an organization
for worker and immigrant rights
that organizes an 8 counties, 7
of which are rural, including
Eddie and Lee. I am a single
mom. My son is underage. I've
worked in restaurants and
cleaning for many years. I am
part of the 11% of the workforce
that moves to New Mexico's
economy. We generate a great
part of this state's money. I
have a driver's license because
I've always followed the law and
I care about public safety in my
community. We trust that our
data in
These agents, uh, or data with
these agencies, and it is not
fair that our information is
being sold to third parties that
could harm us. This action of
selling our information puts
many immigrant workers at
detention and deportation risk,
I ask that you vote yes on SB
36. Thank you.
Thank you.
When I start this Lorenza
Fuentes.
So the icos.
Unatra decentroidad
the the
the
the quinceanosanos in
California.
aquinabuerquetportunida and El
Centra arbuniaciones.
Geluchamos cambiella
in Mexicotenna licencia acido
more importantte parami.
So that is aimo para la seguidad
publica de Estado.
Aora Musa retro informac locus
in segurosielmiedo de familias
we parados.
Ambros favor
uh is a veteran they say
gracias.
I
Bye
Uh, my name is Lorenza Fuentes.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, I am a mother of 6
children, a worker, a member of
El Centro de Waalta derechos,
and like many others, I have
contributed to the economy of
this state for 15 years, 20
years ago, I lived in California
and was not given the
opportunity to apply for a
driver's license, but in
Albuquerque, thanks to Somos, El
Centro, and other organizations
that fought to change this law,
I was able to obtain one here in
New Mexico. It has been very
important for me, for our entire
community and for the public
safety of the state. Now, many
people are facing fear because
there is no law that protects
our information, which makes us
feel unsafe and afraid that our
families could be separated on
behalf of our 5500 members,
please vote yes on SB 36. Thank
you.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
Marshall Martinez, the executive
director of Equality New Mexico.
LGBTQ people have been facing
experiencing increasing danger
in this country, year after
year, whether it's from a
federal government that has been
trying to actively erase our
existence or from volatile and
harmful people in our own
neighborhoods and communities.
So when queer and trans New
Mexicans give sensitive personal
information to state employees
and agencies, we deserve to know
that it will be treated
sacredly. For this reason,
LGBTQ.
New Mexicans are asking you, or
saying to you that we deserve
the clear policy and reasonable
protections made available to us
in Senegal 36. Thank you.
Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Jessica Inez Martinez,
and I'm an immigration attorney
and the director of policy and
coalition building at New Mexico
Immigrant Law Center, as one of
New Mexico's only organizations
providing direct legal services
to immigrant communities, in
particular specializing in
serving survivors of crime and
children who have endured
trauma. We stand in support of
SB 36. The immigration statuses
of immigrants in New Mexico,
many of whom have lived here for
decades and have citizen
children.
should remain confidential. Many
families qualify for forms of
relief that lead to legal status
and may be at risk of separation
before getting the legal
services that they need. If this
data gets into the wrong hands.
We support safeguards to protect
sensitive information, including
immigration status, LGBTQ
status, status of a crime victim
and information regarding
traumas and abused children we
serve have endured, all of which
should not be sold and
disclosed. Thank you.
Thank you.
A speaker.
I
Madam Chair members of the
committee, Lena Weber, policy
director with the ACLU of New
Mexico. We appreciate that SB 36
provides important safeguards to
ensure that sensitive personal
information is secure and helps
clarify agency responsibilities
while protecting privacy. We
also appreciate that federal
preemption is not a barrier
here. Courts have recognized
that states have the authority
to regulate how their own
agencies handle personal data,
as long as they do not interfere
with federal operations. In
2022, the Seventh Circuit upheld
a state.
Law limiting local participation
in immigration enforcement,
reinforcing that states can set
their own policies on data
disclosure. Similarly, in 2018,
the US Supreme Court reaffirmed
that the federal government
cannot compel states to enforce
federal priorities. SB 36 aligns
with these principles by
ensuring that state employees
have guidance on data privacy
obligations, helping to maintain
public trust and compliance with
existing legal standards.
We think the sponsors inert.
OK, we'll go online, um, for
those that are in support will
take 3 speakers 1 minute each.
Go ahead and raise your hands if
you're in support.
OK.
Teresa Garcia. Good morning,
Madam Chair and members of the
committee. I rise today as the
chair of the Domestic Violence
and Sexual Assault Commission
for the city of Albuquerque and
a daughter of an immigrant. We
stand in strong support of
Senate Bill 36, because
protecting the privacy of
immigrant communities is a
matter of safety, dignity and
justice. For for immigrant
survivors of domes of domestic
violence, the fear of
deportation is often a tool of
control used by abusers to keep
them silent. Too many survivors
are forced to stay in dangerous
situations because seeking help
could mean losing their
children.
being detained or facing
deportation. No one should have
to choose between safety and
survival. SB 36 ensures that
personal information, including
immigration status cannot be
weaponized against the very
people who contribute to our
economy, culture and
communities. New Mexico stands
for resilience and inclusivity.
Let's let's ensure that
survivors can seek help without
fear, and I urge my colleagues
to vote yes on SB 36. Let's
stand for privacy protection and
justice for all. Thank you so
much.
Thank you.
Mary Ellen Garcia.
Uh, Madam Chair members of the
committee, this is Mary Ellen
Garcia. I am the CEO of the New
Mexico Coalition Against
Domestic Violence. And on behalf
of our 32 domestic violence
providers across the state. We,
we applaud Senate Bill 36 and
its leadership and recognize
that um survivors of intimate
partner violence, their
information is often used and
weaponized against them, and we
definitely see this bill as a
bill for public safety, ensuring
that survivors know that when
they seek services in the
state of New Mexico, their
information is not going to be
used, um, and weaponized as my
colleagues have stated, uh, for
all the reasons that have been
stated by all of the other
individuals, we stand in strong
support of this legislation and
urge you to pass it. Thank you
very much. Thank you.
Castillo.
Uh, good morning, Madam Chair
and members of the committee. I
am Arturo Castillo, the director
of equity and culture at
Conservation Voters New Mexico.
CVNM stands in strong support of
SB 36 because we know that
anyone who lives, plays, or
works in New Mexico's land, air
or water, deserves to have faith
that our state agencies have a
consistent, clear, and narrow
process for how and when they
share sensitive personal
information about us that could
lead to our harm. This is a
conservation priority because
protecting our environment in
New Mexico is about protecting
the New Mexicans who experience
it and enjoy it on a daily
basis. Thank you very much.
Thank you. All right, we'll go
back to the sponsor. Anything
else you'd like to add?
No, madam Chair, we're ready for
questions. All right.
With the committee.
Uh, Speaker Martinez.
Thank you Madam Chair. Allergies
Juniper is horrible this
morning.
Uh, thank you, Senator and
experts.
Uh
You know, this is a very simple
bill, and I think we say that
tongue in cheek all the time,
but really this is a really
simple bill and this really
Um, you know, it comes down to
an employee.
Uh
of the state or a contractor of
the state to
Not take it take it upon
themselves to
His clothes, sensitive
information, which we would all
be appalled by.
I don't want the MBD to
intentionally share my name or
address, I don't want.
Healthcare authority to
intentionally share my
daughter's name or social
security number.
Um, you would think it's
already.
At the very least.
Um, against
Employment policy.
Um, but in some cases, I think.
There might be a gap, and I
think this is what this piece of
legislation is trying to
address.
Um
I particularly appreciate.
Definition section of this bill,
which I think are always
critically important.
Um, and I also appreciate how
clear it is with regard to when
such disclosure may be
necessary, right? Either
to carry the function of a state
agency to comply with the court
order or subpoena required by
IPRA, required by federal
statute.
So this is not a catch-all.
State will never
Release or share.
Confidential information, they
still can under specific
guidelines. This is just to keep
a rogue employee Mat chair and
senator and experts from uh
taking it upon themselves to
harm somebody else.
Um, for whatever the reason
might be, so I appreciate how
targeted and surgical the bill
is, I appreciate how thoughtful
it is. Uh, I looked at the vote
record. I don't know how, how it
panned out in the Senate, but I
would assume it was unanimous,
or at least it should have been,
uh, I also just want to, um,
Um, express a great deal of
gratitude as I look outside into
this.
His audience, not outside, but
as I look at this audience, um,
you know, Madam Chair, 15 years
ago, 20 years ago, um, I stood
up right there and did public
comment and organized with folks
like Miss Lazar and Miss Diaz,
um, on driver's licenses.
or families live here, they
worship in our churches.
Their kids go to school with our
kids.
Um
And it was such a difficult
fight for many years, um, and it
cut a cross-party lines. I mean,
I don't think we had any
supporters, Republicans or
Democrats.
Um, but to see these families
here and and some of the faces I
recognized because they've been
in this fight this whole time,
and to see you in person, to
take time away.
From your jobs, cause I know
you're not making money if
you're here. You could be
cleaning houses, you could be uh
building a patio project
somewhere, you could be, uh, you
know, serving tables, cleaning
the hotel room where you work,
but instead you took time off to
be here and be a part of this
democratic process, um, and I
cannot thank them enough because
as I've harped in this committee
and in my other committee, which
is tax.
You know, when we have paid
lobbyists or advocates that are
paid who show up on Zoom because
there can't be bothered to show
up in person, but these people
are here.
Literally losing out on a day's
of work.
To give their input in this
democratic process. Um,
Just
You know, fills my heart, and I
don't talk a whole lot in
committees, um, because it's not
my job to do that, but I feel
like I needed to say that
because you're here.
And we appreciate you. And I'm
not going to repeat everything
in Spanish because I know
somebody's doing that already
and uh at that point I did, I
would just be pontificating, so
I'll stop right there. Thank
you. I, I will support your bill
and I appreciate the time.
Thank you, speaker, um,
Representative Reed.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um, and,
uh, senator and experts, um, I
just had a couple questions on
the bill on page 2,
you actually do define sensitive
personal information, so I, I
like that a little bit and um
I'm looking at one, status as a
recipient of public assistance
or is a crime victim and
kind of wanted to talk about
crime victims. I'm, I'm thinking
maybe this bottom part is
protecting that situation, but
so if a crime victim reports a a
battery in a household member,
um, police reports taken, their
social security numbers are
taken because as it's part of
the process, we have to run
background checks for, for the
court process for fairness to
the defense attorney. Obviously,
if there's a record or something
like that.
Um, so does that, and it often
man chair and um
Senator, we, we do the visas to
protect the victims, you know,
so that they're not worried
about, you know, participating
in the process and, and worried
about being deported or any
issue like that.
Is that covered in this bottom
parts where it says if it's a
court process or anything of
that nature.
Yes
Um, yes, it, it is, and it's
more necessary to carry out
what.
Necessary to carry out the, the
function of the agency.
OK, thank you, uh, Madam Chair
and senator, and the only other
question I have is, um, on the
penalties.
in the 250 to $5000 on page 3.
Those penalties are only um if a
state agency or their employee.
Discloses the information or do
they apply? I don't think they
do, but I just wanna verify, did
they apply if uh a citizen
called up and said, you know,
um, gave information out.
Um, maybe they have the social
security number, maybe they, you
know, thought someone was an
immigrant and called the police
and, and does that apply to them
on a private civil action or is
it just to the state agency and
those people disclosing the
information. Madam Chair, um,
uh, Senator, I mean, uh,
Representative, you are correct,
um, that, that this bill only
applies to state agencies. OK,
thank you.
I have. Thank you, madam. And of
course the employee, their
employees.
Thank you, Representative, uh,
Representative Obea. Thank you,
Madam Chair. I think welcome
Senator. Welcome to your guests.
Thank you for being here. Thank
you for bringing this to us. Um,
I had one clarifying question. I
was reading the analysis and
looking at the information and I
see that it covers state
employees and, and maybe I'm not
understanding.
this piggybacks off of, uh,
excuse me, Representative
Reeves's question because I just
call her, OK.
But why are employees of
counties and other political
subdivisions not included in
this protection. Can you help me
understand that?
The, the, the problem we are
trying to address is with this
bill is the fact that there's no
uniform policy among state
agencies. So, um,
We did not do the research to to
see what's going on with all of
the all of the subdivisions, um,
I know there's some subdivisions
that are more protective than
others.
It is a first step.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator, and your experts.
My concern is that I'm making
sure that there aren't loopholes
where.
Information could still get out
there if you're trying to
protect it, so that's one area
that I'm concerned about, um,
just wanted to state that, but
look forward to supporting us.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative,
Representative Sapansy.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
thank you, Senator, and, and
experts uh in the community
members that are here. Um, I
just wanted to say one of the
things I really appreciate about
this legislation is Section 3,
just
Really making it clear across as
a former state.
Um, who was dealing with uh
personal health information, I
was heavily trained in hipA.
Um, but, but, you know, it may
surprise individuals that, you
know, HIPAA means that I cannot
disclose whether someone even
walked into my office, um, when
I am a healthcare provider. So,
and in our, you know, some of
our smaller communities, I think
it's really important that we
have this sort of standardized
standardized policy, um, I was,
I used to work in the HIV and
hepatitis, uh, programs, and so,
um, you know, that's very
personal information.
And so to really understand that
um for, for those agencies that
are now also dealing with
victims of crime, um, to,
because that's also very
personal information that, that
maybe an individual doesn't want
publicly known, um, and maybe
they're coming in to get a
service or they're dealing with
the crime victims operation
commission or or any of its
contractors to know, um, and,
and have this in statute as sort
of a blanket policy that um
given the fact that someone is
seeking services or as a client,
uh, or receiving those kinds of
services, uh, restitution or
other things, um, is, is not to
be shared and is not to be
shared casually, um, or, you
know, when you run into
Somebody that you know at the
grocery store, you know, that's
something that you can't
mention. Um, and I think that is
uh really powerful part of this.
Uh, also the recipient of public
assistance, public assistance
takes many forms, you know,
it's, it's people receiving
health services, but also people
receiving all kinds of different
services. Um, so, I think that
that is uh really, really
positive, uh, really powerful
part of this because certainly,
um, when I was uh working
that capacity, uh, we really
just relied on HIPAA to guide us
and HIPA doesn't, I, in my
opinion, deal with a lot of
these uh other issues that you
have covered in here, so I think
it's just a
Good blanket policy for state
agencies and, and hopefully we
can continue to address this at
the local level as well, uh, and
really think about bringing
cities and counties to the
table. I know that would be a
lengthy process, um, because
every county and city addresses
it a little differently, but I
think that that would be well
worth the effort, um, as we go
forward, uh, in, into the
interim. So, so thank you, uh,
thank you, Senator, and experts
and community.
Um, next on the list we have
Representative Martinez.
Think, madam chair. Thank you,
Senator for
Bringing this, um.
You, you answered a question
about um
Why it's only state agencies, is
it all state agencies that are
covered by this.
Yes.
So Madame Chair Senator, that
would include Department of
Corrections.
Yes.
the Department of Correction if
this passes.
Mount Chair Senator, the
Department of Corrections is not
allowed to report to.
Federal law enforcement.
That they have somebody in
custody.
Um
It
They would not be able to
volunteer it if it was necessary
to their function or if they had
a court order to do so, they
could do so.
That that's, that's the question
that I have, Madam Chair,
Senator. Their function is law
enforcement.
So if they have somebody who has
Um
been arrested for a crime.
Are they not allowed to share
that information with
Federal law enforcement, yes,
they are.
There is nothing in this bill
that would stop that. That's
necessary to their function.
That that's what I needed
clarification.
Um, Madam Chair, Senator, you
also said
That this was just the first
step.
the first step.
You wouldn't
Well, the second step would be
to having a law like this
applied to all the all the
counties and municipalities, um,
but that would be a much bigger
uh lift.
That would be a second step.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator.
Representative McQueen, Madam
Chair,
I move with do pass on Senate
Bill 36.
And you have a do pass motion
for um Seal 36 is amended by
Representative McQueen seconded
by Representative Abeta.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Abita? Yes.
Representative Chavez? No.
Representative Hall, no.
Representative Hoffman v. Hill.
Representative Martinez.
No.
Speaker Martinez, yes.
Representative McQueen, yes.
Representative Ree, now.
Leader Sapansky.
Madam Vice Chair, yes.
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, you have a due pass
on Senate Bill 36 as amended.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of committee.
Thank you, Senator.
Just as a, uh, an update for the
folks in the audience, uh, we
are rolling Senate Bill 137, if
you're here to hear that bill.
Um
Rename enhanced 9/11 Act.
911. Excuse me.
We're now gonna hear Senate Bill
252 as amended.
Go ahead, uh, senator, when
you're ready.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you committee.
I am bringing you son of about
252, uh, which increases access
to healthcare via telehealth. It
clarifies an ambiguity in the
law that popped up this spring
in a new interpretation, and it
shut down our license masters,
social workers who had been
doing telehealth for years. Um,
they received a temporary
permission to continue providing
services pending legislative
clarification of this law, so
the
Bill is to clarify.
So that they can keep working.
Page 2, line 17 is where the
problem occurred.
New reading of the law that had
always been there, licensed
independent social worker.
The word independent refers to
one type of 3 social worker
licenses in New Mexico. We have
licensed bachelor social
workers, licensed masters,
social workers, and then
licensed clinicians, social
workers who are also called
licensed and dependent.
And so the new reading of the
law said only those licensed
clinical social workers can do
telehealth, which was not the
intent, um, and, and caused a
lot of disruption in services to
our rural areas, in particular a
veterans who had been receiving
counseling services via
telehealth from licensed masters
Social workers.
So, once, as we always do, once
we open a section of law, other
things pop up that need to be
modernized, that is line 2 on
page 2, I guess the proper term
for a podiatrist is now
podiatric physician, so that's
fixed. We now have certified
peer support workers also doing
telehealth, they are licensed
and regulated, um, and to future
proof.
This problem.
That is any other health care
professional who's received
Medicaid provider
identification. So as we change
titles, terms, um, and add
different kinds of providers to
our licensure system as long as
they are recognized by Medicaid
provider.
They are recognized under this
telehealth Act.
An amendment was added in Senate
tax due to some concerns about
supervision. License masters,
social workers, do some of their
work under supervision. That is
defined in their scope of
practice act. This bill does not
change scope of practice Act
does not change that supervision
requirement, but we added the
amendment to reiterate and
reinforce that fact.
And with that, Madam Chair I'll
stand for questions.
Thank you, Senator. All right,
we'll go to the audience, um, is
there anyone in opposition to
Senate Bill 252.
Maybe their support, um, is
there anyone in opposition
online.
All right, um, anyone in support
of Senate Bill 252 in the
audience live.
Anyone online and support of
Senate Bill 252.
No.
OK, back to the sponsor.
Anything you'd like to add,
Madam chair and committee, I
forgot to say that the social
work board supports the bill.
Thank you, Senator. Uh,
Representative. Thank you, Madam
Chair. um, and Senator, uh, just
a quick question, um,
I sat on a board for a long
time, mental health resources in
Clovis and we did have a lot of
this telehealth going on,
especially through clothes and
everything, but I know when
COVID ended, um, they wanted a
lot of their people to be not
doing the telehealth. This
doesn't.
Um, take away the discretion or
the supervision of the agency to
say, hey, no, you're gonna be in
the office doing this, you're
not doing telehealth, it just,
just put some in here to where
they're allowed to do it if
approved, is that my
understanding, Senator?
Exactly, Madam Chair.
OK, thank you. That's the only
question I had.
Uh, representative Queen.
Uh, and here to pass.
second.
Right, we have a Dupa motion for
Senate Bill 252, uh, as amended
by Representative McQueen and
seconded by Representative Paul
the 2nd.
And um we, we're going to call
the roll.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Abita? Yes.
Representative Chavez.
Yes.
Representative Hall. Yes.
Representative Hockman v. Hill,
Representative Martinez.
Yes. Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative Reed, yes.
Leader Sapansy, yes.
Madam Vice Chair. Yes, Madam
Chair.
Madam Chair, you have a due pass
on Senate Bill 252 as amended.
Think you ever do pass and with
that we conclude our meeting.
Thank you.
