Yeah.
Representative McQueen, here.
Representative Reeb.
Leader Sapansy.
Madam Vice Chair.
Madam Chair, Madam chair, you
have a corm.
Great. So, um.
Everyone will recall that we had
um.
House Bill 72 before us on
Wednesday.
There were a few tweaks to the
0.3 version committee sub and we
suggested that the um
Sponsor come back to us with a.
4 that included just some minor,
I would call them editorial
almost minor fixes. So if um
Representative Chavez, if you
could give us a very quick and
short overview of what you did
and then we can um
Move forward on the sub.
Uh, Madam Chair, thank you, um,
so basically what we did is we
made the suggested changes that
were discussed in the last
committee at the last meeting,
and then there was just one
technical fix that we had to
change so that we're, it was
consistent with um the language
in, in, in one part of the bill.
So on page 4, there was the
suggestion to change on line 19,
81 member shall represent the
authority and serve as chair.
That's.
new?
Um, on
The next page, uh, page 5.
Line 7,
instead of 4 years, it's 2 years
so that it matches, um, page 4,
line 23 in terms of the number
of years that that one serves
the term and that's 2 years, um,
the next change is on page 5
line 16, we crossed out
annually.
Uh, annually a chair to reflect
that the committee shall elect
other officers since the
authority serves as the chair
and then.
On page 10, we struck on um line
7 and unlicensed employees and
Madam Chair, that um is the
total of the amendments that
were uh discussed.
At the last committee meeting.
Um, thank you, Representative,
um, Speaker Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I just
took a bite. Sorry. It's OK.
Madam chair, when appropriate, a
move.
You do not pass.
On
House Bill 72, but they do pass
on House Judiciary Committee
substitute for housing 72, the
0.4 version. Very good. Um, it
is appropriate.
Because we already thoroughly
discussed this bill on
Wednesday, so we have a motion
made by Speaker Martinez, for I
do not pass on House Bill 72,
but a do pass on House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 72, made by Speaker
Martinez, seconded by leader
Sapansky. We're talking about
the 0.4 version, so what you
call the roll please? Yes, thank
you, Madam Chair. Representative
Abeta.
Representative Chavis. No.
Representative Hall, no.
Representative Hochman V. Hill.
Representative Martinez.
Speaker Martinez, yes.
Representative McQueen. Yes.
Representative Reed. No.
Leader Sapansky, yes.
Madam Vice Chair, yes.
Madam Chair, yes.
Madam Chair, you have a do not
pass on House Bill 72, but I do
pass on House Judiciary
Committee substitute 72.
Thank you, um, representative.
Thank you, Madam Chan, members
of the committee.
Next item is House Bill 308.
Welcome Chairman Monte.
Chairman, I know we have a sub
and we're passing it out.
And just give us one second and
uh um this I imagine the sub for
discussion.
The party hasn't started yet
down there.
Yeah, well, I'm glad you're
happy. I hope that continues,
uh.
Very good. Um,
Right
German lente, the floor is
yours.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chairwoman. I want to first
introduce my uh expert witness.
This is the CEO for the Middle
organic.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee on behalf of the
Middle Rio Grand Conservancy
District board of directors,
thank you for the opportunity to
be here today.
Thank you. And uh Madam Chair,
we do have that committee
substitute.
And what I have in front of me,
the last three digits are 48.
1, is that what you have very
good so um does someone wanna
move the to have a motion to
consider the sub on the floor is
yours, representative. Thank
you, Madam Chair and committee
members. Good afternoon. This is
a simple bill. Some might say
the simplest of bills, um, but
this, uh, first, uh, substitute
to that bill, just simply
expands the conservancy district
to also include not only just
the middle Rio Grande
Conservancy District, but
includes then the Arch Hurley
Conservancy District as well as
we only have two conservancy
districts.
In the state of New Mexico.
OK, very good. Um, perhaps you
could give us an overview of
the, um, you know, the sub and
in its entirety and then we'll
go to the the uh public.
Absolutely. So Madam Chair and
committee members, uh, House
Bill 308 seeks to simply remove
now the Archurley Conservancy
District and the Middle Rio
Grande Conservancy District from
the local Elections Act, uh, the
passage of House Bill 998 back
in 2018, consolidated all local
elections, although the intent
of House Bill 98.
was noble, but the one size fits
all approach has proven
unimplementable for conservancy
districts which are statutorily
designed as special districts.
Therefore, House Bill 98
initially included a 3-year
delay implementing both for the
Middle Rio Grande Conservancy
District and the Arturley
Conservancy District
acknowledging early on that the
challenges associated with this
enactment would be difficult,
uh, shortly after the passage of
the local elections Act, the
Milner Grand Conservancy
District, the Secretary of
They engaged in lengthy
collaboration to integrate the
MRGCD or the Conservancy
District into the local
Elections Act. However, this
process, significant,
significant implementation
obstacles emerged, ultimately
leading to the passage of then
in 2023, Senate Bill 335, which
further postpone the middle
Grand conservancy District's
inclusion until this year or
2025. So despite years of
sustained effort, workable
solutions.
failed to materialize, uh, and
as this prolonged process
unfolded serious and valid
concerns were raised by county
clerks, by constituents, by the
6 mil Rio Grande pueblos that
are in the Middle Rio Grand
Conservancy District, uh,
underscoring the complexity of
their uh of this implementation.
So, House Bill 308 is a measure
of last resort to ensure that
the full participation of the
electorate, especially those in
sovereign nations, uh, within
the Middle Rio Grande
Conservancy District.
needs to be able to participate
uh in in in this election
process and uh alongside with
our our CEO we also have um
Lindsay Bachmann, who is the
director of legislative and
executive Affairs for the
Secretary of State's office. And
with that, Madam Chair and
committee members. OK, thank you
very much representative. So
let's go to the audience. We're
gonna take about 5 or so people,
1 minute each those wishing to
speak in opposition first, OK?
Please step up to the
microphone.
I don't see anyone speaking in
opposition.
Anyone online.
I don't see anyone.
in the audience and support.
Um, please, um, step up here and
I'm gonna allow up to 5 people,
1 minute each.
5, remember.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I'm Meredith Machin
speaking on behalf of the League
of Women Voters, and we were
behind the consolidation of
elections, we really believe in
this, uh, but this is an
important exception, and I urge
you to support this.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you very much
for having me. My name is
Michelle Kavanagh, I am the
Bernalillo County clerk, and
just wanted to um say that
Burnleyo County Clerk's office
is highly, highly in support of
this legislation. Um, we
appreciate, um, the sponsors for
this, and if you have any
questions on how this might
affect my county in particular,
we will be here this afternoon,
but, uh,
Either way, please, please
support this legislation. Thank
you.
Go ahead afternoon chair
committee members. My name is
Kathy Elliot and I am the
registered lobbyist for Arch
Hurley Conservancy District. Um,
we are very, um.
Very appreciative of allowing
this amendment to come on board
to allow the two conservancy
districts, um, in the state to
be admitted from this election
act.
As much as we love our county
clerk and Quake County. Ellen
White does a great job. Um, she
is able to run our elections.
And so with this exception, we
would really appreciate your
support on the bill. Thank you
very much. Thank you.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, I'm
Governor Myron Armijo from the
Pueblo of Santa Anna. I stand in
support of this legislation, and
I wish to thank Representative
Valenti for bringing this
forward. Um, I, Santa Ana is a
part of the 6 Middle Road Grand
Pueblos. I do not speak for them
but for Santa Ana, and we stand
in support of this legislation.
Thanks.
Great. Thank you.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Drew Sutter, registered
lobbyist for the publics of
Aleta and San Felipe, which are
part of the Middle Rio Grande
tribes, as well as for uh whose
uh client is Sandia Pueblo, uh,
all three of these uh uh public
support the, uh, um, the bill,
and we appreciate the sponsor
and the state and MRGCD for. OK,
thank you.
Our
Let's go online and up to 4
people, those online wishing to
speak in support.
All right.
Back to the sponsor, anything
you wish to add before I go to
the committee.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Alright.
Representative McQueen.
The mentor
And chairs and Lunte if.
Um
Your elections aren't held uh in
sequence with the local Election
Act.
When would they be held?
Madam Chairman and
Representative, I would like to
ask our, our expert Ja Kosuga,
who runs the operations for the
Miller Grant to answer that
question, Madam Chair,
Representative, thank you for
the question. Um, based on the,
the bill before you, um, that
election for the Middle Rio
Grande Conservancy District
would be held on in October, so
the month before the the regular
election.
And Madam Chairman,
um.
Is it in person voting? Is it by
mail? How's it, how's it run?
Madam Chair, um, Representative,
the um the method of voting is
um
Basically any method that is
allowable under law, there will
be a rulemaking, um, procedure
uh if this bill passes for MRGCD
to create um rules we did.
Um, pass our board did pass a
resolution and I will just read
the ending part of that, um,
that the MRGCD shall implement
election procedures that promote
voter participation including
but not limited to early voting,
absentee ballot, and melon
voting. Uh, and so the, if this
passes our board will take
action to create the rules and
make sure that there is um
As many flexible options for
voting. And Madam Chair, Mr.
I'll be with the pronunciation
of your last name. I, I know
we've spoken before, Madam Chair
Representative, it's
Kosugasugasuga, um.
What's her, what's her turnout
you get in those elections,
Madam Chair, members of the
board, Madam Chair, I apologize,
uh, Representative, um, turn
out, we're, we're a conservancy
district, I think within Bernao
County, we'll be into, um, I
think between 1500 and 2000 as
we approach the rural areas,
obviously that um goes down into
the hundreds, um, and as we move
into the pueblos, um, they've
been as high, I think, into um
about 1000.
And Madam Chair, Mr. I was
thinking in terms of percentage
of eligible voters.
Madam Chair, um, representative,
I would only be guessing if I, I
tried to give you a percentage
today.
So Madam Chair, Mr. Kosuga,
before the local Election Act,
we, we had all these little
elections.
School bonds, soil and water
conservation district, stuff
like that. And the turnout was 2
or 3% if you were lucky.
And that's why we put them all
on the same date.
So people would actually
participate.
And so I'm, I'm really
Like when you say we're not
gonna be part of that. I'm
really concerned about that.
Um, and I heard that you haven't
been part of it. I heard that
you don't want to be part of it.
I didn't actually hear why.
You should be exempt.
Um, Madam Chair, um,
Representative, thank you for
the question. That's a really
important question. Um, from
technical issues, the middle Rio
Grande Conservancy District is
uh is and so is um our Surley
Conservancy District. We are
qualified electors are actually
landowners within the benefited
area of the conservancy
district. It is not a registered
voter. Um, that's what makes the
conservancy district unique and
what makes um tribal
participation within the Middle
Rio Grande Conservancy
District's elections unique, um,
in.
that, um, tribal members don't
necessarily have to be
registered voters, but they own
a stake in the land that's being
benefited, and that's where the
technical issues came in and
that we've been working on for
years, trying to solve is how do
you create a unified voter
database that doesn't require
the same kind of information for
a registered voter database as
you would for a landowner based,
uh, land-based uh.
There are other technical
complications. Um, the, uh, from
the um from the counties
themselves, they would probably
be better explaining them to me,
but again, those things that
come to mind are, where would
you put polling locations, um,
and the MRGCD you can own land
in 4 counties, um, and so we
vote um in odd years and so if
you are in a year, if you own
land in say Sandoval County, um,
and you want to vote um in
Burnleyo County's election and
you're allowed to, right?
Now we have a way of creating a
database that um you can show up
to any polling location within
the benefited area of the
district and cast that ballot.
Um.
I understand that that would be
problematic on trying to
integrate um our database into
a, the individual counties and
creating that same flexibility,
uh, so that would introduce um
voting restrictions, even just
based on that. So the work that
went into looking at this as
problems were identified, kind
of just kept showing this, this
technical issue that we, the
MRGCD and Rurley are landowner
based. We can are able to create
a qualified electors list, make
sure.
That that like that um those
elections are fairly run um in
MRGCD's case across 4 counties,
and those have been technical
issues that have been quite
frankly difficult to overcome.
Madam Chair, Mr. Kosuga, do, do
you know if
I thought soil and water
conservation districts also
required ownership to vote. Is
that?
You know if that's true.
Madam Chair, uh, representative,
I'm, I am not, I'm up to speed
on soil and water conservation
districts. Um, I will yield to
the Secretary of State's office
on that. I will say that MRGCD
and Rch Hurley, um, that which
was created with the Conservancy
Act itself is is different law
creating conservancy districts
and soil and water conservation.
Yeah, that, that Madam Chair,
Mr. Kasuga, I appreciate that.
I'm trying to be quick. Um.
My understanding is that soy and
water conservation districts
require property ownership.
Soil and water conservation
districts do not follow county
boundaries, they follow
different boundaries.
Um, I.
Thank you, ma'am.
Repres uh Speaker Martinez,
Madam Chair, when appropriate,
I'd move a do not pass in house
with 308, but a do pass in House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill 308.
OK.
OK
Yes, thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Abita.
Representative Chavis. Yes.
Representative Hall, yes.
Representative Hochman V. Hill.
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
Yes
Speaker Martinez, yes.
Representative McQueen.
No.
Representative Reed, yes.
Leader Sapansky
Yes
Madam Vice Chair. Yes.
Madam Chair,
Yes
Madam Chair, you have a do not
pass on House Bill 308, but I do
pass on house judiciary
Committee substitute for 308.
I
Thank you, Representative. All
right, um.
Next up.
I, um, House Bill 171 pharmacy
custodial care facilities.
have Representative Jones here.
happily no committee sub.
is yours.
Representative Thank you, Madam
Chair, committee members, um,
thank you for the opportunity to
present HB 171. I mean I am
accompanied by my expert, Dr.
James Basanti.
He is an addiction officer
HB 171 is a bipartisan and uh we
amended the bill HB 171 makes a
change in the pharmacy Act to
allow custo, the one that Doctor
Basante runs to acquire and
possess control symptoms.
Detox recovery facilities
classified as custodial care
facilities like Santa Fe
Recovery Center and Lifehouse in
Carlsbad, uh, and by the way, we
have the director as another
expert. They are diplomacies to
provide controlled drugs for new
patients who are at risk of
developing dangerous, uh,
substance.
The problem is that local
pharmacies often have limited
hours, closing early during the
week when the pharmacy is
closed, new. The bill allows the
facility improved treatment
access by and therefore prevent,
preventing the potential tragedy
for recovery.
And to speak on the bill now,
Doctor Basanti.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you for the
opportunity to speak. Uh, I'm an
addiction medicine specialist,
uh, born and raised in New
Mexico, recently moved back, uh,
very happy to be back in the
state. Here in the state of New
Mexico, we have a shortage of
beds for treatment at the
highest level of care which is
withdrawal management, a detox
facility and residential
facilities. Today there are
fewer beds in the state of New
Mexico than there was one year
ago with several facilities
across the state closing, um,
detox is arguably one of the
most important.
steps in someone's recovery
journey and currently this
hurdle for our facilities
prevents us from providing care
at all hours of the day, uh,
especially the clients who are
very sick and uh with that I'll
stand for questions and I
appreciate the opportunity.
Thank you, um, are we ready to
go to the audience?
Thank you. Um, those wishing to
speak in opposition to the bill.
Please step forward and I in
with the microphone.
I don't see any wishing to speak
in opposition.
Those wishing to speak in
support, please um.
step up behind and please limit
your marks to about a minute.
Sorry.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
committee members. I'm Melissa
Salzar, director of boards and
commissions at Regulation and
Licensing department, to which
the Board of Pharmacies
administratively attached.
We don't speak in favor against
the proposed bill. We wish only
to point out that the operating
budget impact contained in our
FIR of 70,000 was not included
in our current submitted budget.
Therefore, if the bill is passed
an authorization or
appropriation will need to be
made to allow boards and
commissions division to carry
out the mandate required by the
bill.
In addition, if the bill's
passed for requesting an
extension until June 30th, 2026
to effectuate the mandate. Thank
you.
Anyone else, um, in the audience
wishing to speak and support,
OK. Let's go on Mars to one
minute, so fill up.
Yes, thank you, Madam Chairman
and members of the committee. My
name is Philip Houston. I'm the
executive director of Lifehouse
in Carlsbad, uh, we operated
detox facility, and it's been
our desire from the beginning to
have 24 hour services to meet
the needs of the clients that we
have, and unfortunately, uh,
because of the limited pharmacy
availability in our area, um,
we've not been able to do that.
There are times when we've had
to turn people away and, and not
uh offer the best care possible
and Eddy County, uh, according
to the
Mexico workforce report where
about 40% short of the benchmark
on the number of pharmacists
that we have available, um, and
so that, uh, limits our ability.
This is a, a unique um
limitation to New Mexico and all
the other states that we've
researched, this limitation is
not present, and so we
appreciate your support, uh, of
this bill and the access that it
will provide uh to help us, help
our neighbors, uh, begin the
recovery journey in our detox
facility. Thank you.
Thank you.
Anyone else online.
I don't see anyone else, um.
Re
Did you wanna add anything
before you.
Madam Chair, I would like for
Doctor Basanti. Uh, thank you.
uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, I, I would
actually disagree with extending
the implementation date for this
bill as proposed, um.
And I'll, I'll use a patient
story because I think patient
stories are helpful to
illustrate a point on Tuesday. I
had a gentleman who presented to
my detox facility here in Santa
Fe seeking alcohol withdrawal
management. He was tremulous, he
was shaking. His blood pressure
was elevated, his heart rate was
elevated, and he had a history
of alcohol withdrawal seizures.
From the moment I saw him in my
office clock started, and that's
how fast can I pick up the
medicine to prevent that seizure
or that fatal complication.
How fast can I pick it up from a
local retail pharmacy, um, in
fact, it took us 2 hours to get
that medicine. I almost sent him
to the ER and I was very worried
he was gonna have a seizure in
my facility. This simply
augments an unnecessary hurdle
placed on detox facilities here
in New Mexico that is uniquely
New Mexican. When I talked to my
colleagues practicing in other
states who uh manage detox
facilities. They actually don't
believe me when I tell them the
only way for me to get detox.
medicine is through a retail
pharmacy here in the state of
New Mexico, extending this in
arbitrary 6 months would change
nothing, but probably hurt many
of my patients and people and
your constituents in your
counties you represent.
Thank you.
All right, um.
Go to committee members
question.
Madam Chair, when appropriate,
I'd just like to move a do past.
On House for 170K, I'm thinking
it's appropriate since no one
else is raising their hands. All
right, so we have a motion for a
due pass on house bill, um.
170.
One, I want to make sure I've
got the right one.
Here, would it be as amended we
amended 171 as amended.
Made by seconded by
Representative Hoffman, A
Hoffman v. Hill.
Yes, for clarification, we did
not amend the bill. It was
previously amended. Is that
correct?
Correct.
Thank you.
Um
Would you call the roll, please?
Yes. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Abeta. Yes.
Representative Chavis. Yes.
Representative Hall. Yes.
Representative Hoffman V. Hill.
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
Speaker Martinez, yes.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative Reed, yes.
Leader Sapansky.
Madam Vice Chair.
Madam Chair, yes.
Madam Chair, you have a due pass
on House Bill 171 as amended.
Thank you, Representative. Thank
you very much, Madam Chair and
committee.
All right, we are now, let's.
Get everybody organized, where
is, oh, OK, I see representative
Chavez.
9 Representative Chavez.
So
And we have a long agenda, so it
would be helpful if you try to
keep your remarks relatively
short.
Um
And with that. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
I am here for House Bill 9.
Um, immigrant Safety Act, New
Mexico has 3 immigrant detention
facilities.
Sibula
Otero County and the Torrance
County Detention facility.
What's concerning about each of
these facilities is that the
federal government uses New
Mexico's counties as pastors, as
shields to facilitate
immigration, detention through
contracts called
intergovernmental service
agreements, intergovernmental
services agreements.
I contracts with the local
counties for detention services
and the counties then turn
around and subcontract with huge
out of state private prison
companies to operate the
detention centers.
The reason ICE uses agreements
with local governments rather
than contract directly with
private companies is to avoid a
federal law called the
Competition and Contracting Act.
Federal law requires the federal
government to competitively bid
contracts for services to ensure
transparency and scrutiny of
potential federal contractors,
but agreements with local public
entities like New Mexico's
counties create a loophole to
the competition and transparency
that is otherwise required in
federal contracting.
HB 9, the Immigrant Safety Act,
will close this loophole. This
is not, let me emphasize, this
is not a private prison van. It
only regulates.
New Mexico state and local
government. It gets New Mexico's
public bodies out of the
business of immigration
detention by doing 3 main
things, prohibiting New Mexico
public entities from entering
into agreements to detain people
for civil immigration
violations requiring public
entities with existing
agreements to use their
contractual rights to terminate.
Those agreements when the law
goes into effect and prohibiting
New Mexico public entities from
selling or leasing public land
or property for immigration
detention.
Madam Chair, I would like to
introduce my or actually have my
um expert witnesses and provide
also a short statement.
Yes.
to keep it brief, please
introduce yourself. Good
afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Sophia Genovese. I am a
managing attorney at the New
Mexico Immigrant Law Center
briefly HB 9 is very much on
solid legal footing, 7 other
states have passed similar
prohibitions on their state
public entities from entering
into immigration detention
contracts with the federal
government. The only case where
such a prohibition has been
directly challenged was in
McHenry.
Raoul, where both a federal
district court judge and the
Seventh Circuit squarely upheld
the constitutionality of an
Illinois law prohibiting local
contracting for immigration
detention. The courts found that
the law was a permissible
exercise of the state's broad
authority over its political
subdivisions and that the law
did not violate the supremacy
clause where state cooperation
and federal activities is
strictly voluntary. The
Immigrant Safety Act, similar to
the law,
and 7 other states simply
regulates the behavior of state
public entities. HB 9 does not
violate the intergovernmental
immunity doctrine because the
bill does not attempt to
regulate the federal government
nor its private contractors, HB
9 is not preempted by federal
immigration law, because again,
nothing in the federal law
compels state cooperation and
collaboration and federal
immigration detention. Indeed,
as, as multiple circuit courts
have held requiring state
cooperation would
actually violate the
anti-commandeering doctrine and
states' rights under the 10th
Amendment. So we're asking this
legislature to pass HB 9 to
close this dangerous loophole to
transparency and government
contracting and get New Mexico
out of the business of. Good
afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Jessica Inez Martinez,
and I am an immigration attorney
and a director of policy and
coalition building at New Mexico
Immigrant Law Center. I stand
proudly in my inner section as
an indigenous woman. My father's
family has been here since time
immemorial.
And my mother immigrated from
Mexico. I have lived in New
Mexico all of my life. I have
lived in northern New Mexico,
southern New Mexico, and in
central New Mexico. I am proud
to be a New Mexican. We are
community centered and it is
deeply ingrained in us to
fiercely protect our people and
ensure that our communities are
safe. That is exactly what this
bill is about right now, New
Mexico hosts a disproportionate
amount of US immigration
detention capacity. Any
reduction in the number of ICE
detention beds in New Mexico
will make our immigrant
community safer because
data shows ice is more likely to
conduct arrests and raids closer
to where it hasn't existing
detention beds.
And we all know that
collaboration between local
governments and federal
immigration enforcement
authorities dramatically
increases fear within immigrant
communities. This makes it
significantly less likely that
immigrants will seek assistance
from local public safety
officials and pushes immigrants
and mixed status families into
the shadows, breaking the
connection between New Mexico's
counties and the federal
immigration enforcement
authorities will promote
cooperation and communication
between New Mexico's immigrant
communities and local officials.
and make everyone in our
community safer. We have the
power to hold the line here in
New Mexico and not let the
current administration and ICE
continue to use our state as a
laboratory for cruelty and
mistreatment. The risks of
inaction are far too significant
for us to ignore. We urge you to
keep our community safe and past
HB 9, the immigrant Safety Act.
Thank you.
You, um
Representative, are you ready
for chair with that? We stand
for questions. OK, very good.
So, um, let's talk about
process. I believe there is.
A translator here, so um.
How will we, how, how would we
typically done that? Do you
stand in the front or you?
Oh, OK. Very good. Uh, so, um,
I'm gonna limit the number of
people speaking to 5, as I've
done, and then we'll do about 4
online, OK? So, 5 of you pick,
you know, self select and please
stand with the gentleman.
With the microphone if you're
opposed to this bill. We're
opposed first, OK?
Pot.
Yeah.
Posed first. OK. Anyone opposed
to this bill in the audience.
I don't see anyone standing in
opposition.
Right.
Go online, wishing to speak or.
For about a minute.
All right.
Oh, I see someone called Mayor's
phone. Mr. Mayor.
Yes, can you hear me?
Hello, yes,
yes, sir, I I can hear you. I'm
sorry. You have about a minute,
OK?
Yes ma'am, this is uh Nathany.
I'm the mayor of New Mexico, and
just to let you know, if this
bill passes,
Yes, it will shut down the
prison, and without the prison
having a federal contract the
town of Astania will lose at
least 2/3 of its GRTs and
essentially will kill the town
of Etania. Also, the Torrance
County will spend hundreds of
thousands of dollars plus 100
man hours in transporting
prisoners from Torrance County
to Santa Fe County. So I am
adamantly opposed to this bill
because yes, you're saying it's
not.
a
Anti-private prison, but in the
same sense you also say we're
trying to get rid of immigration
detention and using the state of
New Mexico.
So please continue to allow
these counties to enter into
these contracts because without
this contract,
The town of stature will die in
Torrance County will be
detrimented within 100,000s of
dollars and man hours and also
by filling it with state
prisoners, we will still lose
MGRTs, so you are essentially
killingania and devastating
Torrance County if this passes.
That's all I have.
Mr. Nichols
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, um.
speak on behalf of Otero County.
My name's Harvey Nichols in the
county attorney, uh, Otero
County stands in opposition to
HB 9. That's because HB9 though
framed as a humanitarian reform
would wreak havoc on New
Mexico's rural economies, legal
integrity, public safety, and
migrant welfare.
He'll trigger a bond default,
job losses, and revenue
declines, destabilizing counties
like Otero, Cibola, and
Torrance, specifically in terms
of Otero, our 2007 revenue bond,
uh, is outstanding with $22.4
million in principal left and
$4.8 million in interest.
Uh, the set for payoff in 2028,
um, that was used to fund this
facility specific.
To be a processing facility and
if it's not used as a processing
facility that will default in
those investors will lose that
money.
Uh, it violates constitutional
principles in New Mexico
statutes, specifically the
supremacy clause and impairment
of contracts, which will lead to
costly litigation and federal
pushback. It risk federal
funding and straining local
local budgets and the state, the
state budget.
They will overboard over.
Thank you, Mr. Nichols.
Um, I see another hand.
This is an opt if you're not in
opposition. OK.
I don't see anyone else online
in opposition.
Um
Let's go to the audience, we're
gonna take up to 5 people.
One minute each.
Oh please
Select 5.
And I, and when I say 5, I
really do mean 5.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Lena Weber, uh, the
interim policy director with the
ACLU of New Mexico. We stand in
strong support of HB 9, the
Immigrant Safety Act, New
Mexico's 3 immigrant detention
centers all rely on contract
schemes where ice contracts with
the county, which then turns
around and awards a no-bid
contract, um, with a, to a large
out of state private prison
company, allowing our local
governments to participate in
immigration detention in this
way sends a chilling message to
our immigrant communities.
Makes it less likely that they
will feel safe to seek emergency
help, go to the hospital, or to
contact local public safety
officials. The law is clear that
the federal government cannot
compel states to carry out its
policies that states have the
right under the 10th Amendment
to leave that work to the
federal government. That is what
the immigrant Safety Act does.
It gets New Mexico state and
local government out of the
business of a loophole contract
system so that they can focus on
caring for our communities
instead. We strongly urge you to
pass HB 9. Thank you.
Thank you.
Yeah, he, Madam Chair and
committee members. I'm asked to
Chavez, EDF NM native vote. We
are in deep support of HB 9.
Each person, no matter the
circumstances, should be treated
with the basic level of decency.
Instead, we have people being
held in New Mexico and
immigration detention centers,
subject to inhumane, unhygienic
conditions. Medical treatment is
withheld and people are
suffering.
This is cruel and unacceptable.
Immigrants strengthened the
diversity and state and nation.
Pablo and tribal leaders
throughout this continent long
welcomed newcomers onto this
sacred land. In this spirit, we
carried that sacred trust
forward. The border crossed us.
Many of these people targeted
are just like us, so similar
that members from Navajo Nation
have been wrongly detained by
ice, having so many immigrant
detention beds in New Mexico
only makes it more likely that
traumatizing arrests will
continue to happen. Our own
local government should not be
incentivizing ice and private.
Prison companies to place more
immigrant detention beds here.
Thank you.
Yes, sir.
Buenos Aires,
do you wanna create?
Minobres Carlos.
So you padres I see comunidad.
inso and Juan McKinley, Eddie
Eli.
Aquista.
Demo deli.
But.
But a criminals.
but as the migrants.
Lograf acuerdos.
in the petroleum gas familias
and
no.
Thank you.
OK. Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Carlos Talamantes, and I
have lived in hops for 22 years.
I am a husband and a father of 6
children, and like so many in
our community, I work hard every
day in the construction industry
to provide for my family. I am a
member of Somos Aion statewide
immigrant-based workers' rights
organization in 8 counties,
including San Juan, McKinley,
Eddie, and Lee Counties. I am
here today to strongly oppose
any efforts by New Mexico
counties like Lee County to
enter into new contracts with
ICE to detain immigrants for
immigration violations.
Local officials claim these
contracts are only for
criminals, but we know the
truth. Immigrants in our
community or neighbors and our
families are being attacked.
Many of these agreements with
the federal government are not
just for people with criminal
records. They put us all at
risk. We know border crossings
are down. This means that if a
county like Lee, which has
already expressed interest in
profiting off a federal contract
to hold immigrants in our local
jail, succeeds in entering into
one of these agreements, it will
lead to more arrests and
detention over families in order
to fill beds with longtime
members of a comm over
own community, hardworking oil
and gas families or families
with construction in
construction like mine, should
not have to live in fear that a
simple traffic stop or an
administrative issue could tear
us apart. We do not want an
immigrant jail in our community.
We want to invest in in our
family.
No, no.
Please don't do that. I, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
my name is the Reverend Mike
Angel. I'm the rector of the
Episcopal Church of Saint
Michael and All Angels in
Albuquerque. Our church
regularly supports immigrants
released from New Mexico's 3
detention centers. Almost every
former detainee we've interacted
with has reported miserable
conditions in these facilities.
Many lost significant weight
while detained and talked about
rotten or disgusting food. They
talked about medical conditions
that were left untreated.
And the gospel of Matthew, Jesus
tells his followers, if you feed
the hungry, you clothe the
naked. If you visit those in
prison, you have done this unto
me. Jesus also says if you fail
to feed the hungry to clothe the
naked, to visit the imprisoned,
you have failed me. People of
faith have an obligation not to
look away from New Mexico's
involvement in inhumane
immigrant detention, faith
leaders from across the state
have sent over 200 letters to
legislators urging the passage
of this bill. I joined them and
strongly urge you to surpass HB
9 to protect.
immigrants in our state.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
Marshall Martinez, the executive
director of Equality New Mexico,
and we stand in strong support
of House Bill 9. There is not a
jail, prison, or detention
center in the world, where queer
and trans people are safe.
But that is even more true of
federal detention centers now
with the Trump administration
threatening to detain trans
women in men's units. We should
not allow New Mexico local
government to facilitate the
abuse of LGBTQ people, just so
that ICE and private prison
companies can avoid normal
scrutiny of their contracts. We
cannot stand by and listen to
more horror stories of trans
people being denied their
hormones and medications. People
living with HIV being denied
their medications and the
neglect and abuse and harassment
that queer people face on a
daily
basis. It is time for New Mexico
to take a firm stand against
these violations of human
rights.
And to get its state and local
government out of the business
of immigration detention.
Yes, hello. Hi, everyone. Are
you able to hear me?
Wonderful. Hi everyone. Good
afternoon. This is Congresswoman
Melanie Stansbury. I am coming
to you live from Washington DC.
I am here to testify in favor of
House Bill 9. I want to make
clear that this bill does not
prevent the counties from
entering into agreements with
detention centers for the
purposes of law enforcement and
for local detention needs.
However, what it would prevent
is entering into agreements for
the purposes of immigration
detention.
In the case of the detention
center in our district in how in
congressional District one, they
have failed to meet the
contractual requirements of
these ICE contracts time and
time again, have been subject to
numerous federal investigations
and even a lawsuit over the
death of a detainee. They are
not maintaining adequate
staffing, health care
conditions, and the basic
sanitation conditions that are
required by federal contract,
and this is a violation of
fundamental due justice.
And our responsibility to care
for asylees under refugee and
asylee laws, I strongly support
this bill, and I asked for the
due passage of this bill. Thank
you.
Per
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. This
is Kurt Reeger, the director of
Lutheran Advocacy Ministry of
New Mexico. Lutheran advocacy
also speaks the position of the
New Mexico Conference of
Churches, and I'm here this
afternoon to express our strong
support for HB 9, immigration,
refugee and asylum policies
express who we are as a nation,
and I would argue who we are as
a state, and the influence our
present and future character and
the impact the lives of
thousands. Thus we advocate for
policies that provide vigorous
protection of asylum seekers.
Currently there are nearly
2000 asylum seekers and refugees
being detained in private
prisons in New Mexico. They have
arrived in New Mexico having
endured unimaginably horrific
experiences in travel and by
having made life or death
choices as a result of what they
faced in their home countries,
including war. Extreme gang
violence and economic
catastrophes under federal law,
the detention of asylum seekers
and refugees is completely
discretionary, so we can choose
not to detain the state of New
Mexico can choose not to be
complicit in supporting a system
that
violates human rights and has
placed detainees in immoral and
in safe conditions as
organizations, our advocacy is
rooted in faith.
Good afternoon. Can you hear me?
Yes, and I think I mispronounced
your name, sorry. Uh yes. Uh,
that's fine. My name is Celia
Dahmeyer. I'm a member of
volunteers for Immigrants in
Detention Albuquerque, known as
Vida. Vida is a group of
volunteers that provide social
support to immigrants in New
Mexico's detention facilities.
We have made more than 50 visits
to the facilities in Torrance
County and Cibola County since
2022. We talked to the people
detained there and try to
comfort them and let them know
that they're not forgotten.
And we listen to their stories.
By doing this, we hear a lot
about the way they are treated
in detention. They talk about
being cursed out by guards, not
having access to clean water to
drink, substandard food, delayed
and inadequate medical care
being put in solitary
confinement if they admit they
are, they are depressed.
Recently, when we met a man at
Torrance who had been separated
from his wife and 3 children. He
was devastated, longing to be
reunited with his family.
New Mexico does not have to
allow its local governments to
facilitate these human rights
abuses. We urge you to pass the
immigrant Safety Act and get New
Mexico out of the business of
immigrant detention. Thank you.
I miscounted, um, Jackie Pierce.
Hi, good afternoon. Uh, my name
is Zoe Bowman, and I'm an
attorney with Las America's
immigrant advocacy Center, a
nonprofit that provides legal
services to immigrants in West
Texas and New Mexico.
New Mexico's immigrant detention
centers have the capacity to
house 2000 non-citizens. I am
one of just a small handful of
attorneys who provides free
legal services in them.
Because there are so few lawyers
in these facilities, the private
prison companies that run them
operate with little oversight,
leading to devastating
consequences. For example, one
of my clients reported being
sexually assaulted by a
psychologist employed by the
private prison company that runs
the Otero County Processing
Center.
As the Trump administration
ramps up its efforts to
terrorize immigrant communities,
we're seeing that more and more
of the people detained at these
facilities, longtime New Mexico
residents, including people with
US citizen children. There's no
reason for New Mexico to
incentivize ICE to place more
immigrant detention beds in New
Mexico, which only makes it
easier for ice to target
immigrants living here. For all
these reasons, I urge you to
support the immigrant Safety
Act. Thank you.
includes our public comment
piece, um, rep, did you have
anything you wish to add before
we go to committee?
No, madam Chair.
I
Speaker Martinez, but um.
Yes
Go ahead, sorry. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Representative,
expert witnesses.
Um
As I, as I look through this.
Would you explain the difference
between a civil order and a
criminal order as far as uh
Immigrations dogs, please.
Manager.
Madam Chair representative
immigration law is civil law and
when someone is held for civil
immigration violations, they are
held in tension. It's a
completely. So,
If I understand this right.
Or if they have not committed a
crime in the sense of some kind
of violent crime or something
like that.
And they're being held on.
Charges of being here illegally.
Or, uh
Violate or visa had expired,
they're being held.
So what happens then is my
understanding is a civil order
is filed.
My ice is that.
Correct and manager.
Madam Chair Representative,
these are two different systems.
So if someone's charged with a
crime that goes through the the
criminal legal system. That's
separate from the civil
immigration system, with the
purpose of this bill, and it,
you know,
If they're, they're just
completely. But pardon me, madam
chair.
witness. My understanding of the
immigration law.
federally is
They, it may be.
Separate
But my understanding is so they
still file a civil order to have
someone removed from the
country, correct, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair Representative.
Yes, if someone is deemed
removed country, something
called a notice to appear is
filed, and that is a process.
Handled separately.
And Madam Chair, and that's
What we're dealing with is the
civil order, correct?
Madam Chair Representative,
there are over 4 million people
in civil immigration and civil
immigration. So it's even within
that thing that we're talking
about in this bill.
Madam Chair, so in this bill.
We are, we the the bill states.
Mm that it, if this is passed
and turned into law that any
public facility.
Holding
Immigrants that are there on
civil immigration orders.
Will
have to release them.
Is that the way I understand
this, Madam Chair?
Madam Chair Representative, the
focus of this bill is to
prohibit stain 2, immigration,
detention contracts. I would
still have the authority to this
bill focuses on and prohibiting
state cooperation in that
detention process.
So Madam Chair, um, expert
witness, is it.
possible that a person being
detained.
Or federal civil immigration
violations along with
Federal criminal violations.
With this bill prohibit
Law enforcement in the local
holding facility from
cooperating with
Removing them from this state.
Manager
Madam Chair representative
again, this, the focus of this
bill is prohibiting contracts.
We're talking about contracts
here. ICE is still within its
authority just as they do now
with this bill in in your
hypothetical, I would still have
the authority.
OK. Yeah, Madam Chair, so if
This bill would not.
Conflict with the statutory
obligations of our sheriffs to
cooperate with
Uh, agencies, you're talking
strictly contracts, so in a
hypo, is that correct? Before I
go any further with that, Madam
Chair.
Madam Chair, Representative,
correct. Madam Chair,
witness representative. So
hypothetically,
If um
And I don't know if they do or
not. Let's say the San Juan
County Detention Center.
Um, detains.
I know they don't do it on a
long term basis, but
If they detain any type of
federal.
person based on this paperwork.
Are they in violation of this
proposed.
Law, because I, I know the
United States Marshal Service,
for instance, does have a
contract with our jail to hold
people we have done, um.
Roundups for violent.
People who are here without
proper documentation and they've
been held there.
Would they then get in.
For lack of a better word,
trouble with the state under the
way this law is proposed expert
and manager.
Madam Chair Representative, this
bill does not impact squarely
focused on civil and madam
chair, so what I'm saying is if
the jail is holding people for
that, then they have some kind
of an agreement because anytime
The jail holds people for
The Department of Justice, or
another one, they usually have
to have a contract with them,
even if it's for short term
holding.
So with that in effect cause
that then, uh, ma'am, madam
Chair.
Madam Chair, Representative, no.
Again, the, the prohibition here
is on civil immigration
detention for entering into a
not impact uh what what I
impacted people being held on
the system again.
And, and Madam Chair, so on and
I'm looking at page 2 subsection
C line 21, 2223.
No public body may sell trade
lease, or otherwise dispose of
any real property for the
detention of individuals for
federal civil immigration
violations.
My question on that would be.
Um, again, I'm gonna use a
hypothetical, so.
Uh, let's say I own a
A hanger or something at
Albuquerque International
Airport.
And
The immigration authorities
wanted to contract with me.
To
Bring immigrants there to fly
them out, would I be prohibit
prohibition of this as it's
written if I understand this
correctly, ma'am, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, Representative,
know this bill is. So,
I guess as I look at this, um,
What are we narrowing down to a.
Is it just these, not just, I'm
not trying to minimize that. Let
me rephrase that, Madam Chair,
the, the camps are are the
detainment facilities that are
set up just.
The specific purpose.
Of detaining immigrants is that,
that's the
Sole focus of this bill, Madam
Chair, ma'am.
Madam Chair Representative.
Again, this is prohibits can be
used for other purposes. This is
very narrow and civil
immigration detention uh
contracts between state publics
and impact other industries.
Sorry for being slow on the
uptake here, Madam Cheer but I'm
gonna keep going if that's OK.
So, when we're we're talking
contractual obligation then in
this, and I, I have to admit I,
and it may be in here so please
clarify, is this retroactive or
is it would be from the
Time, um.
What was the date on this?
Whenever this would go into a
Go into effect.
Madam Chair
Madam Chair Representatives, so
this bill would go into effect
on June 20. In fact, after the
session, and then at which point
each of the existing contracts
would, and each of the, the
counties with their existing
contracts rather would need to
exercise the termination
provisions and that the counties
have. And then this would also
prohibit future.
OK. And Madam Chair, and expert
witness representative then.
If the
If they do that, then what
happens to the population of
people being held there, where
do they, where do they go? They
just released to the general
public or they
Transported
Is it the federal government's
responsibility to transport them
or, or um
Do you understand what I'm
asking here, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair Representative of
variety of things. so during
which time during this
termination period,
organizations like mine and
other legal service providers
would work very hard, diligent
for those who have deportation
orders, they plan their next
steps and um for others who
perhaps are subject to mandatory
detention or who are not
released, they would be
transferred.
And um,
Madam Chair and experts and
representatives.
The impact of of funding is some
of the people that um spoke on
the overhead, mentioned the
amount of funding.
When the funding is terminated.
Does this just kind of fall
under that's the cost of doing
business and I'm not trying to
minimize any of this. I'm just
trying to figure out a way to
Get the if that's not too harsh,
but is that what occurs, Madam
Chair, just eat the funding.
Madam Chair, representative, the
vast majority of the money from
the federal government for these
contracts is going to private
prison companies like the
counties by federal law are not
allowed to profit under these,
these contracts that they
receive are are small, usually.
Move the money from the federal
government about 50 cents per
person per day that the counties
are receiving for people in
detention, um, in conversations
with the Cebola County finance
director, the money that is
received under fee, um, is being
held in a savings account. They,
they find it, they have said, I
quote, that it, it is not a
significant source of of
revenue.
So, and Madame Chair, so the
number of jobs lost.
Because that would cause job
losses in those facilities and
the people that live in and
around there.
I guess I would be somewhat
concerned that uh my former
occupation, I've worked under 6
presidents under multiple
parties.
And I have discovered.
Many times the hard way to not
incur the ire of the federal
government.
Uh, is there a?
A plan should, should, and
that's probably somewhat off
task, and I'm afraid that might
cause a result here.
Has that been thought through,
Madam Chair?
Madam Chair Representative, is
your question about jobs or is
your question about the federal
government responding in some
way.
I'm sorry, madam chair is
actually both. The jobs will go
away if the jobs go away and
then the federal government sees
that whatever their.
Interest is
They can be quite hard on state
entities and again it's, it's
part of the Fed versus state.
He also so if, if you can
address that concern, Madam
Chair.
Madam, thank you for your
question. First, in terms of the
jobs, um, again, this bill is
very narrow for the uh
facilities continue to operate.
A bit of respect outside of that
uh that scope, there's other
ways to get in to agree bits for
the second point on the related
to potential retaliation against
from the Trump administration.
What we do know, um, is that
efforts to retaliate against
states um for exercising the
10th Amendment rights during the
first administration generally
failed. Also, generally,
Congress cannot compel states to
carry out federal immigration
policy, even through spending
bills, um, even if Congress
were to hypothetically pass a
law in the future conditioning
funding on states allowing their
political subdivisions to enter
into contracts to detain people
for immigration violations. That
law would violate the
Constitution if it crossed the
line between merely encouraging
or enticing states to do so and
or coercing them to do so, and
that's supported, you know,
through case law, and I would
like to just add that now is the
time for us as New Mexicans to
really stand up and be proud of
our code of protecting.
and knowing that these, this
loophole exists, it is
subjecting people and putting
people up on a platter to
essentially be tortured and that
is the cost of human life is
really too, too significant to
continue to ignore, and I think
that's really the heart of this
bill is protecting immigrants
who are merely seeking safety.
OK, um
Madam Chair, representative
expert witness.
So in no way would this bill.
If there is a detention order.
And the person was put into NCIC
and a local law enforcement
officers stopped them.
And detained them.
When their mean recourse against
our local law enforcement,
whether it be sheriff, state.
Municipal
Or making a
Attainment of someone based on a
federal civil order.
And.
Madam Chair, representative,
that is beyond this again, we
are very narrowly focused on
contracts and the federal
government for civil immigration
detention, um, this doesn't
impact other types of
arrangements. There's also, um,
again, they're
We are focused on criminal law,
so police officers can continue
to carry out their duties as
permitted under state law.
Yeah, in
I'm just
A little concerned, and I, I
understand what you're saying.
You've done an excellent job of
explaining it to me thank you
because I've read it numerous
times and sent it off to 5 or 6
different attorneys.
He had a different, completely
different view of things than
what you've explained.
Um, because they're criminal
attorneys.
So I, whenever we talk about
potentially doing this and
releasing.
The immigrants
We
Have not to date followed
whatever the process is to be
here.
Under the federal law.
I'm just concerned.
As a representative
Where, how that's going to be
handled.
Uh, if and when the time comes,
it just is.
Seems overreaching for a state,
and that's just my opinion.
And, and thank you for your
time, Madam Chair.
And then representative thank
you Madam Chair. A lot of the
questions I had, um, my
colleague who Paul asked, um,
I'll, I'm gonna ask a couple
others and then maybe just
expand on some of those some of
that Q&A. Madam Chair and
representative and experts, um,
so we have 3 of these.
represents the or detention
centers in New Mexico currently,
Madam Chair, Mr. Speaker,
correct, we have 3. OK. And how
long have they contracted with
these.
corporations to detain people on
on civil immigration violations.
Madam Chair, Mr. Speaker, um,
different facilities have been
open for different amounts of
time, but they're all very
recent people for civil
immigration violations after
core civic, um, decided to
cancel the con.
So this is, this one was 2019,
Madam Chair.
Uh, Madam Chair, Mr. Speaker,
correct. And then the other two
Oario County Processing Center
was around, um, 2010, and then
Cla County Correctional Center
started detaining people for
civil immigration violations
around uh 2019 as well.
So this is and and the experts
and representative. These are
fairly recent. It's not like
these have been embedded into
the community as part of their
economic development toolbox
for.
30, 40 years.
Is that accurate?
Madam Chair, Mr. Speaker, that's
correct. Now, um, your bill, as
you said, is very narrow, Madam
Chair and Representative, it
only applies to these contracts
for
Um, used to detain individuals
for federal, civil, immigration
violations.
Um, can you expand on what that
means? What is a federal civil
immigration violation by.
Madam Chair, Mr. Speaker.
Anyone who is not a citizen of
Leeds lawful permanent residents
whom the government seeks to
report. It could be recently
arrived asylum seekers coming to
the United States seeking
safety. It's anyone whom I
determine, uh, uh, a focus of
their enforcement operations and
whom they seek to remove from
the United States.
Madam Chair representatives, are
we talking about a.
person who commits murder and is
here without immigration status.
Madam Speaker, it includes.
Correct, but I think my question
is different. The folks that you
would prohibit.
These agreements from holding.
Wouldn't be the person who is
charged with murder.
I understand, Madam Chair, Mr.
Speaker, thank you for
clarifying. Correct. This is not
a criminal legal system issue.
um
A mother who cross who presents
herself at the border.
Seeking asylum.
Madam Chair, representative
experts.
She is who is being detained
right now.
Madam Chair and Mr. Speaker,
corrected individuals such as
you mentioned, um, and also
noting that, um, this is known
as the term civil. It is not a,
it's not intended to be
punitive, that's even the
language used in IS's website is
not intended to be punitive yet
in these situations, you could
have literally as an asylum
seeker seeking safety coming
across, seeking safety being
persecuted for their religion,
brother say two brothers, one,
they have the discretion to
detain one.
Uh, or both, they sometimes they
choose to detain one and one
gets to wait with a sponsor.
That is a very common
occurrence. The one that gets to
it with their sponsor eventually
gets a a work permit is able to
contribute to our economy, part
of our community, the other one
who's detained could potentially
end up dead. Those were the very
realities that we're seeing in
these facilities in addition to
that I'm gonna I wanna, I wanna
leave enough time for other
folks. So I'm gonna come back to
the question though. This is
narrowly focused.
On
Federal civil immigration
violation. I just want to make
sure we understand. We're not
talking about a murderer who's
here without immigration status.
They're not gonna just get out
scot-free.
We're not talking about the
person who commits sexual
assault was here without
documentation. They're not going
to walk out the street if this
bill passes. You're talking
about prohibiting contracts
between public bodies, uh
uh prohibit agreements between
public bodies and these
companies, these corporations to
detain people who did nothing
more.
Then commit a federal civil
focus on the word civil
immigration violation. And so
what you're describing are
people who present themselves
for asylum at the border. Maybe
it's folks who overstayed a
visa. Maybe it's folks who
crossed illegally.
Through the desert, made a life
for themselves over the course
of 20 years.
And then they got caught up in a
in in in an immigration roundup
and they end up in a detention
facility. Again, no criminal
record, no crime committed, uh,
pay taxes, worship in our same
church, their kids go to the
same school as our kids.
They are being held right now.
In any of these three detention
centers in New Mexico because we
allow this practice and your
bill seeks to prohibit that
practice.
Let me move on, um.
Because I think that the the the
one of the bigger issues I have
here.
Is the fact
That
Private shareholders and private
corporations are profiting from.
Detaining
People who did not commit a
crime, oftentimes with court
dates that never come.
And oftentimes, as we've heard
in inhumane conditions. Is that
right, Madam Chair
Representative?
Speaker, yes, that's correct.
And what are these companies,
man? I'm sure you said I think
you said Core Civic and what's
the other one?
Madam Chair, Mr. Speaker, core
civic and management in
operating 3 of the contracts
here all three of the contracts.
Madam, are you aware of
Any other like agreement.
Across the state to detain, say,
Prisoners within the Department
of Corrections or prisoners
within any of our county jails.
Madam Chair, Mr. Speaker, I
question.
So
there's a set of New Mexico.
Sending its prisoners to a
Private detention facility or do
we run our own?
Madam Chair, Mr. Speaker,
unfortunately, I am just an
immigration lawyer. I don't work
in the criminal legal system.
Fair enough. Um, the answer is
no, uh, Madam Chair, um, but I
think the, the point we're
trying to make here is, this is
a very specific set of
circumstances for a very
specific class of people.
Um, which also gives me
heartburn, right?
Um, is what's good for the goose
is good for the gander or
whatever the saying is.
Um
Let, let me move on, Madam
Chair. um, over the holiday
break, um,
I took a tour of
The, I think it's the Torrance
County, I don't know what it's
called, but it's the detention
center in Torrance County.
And I met 3 individuals actually
said Chavez was there.
Um
And
All 3 of them had very different
stories. One of them, and I'm
not gonna share their names to
protect their identities, but.
One of the young men I met had
been there for I think 6 months,
was still waiting for the court
hearing. And keep in mind, this
isn't like court hearings for
the rest of us, right? Um, we
get accused of a crime, you
know, said Hall picks me up for
committing some crime, there's
some due process there that
kicks in, right? There's a court
date. I've got an opportunity to
face a judge and all the good
stuff.
Um
I think on average, out of the 3
people I met,
There was one who had been
waiting for at least 6 months.
There was one who had been
waiting for, it was gonna be a
year, like in 3 days.
Nothing from, from immigration
court, they were just sitting
there, not really knowing what
was happening.
Um, the first young man I met,
um, presented himself at the
border. He's from Venezuela.
And and came here, traveled
through the Darien Gap.
Up through Mexico.
Um, and I think entered through
Brownsville, if I'm not
mistaken.
Uh
And his wife
We're
from him
He had a tattoo. I don't have
tattoos, but I know a lot of
people in this legislature that
have tattoos because he had a
tattoo.
It was flagged
As being potentially a criminal.
And was transferred, arrested
and then transferred.
to that detention center.
Uh
He had been sick for weeks.
No medical care or very, very
little.
Um, the second person I met.
Was
Uh, a young man in his 30s.
Who was born in Mexico.
And had been brought
To the United States is a 3
month old baby.
grew up in California.
Great kid.
didn't qualify for DACA.
Because when he was a freshman
in high school, he got caught, I
don't know how many of you in
here have been caught with a
joint. I, I haven't, but.
I know it
I know probably a lot of us
have, right?
Because of that, he would, he
didn't qualify for DACA.
Regardless, he built a whole
life, a whole career, moved to
Tennessee, started a very
profitable business, um, auto
shop, I think it was.
Um
He was arrested.
Or
Um, some sort of contractual
dispute with one of his vendors,
and I think a fight broke out or
something.
I gets arrested.
Gets flagged for not having
immigration status.
Gets gets arrested in whatever
town in Tennessee gets flagged
for eyes, ice picks him up,
transfers him to Louisiana, and
they
Board a bus
And they send them across the
border and deport him.
The kid didn't even speak
Spanish.
No family in Mexico didn't speak
Spanish, ends up in um
Somewhere in um I think in
Laredo in Laredo is a Mexican
side.
He ends up crossing illegally
through Juarez, El Paso.
gets arrested while crossing. So
now he's in real trouble because
now it's the 2nd time, and he's
the 3rd guy, like I said, had
been there almost for a year.
came here undocumented from
Guatemala.
Built the life had been here for
several years in El Paso.
One night after work.
He's driving home, gets a flat
tire on the freeway.
It's off, gets off the
interstate like any of us would
for safety reasons.
Police officer flags him down.
starts questioning him.
Eyes gets called
gets arrested.
Its place in immigration
detention.
All three of these were civil.
Immigration violations.
Yet these 3 young men, I pray, I
hope they're not still sitting
there, but I wouldn't be
surprised if they still are.
And I think that's at the crux,
Madam Chair Representative, and
experts.
Of what this bill seeks to do.
And I think that we as New
Mexicans have to make a choice.
Um
I understand the complexities
that something like this brings
to these local communities.
But again, it's not like this is
embedded.
In the culture of these
communities in the economic
development culture of these
communities.
Because
From what I heard in the
testimony today, the one that's
been in operation the longest is
about 15 years old.
Most of them are
Less than 10.
So the question for us is.
Are these the types of economic
development opportunities.
We as a state want to endorse.
And encourage our local
communities.
To engage in
Or
Is it the failure of the state?
That we have not provided those
opportunities for those
communities and therefore they
have to resort to whatever is
available.
And I would submit to you, Madam
Chair and Representative, that
it's probably a combination,
probably more the latter.
Uh, you know, we tend to get a
little lazy up here, and we tend
to look for easy money. And I
think that this is a little bit
of easy money at the expense of
our
Very existence and the at the
expense of our, of our own um
Of our own being.
So, you know,
Now, I'm not gonna paint this as
a black and white, it's not.
Because I'll tell you what, and
to to rips of Hall's point. If
these detention centers are
closed?
Those folks who are there on
simple immigration violations,
not criminal, civil.
They're also not walking out.
They're probably gonna get
transferred to some other state
that has these detention
centers.
So the problem is not really
being solved for those poor
people that are in there.
The problem is more about us.
And do we want to engage in this
activity, especially as we have
a federal administration that is
now on steroids, promising mass
deportations.
So I will wholeheartedly support
your bill. I think it's the
right thing to do. It's not
easy.
I think there's a lot that is
left to discuss with regard to
the economic impact on those
communities, as well as the
well-being of these migrants
that are being held.
But it is a step in the right
direction. Uh, and I, I, I am
grateful to you, Madam Chair
Representative, for bringing the
bill forward, uh, and, and I'm
grateful to the people in the
audience for showing up and
having the courage to show up to
talk about these very difficult
issues. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Speaker, um,
Representative Reeb.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative and expert.
I think I'm understanding the
difference between the criminal
and civil, but I wanna get more
specific scenarios because I, I
just wanna double check that
we're not going to be.
Under this bill letting uh
dangerous people out so let me
the speaker asked you, so with
your bill prevent a local one of
these local individual that was
wanted by ice but had no state
charge that would detain him.
Under New Mexico law.
Madam Chair representative.
When it comes to the criminal
legal system, we are not
impacting the state law
enforcement agencies to carry
out their responsibilities under
state law. I would still have
the ability because ice is in
New Mexico. They have an office
have the authority to detain
someone if they.
Um.
OK, thank you. So you're saying
That basically that would be a
no, they just couldn't go to
this facility, these I'm sure.
Madam Chair Representative again
and I to sound patronizing, this
bill is really focused on
prohibiting contracts between
public entities in the federal
government. So that means I
still has the authority to do
whatever it wants to do under
its mandate. What we're doing
with this bill is separating the
states involvement from
cooperating in that process, OK?
And so Madam Chair, an expert
representative that basically if
I picked up somebody, they would
just like the speaker.
said they would probably just
have to transfer him to a
different facility out of state
or wherever that might be.
Madam Chair Representative, what
I chooses to do is, is up to
them. That's correct. They
wouldn't be able to use.
A local intergovernmental
services agreement. OK, and then
Madam Chair and um
representative and expert. So
would that also be the same if
someone committed a crime that
was outside the US and we just
had a sibil uh detention order
to hold them.
Because that is a civil
detention order, but they'd say
he committed a crime in a
different country.
Um
Now what? What happens now?
I'm sure.
Madam Chair, Representative,
again, it's, it's up to ICE
state's involvement in, in that
civil immigration detention
process. This doesn't impact
ISIS's ability to arrest. So
Madam Chair and representative,
is your.
I'm kind of confused cause I did
watch kind of the last
presentation of this bill and,
and it seemed that the focus, I
believe you had stated, um, you
were here because of the
Torrance County facility and you
had, um, you know, the issues
with the inhumane conditions. So
is the bill.
Is the intent of the bill to.
Um
Deal with the inhumane
conditions, or is the intent of
the patient of uh under civil
orders.
Is it a combination of both. Um,
I'm just trying, Madam Chair,
representative, the intent is to
close effectively the federal
government is using the counties
as a shield to ordinary
procurement requirements
required when the federal
government sidesteps that
competitive bidding process.
It's sidesteps looking back into
a private prison company's past
performance. So what we are
doing with this bill is closing
this loot puncture and
representative in addition to
that, the other intent behind
this bill is.
really actually the heart of it
is public safety, breaking the
connection between New Mexico's
counties and the federal
immigration enforcement
authorities will promote
cooperation and communication
between New Mexico's immigrant
communities and local officials,
so that's also part of this
bill's intent.
You just feel and I share and it
respectfully, I see, I, I feel
that this bill.
Is, is an attempt to, I mean,
we've heard all the comments and
the concerns about the inhuman
and deported for these reasons
or that reasons. And I feel this
fill a void a federal order.
And that concerns me in a sense
because of, yes, the federal
topic obviously to discuss um
and talk about, but
I just, I feel that it's, it's
just a bill that's kind of not
getting to what the real issue
is here, um, which is, and
that's just a a yes or no
question, is that the intent of
your bill, I'm not saying it's
right or wrong, I just wanna
know if that's that's the intent
of your bill, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, Representative, the
enforcement who is responsible
for laws.
Nothing under federal law
requires a when it comes to
civil immigration detention.
OK. And so, Madam Chair, and
expert representative, it's not
so much about the conditions of
these facilities because I would
assume if it was about the try
try to direct the attention to
fixing these facilities and
trying to, I mean, cuz obviously
if it's bad for civil detainees
is probably bad for criminal
detainees and and vice versa, so
I'm wondering why we're not also
focusing on just making these
facilities, um, getting them up
to part where we're not having
these issues and why it's not
being addressed that way. So
that's also a.
Concer I'm having with the way
you're doing this spill, if, if
that makes sense, madam Chair,
I'm not saying it to be wrong or
right, but it's just high legal,
Madam Chair Representative,
something like that might
actually get us as, um, so this
is what the state has authority
to do is prohibiting our
involvement in carrying out
these immigration. All right.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
And of a beta.
Thank you, Madam Chair, thank
you, Representative and your
experts for being here today.
Thank you for bringing this
bill.
providing so much clarity on a
lot of the questions I had, I
know you.
A number of times
this and
Thank you.
As I was saying, appreciate the
visits that the multiple visits,
because I had a lot of concerns
about this, and I also
appreciate the multiple
perspectives brought forth by my
committee members about.
Their concerns and their
questions and just making sure
that.
We understand.
But I, I do think that.
As you see, my, one of my
counties.
And we talked about that.
It
extensively.
And um
Had an opportunity to talk with
my account.
That's why we're in my district.
And I know that actions have
consequences, and so some of my
concerns that I had brought up
in our conversation.
For that, a lot of
My concern is that House Bill 9
does not completely solve that.
still gonna have that treatment
in our facilities. And are you
presenting any solution for
that, see it in the second
concern that I had.
Exactly what Speaker Martinez
had brought up, and if anyone
knows about the distances that
are incarcerated, um, community
members have to go through. It's
definitely me, tribal side, I do
not have.
Jail facility in my community,
so people are taking over 100
miles away, and they're released
the next day and
They have to travel through.
Rural roads of checkerboard
jurisdiction and then the
Interstate 40 just to get home,
and this is all seasons of the
year.
Unless the family member can
drive out there.
When it comes to torrents and
ibula and Otero.
I've had the unfortunate
opportunity or of having family
members in all of those
facilities, um, about their
experiences, I understand it's
not good, it's not perfect.
So that's my concern with House
Bill 9 is that.
We're still not addressing the
inhumane treatment.
And my concern about what
happened further.
From New Mexico.
What happens. And
What does that do to the
families that they may be
connected to here. What does
that do for for court dates? I
mean, is that the problem? Are
we not scheduling cases fast
enough and hearing them, and
what is the, I know I'm asking a
ton of questions. What is the
time frame that they're in
these?
Thank you.
Adam Chair, representative,
thank you from and for me, the
question is also quite personal,
and my stepfather was detained
by ICE in California before
California passed its
prohibition on state contracts
for immigration detention. There
were hundreds of beds for him to
be detained at locally. I still
transferred him anyway to
another private prison company,
Core Civic, in fact, in another
state. It's not state
legislation that
Packs whether or not I will
transfer people. ICE is making
that decision. And this is
something even in my
professional life, I've had to
grapple with. I've had clients
routinely transferred to faraway
states, Mississippi, Louisiana,
Alabama, Florida, and
immigration practitioners,
especially during COVID, have
really refined our um ability to
provide remote representation to
support families to have access
to one another. It is not
perfect because it is
The incarceration system and
also state legislation is not
what's driving transfers. ICE
is. ICE is routinely
transferring co-expert.
Try to keep Madam Chair and
Representative, yes, just I
thank you for your, your
concerns and our concerns are,
are similar in that we wish that
we could, you know, we could
actually address a bill and say,
you know, we should be
addressing these conditions
through oversight.
Unfortunately, we cannot dictate
that oversight, even our
counties don't have the power to
uh make any uh oversight of
what's happening in these
tensions. That's solely within
the purview and authority of
ICE. So what New Mexico can do
is
disentangle ourselves from this
corrupt scheme that exists, and
that's, that that is the start,
the more that we can distance
ourselves from this, this is
unfort unfortunate corrupt
scheme that is torturing
community by removing some of
the access to these beds we're
at least doing something as New
Mexicans to address the inhumane
conditions for civil immigration
detention purposes, and that's
the, the narrow scope, um, but
your concerns are, are well
taken.
Thank you, Madam Chair, thank
you, representative. Can you um
give me an idea what's gonna
happen if this is enacted and
someone's picked up and what,
what happens?
If this goes
Madam Chair, we have an
independent study which shows
that when counties, when a state
have ice beds.
There's more, um, excuse me,
there is uh increased
enforcement operations in those
localities because ICE is trying
to fill those beds. So actually
having the bed space available
puts our communities at risk. In
the event someone is picked up
though, um, for a variety of
reasons, they would be processed
at the local ICE office. So if
they're picked up Paso office at
that point, I has a decision
because all immigration
detention.
is discretionary. And ICE has
the discretion to release that
person with instructions to
attend court at a later date, or
IC has the discretion.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, rep. I have one more
question earlier you had quoted.
Someone from Cibola County
talking about the profits. Can
you tell me where that quote
came from.
Madam Chair Representative, the
finance director, um, Paul.
And last name L.
Thank you, Madam Chair, that's
I have.
Representative Representative
Chavez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative, um.
I won't
duplicate the statements that
most of the representatives up
here stated, I, I just wanna
clarify yet again, um.
I have a dear friend, Sam Bee
Hill, whose wife was killed in
her driveway by an illegal
immigrant.
Would this then have.
stopped the detainment of his
wife's murderer, where would
they have taken?
Him in that case.
Madam Chair Representative, this
bill is narrow regarding civil
immigration detention, this does
not contemplate the criminal
aspect.
Yes, you guys keep stating that
in your response, so I guess.
Let me, let me rephrase if
torrent Otero and Cibola
counties go away.
Where
Does I take those individuals,
those violent.
Criminals. Where do those
individuals then go.
Go ahead.
Madam Chair Representative, if
there is an existing contract
with Marshall's related to
criminal, anything related to
the criminal aspect that can
make me this, that can still
remain that contract could still
remain hypothetically, again,
this bill just addresses civil
immigration detention.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative.
That answers the first question,
so, um,
That's a great answer. Then.
Say
Somebody's convicted, a murderer
is convicted under our state
law.
Here.
And, for instance, um, Jackie B.
Hill's murderer, and then under
the civil process, not the
federal criminal immigration
law, would that then stop the
district attorneys and the
corrections department from
contacting ICE to pick them up
on release.
And I'm sure I represented the
bill does not prevent any any
cooperation, this feels narrow
to just civil immigration
detention.
OK, thank you. Um, and then I
guess on.
Echoing
My friend over here to my right,
um, I, I'm looking here at the
report and it shows that $10
million from Cibola County
annually.
Would no longer be there and
then here in Torrance County
states another $4 million a year
would be taken away if these
were closed. So my question is,
has there been any analysis of
how similar legislation in other
states have affected the local
economy, and if so, what are the
projected economic impacts of
our state's budget or those
county budgets and how have we
looked at how we would then
Maybe help those counties.
Madam Chair, Representative,
thank you for that question. I
do want to clarify some of those
those facts and figures, um, the
counties receive administrative
processing fees that amount to
just a few $100,000 the, the
other figures, those, those
numbers, those millions of
dollars are going to private
prison companies. And so I, I
think it's important that we
clarify the true economic impact
of, of
This bill and we believe that
its impact has actually been
overstated. So again, we're only
prohibiting a certain type of
contract. This is just going
after ICE detention contracts.
This bill does not address other
types of incarceration. Each
facility detains other types of
populations. It does not require
the case of torrents and Cibola
counties because core Civic owns
that property, they would still
be required to pay.
property tax to the counties in
the event of the ICE contracts
being canceled. And again, they
are not prohibited from entering
into, um, other types of. And
third, I, I'd point and this is
something that came up earlier
as well with Representative Hall
with respect to jobs. There is
chronic understaffing in all
corrections facilities across
the state. Each of these
facilities is chronically
understaffed. Two former
employees face such dire and
Safe working conditions in this
facility that they filed a with
and so these have demonstrated
time and time again that this is
also not safe for workers. Um,
lastly, I do want to point to a
special program through the
Department of Workforce
Solutions, mental health support
corrections workers from
transitioning away from the
corrections industry if they so
choose and receive assistance
with job placement and other
industries.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. OK, so I just
want to clarify because we have.
fiscal impact sheet.
And it says,
With this bill, Cibola County
would lose 300 jobs that pay
$42,000 to $65,000 a year
totaling 10.8 million plus the
$180,000 tax revenue. So do
those 300 jobs not go away then
if we then remove these
facilities from the state.
Madam Chair and Representative,
this just where we're moving our
uh complicity in this process to
not contract for the person
still immigration contracts
which many do, um, with
marshals, so that, that facility
will not close. Um, so the jobs
will not necessarily go away.
So they do have other contracts,
those 300 jobs aren't just for
this.
There are other contracts, not
counting the marshals cause
that's probably minimal, but
they do.
House
other
I don't know.
Criminals in that case.
Madam Chair Representative, when
it comes to Silao, the daily
average of the ice population is
about 150 people. The other
populations, whether they be
criminal county custody or
marshal's custody is much closer
to 1000. I do also want to
clarify, um, the number of jobs
and just paint a picture of the
understaffing and where
potentially even canceling the
ICE contract helps with that.
Wait, wait, wait, I think you've
answered that question already,
but we gotta start tightening up
our
answers and
So I'm just I think that was
we're not gonna circle back
because you want to hit that
question again.
OK
Great.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representatives. Those were
all the questions that I had.
Right, Representative Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
I just kind of want a quick
clarification.
Um, so
What happens to those people
that are now detained in
facilities, are they just
At least
They moved to another state.
What happens to those detainees?
Madam Chara released under civil
immigration laws can petition to
be released during that time,
people with deportation orders
would be deported and those who
are not eligible.
Madam Chair Representative.
Um, I, I heard a
Discussion about
Families being affected because
people are being transferred to
other states.
When this keep them.
Closer to their families.
I, I, I'm just not understanding
the logic of.
Shutting these places down and
having these detainees
transferred to other states.
I, I would think
It would be better to keep them
close to
transferred, Madam Chair
Representative to
California, that whole family
is.
I mean, if they want to keep in,
they moved to California.
It just seems
It doesn't seem logical to me
for.
Can you explain to me the logic
of sending them to another
state.
I thank you for your question.
So because New Mexico has 5
times more beds than the average
state, but this bill would do is
prevent these beds to be used
for the purposes of civil
immigration detention. If we
were to do pass this bill, the
families that could potentially
be in jeopardy in New Mexico
would no longer most likely not
be detained in this loophole.
And it's, it's, it's, it's
nuanced, but that's essentially
what this bill would do is
prevent families from being
separated, um, in our state by
working with.
the other states and cohort that
have passed similar laws to
prevent that.
Madam Chair Representative.
Um
I disagree with you because if
those.
detainees were moved to another
state.
There's that separation what
you're
is totally opposite of what the,
what I'm reading in the bill.
They close
They moved to another state.
That creates a huge separation.
I'm not sure that's a question.
It's just an observation, but
Just not making any sense.
That's free to make
observations.
And you know that, of course.
Of
course I do.
I, I, I'm just, I'm, I'm having
a hard time understanding.
The logic.
Correct me if I'm wrong. You
just said that it
Stops those families from being
affected.
If they're moved to another
state, I think that's a huge
impact to that family.
Am I wrong about that?
manager on that point because I,
I see exactly where Rep Martinez
is going and I don't know why
this is not coming out from this
side, but
Those folks, their family is not
here. Their family is likely in
whatever country of origin, so
them them being moved anywhere
else.
Doesn't really matter from that
perspective, although I
appreciate what you're trying to
say, right? Um, but people in
detention here who might get
moved elsewhere, their families
are generally by large, not
here.
Still not making sense to me.
Uh, but
Oh, I'll conclude there, Madam
Chair, I appreciate the time.
I have a few comments on.
So this is what I find um
compelling in this.
We have um individuals who are
being detained through these
contracts on civil.
I, I'm just gonna use probably,
um, vernacular language.
For those individuals, they
have, there are a few options.
One, I could release them.
And apparently that does happen
occasionally on their own
recognisance, and that's a
criminal.
With directions about so forth.
The other is they may be
transferred, um, they have other
facilities that are available,
but in, in talking with you all
offline and and some of the
materials appears that ice tends
to have a higher enforcement
rate.
On civil attainments when they
have facilities and um, you
know, that's what I found
compelling when I was looking at
this. For the folks who are
already detained, you know,
there may be some issues there
of ice, but.
We may be able to um.
Have some small effect for the
folks that are living with us,
our friends, our neighbors, our
workers, our restaurant workers,
our field workers, um, to.
Lower, you know, the rounding up
rate because we were seeing more
roundups we've been reading
about that in the press, I find
very disturbing and may be able
to lower that rate.
Because
We don't have these, these beds
available, I will go looking
elsewhere where they do have
beds available.
So
You know, this is a values
question, I understand we're
gonna and we're going to just
anybody's worldview, but it's a
values question and for me, my
value is I don't like the way
the federal.
Their detention policies and.
Recently, the people are coming
up to the north to what and
round people up who've been here
for for long periods of time.
We're not just talking about
individuals who've just crossed
the border and they they they.
just arrived, these are people
we've known for a long time that
I appears to be out and about
looking for the effect and it is
a small.
Um, I, I from my worldview would
like to have that effect.
So that's where I'm coming from.
And with that, I'm I'd like to
move a do not.
Do pass
or I mean
it's actually I think just the
bill.
To
pass on House Bill 9.
Yes, thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Abeta. Yes.
Representative Chavez. No.
Representative Hall
No.
Representative Hochman V. Hill.
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
No.
Speaker Martinez, yes.
Representative McQueen. Yes.
Representative Reeb, no.
Leader Sapansy.
Madam Vice Chair, yes.
Madam Chair, yes.
Madam Chair, you have a due pass
on House Bill 9.
Thank you.
And know what we don't do that
here.
OK.
All right, we have
Representative McQueen, um, I am
mindful of the fact that we have
the 100 bills party and. Yeah, I
know, but.
Um, so, you know, we're gonna
get as far along as we can
as I, I, I do wanna get at least
our staff some time at the
party. I know most of the rest
of us are all fuddy duddies and
we're not going, I suppose you
are.
Let's get the um committee sub
passed out, please, Mea passed
out.
Try to exit the room as quickly
Represent him a Queen, we are on
House Bill 256.
Ma'am House 256 you've heard
before. This is addresses the
bill introduction deadline at
our last meeting, we discovered
that there was a constitutional
requirement that we have a
statute, so I can't just repeal
the statute. What this does is
set uh the bill introduction
deadline before the final 15
days of a session, which I think
is a period of time that works
for a 60 day session, a 30 day
session, or potentially a 45 day
session. Now that I'll answer
any questions.
Um
I think people will remember we
talked about this bill before we
um gave some input.
Representative McQueen went back
and reworked it, so we're
looking at a committee sub that
adjusts to some of the concerns
that were raised, um, for that
reason, I'm not gonna go back to
the audience, we already did
that, maybe 10 days ago or so, I
can't remember exactly recently.
OK.
Any um questions for
Representative McQueen.
I, I just, and I, I believe I
was here for that discussion,
but I don't remember it. Please
forgive me.
So you reworked the bill, madam
Chair Representative.
And I'm looking at the, I guess
the, the new language would be
after the 15th day prior to the
expiration of the session as
specified in Article 4, Section
5. So,
The bill introduction.
Deadline
would be
15 days into a session.
Madam Chair, Speaker Martinez,
no, it would be anything but the
last 15 days of a session. And
if you think about it,
You know, a lot, you know, bills
getting introduced in the last
two weeks of the session, it's,
it's hard to get that passed.
And we have dummy bills anyway.
So we have a work around the
fact that we have an
introduction deadline in
statute.
I
Weird. Like there's no need for
it. We also have a rule.
So I'm just, the, the problem if
you look at the the uh strike
through language. The problem is
that we have a statutory
deadline of 15 days into a
session and even numbered years.
So if we switched our sessions
to 45, 45, that's potentially a
problem.
The existing statute also uses
the term legislative day.
Which, as you know, is, we think
that's something different, but
it's not defined either in
statute or in our rules.
Mm
OK, so Madam Chair, this bill
will not impact generic bills.
It wouldn't impact any of that.
Ma'am, cheer Speaker Martinez.
They still don't understand
that, but OK.
Anyone
Else we can.
Well, we can talk about is
changes.
Anyone else wish
grill.
Queen. Oh, OK. Yeah.
Representative Bay does learning
that he is the one to grill.
Yeah, OK.
Seriously.
Madam Chair, just to clar
clarification. So the point of
doing this in statue is extend,
you want to extend the amount of
time that we have to file or you
want it to be in alignment with
some of your other HJRs, is that
the purpose of this?
Me chairs and Romero. The point
is we have this existing
statute, which no one really
knew was out there until an
analyst found it.
That says in even numbered
years.
We can only introduce bills in
the 1st 15 days of a session.
So if we do have a a 45 day
session.
That's a problem. So I'm just
trying to anticipate that
problem
and clarify that's what I was
thinking
if he gets his other.
I, yeah,
OK, I get it. Thank you, madam
holding us hostage.
Yes, yeah.
It's just like his.
It's Friday afternoon, we're all
getting a little punchy, I, you
know, let's be real. OK.
Um, so let's get, let me get
everybody under control here,
um, including myself, so we, any
questions that are real
questions or comments on the
bill. Does anyone want to make a
motion?
Madam Chair, I'll move it.
Well, remember
the deal here, we're getting
tired. It's a do not pass some
of it do not pass on House Bill
256 and a due pass on the
strategy of how of committee
substitute for House Bill 256.
OK, we have a motion. Who second
it's out you representative of.
Yes, I did. OK, you're making
amends, OK.
Um, so we have a do not pass a
house bill 256, but I do pass on
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 256,
Romero and Abeta were the movers
in the seconder, um, will you
call the roll please, thank you,
Madam Chair. Representative
Abeta.
Yes, and I wanna explain.
We're gonna get a statue on that
pretty soon.
Rip
Representative Chavis.
Just kidding. Yes.
It's just brutal.
Yeah, we are.
I'm gonna take my gavel out
pretty soon.
Oh,
OK,
you know, we're all
getting
representative Hall.
Yes.
Representative Hochman V. Hill.
Yes
Representative Martinez.
Speaker Martinez, yes.
Representative McQueen, yes.
Representative Reeb, yes.
Leader Sapansky. Madam Vice
Chair.
Madam Chair.
Yes, Madam Chair, you have a do
not pass on House Bill 256 but a
do pass on House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 256.
My, um,
Hope is we can conclude by 6:30,
so the question is.
If
Which would you prefer to go
first based on that kind of a
deadline. You have a 100 bill
party and it's not just for us,
there are other people in the
room.
And which would you rather go
first, the horses or the gas?
I, I would, I would do horses.
I
knew you were gonna pick the
horses, cuz I know he's an
animal lover just like I do have
the staff of our natural
resource agencies here, so I'm,
I'm hopeful horses go quickly.
OK. All right. All right, folks,
we're on.
House Bill 284.
284.
Free roaming horses and
livestock.
Ma'am Cherry, you're ready for
my explanation
we are passing out a sub.
OK, you can start your
explanation. So, ma'am, members
of the committee, uh, this bill
addresses free roaming horse
issues does not solve those
issues. The basic issue with
free roaming horses is we have
too many free roaming horses. So
this bill does 3 things. It
creates a mechanism for adoption
or relocation.
If you have a good home or a, a
qualified horse facility
preserve.
To move the horses to.
It provides for birth control.
For the horse herds, so they
stopped reproducing.
And it prohibits the slaughter
of the horses.
And that's what it does and with
that we'll stand for questions.
All right, um, still we have the
public comment thing, so those
in the audience wishing to
oppose the bill, please, um,
approach the gentleman um with
the um microphone.
Um, here he is. Sorry, sir. And
You have a minute, Madam Chair,
committee members. My name is
Tom Patterson. I serve as
president-elect of the New
Mexico cattle Growers
Association.
HB 284 addresses one aspect.
Of the problem at issue here.
People who elect not to care for
their horses and release them,
typically by just dumping them
out in the woods where they're
wolf bait.
Cattle growers has worked with a
sponsor. He is genuinely
improved this bill as it moved
along.
When we received the amended
bill early this morning, we
immediately reviewed it and sent
him some suggested changes. He
said no changes before the
hearing today we're willing to
continue to work with them. This
is a mild opposition, but until
we address some key points, we
have to stand in opposition.
Thank you. Thank you.
Um
Opposition
Thank you, Madam Chair James
Borough tribal member from the
Pueblouake,
uh, the wild horse and burrosac.
Protects wild horses and burrows
from capture brandy and
harassment or death. It also
considers them as integral part
of the natural system of public
lands, and I believe this bill,
ma'am, would do two things uh on
the act of one would be captured
and the other would be
harassment of these.
Also, ma'am, um, you take a look
at uh.
The, uh, the wild horses in New
Mexico, the uh Pacitas areas
where most of these complaints
or 90% of these complaints are
coming from, um.
You take a look at what's going
on in there, people are moving
into the horse's domain and the
horses having to scoot over so
that people can move into their
domain.
And they're wild horses, they
know how to live in the wild,
they know how to protect
themselves. They, they know
everything about themselves like
we do as humans, we protect
ourselves when we're in trouble
when we're sick. They know how
to weed out a bad horse, a sick
horse.
Natural course of of of life is
the best way for them, ma'am uh
let them die naturally or uh in
the wild, man. Thank you.
All right, um.
Anyone online wishing to oppose,
I see.
Patience, O'Dowd.
Patients
Hello? Uh,
OK, good, thank you. Good
afternoon, chair Chandler and
committee. I am now president of
woe and environmental
conservation group and recently
became a civil rights nonprofit
as well. HB 284 will
unconstitutionally strip our
natural resource with the purest
DNA in the country of biologic
treasure of their scientific
preservation, so they are
already well contraceptive and
in great health. Preservation
will be replaced with the
accepted.
Look good words and in fact
allow them to be wiped out and
to be slaughtered. This goes
against New Mexico legislature's
duty, personalsuant to CA XX
section 21, the statutory
mandate of the livestock board
and the supremacy Clause
regarding the livestock
definition slash food safety,
and also our due process. I told
the sponsor these Native mega
fauna are compatible with the
365 energy corridor.
long ago. However, the LIB.
Thank you. Thank you. Um and we
have Cheryl Gibson.
In office
Hello, my name is Cheryl Gibson.
Can you hear me? Yes. Yeah.
Thank you so much for this
opportunity to speak.
I oppose HB 284. I submitted a
letter in opposition last night
at 11:57 to the committee
members and sponsors. I hope you
all will take time to look at
that letter. Um, HB 284 is a
ruse that pretends as though
it's going to prevent the
slaughter of horses, and it will
not. Those horses will be
rounded up. They will be
entrapped when no one is
watching, they will be auctioned
and mixed up with other horses,
and they will go to slaughter.
The the wild horses are a
natural resource. They are
protected by our Constitution
and this bill
is bad. Thank you so much for
your time.
Let's go to the audience.
Those in support of the bill.
Wishing to speak in support,
please um.
Stand with this gentleman and,
and it's a minute.
Thank you, Madam Chair. My name
is Catherine Crociatta. I'm a
registered lobbyist with the New
Mexico counties. We stand in
support of this bill, managing
these animals places a
significant burden on local
government and can create a risk
to the public and other
livestock and so it's it's
necessary to establish
management practices, and we
stand in strong support. Thank
you. Thank you. Anyone else in
the audience wishing to see
anyone, anyone online Susan
Harrelson.
Hello.
Right. Um, chairman, Madam
Chairman and committee. I
represent the Coronado
Stonewater Conservation
District, which is just north of
Albuquerque and includes
Placidas. The horses are doing a
lot of damage to the land out
here as they are in many other
parts of the state, so we
strongly support this bill and
we ask you to pass it. Thank
you.
Thank you, and we have one more
person, Susan, no, um, Peggy
Roberts.
Peggy.
Yes, thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Peggy Roberts, and I
live on a small ranch in
Placitas with my horses. The
neighborhood where I live no
longer has grasses for the free
roaming horses or other wildlife
to eat, nor is there water in
the creek to drink because of
the limited vegetation in the
area, some residents try to keep
the horses from starving by
feeding them. I've seen up to 50
horses that a feeding location.
At a minimum, that is $80 a feed
daily, as well as the financial
Burden, feeding locations cause
food aggression between the
bands and semi-domesticates the
horses, which increases their
desire to interact with people.
The horses caused major
conflicts between neighbors,
destroy the landscape, frighten
people, and cause property and
vehicle damage. During the 12
years I've lived in Placitas, I
have known of one or two horses
killed each year by a vehicle.
HB 284 would provide a means to
remove at least some horses from
Placitas and relocate them to
lands that can support them or
rescues where they can be cared
for. Please support the bill.
Thank you,
that concludes our public
comment.
Ma'am, chair, I just wanted to
say I'm joined by Nina Edelman
with uh Animal Protection in New
Mexico and Karen Herman with
Mount Taylor Mustangs.
Committee, um, questions,
comments.
Madam Chair, representative
experts in New Mexico and I'm
pretty well, we have a big wild
herd up near the Carson and
having growing up here.
How, I mean
I understand the concerns of
those who are opposed to it.
I've also seen horses die of
starvation and it's horrific.
So, but part of the argument
here is not, is it also not to
deal with the the wild Mustangs
that have been.
In our state for decades, not
just.
Horses
Dumped by irresponsible.
Owners
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, um, Representative
Paul, so we have
Our existing law, which is
being, which would be repealed
by this act has language about
Spanish colonial horses.
In DNA testing and actually
tasks a museum associated with
UNM is being responsible for
this. And like none of these
things are practical. We, we
don't have a DNA standard for
Spanish Mustangs, um, the horse
herds have mixed and inner bred
for years. Um, we, we don't have
some, you know, pure creature of
noble heritage out there that's,
uh, you know, roaming around.
We, we have a bunch of horses
that don't get enough to eat and
are damaged.
the
Adam sure I guess that was
probably my point in the
question.
Unfortunately, when you run out
of resources.
Euthanasia is occasionally.
The only
Solution, when you find an
animal that's down and out,
horses have.
Particularly, I own them. I know
I feed them. Trust me, I know.
If particularly uh.
Especially domestics that have
been turned out.
Their stomachs don't take a lot
of wild food.
Like a Mustang, so I think we
would have to understand.
That you probably can't save
them all, but that is it correct
in saying that this is not a
bill that's designed to just go
out and knock off the horse or
euthanize the horses, Madam
Chair.
Me chair in Paul, absolutely
not, um, you know, this, this
bill is meant to address the
population in a humane and
thoughtful manner, you know, so
the only horses that would be
removed would be horses that
Uh, could be relocated.
And then, of course, the, the
birth control, which is done by
darting the mayors.
Uh, from a distance, you know,
to try to keep the horse herds
from reproducing, you know, so
we, if we have this population
pressure, we're just trying to
reduce the pressure.
Madam Chair, my understanding is
representative that this would
be done by our livestock board.
And that they are in concurrence
with this, uh, Representative
Madam Chair.
Man chair represent Paul
actually not, um, it is set up
in the bill. It would be done
through contracts with uh local
governmental entities, cities,
counties, soil and water
conservation districts and these
uh wild free roaming horse
experts, uh, the livestock Board
would draft the rules and
administer the rules, but would
not be responsible for either
the birth control or the
relocation.
And Madam Chair, just quickly, I
don't wanna beat this to death,
um.
The oversight board of, is there
anyone overseeing, I mean,
I'm kind of anti-committee to
see a committee over another
committee.
But
That being said,
The this board, is that gonna be
made up of people who I, I read
the definition of someone who is
a
As a
Expertise with equines.
Um
Is that going to be strictly
enforced just so we don't get
someone on that.
who makes a claim they're an
expert, and then just is trying
to clean up the neighborhood
because they're doing damage,
Madam Chair.
So ma'am, chair represents all
the livestock Board, which is
already constituted with with
implement the rules, people
would apply to that board to be
recognized as an expert. There
would be specification of uh
experience and qualifications,
and they would review those and
and create register someone as
an expert.
Very good, thank you, Madam
Chair.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative,
just as a question, and I know
that this is proposed through
the rulemaking process, but
there's concerns from our
community about.
Um, I think what we heard in
the, um, against sort of
situation is that
The systematic euthanasia
euthanizing of horses is like
the biggest concern, right that
Boitas has this problem, but now
statewide we're going to be
enforcing these rules, um,
across the board for wild horses
that roam everywhere, um, so
Madam Chair Representative, is
there protection within the
rulemaking that isn't that we
understand at what point
population control is.
Maintained or decided rather
than just knowing that this is
going to be a systematic.
Ma'am Cherry ribs and Romero,
the the only allowance for
euthanasia in this bill is for
um horses and uh
There's language in here. I'm
not finding it, um.
horses in particularly poor
health.
It's on page 10.
Um, a horse determined by
veterinarian license practice in
New Mexico to suffer from a
medical condition that
significantly impacts the
horse's quality of life and
cannot be recently treated.
That's the only way the horses
would be euthanized and that the
bill actually uh prohibits
slaughter.
Um, ma'am, chair, uh, Romero,
euthanasia is used for a sick or
injured horse, slaughter is
typically used either simply to
call the herd or sometimes for
processing the horse into other.
things like dog food.
OK, Madam Chair, Representative,
the other question is on the
striking of the protection of
the American wild horses versus
the wild Horse and Burrows Act.
Um
I understand that
I'm trying, I'm trying to go
back and forth between the
original bill and just
understand what was removed from
that act and the protection, and
again, this being like a
long-standing tradition in our.
Uh, rural communities to protect
the wild horse. I'm just
curious, um, what we're changing
as it responds to federal.
of the previous bill.
A just striking all that, or do
we bring it back, Madam Chair.
Ma'am Romero, of course, we're
not changing any federal law
because we don't have the
authority. There's a federal uh
act covering wild horses and
bros, and we're not touching
that.
Uh, horses, uh, this only deals
with horses on state and private
land, uh, what we are repealing
is the current uh version of
77-18-5, which talks about
Spanish colonial horses, even
though there's no standard for
that, it talks for DNA testing
for Spanish colonial horse
horses, even though there's no
standard for that, and it tasked
the mammal division of the
Museum of Southwestern Biology
at the University of New Mexico
to oversee this process.
Apparently no one ever asked
them.
And they don't actually do this.
So we have a statute on the
books, which prevents any humane
rational management of free
roaming horses and one of the
main benefits of this bill in
addition to relocating some
horses, adopting some horses,
uh, birth control, one of the
main benefits is getting rid of
this unworkable statute. Thank
you, Madam Chair. I just, I, I,
this is a new issue to me, um,
and I know our community has a
lot of heartburn about it. I
can't support it today.
to just try to get my head
wrapped around this since
they're how this will work.
Um, but for that, man I'm sure,
um.
Well, I think it is that this
only applies to state and
private lands in the state. It
will not obviously affect
federal lands, it will not um
affect soccer coming from, but.
To me it's try to address this
problem, I.
I, I represent a little piece of
Sandoval County, so I did get
them, but um there are a lot of
horses congregating and.
Um, we're not managing the
populations, and I just think
it's more humane to try to
address it in the way that um.
Instead of us.
Just kind of
You know, kicking the can down
the road cause I've been here
Yes, thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative of Beta.
Representative Chavis.
You're so quiet now we assume
there's a boat when there is no
boat.
Yes, and I really do want to
briefly explain.
Representative Chavis. Yes.
Representative Hall. Yes.
Representative Hochman V. Hill.
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
Speaker Martinez, yes.
Representative McQueen.
Representative Reeb.
Leader Sapansy.
Madam Vice Chair. No.
Madam Chair, yes.
Madam Chair, you have a do not
pass on House Bill 284, but I
do.
Do pass on House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 284.
OK.
Oh yeah
Thank you, chair. Thank you,
Representative McQueen. Um, I
just want to say that this a
huge issue in my district, and I
do have
Multiple jurisdictions, but I
look forward to seeing the
results of this and.
How well it works
Neighboring communities
That are under other
jurisdiction.
Eugen. Thank you.
You, um
So where we're at is I'd like to
shut down at 6:30, um.
For reasons already stated, so,
um, we can start hearing the
bill if it's simple, then.
For good, if not, we can pick it
up.
Maybe finish it off tomorrow
before we do the, um, we have
about 5 kind of CYFD um child
welfare type so.
Madam Chair, this is a simple
bill. Oh yeah.
Um, ma'am Chair, uh, what this
bill does is put in the statute,
uh, basically the core element
of our existing methane capture
rules. It's a little bit, um.
Uh, backcast word, um, the, um,
we already have the rules. The
rules are in place and this bill
puts in the statute the core
element, the 99% capture. It
does not seek to change the
rules in any way.
It just seems, it just seems to
put them into our statutes, so
they are more durable in the
future. And with that, we'll
stand for questions.
OK, let's in.
OK, and it's a real bill. It's
not a sub, great, um, let's go
to the audience. Anyone wishing
to speak in opposition to the
bill, please step forward and or
next to this gentleman here and.
Each of you can have a minute.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. I'm Ashley
Wagner, the vice president of
government affairs for New
Mexico Oil and Gas Association.
We represent over 200 member
companies.
Nimoga opposes House Bill 258
because the bill is unnecessary.
During the water and Natural
Resources Committee in October,
New Mexico Environment
Department and the Energy,
Minerals and Natural Resources
Department gave a presentation
on waste rule progress.
88% of the operators who
reported in July 2024 had
reached the 98% gas capture rate
even prior to the 2026
requirement.
They found that there have been
significant reductions in
venting and flaring in
comparison to production
increases, especially in the
routine venting and flaring
areas which has decreased by at
least 77% since 2018.
You to date gas capture
percentages have.
Percentages have increased
slightly, even though production
increased 8%, showing operators
are paying more attention to
infrastructure and takeaway.
There has also been substantial
work in the reporting areas
where operators were not
properly reporting their gas
losses.
Please oppose. Thank you. Thank
you. Yes, sir.
Thank you Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Mike Miller,
Permian Basin Petroleum
Association.
In addition to the
Reasons that were stated by Miss
Wagner, uh, this bill is not
fully considered existing
infrastructure limitations.
House Energy Committee amendment
removing the exemption for
pneumatic controls poses an
issue since the access to
electricity in the Permian makes
this a problem to electrify
controls mean using diesel
powered generators which are not
covered under this bill but do
add to uh emissions. So for
those and other reasons we
oppose this bill right now.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Jim Winchester, with
the Independent Association of
New Mexico, which is a fancy way
of saying that uh I probably
represent small oil and gas
producers. Um, this 98% gas
capture rule is a is a major
state regulation on our
industry, and it took 3 years of
stakeholder input to get that in
administratively passed. It is a
very highly technical rule. It
required equipment upgrades,
millions of dollars for our
members, but a rule is a rule,
and
So those upgrades have been made
for the most part in good faith.
The problem here is that this
bill does not simply codify or
rubber stamp if you will, that
that regulation.
Without discussion, without a
stakeholder process, this bill
does make substantive changes,
costly million dollar changes.
In short, it's another
unfortunate example of moving
the regulatory goalposts which
breaks good faith and hits our
small producers the hardest.
Please stand respectfully
opposed. Thank you. Thank you
and let's go online.
I will take a.
More than a minute in in
opposition on Adrian.
Good evening, good evening,
Madam Chair Chandler and members
of the committee, Aidan Gomez
with the Greater Albuquerque
Chamber of Commerce Commerce.
I'm here today to oppose HB 258,
as we read in the legislation
this bill codifies what pretty
much in OCD, OCD rules already
based on recent data, 88% of
operators are in compliance as
it is, and the OCD has tools to
force the remaining number. This
rule is working. The industry
has been very successful at
capturing natural gas and we
have
Every reason to believe that
innovation will continue as it
improves profitability.
We urging no vote on HB 258.
Thank you.
Online
Don't see anyone, anyone in
support in the audience, um
please raise your hand.
and step forward. Madam Chair,
members of the committee, my
name is Travis Kellerman. I'm
the senior climate policy
advisor for the governor.
I'm here standing in support of
HB 258.
This does codify the 98% gas
capture rate, the requirements
of the very successful 2021
methane waste rule.
It includes both wells and
gathering systems.
We've reduced methane by 72%
since our 2005 baseline
according to the latest GHG
emissions inventory.
And in 2023, as the industry
celebrated, we reduced methane
by 26% alone, fugitive methane
reduction.
So let's keep it on track. This
is about codifying our nation
leading methane rule, the same
rule that the federal government
based theirs on.
We can do that in New Mexico.
This is a governor priority. I
urge your support. Thank you.
Thank you.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Tanis Fox.
I'm a lawyer with Western
Environmental Law Center. Two of
the governor's, uh, first
climate initiatives were to pass
the methane waste rule and the
ozone precursor rule. Both these
rules reduce methane emissions
from oil and gas operations, HB
2258 tracks the requirements in
place in the methane waste rule,
although HB 258 is amended, does
not accept quote normal
operations.
pneumatic controllers and pumps.
Industry objects to deleting
this exception. However, it's
very important to understand
that the ozone precursor rule
establishes tight controls over
pneumatic controllers, new
controllers must have an
emission rate of 0.
Existing controllers are
scheduled for replacement with
non-emitting controllers. So
pneumatic controllers are
subject to strict emission
requirements, deleting this
exemption should not be
problematic for current
operations. We urge you to give
HB 258 a due pass. Thank you.
Thank you. Now, let's go online,
those wishing to speak in.
It
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee,
apologies for being remote
today. It's the elementary
school dance.
I want to stand and support of
this legislation and remind
people that although rules go
through a very stringent process
with experts and
cross-examination, they're
easier to roll back then.
guidance that placed in law, and
we're seeing that federally
right now. In fact, just
yesterday, Congress voted roll
back the emissions waste
standard and fee and we're
concerned that in a future
administration, that industry
would push to roll these rules
back. In fact, the independent
petroleum producers sued to stop
these rules and rules similar to
them, and our
concern is that given that oil
and gas and the associated waste
belongs to the New Mexico public
and is extracted off public
lands that the legislature and
administration.
All right, um, Charles
Goodmacher.
Charles
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you very much
for this opportunity. I'm
Charles Goodmacher, uh,
registered lobbyist speaking on
behalf of Earthworks, uh, and
thanking the sponsor very much
for this bill. It is much
needed.
Camilla basically took, took,
uh, stated very eloquently what
I was going to say about
administrations change. We all
know that, so the current
regulations could be repealed
easily as the federal example
shows, please support this bill.
Thank you.
Thank you, Charles. OK, back to
the sponsor. Madam Chair,
thank you. It's it's a good
example of the pit rule, which
was developed under, I think the
Richardson administration, it
was simply undone by the
Martinez administration. We're
just trying to put the the basis
for the, the current rule, the
core of the current rule in the
statute, that's all.
Yeah
Just real quick. Thank you,
Madam Chair Representative for
this very timely piece, um, I, I
think it's just important.
That when we're talking about
methane, the, the clarity that I
received this last year on the
fact that we're talking about.
Something that is a like a
multiple polluter. It's not
carbon dioxide. It's, it's like
a 117 or to like over 100 what
carbon dioxide does and so I
just, you know, when we're
focusing on like a narrow rule
like this, um, and what it uh
perspective of what we're
emitting in New Mexico as we
continue to see methane
emissions continue to go up in
our state. This is really
critical, um, and I just wanna
thank you, anyone else wishing
to come?
I'd be happy to make.
OK. Um, I do pass, wait, I think
on this one.
Oh yeah, OK, sorry.
Good for you, representative.
Um, we have a do pass motion on
house built tended previously
amended,
made by, please. Yes, thank you,
Madam Chair. Representative of
Beta. Yes.
Representative Chavez? No.
Representative Hall.
Mhm
Representative Hochman V. Hill.
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
No.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen. Yes.
Representative Reap.
Leader Sapansk. Yes.
Madam Vice Chair.
Madam Chair, yes, Madam Chair,
you have a due pass on House
Bill 258 as previously amended.
I'm sure I'd like to thank my
expert Ben Shelton.
General counselor who I, who I
failed to as well.
Thank you very much very clear
oh, OK, so tomorrow we start at
8:30, everyone, we have a pretty
full, you know, where you've got
CYFD child, yup.
Um
So,
you know.
Who's they? and who's that day
I'll have like yogurt and fruit.
How's that? We are eating too
many burritos
OK, well, everybody have fun
who's going to the party.
