Thank you madam chair calling
the roll.
Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane.
Yes I'm here.
Mr speaker.
Representative McQueen
Representative Nibert there.
Representative read here.
Representative Rehm here ma'am
thanks of.
Representative semansky.
Madam vice chair here.
Madam chair here.
Madam chair you have a quorum
thank you.
We're gonna be starting with
house bill Levin before we do
that I'd like to.
Procedure.
First of all I I want to remind
people that this is a meeting to
discuss discuss to bills and
we're here to talk about the
substance of the bills we are
interested in your comments as
to the substance of the bills.
We expect everyone to be
courteous and respectful of one
another and that means no.
Erecting comments on one or
another side directing comments
on elected officials questioning
their motives or judgment or any
other kinds of despairs
disparaging comments if I have
to I will just the attendance
two asked people to leave for
not following who are not
operating within those
parameters.
There are no recordings
photographs
without permission of the chair
so I would ask you to refrain
from using your phones to take
pictures or to record the
proceedings I would know that we
record all of our proceedings
and anyone who wishes to watch
the webcast can do so after
after the meeting
and with that I will turn the
floor over one more thing the
way we will do public comment is
I'm allocating twenty minutes to
each side for public comment.
I will pick on people in the
audience as well as online I'm
going to allocate six minutes to
those individuals online and
it's actually twenty one minutes
so we'll we'll have have the
rest of the time sixteen minutes
that right whatever for life
COVID two minutes per person but
there's no reason why you need
to use two minutes if you don't
if you're if you don't need to
and I point out if you don't use
two minutes that means there are
more people who can speak to the
issue whichever side you wish to
comment on so use your time
judiciously but when the twenty
one minutes is up I will ask the
I will ask you all to
sit down and we will then move
to discussion of the bills
themselves amongst the committee
members I hope I've been clear
with that I turn the floor over
to Representative Romero and we
are on house bill one hundred
fourteen day waiting period for
firearm sales thank you madam
chair thank you members of the
committee house bill one hundred
is of waiting period bill for
the possession of fire arms in a
common sense way to prevent
impulsive volatile acts of gun
violence this bill does two
things and we look at the
demographics of New Mexico and
the high rates of suicide that
are plaguing our children in use
today this helps with access to
a firearm by imposing a waiting
period for those in those
volatile situations the second
portion and reason for this bill
is for.
Basically background checks
loophole that currently exists
where if after three days on the
background check has not come
back with a clear clear answer
as to whether or not this person
should have a firearm
unfortunately the of default
mechanism today is to present
this that person with a firearm
after those three days of not
hearing back there is an immense
backlog right now of those types
of background checks that are
being done in which case this
creates a massive loophole for
those who should not have access
to this farm this waiting period
ensures that that background
check is done and that folks can
get access to their firearms in
a in a fair and reasonable way
so with that madam chair just
like to introduce my expert This
Is Maranda fiscally with New
Mexicans to prevent gun violence
and she'll be helping with
with any expert testimony and I
don't know if you want anything
thank you okay thank you madam
chair with that will stand for
questions thank you so now we'll
go to the audience and what I'd
like to do is first do the
online folks just because I
think it'll be easier to manage
and then we'll go to the
audience for those opposing the
bill so those of you with your
hands raised and of.
Please put your hand down if you
are in favor of the bill so if
you are in opposition to the
bill I would like to see your
hand raised and I just want to
be clear we are going to be
allocating up to six minutes
four comments through the video
participation mechanism that we
have in place and we will be
timing it and when we're done
with the six minutes we will
shut down the video portion of
the commenting and then we'll go
to the life portion of the COVID
I just want to be clear so
everyone's understands what
their expectations should be
with that I see a person we're
starting.
I see a person named Tim white
Timothy white you have up to two
minutes.
Thank you madam chair
You might just this.
So you're not looking at my.
Or maybe that's there's no way
to do that
I I appreciate the opportunity
to address the committee heard
as an expert witness previously
on other matters before this
committee Senate Judiciary.
And.
Many others in the past I simply
want to say as an individual who
legally possesses a number of.
Firearms that would be made yeah
we go are subject to this
waiting period
That.
These bills that are before the
legislature right now that
having that there.
So called addressing assault
weapons or country control
measures.
I'm I would implore the members
of the committee to either read
or have someone review with you
the Heller and Grune U. S.
Supreme Court decisions because
these bills will not withstand
constitutional attack.
Once they're signed if they're
signed and all of the time that
has been spent by these
committees by the Senate by the
house
is going to be wasted it's
they're not going to withstand
attack under those two recent US
Supreme Court cases.
And we will then further waste.
Thousands and thousands of
taxpayer dollars trying to
defend these bills that are
really DO at on I would just
urge the committee not to pass
this bill and not to pass the
next bill that's up on the
agenda having to do with this so
called assault weapons and
trying to ban standard capacity
magazines thank you.
Time.
Thank you Mr why.
Next person on the list as a
person name.
Stephen white and would you take
your hand Mr Timothy white.
Stephen white.
You have up to two minutes.
Madam chair and committee
members my name is Stephen white
from Farmington Representative
about a thousand members of our
local gun club and other people
that are interested in second
amendment and speaking today to
you as a retired soldier and
officer opposing H. B. one
hundred and one a one I won't be
present any firearms or crime
faxes appears to me the facts no
longer matter only the political
agenda.
If this bill one of a litany of
freedom destroying gun bills
passed into law violating
presented at the provisions of
state and federal constitutions
including not only the right to
bear arms but the protections
against bills of attainder ex
post facto laws and prior
restraint.
Then you as representatives of
the people are in violation of
the oath you took.
If I as a soldier haven't taken
the same rules were to violate
my oath of office I would be
subject depending on the
severity of the infraction to a
maximum penalty of death.
You is legislature's on the
Legislature tors on the other
hand
Sir when we get to the bill
into the refuse to not
this size the elected officials
please speak to the bill.
Before you send of the
unconstitutional infringements
of this legislature so
degenerate diligently working
toward that would result in the
forfeiture of my rights and
freedoms.
The same rights and freedoms of
all citizens for which I was
then and even now willing to lay
down my life to protect.
How can I trust and respect have
trust and respect for
legislature's who ignore their
oaths of office to me and our
citizens madam chair committee
this concludes my state.
The next individual online is a
person unmuted said the average.
Afternoon members of the
committee again my name is of
average I am a firearms
instructor as well as a law
abiding citizen who owns
firearms
this bill would not do anything
to under the criminal
Criminal individuals from
obtaining firearms I say this
from experience as a law
enforcement officer I have never
reciprocal to obtain a firearm
through legal means they bought
it off the street or obtained it
through a burglary or some other
illegal transactions.
it is unconstitutional.
That includes our state
constitution and also the US
constitution so I urge the
committee to not pass either one
of these bills and you would
make criminals out of law
abiding citizens.
And I want to just need to think
about that.
I yield the rest my time to the
next person.
All thank you we have about
enough time for two more people
at most
online Kenneth.
Blaze Bledsoe.
Keefe of excuse me Keith.
Let's believe believe so police
you if you could state your name
I appreciate it.
Keith.
K..
You need to view yourself.
All right we'll go to the next
person.
There's a person named Lou we
Sanchez.
Louis St.
Yes ma'am I'm on thank you and
thank you thank you madam
chairman so my name is Louise
Sanchez and the owner calibers
indoor shooting ranges
with both of these bills that
we're looking at right now the
fourteen day waiting period I I
truly feel just as not only a
gun owner but looking across the
sole rights this as it's been
stated before this will do
nothing as far as a cool down
period end and you know probably
in state New Mexico putting and
pacemakers this is truly gonna
probably make felons and a half
of all New Mexicans if these
bills are instituted also the
our oil.
The the next incapacity if you
look at that server on house
bill one hundred so that's okay
okay one hundred so a fourteen
day waiting period as the
officer had said before earlier
and then I'll yield we are not
one fireman we're the largest
buyer of dealerships in New
Mexico no one has ever ever
gotten a firearm and went out
and committed a crime it's just
doesn't happen I mean will it
could happen absolutely it can
but the fact matter is this is
on constitutional goes against
both the New Mexico constitution
and the U. S. constitution so I
would I would hopefully and I.
This fairly faithfully I hope
that this will bill will not
pass as it does go against all
those that federal officials and
state officials take to protect
our constitutions thank you
madam I ate give back my time
thank you we have time for one
more online and then we'll go to
the audience Nate eski.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee it seems that
there might not be a good
understanding of the background
check process and since that so
central to this bill I want to
ensure there's not
misinformation around the topic.
Someone goes into a gun store
lost by farm they fill out a
background check for the store
then contacts the FBI national
instant criminal background
check system next either online
or by phone I'm not aware of any
gun store New Mexico does not
phone service next draw from
three databases in an individual
who the flags as a prohibited
person or not before the check
is even initiated.
As the name indicates the check
is instant in fact the justice
department mandates an immediate
determination rate of at least
ninety percent the gun stores
told immediately whether they
can proceed with the sale or if
they must not once the check is
done there's no system in which
the purchasers I for follow up
if this bill made the store hold
the gun the person staff changed
her prohibited person during
that two week period the FBI
would not reach back out to the
gun store to tell them that they
made a decision at the time
check one rare is the sponsor
says delays by federal law the
FBI has three business days to
make a final determination after
which the guns for can proceed
with the sale the FBI will soon
after three days gonna sold and
gone regardless of state law
they won't bother contacting gun
store they also work for the
local law enforcement get the
gun back if the sale should have
been to not send a retrieval
order to ATF were then
responsible for treating got ATF
rarely does so for this among
the other reasons stand in those
upcoming oppose the bill thank
you thank you so now we'll go to
the audience and we're on those
wishing to speak in opposition
so let me just explain we have
attendance with microphones that
you all will raise your hands
and I will call on someone and
then he they will hand the
microphone to you you'll get up
to two minutes and when you're
two minutes just concluded I ask
that you terminate your comments
and give the money back to the
attendant
so please raise your hands if
you wish to be acknowledged okay
so the gentleman here in the red
shirt.
Chair members of the committee I
understand that one of the
reasons cited for this bill is
people you know having fourteen
day cool off period if they're
gonna maybe commit suicide with
a firearm now if that person
already has a firearm and
they're getting a subsequent
firearm I would argue that that
sort of undermines the reasoning
for that and I don't see any
exception that bill for anybody
who already has a firearm
purchasing a subsequent firearm
in fact a cool off period would
not really affect that now
respecting the constitution
though the constitution doesn't
really allow for say a fourteen
day waiting period to publish
your ideas or fourteen day
waiting period to for eighteen
year olds to vote after early
voting starts in the same sense
that it doesn't allow for a
fourteen day waiting period of
to keep and bear arms for
defense and other lawful
purposes thank you thank you.
Yes ma'am yes.
Good afternoon madam chairman
and the committee thank you so
much for hearing us today my
name is Lisa Morris first by
president of the F. R. W. here
in Santa Fe and I am speaking
today as a citizen with a
background will just in social
work and as in a background in
education
I just want to say that I don't
think that this bill
accomplishes anything in regards
to what miss Romero address
which is
she spoke of mental health
mental health issue we are
fundamentally talking about
The violence that some people
commit whether that be suicide
or against another individual.
We're talking about mental
health issues and not the gun
itself and I don't believe that
this bill in any way addresses
the the mental health issues or
the state of mind that people
may be in when they may seek out
a weapon I will tell you that
most people if they if that is
what their goal is they will
find that gun one way or the
other and much of the gun
violence and much of the suicide
that you're talking about can be
accomplished in various ways so
the person that's going to do
this we'll find a way to do it
if this is what they really
really want to accomplish they
will use a gun or they will not
use a gun.
What this bill actually does is
it criminalizes responsible gun
owners and we do not need to be
criminalizing responsible gun
owners what we need to be doing
is addressing the mental health
issues in this country and in
our state thank you very much
and thank you for my time.
Thank you I understand there's a
gentleman on the side of the
room who's in opposition is that
correct.
Okay.
We do have the money to this.
Mr.
Mr Martinez.
Madam chair of members of the
committee I'm Bob Martinez on
with the fraternal order of
police here in New Mexico with
the largest law enforcement
organization retardant active
the law enforcement officers we
stand in opposition to HB one
hundred clearly there are a lot
of issues that were experiencing
and focused on but I believe a
there's a need to look at these
this is bad public policy and we
are in opposition thank you
madam chair members of the
committee.
Thank you.
All right we're going back to
this side could we did go to the
second I'll please.
Good afternoon madam chair and
the committee my name is
Kimberly Kantor I am born and
raised in New Mexico lifelong
resident I love the state.
There are.
All the reasons in the world I
keep hearing this excuse me I
keep hearing I'm a little bit
nervous I keep hearing the same
reason over and over.
Cooling off period regarding HB
one hundred.
Cooling off so that someone
doesn't make an impulsive
decision.
Yet I haven't heard any reason
reasoning for restricting my
rights to purchase a firearm to
protect myself when I have been
violated.
When someone else should have
been practicing some kind of
cooling off period I'm very
upset about this proposed
legislation I implore you to not
give it a to pass.
I want to retain my
constitutional right to protect
myself I live alone I'm a hard
working woman I have a grown
adult the woman that I raise to
be responsible she is also a
responsible gun owner.
These do not restrict my rights
to protect myself my home has
been broken into my truck has
been stolen my car has been
destroyed at my place of work
Albuquerque is not the city that
I grew up in anymore.
Please again do not restrict my
rights to purchase a weapon to
protect myself I am already a
legally.
I already legally own and have
purchased multiple firearms when
do the background check I have
no problem with it I continue to
educate myself as a gun owner.
This will do nothing.
This will not make a difference
thank you for your time thank
times thank you
is there a Mike of.
terror mica.
Okay.
Thank you madam chair committee
members terra Mitch a state
director for the national rifle
association here in New Mexico
the fourteen day waiting period
obviously not opposition to this
bill the fourteen day waiting
period imposed on all firearm
purchases by house bill one
hundred.
Is it a rational requirement
considering that all New Mexico
gun owners or gun buyers must
pass a background check as
required by the twenty nineteen
law that you passed the
mechanics of an FBI nics check
will not be altered by this bill
no additional criminal history
information will be on earth if
this built in statute the bill
would simply delay your ability
to protect yourself and your
family
for those who would argue that
house bill one hundred provides
a cooling off period please
consider that two thirds of gun
buyers our current gun owners SO
two thirds of people buying
firearms already have a firearm
in the home nothing in this bill
would prevent an impulsive act
on their part.
Two things that the author
brought up and she was laying
out the bill one was that it was
and it the bill was attempting
to reduce youth suicide I just
want to remind the committee
that in order to lawfully
purchase a firearm you have to
be eighteen years old for a long
Madam purchase and twenty one
years old for handgun purchases
another thing that the the
author said the bill was aimed
at
At addressing was a delayed
response that a prospective gun
buyers might get from an FBI
nics check
I would remind the committee
that this bill doesn't impose a
fifteen a fourteen day waiting
period on people who are
initially denied a purchase
under next this bill provides a
fourteen day waiting waiting
period even for people who are
instantly approved by state
under state national a criminal
records check when they purchase
a gun from a dealer thank you
very much for your time thank
you for.
Hello I'm.
Over here in the gentleman in
the beard next and the third
row.
The yes yes.
Hi hi good afternoon my name's
Fred bacon I'm a retired
firearms trainer for thirty
three years and I trained a lot
of people here in New Mexico and
I just wondering up one thing in
that is eighteen US code to
forty to deprivation of rights
under color of law.
Of when you prevent when people
are prevented from exercising
their rights serve beer
penalties under federal law.
For those who do that and so
this could be something that
could come up in litigation
later on which would not be good
and I hope that you'll consider
that thank you.
Up.
Yes Sir
yes.
Madam chair committee my name is
David Leffler.
I am a refugee from the peace
loving peoples Democratic
Republic of California.
They already have a waiting
period are you speaking in
opposition and opposition okay.
I have been a gun dealer often
on for over fifty years.
Let me tell you a very short
story and one with this young
lady here all several years ago
I was sort working in a gun
store in Sacramento California
State Capitol young lady came
and she was going through a very
nasty divorce she had a
restraining order she purchased
the gun for me.
Ten day waiting period should
have picked up the gun three
days because three days later
she was dead.
She was not able to protect
yourself because of waiting
period waiting period it's kill.
Another issue as a rural gun
dealer here in New Mexico some
of my customers live over a
hundred miles away from my store
that means they would have to
travel a hundred miles to come
into a background check and then
a hundred miles home hundred
miles back for the pick up and
then hundred miles back four
hundred miles couple of days of
wasted time when the national
instant check seems to be
working all of next year waiting
period is not going to help
anybody thank you thank you.
Yes in the way back there by the
television.
Thank you madam chair committee
members I just wanted to add to
what the gentleman previously
said I was a W. here from
California for twenty nine
years.
I was there and saw the waiting
period begin at it at the time
of time and then it was
increased to fifteen days and
subsequently been backed off to
ten but I just wanted to relate
that during my time anecdotally
I never saw one instance where a
criminal was was in the least
put off of obtaining a firearm
by the waiting period what
turned out to be more like was
an obstacle placed in front of
law abiding citizens to obtain a
firearm in sometimes in a needy
fashion
with regards to the suicidal
individuals are suicidal
ideations I had a number of
cases out there that that
individual either found a gun or
found another way to to commit
suicide so I don't believe this
this gun bill here is going to
affect the right people that
we're seeking to have an impact
I think it's a no pun intended
but it's off target thank you
thank you.
All right any okay
this gentleman over here will
start coming back this way now
there's a gentleman.
In the I guess that's the fourth
row thank you.
Okay thank yes I had two
siblings Committee of side one
with a firearm and one with a
carbon dioxide in the car
started a car whether in the
garage of the both end up same
situation I suspect that though
one to committed suicide with a
firearm what would happen with
the quick about the fire I think
the fourteen day waiting period
I can see how it might stop
somebody Fritz suicide is
instantaneous thing.
A difficult fourteen days what
we go thirty I myself another
one how do we got twelve years
what the hell it's all stupid.
Thank you.
this gentleman over here.
This opened up here.
Morning madam chair for
afternoon madam chair committee
of my name is Erica owners right
to bear arms I'm also a veteran
of the military twenty four
years and worked as a paramedic
fireman for thirty three years
so I have a little bit of I
think experience to speak with
when I talk about suicides and
gun violence first off we
already now have a mandatory
waiting period for those under
twenty one it's ten days
regardless
extensive background checks have
already been talking about and
one of the other things that has
been brought up is if you do
have a restraining order taken
out against you.
You get delayed you're unable to
pick up that firearm so that
needs to be that that if piece
of information is to be put up
there.
one of the other things is like
like some of the other gun shop
owners in here up there to my
knowledge which I would through
a trace I would know about if
one of the firearms I sold to
somebody was used in a crime it
would come back to me and in six
years I have not had that been
actually nine years.
To reiterate this is been tried
in the past and other states
there's no empirical data to
support that this is in effect
on violence with the gun.
the three day loophole as the
author spoke about that is not
mandatory that's at the
discretion of the store you do
not have to turn over firearms
if you don't want to if unless
you get a proceed you do not
have to do with that that person
goes into an open status.
Again for my thirty three years
experience I've seen a lot of
suicides and I can tell you that
probably more been done by other
means than with a firearm.
I think lastly I just wanted I
think this is a field gold feel
good bill that's not gonna
complex anything of substance or
with the intent is and door
minder are US and state
constitutions states our second
amendment rights shall not be
infringed thank you thank you
that concludes our public
comment piece in those in
opposition so what I'm gonna do
now is to about six minutes
online with people who support
the bill so those of you with
their hands up please take your
hands down if you do not support
the bill we're not going to hear
people who support the bill and
I'll call on people with their
hands raised and I will let you
know concluding that part of the
could public comment so Timothy
would you take your hand down
please Timothy white take your
hand down thank you.
Adelante
Would you on mute yourself.
Adelante.
Madam chair my name is Cheryl
Harris and I did not have the
opportunity to change my name I
do not Representative Adelante
progressive caucus today
although they support this also
I'm speaking for myself I live
in Albuquerque and I believe we
have an epidemic of gun violence
on our hands nobody would argue
that I believe part of our job
as citizens and yours is
legislators are it's the health
safety and welfare of people and
the fourteen day waiting period
yes Sir one or two lives it's
been worth it are we have
approximately fifty suicides by
gun per day and about ninety gun
violence homicides per day in
America we've already had twenty
three fatal shootings homicide
or murders in New Mexico so far
this year and this has to stop
common sense measures like
making people wait fourteen days
to get it done of and I will
talk to one on one right now.
But if they work for a few
people they've been worth it the
lady talked about the one two
thirds already had it done but
that means there's one third of
the people who are buying a new
gun for the first time they
don't have one
their new gun owner and they may
be the ones that we can help by
a fourteen day waiting period
thank you very much.
Thank you we have Kathleen
mostly Kathleen.
Thank you dear.
German chancellor members of the
committee I'm a retired
community health nurse a member
of the American public health
association I lost a professor
and a colleague nurse colleagues
to gun violence and I would like
to in honor my professor who
always said the best predictor
of future performance is past
performance there's a two
thousand seventeen National
Academy of science study looking
at waiting periods over eight
forty four year period and they
found that waiting periods
reduce gun homicides by
seventeen percent and that was
looking at seventeen state done
had these waiting periods.
Not avoided roughly about seven
hundred and fifty homicides per
year and expanding to all states
would prevent an additional nine
hundred ten homicides per year
so thank you for bringing this
bill forward and please support
it.
Thank you we have D. via Shiv.
This afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Debbie ocean New Mexico
voices for children speaking in
support of hospital one hundred
house bill one hundred is
essential because it gives
individuals the precious
necessary time to reconsider
before committing an impulsive
act gun violence or suicide in
fact studies find that states
with waiting periods have fifty
one percent fewer firearm
suicides and seventeen percent
fewer murders we strongly urge
you to support house bill one
hundred because no one should
have to experience an untimely
death due to a fire thank you
for your time thank you a person
named Deborah.
Deborah.
Yes thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I want
to encourage you to vote yes on
H. B. one hundred New Mexico's
waiting period bill H. B. one
hundred gives the FBI
significantly more time fourteen
days to make sure gun fires in
the state won't threaten the
safety of themselves or others
twenty two states currently have
added a waiting period New
Mexico to join this group by
passing HB one hundred thank you
so much thank you and our last
person Janet
well let fortis Ortiz.
Janet.
Yes thank you madam chair and
committee for all the reasons
stated earlier and many more I
support house bill one hundred
and urged committee to pass it
and send it to the floor thank
you very much thank you will now
go to the audience those wishing
to speak in support of the bill
please raise your hand all right
so we'll start with this
gentleman here in the.
Jacket.
madam chair members of the
committee my name is Alan
Sanchez I'm the executive
director of the New Mexico
conference of Catholic bishops
we come not to impose but to
propose and the bishops have
been encouraged by patients in
other states that have
implemented similar legislation
to support this of the bishops
really want to make the
statement important to us into
the bishops is that we bury the
victims I want to repeat that
we've it buried the victims.
And console the morning and
grieving families these are real
people and so we urge you to
please vote yes on this
legislation.
Thank you this gentleman over
here
Good afternoon a.
Chairman and committee my name
is John McKenzie I'm in support
of this bill hi I am a veteran
Vietnam era veteran I am
familiar and gun owner and I'm
familiar with that one
interesting discussion here
so it's hard what can I say that
make a difference so we know
that there's a huge rate of
suicides and somebody said well
if they don't do it with a gun
the do it some other way the
reason the suicide rate or one
of the reasons a suicide rate is
so high in New Mexico is because
the success rate of suicide is
much higher than it is with
carbon monoxide or night for all
these other you know it's it's a
so the that's one thing.
I also want to say.
That I don't think anybody who's
in favor of this legislation.
Is claiming that it's going to
solve the problem.
Right this is a small step.
And we have other bills here
today and others proposed but
indecipherable with the federal
government abdicating their
responsibility on this issue for
the states to step up.
So
Third thing I want to say real
quickly is that the cider that
impulse in terms of crime
committing is not a factor.
anybody who I take the
Albuquerque journal.
And the Santa Fe New Mexican
read it most days and there are
yes this guy went out and bought
a gun and robbed a gas gas
station.
that that happens it does not
pretend it doesn't happen that's
not the only way anyhow thank
you very much for your time.
Thank you raise your hand
Let's go to the second room
Person in the red tee shirt.
Thank you I just
madam chair and committee I
stand in favor of this bill I
believe that eight it's like the
gentleman said before there's
not one thing that's going to
solve all the problems
mental health is something we
are addressing we're trying to
address in the state but the
fact of the matter is that there
are too many gun deaths in this
in this state in this country
and that we're losing children
and that most people that are in
a moment of crisis that doesn't
necessarily mean they're mental
mentally ill it just means are
in a mental health crisis will
sometimes though and get guns
and that outweighs the waiting
period that most legal gun
owners have to do two weeks is
nothing for somebody that just
decides to buy a gun
I can tell you I lost I
minimally family members to gun
violence my brother included and
I would like to stop all the
killing at least
do what we can it's not going to
solve everything thank you.
that person an orange.
Madam chair committee I'm Dana
Middleton from the national
organization for women and you
know I just love the statement
about there's twenty two states
have done this and I would like
to see we'd like to see New
Mexico be the twenty third state
to do such a thing because we
need to stop this and every
little thing we do on that path
has to health thank you so much.
In the raise your hand the woman
in gray.
On the same row second row gets
great.
Madam chair members of the
committee on Janet Williams and
I'm standing in support of this
bill for a a U. W. and the
league of women voters we
believe that this will help and
we want you to pass it thank you
thank you we're gonna go to the
third row New.
yes the woman in the with the
red mask.
Weka ninety at such excluded to
the hot hello everyone my name
is she's from down south most
people call me Alexis Jimenez
I'm from Rio Rancho and that's
down south so I guess that
counts
I joined as a volunteer moms
demand action ten years ago just
right after the sandy hook
massacre at that time I was
just.
Amazed to see that eighty eight
Americans were dying every day
from gun violence eighty eight
every day.
Ten years later it's a hundred
ten every day are dying from gun
violence and you know more than
half of those are from suicide
We know we can't stop everything
but we can stop some stuff and
we can certainly make it harder
for people that are ready to
hurt others or themselves so I
do stand in support of this bill
we must keep do what we can to
keep firearms out of the hands
of dangerous people immature
people or or irresponsible
people mainly children and also
especially maybe those
considering suicide we can do
things and this is one of the
things we can do and I ask you
to support the bill thank you
very much thank you who else in
the third row.
Okay no one else in the third
row fourth row.
Okay sure.
Madam chair and committee my
name is Paula McLean I'm vice
president of New Mexicans to
prevent gun violence and I
believe in baby steps we're in
support of this bill.
Thank you anyone else in the
fourth row the.
Okay and in the in the front
row.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee and Maxwell with
New Mexicans to prevent gun
violence and I just want to call
your attention to the
FIR in the New Mexico Attorney
General who is a noted that on
the ninth circuit in California
held that California's waiting
period bill did not violate the
second amendment and then also
as one of your colleagues in
fact was speaker Martinez said
in another committee hearing
that it's not the legislature's
job to pass bills based on what
the Supreme Court will do thank
you.
Anyone else wishing to speak in
favor of the bill.
All right that concludes our
public comment portion of our
agenda I'll go back to the
sponsor for any concluding
comments that you'd like to make
before we go to committing stand
for questions from chair all
right Representative McQueen is
first on my list.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair representative
a couple of questions
The gentleman said that and your
that there was a ten day waiting
period for those under twenty
one I can I can find any
reference to that you know
anything about that Madam chair
representative I'm not aware of
that law on the books that is
not something that we
It may be something a guns sales
person may impose upon
themselves but madam chair
representative on statute Madam
chair is ever more of fifty
could be a reference to.
There is a reason federal action
taken I think specifically with
regard with respect to assault
weapons could be related to that
Madam chair representative
perhaps but there's nothing in
New Mexico regarding that.
Madam chair of the Romero
This is.
It seems reasonable to me I have
a bill I'm working on the.
dealing with a difficult issue
and and I had to present to
committee and I told them it
does not solve the issue but
it's a step in the right
direction and you know I think
we do what we can when we can.
in I know that can range like
many classes to show rights are
not absolute so first amendment
rights can have a reasonable
time place and manner
restrictions I know I had to
ask.
members publicly my committee
the other day because she felt
it was her first amendment right
to show comments from back in
the room.
And.
It should be given the chance to
speak in when we asked her to
stop speaking and she wasn't
able to do that
but the one question I have on
the bill was why why fourteen
days and specifically in
reference to if we have a
circuit court not our circuit
the circuit court case law
supporting a ten day period
that seems like a period to me
what my fourteen days and not to
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative so we started
with fourteen understanding the
reality of New Mexico so we talk
about with law enforcement and
with a lot of our data systems
in our state being somewhat
challenged right when we look at
broadband we look at
connectivity we look at some of
those other issues that we may
have we basically went with the
extensive time frame because of
the fact of the matter of New
Mexico being the most rural
state so in order to make sure
that we had those that
flexibility built into that in
many ways the new the number is
quite arbitrary but it's uniform
and that it's a fortnight it's
you know fourteen days to weeks
easy to remember but that said
madam chair representative I'm I
agree with the ten day being on
the books we'd simply wanted to
make make it understood about
the reality of New Mexico and
that that whole data sharing
that Madam chair representative.
chair representative thank you
for that
A certainly I would certainly be
open to two different time
period but
as I said I do think this is
the reasonable precaution thank
thank you madam chair.
Anyone else wishing.
Your question Representative
Reese thank you madam chair
representative.
I'm just listening to all these
individuals speak and I'm having
just a really hard time
understanding how this cooling
off period really solves
anything specially the gun owner
got the guy who sold firearms a
seven nine years
the fire arms never traced back
to a crime or suicide from
something he sold so if there's
twenty three states that are
doing this can you tell me the
statistics in the states that
this is actually affecting
suicide rates or is actually
affecting crime because the
statistics I'm showing is that
ninety three percent of events
that are used in crimes are
legally purchased and so if you
could maybe explain that a
little bit that would.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative so a couple
things we look at New Mexico
specifically why this gun law
makes a lot of sense and no
disrespect to the person that
talked about you know his
relationship with the folks
purchasing firearms at his right
retail location we propose no
such data collection on upon our
retailers in which case that's
for from in many ways is is very
anecdotal to our information
that we have statistically so
when you look at New Mexico
there was a massive spike in gun
deaths in twenty twenty one
sixteen point eight percent
higher than we had had
previously and of course
when you look at the numbers
five hundred sixty two of those
fire related deaths of them
three hundred eighteen were
suicides when you look at how
suicides are happen in the in in
New Mexico and around the United
States New Mexico specifically
there are happening with
firearms we're obtaining such a
firearm in that state we talked
about the background checks
being quite instantaneous in
most cases those folks are in a
volatile situation where
typically a twenty four hour
period may change their mind
from committing that act and we
look at folks that decide to
commit suicide eighty five
percent of them using a firearm
are deadly and so when we look
at what's happening in our state
and the number one
form of super form of death it
worry should say the number one
killer of teens and children
today New Mexico is in fact
suicide we are looking at all of
our options to essentially
target how to decrease that when
we look at the statistics and
the data that we have on this
can prevents of fifty one
percent of suicides in this case
with this cooling off period the
pediatricians of America I'm
saying that wrong but.
That
research center has peer
reviewed on that statistic and
then looking at homicides
seventeen percent can also be
prevented with a law like this
it'll defer to my experts if I
missed anything Madam okay and
madam chair Representative and
at the suicides do you know how
many of these people owned guns
previously.
Madam chair representative
that's a great question I wish I
did know the truth is no all I
do know about households gun
ownership is that nationally for
around forty percent of
households own guns so when you
look at the two thirds that
already own guns of those four
that forty percent we're looking
at in particular for this law
those who are seeking to obtain
firearms in that volatile state
in the prevention of suicide
Madam chair representative
there's also studies that show
that the immediate purchase of a
firearm to be used in that and
I've suicide will be it will
happen within twenty four hours
so.
Going off period really makes
makes a huge difference are
madam chair hard time here and
I'm sorry I'm so introduction
speak more loudly so what we're
seeing is that the risk of
suicide is highest immediately
after for after the purchase of
a firearm usually a handgun
within twenty four hours says
any kind of waiting cooling off
period we can have I think if we
can save a life it might be
worth it and madam chair
representative of expert
Just in the line of work I did
for twenty five years most of
the suicides I saw or the gun
crimes I saw
really there they if they want
to commit suicide they find a
way to do it and so I I just
have a little bit of an issue
with that
I have a bigger issue with the
fact that as this lady express
and I believe it a gentleman
express that if I wanted if I I
going through a domestic
violence situation Madam chair
representative expert and I need
that gun immediately I could
have to wait for fourteen days
in order to protect myself and
obviously we've heard examples
of how people have been killed
because they are now aren't able
to protect themselves and they
have the right to do that and so
do you have a and what what do
you think about that I mean
there's their lives are just as
important as the people you were
trying to save absolutely madam
chair Representative I I don't
disagree with the concern and I
think that that bill that is not
necessarily addressed in this
bill we're we're focused on the
two portions of
and statistical analysis that we
have we have not seen any
statistical analyses on those
who haven't been able to obtain
a firearm that needed one
perhaps in that fourteen day
period we've heard anecdotes
about that when we talk about
the scourge of suicide and we
talk about those who are
receiving who are getting access
to guns because of this
background check loophole in in
this three day waiting period
through next that's what we're
targeting here if we saw you
know the the data in another way
that could address that issue
that what I've said previously
in committee madam chair
Representative is that you know
we've committed to protecting
those who are in potential of
harm's way talking to law
enforcement talking to those
those protection orders being
able to.
Put all EC when it comes to
keeping folks protected on in
committing to that and making
sure that we we you know we look
at potential issues with it put
this bill on doesn't you know
look at the counter mostly
because we don't have the data
to to back up those those
stories at this point madam
chair representative.
Madam chair representative one
other point is that when we pass
the domestic violence really
caution firearms build back in.
For you for five years ago we're
actually seeing a backlog of and
and see I see we're trying to
they're trying to figure out
what that hook up is that's
another reason why we really
want to get a fourteen day hold
so law enforcement can do more
thorough background check the
law enforcement that I've spoken
to Thorley about this piece of
legislation really thinks would
help with that as
I I just don't know how you
balance a second amendment right
to protect yourself.
And say one's more important
than the other I understand
there's gun problems but I I
just don't believe that this
this fourteen day waiting period
is going to solve any of these
issues that you wanted to solve
I don't A. sympathize with the
the fact that we do have a gun
problem in the state of New
Mexico course we do we all know
that but I don't know if this
bill is going to address what we
wanted to do and and more so
we'll just infringe on people's
rights to protect themselves and
I'm just not seeing that the
studies or the correlation
between this fourteen day
waiting period working with what
I've heard today so I thank you
for answering my questions and
all.
Representative redeem.
Thank you madam chair and madam
chair and Representative Romero
there were couple remarks made
that I want to kind of go back
over
and there was a statement that
this is going to reduce the
child suicide rate.
How is how is that going to
occur and was let's define child
as below the age of eighteen.
Madam chair representative so
today it you can't and without
parental permission you cannot
get a gun
If you're under the age of
eighteen for trials Madam chair
representative when we look at
the statistics of teens who are
committing suicide those who are
over eighteen and above madam
chair this is the number one
cause of death for that group of
I don't I don't know necessarily
how it plays out from the
different age groups per se but
because they're categorized in
that grouping Madam chair
representative this is this is
seeking to address that portion
of of teens over the age of
eighteen who are using firearms
to commit suicide.
Madam chair and Representative
Romero let me clarify something
that if you're eighteen if
you're under the age of eighteen
and you have parental consent
you still can't purchase of
firearms.
But.
What you're saying is that
suicides are more teen suicide
stand teens dying from opioid
abuse such as fat and all is
that what you're saying Madam
chair representative yes firearm
deaths for children and teens in
New Mexico is the number one
killer of two of two of children
and teens.
madam chair and Representative
Romero you said this is a
dressing the three day loophole
what are you speaking about.
Madam chair representative of
its in your FIR on page two but
just to to talk about what you
may have heard referred to as
the Charleston loophole over the
three day loophole essentially
what happens today is of course
we have universal background
checks you go in you get your
background checks in order to
purchase a firearm if the that
results of whether or not you
can obtain a firearm is provided
to you within that three day
period the
gun seller can then provide you
the firearm without the result
so when we look at what happened
in Charleston and in twenty
fifteen this this up basically.
A mass shooter obtained a
firearm with after that three
day period where he should not
have been able to access a
firearm in half and was able to
do that because the background
check had not come through and
when you look at the backlog of
background checks in both twenty
and twenty one
And we're we're seeing that in
twenty twenty five hundred
thirty five thousand background
checks could not be resolved
within three days and in twenty
twenty one four hundred sixty
six thousand plus could not
of.
Could not be produced within
three days so giving us that
extra time to make sure that
these background checks come
through we know for sure that
this person should be allowed a
firearm on provides us that
buffers well madam chair
representative.
So madam chair and
Representative Romero most of
the background checks or instant
but what let's stay on yours
let's go to page two one
seventeen.
And madam chair so that we can
address exactly what they're
addressing after background
check I would like to have an
amendment which states which
results in a delayed approval of
three days and then just dealing
with that.
Representative do you in their
suggestions R. A. Ives I believe
so I'm just trying to make sure
that it
first comports and that we are
trying to understand the
implication of that madam chair
If so again this bill addresses
to it important issues one is
that we're trying to prevent
access to a gun for those in a
volatile situation and to for
those that should not be
obtaining a firearm in which
case in either of those
situations madam chair
representative I'm not sure that
you're
Suggested amendment.
Keeps us in line with that.
In you help me understand that
you madam chair and
representative what I'm saying
is if it's the three day delay
that is the issue that we are
really at the language and here
that if it is a three day delay
than the fourteen day
kicks in rather than the end
step background where there
approved.
Madam chair representative again
for that cooling off period to
occur we would want to extend
that waiting period generally
right so again this bill with
the waiting period is looking to
those who are in that volatile
state and to ensure that they're
not going to commit an act in
that volatile state and so.
We would we want to longer time
line that's what we're asking
for this bill madam chair
representative.
So madam chair and
Representative Romero I see
Representative I hear you saying
that's not from that's not
different okay.
If you want a motion to amend
consider that.
Madam chair I make a motion to
amend so that we at the word
after on page two one seventeen
after background check which
results in a delayed approval of
three days.
Second.
Okay so.
That we're considering is adding
online stage.
Mine sectors.
After the word chat which
results in a the lady approval
of three days is that correct.
Yes madam chair okay just a
motion for consideration we're
now discussing the to amend any
further comments Representative
bring.
No madam chair I think that
addresses what they were talking
about the loophole that they're
trying to address and this makes
it specific to that loophole.
Anyone else have.
Madam chair of risen ring.
Yes Representative green have
for.
Go ahead yes so I I know I come
into the ring.
So I I
You're reading three days at the
end of a sentence that includes
fourteen days so it would
essentially make the fourteen
day waiting period only apply if
there is a delay of three days
on some background checks so
it's a little doesn't quite fit
very well there but but more
importantly you know I I think
we've heard from the testimony
the.
The the concern is largely
Suicide.
Not.
Prime and then we cited the
Charleston loophole I understand
that
Someone who is purchasing a
firearm with with suicidal
thoughts there's no indication
there's there's no likelihood
that they're going to not pass
that package.
So I I think it undermines the
well I believe is the main
purpose of this bill
and also I don't think language
quite works but thank you madam
chair and chair the reserve room
the madam chair and
Representative McQueen the.
My experience in my training my
degrees actually in psychology.
attempt to suicide is a cry for
help.
Now individuals to do suicide
that is successful have thought
it out and planned.
And I have had suicides were
people drove their car off
cliff.
So
I think that saying that we're
going to preserve pre vent them
from buying a firearm everyone
from buying firearms or picking
it up in fourteen days is.
Is not looking at the overall
problem if the person's going to
commit suicide as we heard from
one gentleman you know we had
siblings that that that and
they're going to choose whatever
method.
And typically what I found with
women they don't want to
disfigure their body and then
don't care about in suicides
that I responded to is a police
officer.
Madam chair representative Ramon
I think the Sanchez and clear
that.
They're not Representative also
side.
But
they will likely presents some
thank you.
Anyone else was.
And then.
It is
have cable.
Thank you madam chair calling
the roll.
Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane no to table.
Mr speaker yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert noticable.
Representative read.
Representative Rehm no ma'am.
Representative Sapan ski yes.
Madam vice chair yes.
Madam chair yes.
Madam chair you have six yeses
and for nose the motion to amend
is been tabled
So getting back to discussion of
the bill itself I believe you
still have the floor
Representative ring.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative Romero the other
thing.
That you said just a moment ago
of the yeah when Representative
read was asking questions this
would allow law enforcement
additional time for a background
check.
Would you explain that.
Share my experts Madam chair
representative for law
enforcement I have spoken to you
directly said that this would
help them when they're certain
background checks that could go
on to that default proceed
process this would give them
that extra time especially in
regards to domestic violence
misdemeanors under protective
orders.
Madam chair and thank
Expert let's go ahead and
described what information is in
the next system.
Is that where they're going to
get their information from.
Madam chair representative the
issue right now in New Mexico is
that the names are not going
into next in time we have a big
backlog especially after we
passed the domestic violence
formally present law Madam chair
representative.
Madam chair and Representative
Romero.
Explain to be in this bill where
it says that law enforcement
local law enforcement will do
additional checks.
Madam chair representative
doesn't say that in the bill I
think what we're trying to touch
on is that for those that are in
that backlog state that haven't
been process through Nix at this
at this moment right if you were
going to go by purchase a
firearm and you had a domestic
violence record and the record
was to be entered into next
because you now have that record
there's a backlog right now of
those the entry of those records
into the system so if that
person was seeking to have to
purchase a firearm it may not be
it man Jareth three days before
that person would receive that
background check or perhaps it
would even be come back as a as
a positive on that that person
was not allowed to have a
firearm so there's a there's
right unfortunately right now
Madam chair representative that
that data backlog and since
COVID and we've seen the strain
put on the next system from many
people purchasing firearms from
twenty twenty and twenty twenty
one there's a constraint there
coupled with the fact that Madam
chair representative we have the
this the restraining or base
budget provision in our state
law with this temporary
restraining order so those
together have constrained the
system of data Madam chair
representative.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative Romero so let's
go ahead and talk about next for
a moment let's say that they get
a delayed response in three
days.
If they haven't denied it.
The purchases approved.
So.
Adding another eleven days to
wait does not deny it Madam
chair representative as from our
data and for what the FBI
recommends and from what law
enforcement engages with within
the system they recommend having
a longer period of time because
they it flags it for them when
there's those background checks
are coming through in which case
they have to respond to that or
they should be within that three
day period since it's a time
constraint for them if that they
have more time to look through
their system to be able to
respond to that request for
that background check Madam
chair representative there's a
better chance that these for
people will be flagged as to not
be able to obtain a firearm.
Madam chair I think we'll move
on from that but let's of course
one of my questions is so you've
chosen madam chair and
Representative you chose in
fourteen days and we've heard
that California and the yield
their ten day waiting period
basically or fourteen days is
almost a third wonder why are
you proposing it to be that much
longer why not ten days for you
know like I explained three days
it's approve make it five days
Madam chair representative great
question as we as I spoke with
Representative McQueen about
this I'm on the record we
essentially chose fourteen days
because of how rural New Mexico
as we cough often talk about the
reality of our state the
challenges with data sharing
connection are different law
enforcement agencies are
different you know folks talking
to each other broadband access
at such a in order to compensate
for some of those challenges
madam chair representative we
thought we would build in a
longer timeline understanding
that it's working and Hawaii
how we would be able to do that
here madam chair representative
it's a uniform out of days
Fortnite two weeks but we would
be you know if if there was any
data to the otherwise were we
this was our suggestion madam
chair representative.
Madam chair
Representative Romero.
I think I think that there have
been some real concerns have
been brought up
by some of the opposition
domestic violence a person that
has a threat against them they
need a firearm the tech
themselves and I wonder why you
don't build in any exception to
go ahead and address those
people I mean particularly a
person that you know has a
restraining order against the a
person who's known to be violent
they should be able to go ahead
and get a farm to protect
themselves.
Madam chair I didn't hear
question but I'm happy to
respond from what we understand
about the fact that.
Those who are victims of
domestic violence more often are
those who worse seeking to have
firearms that they shouldn't
right not the victims but rather
those seeking to perpetrate
these crimes coupled with that
Madam chair representative
Is that we don't have the data
talking about the this waiting
period hindering those from
potentially needing to protect
themselves in any sort of
statistical analyses and so if
we could understand that better
versus just the anecdotal
stories that we've heard we
would be happy to to try to
build that into the bill in some
way but we don't have any
meaningful
analysis that tells us that
versus what we're presenting
today which is why we've chosen
a fourteen day waiting period
madam chair representative.
Madam chair and Representative
Romero I I do have some good
data out of Bernalillo county
that sixty six percent of
persons who were involved in
homicides had a prior felony
arrest and thirty eight percent
had a prior felony conviction
and I think that's where we need
to start focusing on our our
efforts on is the Fallon of
Madam chair in Representative is
interested we look at the
current law you know without
your twenty region here this
last summer at our courts in
correction I said how many cases
have there been.
For the transfer and they didn't
go to a firearms dealer.
The there was a share of their
and there was the court and that
question was posed to and it's
one case.
One case of Taos County where an
individuals sold a stolen weapon
to another well we figured it
out another way other than
needing this.
And this was sold to us says boy
this is really gonna prevent
People from getting guns anyway
thank you madam chair thank you
representative Representative
Nighbor.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair representative
you're a lot closer to con law
class and that I am for.
And so so my question is if I
recall correctly when when the
government.
Deals with issues concerning.
Those rights specifically
constitutional rights.
The government has to narrowly
tailor.
Whatever restrictions a desire
to impose.
Those restrictions have to be
very.
Narrowly
Pointed toward.
Protecting a legitimate public
concern.
And so I just a question madam
chair and representative number
one am I accurate on that number
two do you believe that the
language you've included here to
do that.
Madam chair representative I
believe so this doesn't top
touch on adult whatsoever
The constitutional provision I
think you're referencing mostly
because this is just a waiting
period it's just talking about
you know we're not talking about
in excess we're not talking
we're talking about being able
to structure this in a way and
you'll see the ninth circuit in
agreement is that it's a
precaution on its ensuring that
if you're actually going to tame
this in the same way that we
make sure that people know how
to drive before we give them a
license to drive a car this is a
precaution to make sure that we
are providing these firearms to
those who are not in a volatile
state and those who can lawfully
obtain one and those of the
guard rails that we're looking
at today madam chair
representative in line with our
constitutional rights.
Madam chair representative
there's a vast difference
between the granting of a
licence and the limitations are
a limitation on a constitutional
right to use or not.
Madam chair representative.
In my opinion this doesn't
conflict with that.
Not just generally you we don't
have a.
Right under the constitution to
drive a car we've we have to
have a license of.
But to to.
When we deal with constitutional
rights regardless of the the
right.
The government has to have a
very specific point of concern
that they want to address and
the language tailored to
restrict that right.
Has to specifically address that
specific concern for to pass
constitutional muster if I
recall my constitutional law
class many decades ago
and so you know my my point is a
license that we get from the
state to do something as much
different than the government
imposing a restriction on a
constitutional right would you
not agree with that Madam chair
representative the compelling
government interest in this
legislation today is saving
lives on preventing suicides
from happening for those
involved all states and
preventing those who are now
able to access firearms because
their background check hasn't
come in quickly enough within
that three day period to build
in that buffer because our data
systems are working so.
Madam chair representative the
government needs to present that
compelling interest and this is
what we believe we're presenting
today.
Well let's let me try to
understand your your answer
there we're doing this because
of delays in the background
check.
Was that part of the part of it
Madam chair representative it's
two fold the first is that those
who are obtaining firearms
without this today are often
volatile state we've talked
about suicide numerous times and
the statistics here in New
Mexico for those who are
obtaining firearms that's
compelling interest number one
and number two is that our
current data systems regardless
of our universal background
checks law is required is
creating a loophole for those
who are balance to those who
have temporary restraining
orders against them those who
may be able to actually get
around to the current universal
background check system and
obtain a firearm because there's
just not enough time to ensure
that these background checks
have been accomplished.
Madam chair representative in
addition to that the FBI experts
have recommended extending the
time to complete background
checks to reduce the number of
firearms purchased I use the
full proceeds which also of
concern is that in twenty
nineteen during the COVID
pandemic there was a huge spike
in gun sales across the country
New Mexico one of the biggest
spikes in gun sales and the FBI
was and was doing back
Representative did twenty four
thousand five hundred seventy
one background checks that is a
forty nine percent increase in
from the year before so we're
seeing kind of a perfect storm
right so we have to domestic
violence formally order we have
the surge in gun sales and I
think if the FBI is recommending
this saying we do have an issue
here that for fourteen day hold
would save lives I think it's
worth while the person who can
still own that firearms they
pass that background check they
get their firearm Madam chair
representative.
Okay so let me try to type two
thoughts together you just
mention one two thousand twenty
one there was a surgeon in gun
purchases earlier you mentioned
the twenty twenty one suicide
rate among use what was highest
so my question is how many use.
Would have been saved had this
law been enforcing the fact
Madam chair representative we've
already discussed that we don't
know the statistics surrounding
that we just know that the
number one cause of death in New
Mexico for children and teens
are firearms.
Well madam chair and
Representative I'm a bit
confused because.
You cannot purchase.
A firearm.
So how would a fourteen day
waiting period have any effect
on that.
Madam chair representative.
Perhaps if we could look at the
statistics we can get back to
you about those who are over
eighteen that are obtaining
firearms that are within that
pool of of those who are dying
of gun violence in our state
madam chair and representative
of I think Representative Rehm
mastic that aren't nearly
exactly the same question I need
to get an answer so you know I
appreciate your bill you're
interested in pursuing this but
at a certain point it's got a
little repetitive.
Madam chair and she brought up
twenty twenty one of firearm
increase it had nothing to do
with Mr Raines
discussion I was trying to tie
the two together.
Madam chair representative let's
look at at the language that
you're proposing.
Is a word transferred defined in
this section a law.
Madam chair representative
essentially built into the
transfer of firearms that we
discussed through background
checks so
my understanding madam chair
representative is that it's
In line with the rest of the
provisions of the law.
Madam chair and Representative
I've I assume that's a no and so
we would look to the normal
usage of that term in trying to
figure out what we mean by
transfer.
Madam chair you I believe so why
wouldn't we I mean.
I think we understand what it
would mean to to transfer of
firearms right and can generally
transfer would be by
relinquishing possession to
another something along those
lines current.
I'm wondering.
Why you chose that work because
sale with the defined term.
And sell in the statute.
Is the delivery or passing of
ownership possession or control
of a farm for a fee.
So my concern is.
That you could have a situation
where someone is is potentially
going to buy a firearm from
myself.
I'm not related to it's not an
immediate family member.
They want to go.
They want to go.
See how the economic works I
want to go the range and use it.
And I believe that this language
or to employed.
Prevents me from giving that to
the potential buyer without
going through this background
check process there's no
exception to that is a.
That's correct madam chair
representative we have a
universal background checks law
New Mexico.
Only for this the actual self.
I think that this language
prohibits me from.
Transferring to a.
Buyer.
I want to check out the weapon
before he actually buys it and
and so again I'm trying to get
to the the point that we have to
narrowly.
Hey Lou this to your.
What you are arguing is a
legitimate government concern
and it seems to me that there's
a much broader net cast.
Because of the word transfer
he is utilize not the word sale
and we have similar arguments
when this law was was debated
Google here or a few years ago
trying to make sure that that
the words employed were is as
specific as I can be and I use a
word sales which are not using
words so.
Madam chair representative
The.
The fourteen days.
Concerns me because we are.
Restricting a person's right to
access the firearm and this
testimony revealed there's real
instances where.
A person.
Maybe the media access to that.
Firearm.
For their own personal
protection.
So we look at this legislation.
Do we not have to weigh.
That.
Those factors against the.
Representative you're trying to
to protect.
And and if challenge with the
court have to weigh those those
factors.
Madam chair representative
absolutely but we presented
numerous statistics today as to
why we're trying to to get this
law on the books in favor of
what we're trying to narrowly
tailor to preventing suicide
preventing those from accessing
firearms in which case you know
put I'm posing this waiting
period in.
The interest of preventing those
staffs that's that's why we're
here today madam chair.
The madam chair and
representative on the other
hand.
preventing someone to.
Find work to secure the very
protection that they may need to
protect themselves which is a
right guaranteed under the New
Mexico constitution would you
agree with that Madam chair
representative I would
however we don't have any data
to back up these stories that
we've heard about these folks
trying to get access to these
kinds of the situations in which
case if we would needed to build
that in in a way that prevented
what you were talking about we
would we have no information to
inform those situations on
that's not what this bill is
doing here today.
M. Madam chair representative of
the only day that we would have
would be as if somebody actually
tried to secure economic.
And as a gentleman in the back
said.
No one comes picks up the gun
because they're dead in the mean
time and we don't want to see
those statistics.
But I would surmise that there
are situations where an
individual.
Should this pass would want to
immediately arm themselves
because of actual threats made
against that person.
Actual threats of rape physical
violence maybe death.
And that person feels like they
need to.
For the first time go out and
purchase a firearm to protect
themselves and that's a right
guaranteed in our constitution
and and yet we're going to say
you can't exercise that right
for fourteen days even though
the threat may be immediate.
Maybe that expels or.
Current spouse for.
And friendly neighbor for
Stocker will whoever may be is
making some immediate threats
and that person.
That is receiving those threats
does not have an Avenue to
immediately protect themselves
and and and I think that's a
real concern it's a concern I
have and and so
And I would hate to see five
years from now statistics that
show that we've lost some people
who would like to have protected
themselves and we have denied
them that ability that our
constitution guarantees and so
for for those reasons I am
Very concerned about this I I do
believe you need to look at your
language because I think it
probably needs to be.
Much more specific to address
the concerns you raise
Teenage suicide is not even a
factor in here
because I can't purchase are
many years so I would encourage
you to look at the language
employed and
by the.
Maybe.
Check that because of the same
does become law
It's likely almost guaranteed to
be challenged at some point in
time and the ninth circuit court
of appeals won't be the court
deciding and it'll be the tenth
circuit and
Our constitution is much
different than probably the
constitution that was decided in
California so thank you madam
chair thank you Representative.
Representative Lane.
Thank you madam chair.
When discussing the off period a
lot today I think we need to.
Going off in this room.
Take your jacket off we could
put did we could put in a word
with the speaker if you happen
to see maybe you can.
Make a call so we're all gonna
wear shorts.
So madam chair.
As I understand the presentation
there's really two rationales
for the fourteen day cooling off
period mentor the first one is
to help prevent suicide is that
right.
Enter and madam chair the second
one is to close what I
understand the risks described
as a loophole.
within the federal the FBI
background check that maybe
they're being processed within a
timely manner and that results
in some kind of an automatic
approval is that right Madam
chair representative yes we've
seen that and I would also just
add that in addition to suicide
there are statistics on homicide
that are prevented as well.
Madam chair them can you can you
elaborate on that I sure madam
chair representative if you look
at the decrease in gun homicides
comes from the LAPD states with
waiting period laws had a fifty
one percent lower firearm
suicide rate and other studies
show that the states had a
seventeen percent decrease in
gun homicide.
Madam chair.
With regard to the the closing
the loophole can you explained
for me how the number fourteen
how does achieve that.
Madam chair representative so
again today.
Next the
Back to the national background
check system that we employ in
New Mexico as a universal
background check if you request
that background check
you are to receive information
within three business days from
the next system right now
there's a backlog in addition to
the backlog there's also new
information that's being
inputted every single day from
New Mexico regarding temporary
restraining orders from gun
sales
As well as the fact that this
data coming back across the
state we don't know how well
their data systems are working
we've heard.
In this body numerous challenges
with broadband with access to
information with connectivity
between the various systems that
exist in which case based on all
of that information a fourteen
day waiting period would ensure
that the information would come
back verifiable from next within
a certain time frame and it
would also ensure that those are
verified within our state madam
chair.
Madam chair that I mean it it is
possible that even after
fourteen days you still have a
result of that is an awful madam
chair so chair again I'm I'm
struggling with this the number
fourteen.
is there any objective.
A place that the number fourteen
came from Madam chair
representative reasonably if we
were to impose brick questing in
needing the background check
regardless of that waiting
period it could take a year
could take as we said heard five
years inmates in which case
madam chair representative this
is meant to be reasonable time
frame to have a response to have
a cooling off period and to make
sure that we're meeting the
demand of
these background checks.
Madam chair and.
But I as I understand the second
rationale it's it's to keep
firearms out of the hands of
people who have no business
owning them is that right center
and so madam chair right.
If that's true then it seems to
me a better approach for closing
the loophole would be let's say
fourteen days or until the
background check is completed
whichever is longer.
Have you have you given any
thought to that approach Madam
chair representative I think
Representative Rehm just
presented that opportunity for
us to think about it coupled
with the off what we are
interested in this bill is to
prevent those who are in a
volatile situation to have a
cooling off period as we started
this discussion madam chair
representative.
Madam chair yeah and so I think
if you do that until the
background check is completed
piece fourteen days whichever is
longer I think as I
underprivileged I think it was
more around three days.
I think you close a loophole
piece.
With regard to the.
First rationale which is
preventing suicide.
Madam chair do you know what
percentage of suicides in New
Mexico.
Well actually I think how I
understood the presentation was
we we don't know what percentage
of suicides in New Mexico are
committed by someone who is
person fired for the first time
is that right.
Madam chair my experts Madam
chair representative no we don't
but we do see nationally as that
of there's a Twitter study show
that within that first twenty
four hour period that's when you
have a very high chance of
suicide we don't collect much
data in New Mexico in terms of
firearm deaths because we don't
put any money towards it but
that would be something maybe we
should look at thank you madam
chair representative madam chair
at you know I understand there
may not have a lot of data but I
would submit that New Mexico is
quite a bit different it's a
very unique state when it comes
of firearms.
you find firearm owners across
both parties
this is not really a political
issue in that sense there.
There are multiple Republicans
and Democrats that are that are
avid firearm owners and I
suspect.
There are a lot of states where
that's necessarily the norm so
let me let me ask the question
this way is there any data.
That we have that compare when
the gun was actually bought
verses when the gun was used.
To commit suicide.
Madam chair representative would
be happy to take that up for you
we don't have anything relative
to New Mexico I think it said
that but we're you know.
For those that are it without
outside of that two thirds
category seeing a firearm that
the little twenty four hour
period we've seen that fifty one
percent
for those that have a waiting
period.
Will not commit suicide if they
have that time to rethink their
situation and that's from the
American academy of pediatrics
madam chair representative.
Insurance that's really the crux
of the argument being put forth
is that.
The if we can just slow down the
mountain time from when the
farms purchased to when it's
used then that in itself will
present prevent suicides.
That more may not be true.
madam chair the the issue I
think that that I have and I
think a lot of people across the
state have is.
We're making an assertion that
that's true we don't have any
kind of objective studies to
look at what is there is
happening in New Mexico.
And that may be fine if we're
talking about a privilege
maybe it's driving at sixteen
sort of fifteen.
But we're talking about a
fundamental right yeah and and
you know that's a legal phrase
when we talk about fundamental
rights.
And so madam chair it concerns
and winced when we talk about
limiting.
People's fundamental rights.
On the basis of an argument that
we don't have any objective data
here in New Mexico.
And madam chair and a lot of the
other.
Point and maybe and I don't have
any user be repetitive so the
end of the other thing that
strikes me is.
It just feels like we're
legislating from a from a
position of benevolence.
And so I think.
Did any of everyone in this room
would if they had a magic wand
would eliminate suicide as a
possibility.
I don't think anybody.
considers that
a good thing and so it's not.
That the rationale behind it the
motive behind is necessarily
wrong.
It's that when we legislate from
a position of benevolence what
we end up doing is we we limit.
the rights of of the vast
majority of other New Mexicans.
And so it especially with when
we get to in the context of a
fundamental rights.
I don't think that's the time to
legislate from benevolence.
I think we have to have good
solid data.
to justify limiting someone's
fundamental rights.
And based on what I've heard
today I I think there are good
faith arguments but I don't see
any data to back up.
The restrictions on on otherwise
what would be a lawful purchase.
Really for the history of our
state and all of a sudden were
saying well hold on a minute.
We're going to run this number
fourteen.
And then we're gonna institute
that and if you don't abide by
it then all the sudden you are a
criminal.
Previously it was completely
lawful behavior.
And by the way it's not done in
the name to stop creating
criminals are violent criminals
it's done in the name to prevent
suicide.
and I I think that.
The majority of New Mexicans at
I don't think that they're gonna
be okay with that so thank you
madam chair.
Thank you representative
Representative Sapan ski.
Thank you madam chair
Representative
I just want to share a couple
things
You know looking through the
data myself on the suicide issue
you we have been known for
twenty years that the risk of
suicide is highest medially
after purchasing higher.
And you know do you think about
twenty years of.
That's that could have been
potentially prevented
ameliorated of loss of life life
that could have been lessened
you know I I don't necessarily
see this for from a point of
The.
This is what I will refer that
but I I I I see this more as a
moment of urgency.
And
You know if there's the research
is clear that when you talk to
suicide survivors that their
risk of
committing suicide and making
that a tent and contemplating
those actions occurred
immediately before they took
that action with the twenty four
hours
yes so.
Maybe a crisis occurs maybe
something terrible happens maybe
you know other other issues rise
to the forefront and that action
happens quickly so to me from a
public health perspective I
think a delay is the least we
could do to prevent prevent
those suicide deaths you know
and and on the topic of of
particularly domestic violence
related homicide if you are a
woman you are much more at risk
of
being a victim of gun violence.
that you know there's very
limited data on it you know I I
know it would be so ideal to
have a look at all of the
firearm discharges and in in the
country and see what what what
was the rationale for each of
those.
you know for four decades we
have had a ban on federal
firearms research at the at the
federal level so I think
hopefully soon we will start to
see more reserves of that nature
but even in the limited there's
been multiple passes it research
on this topic.
And even in that limited
research you know for every
defensive
attempt.
It's eight times that is is the
and victimization and so I even
if that's just a massive
undercount overall that
disproportionate already between
defensive you set and
victimization use I mean I just
think that
In our state we are really
struggling with violence public
safety domestic violence
intimate partner violence
diseases of despair I just sat
there a long presentation by the
department of health on diseases
of despair which include
depression and suicide.
So are I'm glad you brought this
forward I think you know there
may be more discussion about
what with the right number of
days is but you know we need to
have a
the right number of days of
these background checks can be
completed.
and also so that we can delay
and it and allow that person
some time to recover from
whatever it is that is prompting
them to want to take that urgent
action that may and their own
life so thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative and the
other members wishing to ask
questions or comments.
So.
I'm gonna support this bill.
And I just want to talk about
one of the kind of objections
that I hear it that's a common
thread in gun this our
discussions in.
There's always an example of
what situation it won't help
always whenever we're hearing
from opponents of these bills
it's it's always well they'll be
this situation where this bill
won't help and you know what
your hundred percent right
hundred percent.
a lot of our legislation doesn't
fix everything every situation a
hundred percent
we passed legislation the to
address problems the best we
can.
And to make as much improvement
as we can.
And not probably anyone of them
like our D. W. I. laws it's at a
hundred percent heck no it's a
hundred percent people are still
driving intoxicated but we have
a law on the books and we know
that it does make a dent in
people who drive intoxicated in
terms of modifying their
behavior.
So this bill's not hundred
percent no just like all our
other bills not a hundred
percent but it is going to help
I believe and the data shows
that it will help with suicide
prevention hundred percent no.
Somebody will use some other
device your hundred percent
right but to the extent that
people have access easy access
to a gun and they're acting on
impulse and we can prevent that
we've done a really good thing
for the state of New Mexico and
for the citizens in the state of
New Mexico so I wanna thank you
for bringing this bill and with
that I'd ask the clerk to call
the roll.
I need a motion.
Two passed by Representative
subpoenas second by speaker
Martinez.
Thank you madam chair point of
vote.
Representative Alcon yes.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane no.
Mr speaker.
Yes.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative Nibert ram.
Representative read with them.
Representative Rehm no ma'am.
Representative Penske yes.
Madam vice chair yes.
Madam chair yes.
Madam chair you have six yess
and for nose for do pass on
house bill one hundred.
Thank you Representative now
we're on house bill one on one
large capacity magazines and
assault weapons
Large capacity magazines and
assault weapons and I'd like to
talk about a little bit about
how we're going to address this
bill I have been advised by the
sponsor.
I'm just taking a stretch okay
I've been advised by the sponsor
that they will be having an
amendment
so what I'd like to do since we
have many people here I'm sure
female to
Address the bill is to allow the
sponsor to give a brief
description of the bill.
And then we would we would go to
public comment so individuals
who came out to address the bill
could do so
recognizing that we won't
obviously entertaining.
Secretary rejected bill until
the amendments been presented at
the next
meeting that we have on the bill
but we will not be taking public
comment in the second meeting so
this is a time for public
comment on house bill one oh one
after the sponsor provides a
brief overview of the bill and
keep in mind sponsor very
probably talking about it the
second time we present the
amendment so fine
Ventricular assist question on
sure process you just outlined
yes would you be open to having.
The actual committee questions
wait until we have the amendment
and the underlying bill because
I know last time the chair had
some consternation about us
being repetitive the actually
that makes a you make I think a
very good point
Representative Ezzell we'll have
a brief description so that we
if we set the scene for the what
we're gonna be talking about get
our public comment then log that
come back with whatever
Representative you wish to
present and then proceed from
there are makes a very good
point yes Representative neither
of madam chair just so I do have
my experts lined up is my bill
next yes there just because so.
What.
So what we're gonna do is here
the bill and we're going to do a
similar process lower to the few
people from online okay
opposition in those in favor
etcetera just as we did with you
know essentially what we do with
House Bill hundreds of people
know what to expect the floor is
yours Representative thank you
madam chair this bill is
essentially of mass shootings
prevention bill.
As we've seen with the scourge
of gun violence across the
country and those being
perpetrated with weapons of war
that are tending to
murder more
More people because of the
capacity of these weapons and
because of the way that they're
designed to
To kill we are seeking to
prevent that in New Mexico with
me today madam chair is my co
sponsor Representative Roybal
Caballero this bill has become
an effort beyond that of myself
which prompt was prompted after
the fall the shooting for me but
of course this is been happening
for now decades of this bill is
a compilation of both a high
capacity magazines a provision
as well as an assault weapons
provision and with me as well is
the council for governor Lujan
Grisham's office Kyle Duffy and
Ben Baker with the department
public safety we stand for
questions madam chair thank you
very much appreciate that and
we'll have probably have plenty
of questions when we get back to
this bill so at this point I'd
like to go online to those
wishing to speak in opposition
to the bill and I will probably
take you know three or four
people depending on how long you
speak so those wishing to speak
in opposition leave your hand up
if you were speaking in support
of the bill please take your
hands down on the video okay so.
we will go to Tom flam flam mon
Fleeman.
From.
Yes one of the top line thank
you very much for the
opportunity I just like to point
out that this is a direct
conflict with the brewing
decision these this bill is
basically.
Based on because of that issues
and I also like to point out
that when this bill was
presented to the house of public
affairs committee the sponsor
indicated that there would be an
event and the amendment was to
be just simply having a registry
and also to eliminate the fifty
caliber issue on their but when
you look at the bill you see
that was tied tightly written.
and it includes a references to
fifty caliber on fifty one times
I would challenge the sponsor to
tell us how many people are shop
with a fifty caliber weapons
particularly in New Mexico it
doesn't happen self of the issue
is is this bill has not actually
been approved by the house
public affairs committee
so I'm not sure why he would be
at the Judiciary Committee.
The house public affairs
committee approved.
An amendment based on what they
were called contained but that
doesn't get time that it
contains a lot of the stuff.
So also just thought you know
the ninth circuit has been
reversed eighty one percent of
the time since two thousand
seven that refers to the
previous bill.
So thank you very much thank you
K..
Yes.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee of I'm very much
opposed to the bill of one like
command said it's just a comment
it calling some missile weapon.
And too many people here in New
Mexico use an A. R. fifteen and
other semi automatic weapons
like this to go after of groups
higher which.
Oops all which hi you.
That is the main weapon of
course because it can fire fast
enough to keep up with the
coyote.
You get one shot at a coyote if
there's a pack of six or eight
you're getting one out of their
May so you got more live stop
down.
You got more hawkish.
Turn up your farmland can you
get more of a map lines going
after lifestyle this is very
much used here in the state of
New Mexico another thing about
the high capacity magazines.
All you would do on this loan a
criminal down less than five
seconds.
Me as a sixty year old man.
I can change magazines.
And the phone again in less than
three sex a sixty one year only.
Number two these bills only go
after legal gun owners a
criminal has access to these way
before we.
And all after you take away from
us
Thank you very much for hearing
my side of the and you'll have a
good day thank you.
Greg Sheehan.
Greg.
Greg will you on mute yourself.
Can you hear me now yes.
Okay thank you madam chair
committee my name is great she
Sheehan Quemado New Mexico I
wish to express I objection to
HB one on one first and foremost
because I believe it to be
unconstitutional I will
paraphrase a leader from another
state that has recently said in
general about imparting laws are
held against the law abiding and
not the criminals I understand
the hurt and pain caused by
these mentally deranged mass
shooters I understand how
families want justice but is it
justice to ban firearms from law
abiding citizens how is it
common sense gun laws take guns
away from people who committed
no crime and hopes to dissuade
people who've already made up
their minds and are going to
perpetrate a crime.
Your hope is that if you make it
harder to get the firearm or ban
certain times and bad people
want access to firearms that
just doesn't work.
That people always get firearms
I understand that your whole
that is your whole but I would
tell you and I can guarantee
what will happen if you make it
harder or impossible for law
abiding citizens keep their
firearms are tools of their
choice we're defending
themselves date from law abiding
citizens will obey the law
because they are law abiding
citizens in the first place but
doing so will put a law abiding
citizen in peril I am very
skeptical skeptical of the so
called common sense gun laws or
policies which seek to diminish
the freedoms of the people who
are doing nothing wrong instead
of punishing the people that are
doing something wrong.
It is an offense notion that you
don't think we can or should be
able to defend ourselves and
loved ones against of advisement
person with a proper tool to
stop that attack that just
doesn't make any common sense
thank thank you your time is up
thank you
this is our last one Jim Ghazni
from Silver City.
Hello Committee thank you
I kind of agree with some of
previous figures that I guess my
point is that I would rather my
eighty five year old mother have
the capability it because she's
not able to she's very easily
and not have to rely of when two
or three people are trying to
solar
and again the the criminals are
gonna follow these rules I I
think that is my main point is
that the people who really need
more capacity more capability
are the ones that are this is
all.
Thank you thank you will now go
to the audience those in
opposition so if I may first at
the request of one of my
colleagues I'd like to call on
Bob Martinez and then talk Tara
again then we'll do the rest of
that's okay.
Mr Martinez.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee about
Martinez with federal or
pollution in New Mexico we stand
in opposition to the bill.
We of course understand and see
that the amendments would
exclude law enforcement however
the issue with the bill that we
have is that it doesn't address
the problem of crime and
criminals thank you thank you
and Tara would you like to go
next and then go to the general
audience.
Thank you madam chair committee
members Teramo chat and our
state director for New Mexico
to give committee members an
idea of the scope of this bill
and its impact on law abiding
citizens in New Mexico I'm gonna
pull numbers from a professional
research firm called sentiment
they did a.
Two thousand twenty one national
firearms survey they estimated
that forty eight percent.
Of adult gun owners in the
United States have owned
magazines that hold more than
ten rounds and that thirty
percent have owned in a our
style semi automatic rifle just
the type of firearm that's
targeted by this bill if you
apply these percentages to New
Mexico's adult population an
estimated gun owning population
you'd find that nearly a quarter
of a million New Mexicans have
own magazines that hold more
than ten rounds and you'd find
that more than a hundred and
fifty thousand New Mexicans own
a are fifteens are similes
similarly styled rifles.
All these people would be forced
to register their lawfully owned
firearms and their magazines
with TPS under this bill under
house bill one a one.
Also want to one would
unnecessarily burden DPS it will
cost the taxpayers of the state
tens of millions of dollars and
it would have absolutely no
impact on violent criminals who
are certainly not going to
register their weapons with the
state I also wanted to point out
the state of Colorado enacted a
magazine limit and twenty
thirteen to fifteen rounds it is
not reduced firearm homicides or
mass shootings in that state the
number of fire related murders
has risen every year since that
enactment in Colorado and now
stands at three times the level
of twenty thirteen this is been
a failed experiment next door we
urge you to oppose this bill
thank you thank you okay let's
start in the back and then we'll
come forward to this time so
gentleman in the back to the
left here.
The the television set.
Great yeah.
Thank you madam chair committee
members
What we're hearing I think is is
general dissatisfaction with the
notion that because of the crazy
actions of a few the rights of
many are are online the vast
majority of gun owners I have
never harmed anybody with the
guns that they've legally
obtained and the magazine
capacity itself
has been irrelevant again I
refer back to my experience in
California and I attended a I
had a the tragedy of having to
attend a shooting in a high
school here in San Diego county
I also had one in Aztec New
Mexico here just a few years
back that I was involved in
there were no rifles involved in
those they were they were hand
guns so I would I would the just
say this that the to the we all
understand we all have a goal of
keeping firearms out of the
hands of criminals and
irresponsible individuals but I
think we're targeting the wrong
group in I think that we could
probably actually be much more
effective were we to focus on
the actions of those that are
breaking law so I I ask that you
pose this bill thank you thank
you.
moving over there's a man with a
blue hands up who shared with
the mustache.
arm.
Hi chairman and committee my
name is Joe Culbertson
here representing New Mexico
cattle growers association and
myself
the member and the vice
president
this this
this bill targets law abiding
citizens I think that's pretty
obvious because the criminals
can get their hands on as many
weapons as they want.
The other thing this bill does
is through the the wording in
the bill we're basically going
to be registering our weapons
with the department of public
safety.
If we intend to keep those
weapons that we acquired before
the the effective date.
And so I think that's the same
as gun registration and I think
that's wrong thank you.
Thank you.
the gentleman with the beer.
Thank you okay David Leffler a
gun dealer in requests all.
I purchased called weapons war.
No military in the world issues
of semi automatic guns rifles to
their troops not one.
The last time they did it was
World War two.
So it's a little out of date
column that actually it's a
motion gun ban the guns
specifically protected by the
second amendment we tried that
in between nineteen ninety four
and two thousand four and it did
not get renewed because it
didn't work according to the
Congress of the United States.
Some of this the cosmetic
features.
That are mentioned in that bill
would mean that the rifle that
my wife and I can both use I'm
six foot three she is five feet
tall because I can address the
stock so that it fits her reach.
Again please oppo I oppose this
bill do not vote for it it is
poorly worded silly and anti
constitutional thank you thank
you
We'll get to this gentleman over
here off of the road with the
sand that fear yes thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you my name is
Matt Lawson from some San Juan
County
briefly touch on the fact that
this isn't just a cosmetic issue
forward hand grips the stocks
that are adjustable things like
that this bill is highly
discriminatory against people
who are disabled and need those
features to engage in hunting
and shooting sports in defense
of their almond ranch
my main point however is that
when this bill was five pages
long two weeks ago it was
introduced in the public affairs
committee
as an example I think my
interpretation was is an extreme
example Representative Lord
brought up that all of these
features are found on the fifty
caliber rifles that are at a
minimum twenty five pounds of
sometimes up to fifty pounds
they're not used in these types
of crimes that we're looking to
prevent
that was brought up as a concern
of hers and it was the
understanding at that time that
the amended version of the bill
which started out at five pages
ballooned F. sixteen and I
believe it's now up to eighteen
pages soon.
those are the response been
exception written for that
instead they targeted this bill
as a specific band towards what
they promised to make an
exception for two weeks ago so
this bill as it stands has never
been seen by the house public
affairs committee is
unrecognizable from its first
copy that actually goes directly
against what was discussed in
that committee and I'd like to
see it return to that committee
in its current form and start
over the process again thank you
thank you all there are two
individuals opposing over here
and like to give me a chance I
haven't spoken yet today over
over over here there I I'm yes
right go ahead.
I'm Steve Williams Bluewater New
Mexico to center.
I'm I oppose this on numerous
issues but primarily.
Anyone here veteran actually
some clothing.
Special operations south and
Central America
it counterterrorism former
officer also a security
professional I'm a licensee for
manufacturer and a of and of
ammunition and firearms.
I work out of my home but mainly
as a security for a professional
I'm board certified in security
management and looking at all
these
Heinous act but he's not cases.
They are on target for many
minutes possibly an hour or more
before law enforcement to get
there and get inside but you get
the same body yes they form
themselves with modern weaponry
and high capacity magazines but
they can get the same body count
to a couple of muzzle loaders
not to mention a couple of
revolvers which speed loaders.
This this bill would do nothing.
And as a the funds manufacturer
and other people that.
The gun dealings dealers we
order magazines in but it can
hundred round basis.
So I probably got three hundred
magazines that got more than ten
rounds and.
What I throw away your
commitments there's no serial
number on there's no dates.
I like the gentleman the backset
the feds tried this years ago
when it did not work.
Thank you madam chair thank
thank you and then this
gentleman will go back over to
the side.
Thank you madam chair and thank
for the chance to speak mothers
keep garden registered lobbyist
for the national shooting sports
foundation the trade association
for the gun dealers FL's and the
the manufactures and ammunition
manufacturers nationwide I think
it's important remember that we
have some folks on the ground
here every day our gun dealers
in many cases on on compensated
are on the front lines of making
sure these weapons don't get in
the wrong hands they not only go
through the paperwork and
evaluate what's written but they
also evaluate the individual
who's before them to make sure
that that person is not in acute
distress and all those other
things make sure that when they
do transfer that economic to
that individual that is the
transfer that's legal it's safe
in the public is protected this
is really important to remember
these individuals do not want to
see their name come back with an
investigation as a result of
some terrible or horrific
incident that just occurred we
know that these laws get broken
these things get stolen and so
for us we're very concerned
about lumping these weapons is
if this is really the problem
the problem is we we know we
have a problem of violence in
our state and we have an address
that real problem the source of
all this which is our violence
problem in the state so we're
talking about once again putting
take away the rights of law
abiding citizens asking them to
take additional steps to
continue to be law abiding
citizens putting potentially in
jeopardy this bill I fell to
register a magazine that I have
for one of my own weapons if I
felt a Representative one
magazine I could become a four
three felon that's a really of
deep concern to me and I don't
think that's fair to law abiding
citizens New Mexico and so we
stand respectful opposition
would love to see the amendment
I think would help us to
understand better what the
bill's going to do in the future
but with that manager we stand
and respect opposition thank you
thank you let's go back over
here so on the front or the
gentleman with the very nice
follow.
Good afternoon here.
And members of the committee on
Jim Keller one of the founders
and members of calibers we've
been in business twenty five
years and to try to add some new
information that has been going
to re for we have mandatory
suicide trading at at caliber's
we've had it for many many many
years to train everybody on the
floor in calibers to watch for
signs of mental disturbance
watch for a little cues on
people that a little bit off
center and to watch for
suspected of of people that may
be suicidal and prevent them.
The of the next.
Program says that after three
days after the application if
they have not made a an
affirmative determination that
the FFL dealer may.
But does not have to approve it
and certainly if somebody's
looking little strange we're not
going to approve the transfer we
don't need the blowback on
ourselves we don't do that
problem.
We we believe that education and
training is the answer we have
had for a best rated four
hundred fifty thousand people
shoot and learn that are ranges
since we've been in business
we've trained over two thousand
of.
Hello Enforcement people we have
contracts with the police
agencies we have constant losses
on safe use of firearms and
protection we believe that
education and training and
trained thank you have trained
and dealers was going to protect
our system much better than
these alternatives oppose the
bill.
Thank you Sir we have time for
two more so this gentleman with
a black stripe and all that and
you next okay.
Madam chair committee good
afternoon my name is Wes I'm
retired army bomb technician.
A hunter a competitive shooter
of federal research employee.
I've lived in the state since
two thousand five and I'm in
opposition to this bill this
bill will have no effect on
crime other than to create a new
class about law.
Modern sporting rifles and large
frame semi automatic pistols are
used exceedingly rarely in crime
criminals prefer small firearms
that can be easily concealed
criminals don't obey the law.
This bill would hinder my
ability to protect myself in
rural New Mexico where I live
and chair of responses measured
in tens of minutes.
This bill would also prevent me
from using federal BLM land for
illegal activity.
I've watched in horror over the
years as my status softened its
stance on criminals drug
trafficking in the mentally
disturbed while trying to make a
felon out of those who have been
law abiding citizens simply due
to the fact that use own
firearms in common use of the
time as laid out in Heller and
brewing.
I've watched legislature passed
the Civil Rights Act to confer
greater rights upon the
criminals to sure law
enforcement officers.
While seeking to strip away my
rights by exempting the Civil
Rights Act from this legislation
your efforts would be better
directed at the narcotics trade
and mental health.
Madam chair committee thank you
thank you and the the gentleman
green shirt next to you.
Yes Sir.
Thank you madam chair a
committee members
As defined in the renewable
almost everything is going to be
considered assault weapon which
is it inaccurate by description
by definition an assault weapon
as a select fire weapon which
means you can easily switch it
to fires a machine gun that is
an assault weapon so
unfortunately and I don't know
where this initially stemmed
from.
Assault weapon is the catch
phrase so it kept its in its
only by statics by different
things that you attach the farm
has been said here that which
oftentimes might help somebody
that has a physical disabilities
back and be able to you cities
here but it doesn't increase the
lethality of the firearm in any
way it's going to shoot the same
bullet that it shoots whether it
has a forward angled foregrip
honor a flashlight or a flash
hider it's not going to change
the lethality of that firearm as
as was said before most firearms
that are used in violence are
pistols they're not they're not
rifles
This but this this bill as it is
written would essentially turn a
twenty two rifles the ten twenty
two that's been around for about
sixty years or more it would
make it an assault rifle which
is just.
Ridiculous
The fifty caliber has already
been discussed the previous
assault weapons bans.
As was also discussed a
distinctly had no effect on
crime.
more people are killed with
handguns and actually more kids
with hands and feet.
then there are firearms and
we're edged weapons is a matter
of fact so
What could also happen with this
is this could end up as
government confiscation which is
you know personal property if
this bill was to go through it
would limit what I would be able
to sell it my store probably to
five point five to ten percent
of my product my employees would
lose their jobs times up Sir
thank you
we're through with the those
speaking in opposition will now
go to those who to speak in
support of first going to go
online for a few people and then
we'll come back to the audience
so those wishing to speak speak
in support of the bill online
please raise your hand all right
I see a person named Eli.
You are please on the of the
lies gone Lauren container.
Lawrence I'm active opposition
of the okay well then take your
hand in hand please
we already know about Greg
please take your hand down if
you've already spoken Greg
please take your hand down John.
Thousand.
If you're speaking in support
please on mute yourself.
No madam chair I'm here to speak
in opposition and have been in
for the duration of this is that
all right well viewers now on in
favor so Deborah.
Deborah.
Yes madam chair and members of
the committee my name is Deborah
and I volunteer with the Mexico
moms demand action passing H. B.
one oh one would give you
Mexicans protection from assault
weapons and high capacity
magazines by taking these
weapons of war off the streets
research shows that state
policies on high capacity
magazines is the strongest
predictor of the mass shooting
range in that state we can do
this we have to make a change
nine states already prohibit
assault weapons and fourteen
states prohibit high capacity
magazines New Mexico must
advocate for change we need to
join in passing these lifesaving
and foundational gun safety
policies please pass H. B. one
oh one thank you so much thank
you Terry Hackler.
Terry.
Yes I can.
Thank you Terry Janet.
Got can.
Janet thank thank you thank you
madam chair and members of the
committee and also speaking on
behalf of the members of the
Senate chapter of the national
organization for women we stand
strongly in support of this
failed to limit or ban the use
of assault weapons and high
magazine
weapons.
It seems common sense beginning
to protect our citizens from.
Thank you very much thank you
Kathleen mostly.
Members of the committee thank
you for bringing this bill
forward.
I have had a professorship in a
mass shooting.
And her as a center for she
always have the best predictor
of future performance is past
performance and there is very
good evidence for this measure
in fact a study in the journal
of public health over twenty
seven years she showed that
states without a high high
capacity magazine bands had more
than double the incidence of
mass shootings and three times
the number of victims
so one thing I'd like to
introduce the costs down I
haven't heard that very much and
New Mexico in their strategic
approach to gun violence sites
that we spend two minutes two
billion dollars a year on gun
violence that's over eight
hundred person.
Every town and John Hopkins
sites five to six billion or two
to three thousand per person
we're of our state and I don't
see how we can afford to keep
spending money on gun violence
thank you very much for bringing
this bill forward and please do
support it.
Okay we have one last more about
person on for online and that is
Sylvia think.
So yes.
Yes good afternoon madam chair
committee
central bank representing six
hundred eighty W. New Mexico
members a New Delhi in New
Mexico as an organization and I
personally as a gun owner are in
support of HB one a one.
I should arrange my husband used
to terminate however assault
weapons Munoz recreational or
substance purpose they're meant
for killing on behalf healthy
out please support H. B. one oh
one thank you thank you that
concludes our on line part of
portion of our public comment
now we'll go to the audience
those wishing to speak in
support
you let's go to
The gentleman in the jacket
please.
To I'm sorry we have that that.
That is to all the money okay
you want to stand if we stand on
the corner we go out yeah you
could you could on the sure.
Madam chairman members of the
committee my name's Alan songes
on the executive director of
conference of Catholic bishops
we understand that this is a
very difficult bill to discern
they pray for your work in
discerning this since we heard
this bill last in the last
committee in our country we've
had thirteen mass shootings
there's a problem we have a
problem and this is only one
piece of a solution in this but
we can't deny there is a there
is a problem more shootings than
days since the last hearing so
please act on this thank thank
you going to the second round.
yes.
Madam chair and members of the
committee on Jennifer Williams
and I'm standing in support of
this bill for women voters and
we strongly supported thank you
thank you.
and the red of tier.
From Santa Fe County I'm
appointment action and we
support this bill.
Assault weapons and high
capacity magazines are involved
in the ten deadliest mass
shootings between two thousand
nine in two thousand twenty and
every time analysis of mass
shootings from that time period
about six times more people are
shot from per shooting what is
all of the issues six times the
number of people.
That that's a number that we
really need to work on and I
really think this bill is a
chance to start the work that we
need to do for common sense gun
legislation thank you thank you
anyone in the back rows okay one
of the options are.
Anyway they're wishing to speak
in favor of the bill okay.
I have one more.
Every chair members of the
committee my name is grant of
school for president of New
Mexicans to prevent gun violence
we stand in support of this bill
an assault weapon is not a cat
a catchy phrase assault weapons
are military weapons designed to
kill as many people as possible
as quickly as possible the
bullet from assault weapon
travels three times as fast with
twice as much force in
comparison to basically a nine
millimeter handgun the legality
is severe when a bullet from an
assault weapon penetrates the
body the cavity that is
important to the body is much
bigger than that of a semi
automatic handgun or rifle
because the cavity is so large
it creates an intense amount of
bleeding destroys tissue and
organs and polarizes bones and
then in addition to the cavity
in the body that's created the
fast moving forward also creates
the shock waves that caused
additional damage to the tissue
in terms of without in children
it's much more severe when a
child is shot by an assault
weapon there is an immediate
loss of blood children have half
the amount of blood that adults
have so that is why he believed
out so much more quickly to
scene and.
Tragedy after tragedy only
trauma one centers can treat
victims of assault weapons
shootings because that is where
massive amounts of blood or
stored if the shooting does not
hear happened near trauma center
that child will likely die thank
you very much thank you anyone
else wishing to speak in favor
of the bill for okay thank you
so
The plan as a way of discussed
earlier we have a committee said
that will be looking at but we
do have a copy of it so members
wishing we'll get it into the
share file is it I don't know if
it's initiatives in its insure
file so members can have the
opportunity to take a look at it
before the next meeting so with
that I want to thank the
sponsors and our experts for
your time and we will then go on
to our next bill.
Madam chair madam chair I think
there's a little bit of
confusion because the bill that
we have today is a committee sub
for this committee aha the
changes that we have are very
minor like they're they're
basically
What the hell would you please
madam chair of the technical
amendment via they're not so the
substance of this bill without
question is what we will be what
we would like to discuss okay
and referred to the committee
has had and there's analysis on
this etcetera so this they're
all technical in nature okay I
guess maybe I misunderstood our
conversation from earlier today
I think so.
We we would like to have this
bill evaluated there is this is
this is the bill as it has been
amended for high capacity
magazines into their madam chair
and this is this is what we are
presenting today the substance
of this bill.
We know that there will be
technical amendments but we'd
like to get feedback on the
substance of this bill madam
chair and we'd like to make sure
that we include those technical
amendments with any suggestions
that are made today.
Okay so what you're you're I
hear you say you want to talk
about your your your your sub
get feedback from us and then
come back again.
Madam chair representative
that's if that's the will of the
committee we the the substance
of this bill is absolutely what
we would like to discuss okay
okay all right
So the people seen the committee
sub.
Yeah okay is that the.
Thank you give you the to to
number.
And your analyses today are on
the committee substitute.
Posted.
actually if it's been in the
share file you've seen and so if
we can get an idea about what
was put in the just put in there
two days and the let's just
review the two oh two number to
make sure two five one four six
point two.
That.
Five one four six point two.
The committee says to committees
the committees of and it's in
essence Committee so.
And that is in the Here file.
We have a committee seven this
year okay what we need to verify
if it's not in the Here file I'm
not going to do that.
We've had it for.
Right.
This is.
That's.
Which is the.
Okay so what I heard said was
the number of.
That.
The representative cited as this
committee so has been in the
share file for two days okay all
right some.
We need copies.
That's the field.
Thank.
Yes.
So.
Yeah.
It has been ensure the coverages
and making the banker.
I.
Madam.
Representative why don't you
begin to tell us what changes
there are.
Sure Madam chair representative
between the time of the
We had X. accepting feedback
from house consumer public
affairs committee present day
the bill in front of you today
basically remove the regulation
of fifty caliber cartridges
we've added large capacity
ammunition feeding devices the
definition of being capable of
holding more than ten rounds to
the list of regulated items
it was in the original bill but
it unintentionally omitted the
The definition unfortunately
We remove the requirement that
DPS create a list of assault
weapons covered by the act by
rule instead we requested that
they update it as they need as
needed madam chair we have
amended the definition of
assault weapons to remove rifles
with shrouds madam chair
So a lot of technical changes
the vast subset I can keep going
if you'd like to but I I don't
know if we want to have Q. and a
I can keep going through the
list of that's better okay madam
chair we
Amended the definition of
assault weapons to include a
semi automatic rifle that has an
overall length of less than
thirty inches that's consistent
with our analysis of we talk
about why we've amended the
language in section for a regard
regarding the time limit to file
endorsement affidavits to cover
circumstances where an orange
owner received a regulated item
as an error while the resident
of another state.
we also amended section for a to
require endorsement affidavits
to list the make model caliber
and serial number as applicable
of assault weapon attachments
and large capacity ammunition
feeding devices as well as the
owner's name address telephone
number and date of birth.
We have amended section forty to
allow endorsement affidavit
holders to transport the
regulated eyes of items to
federally licensed firearms
dealers out of state for lawful
transfer of we amended section
forty to allow endorsement of a
David folder holders to transfer
their regulated items to person
to qualify for law enforcement
public safety exceptions
we amended section five to
clarify make uniformed the
circumstances when law
enforcement public safety
officials may possess regulated
items.
And we added a provision in
section five to allow
individuals to process certain
assault weapons allowed pay
department of public safety rule
for hunting.
And we clarified section nine
severability clause application
to the scenario in which a court
strikes down section threes
prohibition of the cover item so
this is feedback and some of the
questions that we had had in the
previous
Committee and then offline to
clarify some of these provisions
ensure that we tied off any
loose ends on in general madam
chair for for those that are
here and understand where this
is coming from that question was
commonly answered the state of
Illinois just passed a an
assault weapons high capacity
band this is.
Hearing a lot of what they did
inclusive of our laws and of
course the
Any of the necessary components
that we need to have in here to
clarify through New Mexico lost
so in general that's that's it
madam chair okay so.
A. Preciado your explanation.
That sounded like a lot of
Information with your.
So this is what I'm going to
recommend we're gonna allow the
committee asking questions about
this the committee so additional
questions and then we're not
gonna take action on this bill
today I feel that it's too
important for people and it's
obvious that people didn't know
what was in the Here file and so
on.
For us to take action on so I
think we will have a
conversation about what what the
new service about.
You will be able to ask you
questions but we're not voting
on the today I think it's
there's.
Or at this point so with that
I'm happy to.
Take names for people who wish
to discuss.
Representative McQueen.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair representative
Through it and I did have some
questions so just sort of flip
through and ask questions is my
my notes indicate
Madam chair representative on
page two one three give a
definition of antique.
Madam chair representative we
get that from federal law and so
we we pulled it out of the
United States code madam chair.
You want to add to that
amendment Madam chair
representative yes if you look
on page two line six to seven we
do define antique firearm by
reference to eighteen USC
section nine to one a sixteen
and it's that's kind of an
extensive definition I can read
that off to you if you'd like I
added reference to that
definition and federal code
Madam chair representative for
can give me a ballpark at the
age.
Yeah one second madam chair
representative.
And Madam chair representative I
confess I you know that jumped
out at me and I missed the
definition them immediately
below it so thanks for having
that Madam chair representative
yes it is defined as firearms
maybe are manufactured before
eighteen ninety eight.
Thank you madam chair
representative
On page upon page three in the
definition of semi other mac
fissile it talks about the
magazine.
With Pepsi to accept more than
fifteen rounds is a is that
magazine separately regulated in
addition to the Act this'll
Madam chair representative
that's a great question so that
that specific category of
assault weapons as for semi
automatic pistols with a fixed
magazine so it's magazine that
is permanently attached to the
economic however and one of our
amendments that we have
identified that we will be
making we will be reducing that
from the fifth more than fifteen
rounds to more than ten rounds
to be consistent with our
definition of large
Capacity ammunition feeding
devices.
Thank you for that chair
representative expert on page
six.
what is twenty two caliber
rimfire ammunition.
Yes Madam chair representative
My other representative expert
here might be able to better
answer that certainly madam
chair members the committee
Representative McQueen twenty
two rimfire is a specific type
of ammunition commonly used in
twenty two caliber weapons
already so it's a a designation
that further specifies the
caliber rimfire.
Okay thank you.
In.
Madam chair representative maybe
walk me through the the
affidavit process so it is am I
correct in understanding that.
Existing weapons people will be
allowed to maintain those
weapons but they have to fire
file an affidavit.
I defined the economic and that
the.
Correct Madam chair
representative right so the in
order to sort of wrap our hands
around those that are already
existing is ensuring that we get
a handle on where
what where they are what's
happening with them and that
they don't end up in the wrong
hands so this is basically
ensuring that we have this
registry in place to to just
know what what's going on with
them and and that they are in
the hands.
In Madam chair representative my
understanding is the.
Senator.
The clips and I I don't know if
that's the same as large
capacity ammunition feeding
device but that those do not
fear serial numbers.
So
have you have you tractors.
Yes madam chair representative I
believe you are correct often
they do not have serial numbers
which is why we put on page
eight line fourteen as
applicables so if it's not
applicables to that device they
don't need to list it on the way
we will be tracking it though is
by knowing the owner and the
owner's identity so we know it
may be a make and model as well
would help granted it and it
doesn't prevent the owner from
you know swapping it out with an
identical making model by it's
again you do it it's part to fix
every little thing if someone's
going to try and get around the
state they might be able to swap
it out with an identical
magazine from the same make and
model but that's a highly
unlikely scenario.
Thank you for the Senators Madam
I look forward to.
Reading the billion thank you so
to just to be clear you know we
can have a conversation about
this we will not limit the
conversation to the new things
that are.
Being brought when you to come
back with what you're saying are
some small.
Yes and so does everyone
understand what I'm saying here
we can have an initial
conversation about what's in
this
I understand you all have some
additional changes you would
from may we will not limit
conversation to guess those
additional change are we on the
same page and I'm looking at
Representative Lane because he's
looking at me I.
As as the workers are.
Look my mom gave me.
So I ended and I.
Well I'm it yeah.
Single moms are Sir.
so I'd I want to avoid any kind
of disputes next time so I
disagree that's that's the
reason why I ask this more fun
yeah so
When the changes come back the
is it the chairs saying that
that the question need to be
limited to what the changes are
and how much is a bill no I
think we can talk about this of
that we okay frankly many of you
just realized existed okay let
me say whatever's six other
little things that they let me
say publicly thank you for that
Sir okay.
Right.
our representative
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative couple things the
the definition for
automatic.
Assault weapons.
Is fairly expensive and I guess
my question is.
Is this a common understanding
of what an assault weapon is
because.
I never thought that I owned an
assault with the hi my.
It could to could you maybe
you're like me all where this
comes from and why it's so
expansive seems much broader
than I would normally ascribed
that term many Madam chair
representative so from my
layman's understanding is
essentially has a lot to do with
the heat and the capacity of
being able to fire the fire and
the a lot of these attachments
which are being called cosmetic
are actually in fact to be able
to operate the firearm so that
you don't burn yourself and so
that you can basically take on
numerous
bullets quickly without that
rapid fire with without burning
yourself so that's what a lot of
these components would be on
from that from the other
perspective of the the various
states so we have a Levin states
that have passed similar bans
the this is in common common
step with what they've done and
how they've defined it that I'll
defer to my experts to to inform
from their perspective yes madam
chair representative I can speak
to you where we took some of the
definitions these definitions
are consistent with the federal
assault mostly consistent with
the federal assault weapons ban
as well as the recent Illinois
law and California law so in
terms of those states and many
of the other states that do
regulate assault weapons this is
that consistent with the
definitions in those states.
And.
Because I I see that if the
firearm has a pistol grip or
thumbhole stock.
It's an assault weapons and.
I'm not a weapons expert there's
a lot out there I'm not one of
them but.
It just seems to me that that
captures a lot of things that I
would think would be.
Regular hunting rifles.
And and so if that makes it.
As an assault weapon.
A lot of things.
That.
One would not understand to be
an assault weapon but just the
regular hunting rifle and and I
haven't gone all the way through
this for us I presume that there
some registration requirement
here and which means.
We're going to have to register
a lot of things that people.
Probably don't think a lot of
the register so my reading.
Page two line fourteen correctly
that your your chance to capture
all those things.
Madam chair representative
Nibert members of the committee
I think one of the key
differences defined obviously
there's a expansive definition
which you you mentioned which
has many variables I think the
the designation of a pistol grip
and ori thumbhole stock which of
the two things you brought up
differentiate themselves from a
traditional hunting rifle in so
far that one is not holding the
weapon.
Shores on till one is holding
their hand in this but position
some of the other definitions
have to do with what is done
with the non trigger hand
related to the other hand that
the economic can be controlled
by Forand and handle devices.
Well I I I mean I I just look it
says if the firearm has one or
more of the following and a is a
pistol grip or thumbhole stock.
I assume a thumb hole stock is a
is a hole in this the stock.
And that could be drilled for
variety of purposes but.
I mean all the sudden that whole
mix of an assault weapon I'd I'd
just.
I'm not it just seems like it's
a you're capturing a lot more
things of what hi as a.
I would say a modest firearm
owner would normally associate
with the term assault weapons
and and that's just one of
several pages of of definitions
for any one of which make it an
assault weapon.
Madam chair representative it
makes it more simple because
again these are technical terms
for us to clarifies when it
comes to the public
understanding that our
department of public safety will
post basically the list of make
model brands that would
essentially be fall under these
categories including those that
are exempt we've spoken to some
of the sporting shooting
organizations about Turkey
hunting in the types of you know
rifles that might fit in that
category in order to exempt them
so madam chair representative
when it comes to clarifying the
terms GPS will have that
publicly facing in order to
clarify anything that is
confusing or perhaps is it
assault weapon isn't it it's
easier to identify based on make
model and and branding well if I
if I read this we have three
pages of what anyone item would
make it an assault weapon and we
have.
Plus.
A plus for twelve lines of the
exemptions.
And the exemptions are very
broad but again I haven't gone
completely through this but I
mean it just it just strikes me
that the.
The net you cast for assault
weapons.
Is much broader than I would
normally a tribute to that type
of of economic and so
you know if I'm a look at that
pretty closely that night I
guess if we're here tomorrow and
and.
look to make sure that we're not
the.
Testing a broader that the
necessary madam chair only got
about page rates of have more
questions tomorrow thank you for
the opportunity sure just to
clarify.
Have you Representative got
enough it's the changes that you
plan on making
to this
subcommittees
The technical changes yes we
have a list yes and that's why I
wanted to take feedback okay
it's a shortlist it's again
reports like ten versus fifteen
Okay and is it written down
somewhere.
Yes okay and have you provided
to us not today then to okay so
when should we expect to see
that.
Whenever you'd like madam chair
we can we can bring it back to
do those technical changes but
the substance of this bill is is
what is basically the intent of
of the legislation yes you know.
I'm sympathetic to gun safety
but I really feel like we need
to have the information so that
we.
A technical change is a subject
to dispute potentially
I think we might agree that what
you view as technical others
might view as more substantive
so I would like to see that
information and advance a at and
before we a poll come bring this
bill I this is a very important
thing in terms of what we're
talking about and it has to be
done correctly otherwise we're
putting a lot of people in
jeopardy
and so I would like to see that
list in advance so that our
members can take a look at it
and get their feedback in terms
of expertise if they have their
own kind of consultants that
they like to go to on gun safety
issues so
We need to see that before we
take this bill back up so
Okay so I think are at I am
hearing I see some nods from yes
did you years of the floor
Representative I'm sorry I just
want earlier what the process is
here.
Madam chair some feedback I've
just gotten my phone blew up
well we were talking
I understand that that some
whole is used in competition on
normal rifles competition rifles
for for competition not assault
weapons by any other definition
but it does have a thumb hole
which would make it an assault
rifle and or assault weapon as
defined and so.
You just might want to think
about some of that make sure
that you're capturing what you
intend to capture not capture
Madam chair representative there
are exemptions for competition
and for the use of that in
competition in the licensure
provisions so that's precisely
what we didn't want to meddle
with.
Get I'll take a look at it thank
you.
Thank you so
We're gonna be getting some more
information from you
Representative so look forward
to that will it be and I'm I
would be nice to have it in
amendment important okay.
We can offer a new committees up
if that's easier one uniformed
built think that is probably the
cleanest way and we need a
little bit of no you know a
couple days notice because it's
it's this is complicated and
madam chair I'm happy to provide
the list of the changes from
Consumer public affairs to this
committee and and any of the
technical changes that we're
discussing that we would like to
make again that short list and
ensure that it's cohesive with
before discussion and that also
those files are not just insure
file but printed.
Yes and I think that would be
very helpful and the members
would appreciate that very much
so we are at five o'clock I got
a text from the speaker alerting
me us to the fact that we're
gonna be starting up again so
let's talk a little bit hi
Representative Nighbor we would
take up his bill is exciting
uniform unclaimed property act
bills first things at noon
tomorrow so will we'll plan on
that Representative with would
you like to have your denial of
bail bill heard most welcome.
Oh I'm sorry okay yeah you
mentioned I'm sorry okay yes are
are a very.
Very good and if the tech will
I'll put out an email telling
folks what we're gonna talk.
