It's found incompetent this this
bill does three things first
hearings to determine
competitive dangerousness will
be held more expeditiously
second out patient and
residential community
restoration can be options they
don't just have to go to the
hospital.
They don't just have to be
locked down we can look at
options within our community and
last new mexico behavioral
health will have the opportunity
to create a treatment plan in
case management for these.
Pretty much at the supreme court
it is but as a trial court judge
my job also included the
ministering justice and I don't
believe that we had the
resources or options available
to do that i'm asking for your
consideration and to give our
trial courts more alternatives
besides jail hospitalization and
forced evaluations thank you
thank you is that the initial
presentation because I would
like to get to the audience so
i'm going to take public comment
but no more than 10 on each side
and i'd like you to try to keep
your comments to a minute and
you know I apologize for that
but you all know of course we're
in a very tight schedule and we
need we'll be getting to the
floor relatively soon so without
I would suggest people line up
so we can get through
participants quickly.
The.
Good morning very sure that was
the committee out part on.
Support of this legislation and
we've been from multiple
hearings on this and what what's
really striking about this
legislation even for people who
sometimes oppose it is in fact
that on whatever side you're on
there is uniform agreement that
the system.
And that the system is not
helping those that need to help
and in fact rather this
criminalizing carceration mental
health.
Society.
But the current system.
People who have worked on this
on both sides because it really
is such an important issue and
it all allows communities.
Thank you
denolly.
My needs to know he will send
them a staff attorney
of new mexico.
The issue of criminal confidence
he and mental health in the
criminal courts is one that
deserves are close attention and
care.
And quite frankly
in order to work any of our
solutions need more attention
and more consideration from
stake holders and community
members than was possible during
this legislative session but we
are interested and looking
forward to working continuing to
work with the supreme court
commission on this issue during
the interim in order to better
balance
the needs of public safety and
the rights of those who are
experiencing mental
metal health crisis and
developmental disabilities in
our criminal legal system thank
you
yes madame jared members
committee my name is a doctor on
the afternoon mexico provisional
part butter association and
which is what they despot just
for bringing for legislation
will help people offer
understand
thank you.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee on martial
martinis the executive director
of equality new mexico and we've
done compelled to see that other
particular people have been
clamoring for access to mental
behavioral health services are
community is bagging for
addiction treatment and while
the legislature has proposed
significant infrastructure in
this session passing new laws
that expand mandated treatment
doesn't make providers appear
out of nowhere and it won't
create a system worse or centers
for our communities to find the
treatments that they so
desperately deserve we have a
community full of people
voluntarily seeking treatment
that does not exist and in good
conscience we can not create a
space where more people are
mandated to engage in treatment
without their consent while we
continue to tell members of our
community at the resources just
on exist for that
thank you next.
Came our medicare members of the
committee my name is money so
then and the executive director
of the new mexico.
This bill directly impact
marginalized populations
including those experiences.
People experiencing homelessness
have increased vulnerabilities
which directly impact the
feasibility and i'm successfully
being part of what this bill
starts out to do.
It was just mentioned that this
bill will be done through a
trummet
we don't we do not see how this
can be because the five guiding
principles from it form care are
safety choice collaboration
trustworthiness and emparaments
ensuring that the physical and
emotional safety of an
individuals address is the first
step to providing trauma
informed care we understand what
this bill aims to do and we
agree that are behind the house
system the letters build the
system first the coalition
believes in a continue of care
however it must be done through
a lens of and we know far too
often the systems do not work in
this way.
This bill will work to
criminalize experience
and with this we ask that the
committee boat no one each be to
thirty three.
Thank you all and thank you
matter what your members of the
committee eleven pounds
representing the disability
collection and unfortunately i'm
standing in opposition to the
bill this morning and it paints
me to do that because we are
very strong supporters of the
idea and the practice of
diversion from the criminal
justice system for people with
mental health disorders
unfortunately this bill is not
it this is an attempt to sort of
show horn a diversion program
into the confidence established
and it doesn't work the
provisions of this bill and I
followed I missed a lot of the
earlier iterations of it but I
have seen numerous iterations
and the provisions of the bill
are unclear their contradictory
and their unworkable with just a
minute to comment I obviously
can't go through all the
problems but this bill is still
not ready for prime time and we
would urge that this matter be
held over during the internet
for some serious work on a
really important issue thank you
matter thank you to
my chairman was the committee
troy we searching for the
mexican state police we stand in
strong support of this bill the
spiel deals with the portion of
population that we need more
tools to help individuals in
this situation you lies a lot of
resources bounding any of us
think that we get the outcomes
that we should get or that
anyone is happy with.
Many of these individuals in the
going to end out of jail as
you've heard in the current set
of
stay please deal with these
individuals at a regular basis
we we feel and know that there's
a better way to handle this
situation so we sports this bill
as the first epidemic finding
that better way thank you thank
you.
Then.
Thank you madame chairman many
moments better but on the cheap
other defender
the building you have in front
of you which is the committee
sub which is about the third
version is the improvement over
the last first and there has
been work done on this and we
really do appreciate that from
the sponsor from doctor niece or
in your team from his eighteen
and
supreme court justice I think
the first speaker we still see
this is working progress there's
a lot of things that need to be
addressed I think you know the
district attorneys and i'd then
speak from themselves but I have
a public then still believe that
they are some protections for
both sides need to be built into
this there is a team from the
city of hobs area which has
public fender probably somebody
from the d a treatment community
is going to buy any to look at
the miami model and report back
to us so there's a lot of things
that we can do so i'm optimistic
about getting somewhere i'm not
sure we can do in the session
thank you thank you.
Jim madame chairman members in
the committee jim jackson i'm
speaking to you today just on my
own behalf
and as my colleague noted it's
really a disappointment that I
have to be speaking against this
bill because we really strongly
support diversion but I don't
think it's going to be available
to people that's my biggest
concern with this.
Diversion under this bill is
only available to those folks
for whom there's a serious
question about whether they're
confident to stand trot and I
think that we've heard in
previous community hearings that
the defense attorney and the
public defender are reluctant to
say okay we agree our client
agrees when it's clear that our
client might not be confident to
even make a decision about this.
And once they did once a
determination is made a person
is confident or inconfident in
either case they don't get
diversion.
This is the diversions only
available before there's a
determination whether you're
confident or not and their end
this whole thing is triggered by
somebody raising a good faith
question about whether you're
confident so are my concern is
simply that I create sort of a
false hope that people are going
to be diverted and I don't think
anybody is going to end up being
eligible for a diverse I agree
with previous speakers that
there are some other issues in
this build we don't have time to
get into those I would just
encourage everybody to get into
work on this over the interest
worked with the commission and
so on thank you you're welcome
this will be the last one in
president i'll take a couple
of representing the common
defense lower association we
stand an opposition to this bill
we've been working with the
sponsor very want to echo the
comments about pre prosecution
as version and I just want to
make the point that that's where
this the resources need to be in
the pre prosecution diversion
statue before there's even a
criminal proceeding because
raising confidency is very
tricky and once you raise
confidency as the lawyers on on
the committee know it creates a
ethical
conflict for the attorney
because if the person is even
seems inconfident you can't
agree to it diversion program at
that point and I just saved one
last thing is it doesn't address
the the common sea where they're
found incompetent but not
dangerous they don't get any
reason.
Thank you we're going to go
online those wishing to speak on
the bill i'm taking them as
combined given our time
constraints I see three hands
raise paul if you would keep
your remarks to one minute
please.
The.
All
it could be okay
sorry so many was paul during
the chief please present the
police department madame
chairman community members I
just want to briefly take the
time to for my support for this
bill I think taking steps to
deborah people out of the
jails and prisons into treatment
will hopefully alleviate the
pressure that my officers are
feeling in the streets every day
dealing with these so when he's
folks in these repeat offenders
over and over where they're
hopefully better services aside
from
criminalizing incursed region
for mental behaviour behavior
help issues.
Thank you thank you we necks
have met dietal.
And chairman of the committee I
made from the commander with the
other police department the last
six years i've overseen
especially unit working with
individuals with a big health
diagnost many of the people we
try to help out competences some
of these individuals cycle to
the justice system especially at
the missed you know level for
years not getting the help the
system could provide.
This leads a tragic outcomes
these outcomes include suicide
overdoes pedestrian fatalities
and most disturbing of all a
deadly forcing counter with
police.
The city of our tricky and the
police apartment in also support
these amendments we urge these
committee to these changes
forward which could not only
improve one but also preserve
them.
Thank you thank you and i'm
gonna take one last person
online and that is erin told
layer
lena
erin.
The.
I can hear me yes.
Am thank you madam sharing
committee my name is erin
totalina pomlo and i'm the
police chief for the gall police
department and just as you know
the state in new mexico
has a same issues as we are on
the western part of the state in
also are dealing with an influx
of individuals who are coming to
our system consistently and we
do have a lot of trespassers
shop lifting it to continue
court system going through that
for their individual who
possibly needs help and we do
see that they need help there's
just not enough tools there for
our officers to continue to
provide the service that we need
for these individuals who are
under vulnerable needs but I do
m in support of this umbile it
is a tool to help our long
forcement officers as you know
that we are short on officers
where we are struggling as far
as crime is indated in our
community and this bill would be
a support to our law enforcement
thank you for the time thank you
that concludes our public
comment peace of of the
discussion
presenters did you want to out
anything before I go to
committee questions yes i'm
going to differ to a doctor
niecer
okay.
The.
You could be reasonably brief
that would be helpful doctor
yesterday i'll try
so
we've met as representative lou
handset with
stakeholders for almost a year
now we started in
in july of this last year at the
same time policy academy on
competency we were one of five
states and this is the national
issue that that all states are
really trying to address we've
talked to many states who have
looked at statute changes
and how they're they're
effectively approaching their
competency issues
what I will say is that while
this is a very complex issue um
were really trying to address
criminal competency and so
there's a lot of this and I
completely understand a a fear
of lack of programs and lack of
resources but unfortunately
unless we do something statutory
it'll be very challenging for us
to build or or provide
allocations to any of those
programs to grow them so I did
want to just make that comment
that we're looking specifically
at criminal competency and not
necessarily approaching sort of
like the community resource
aspect of things quite yet but
this has to change first before
we can do.
Okay thank you so let's go to
the committee now if we can I do
want to recognize representative
read because I know you have
some time constraints here thank
you madame chair and
representative
I wanted to person agree with
you guys that this code does
need to be reworked I think we
can all agree on that but as
someone who's worked in this
code a lot and my career it's
it's a very complicated area
it's not easily understood and
and I am really hesitant here in
the comments and reading this to
jump enter just approving all
these changes to the company
code which I don't feel is going
to do what it was hearing from
law enforcement madam chair and
representative this is gonna
make us safer and I I don't read
it that way I read this to allow
people that are dangerous to be
and it says you can be dangerous
and put into a diversion program
and so i'm i'm concerned that
you could be dangerous and then
go into some type of diversion
program I don't know really how
that will protect the community
but I share also the concerns
that
mister bower had and I believe
there was a defense attorney who
had of an and i'm actually not
very pro defence generally but I
I do understand the fact that
incompetent defendants do have
rights and when you when you
look at page two of the spell
and someone raises competency.
And it says you can order a
competitor evaluation or you can
agree to put him into a
diversion program prior to
even looking at their competency
is concerning I I don't know how
you make that leap when you
don't know manager
representative that somebody is
even able to assist in making
that decision you're therefore
asking a defence attorney to say
well on my clients probably not
competitive I don't believe
they're confident or I don't
know cause we haven't even
bothered to do the test and i'm
gonna tell them they're going to
go into this diversion program
the they should have some type
of I mean if we're going to make
a decision for somebody like
that I sure would like a
competency evaluation to to tell
me that that's the right thing
to do where I am sure the
defense attorney would like that
and so that that hurt really
concerns me and then going into
manager the.
The part that if they're ordered
into the diversion program it
looks like their case is
automatically dismissed and and
I understand manage your
representative what you're
trying to do but normally when
you go into the diversion
program the case isn't dismissed
until after they successfully
completed the diversion program
so here it's just wiping
everything out what if they
don't complete the diversion
program according to this
underpage two so it's it's
basically just missing the case
even prior to treatment so I I
have issues with that I also
when i'm trying to be as quick
as I can because I know I have
to leave and and we're on time
constraints I see conflicts with
the the term dangerous and and
what's considered dangerous
i'm just more concerned about
these different.
Restoration company restoration
programs and outpatient programs
and and that these people who
are considered dangerous will be
in them and I guess my my point
of all this is seems like a
mumbled mast to me legally
looking at it and I I think this
is
critical area that we cannot
just jump right into today and
you know we got notice of this
yesterday jump and right into
this and making these huge
decisions on something that I
believe should really be handled
in the interim and i'm happy to
help in the interim I would also
manage and bring to the
committee's attention I was a co
spot service and a bill twenty
three which is an appropriation
that was I believe approved with
a
representative heard in and
jones tall man on
a study for specifically the
behavioral health statutes and
it will deal with its it's money
to where we can actually have
specialists and lawyers and and
people who have stakes in it
study based on the miami model I
think somebody write up and so I
sure would like to get that
study back before we actually
look at it and then I do also I
agree with one of the comments
that i'm not seeing anything in
here which is what i've noticed
throughout my career is when
you're dangerous are not
dangerous but incompetent and
there's nothing to do with those
people I mean they're not
confident they're not dangerous
so we can't go forward with the
new type of
I guess commitment hearing and
those are the ones that are just
released to the street and with
no services are nothing to do
and then they just keep repeat
offending and when they would
keep repeat offending
those are those people that end
up with ten cases that you know
nothing can happen so i'd love
to see something in here that
deals with someone who has found
not competent or found company
not confident and
not but not dangerous
so that we can.
Have some services for somebody
like that because that is a bulk
of what we see is these people
who aren't charged with
dangerous crimes but they're not
competent and we have no where
to help these people so I just
enclosing and I know I didn't
ask you a lot of questions i'm
just trying to make comments
so that I could you know move
this along but it would love to
work on this in the interim with
anybody who is willing to I
think this is just an area we
cannot rush into I don't believe
this is going to protect the
community as long for some of
the leaves it is it's a very
complicated area that I think
unless you've dealt with that a
light it's it's something that
is it's not as easy as it looks
as i'm sure you guys although
that so
I just I have a lot a lot of
concerns about this and I I
can't support this legislation
even though I probably won't be
here to vote
but it just legally has a lot of
issues to me so I just want to
make those comments and you're
surely free to respond but thank
you
okay so I just want to know
thank you very much
representative appreciate your
insights I just want to know
what we do have an accorunt here
here now with on.
Bills and finance and so on so
it's it's a little tricky as we
get so close to the end of the
session so I apologize for that
on the next have representative
sapanski
thank you madame chair.
Uh in I I want to think all of
you for bringing this built
forward because I think you are
opening up a a discussion and a
really important way about
some of the issues facing our
communities
and I
have so many questions i'm just
gonna highlight a few big ones.
For the discussion ahead of us.
It and first i'll start with a
comment on the availability of
treatment resources in our
communities
the.
The wait times are outrageous d
revenue sources for a treatment
facilities are limited
I I understand a view of sort of
if we build it they will come
and if we create these programs
that will open up.
Sources are finding that I don't
view court based services as a
stable source of funding for a
health care facility or for an
independent provider
we are you know in our own
community and santa fe we have
numerous providers that do not
accept medicaid that do not
accept insurance period so.
If you were someone who
can pay two hundred dollars an
hour two hundred and fifty
dollars an hour
you can access those treatment
services by.
He happened to be a medicaid it
could be a six month weight
just to get a counseling
appointment so you know I really
want to go some of the comments
that we heard around the
availability of treatment
because I do believe this is the
conversation about treatment
with in the court system and how
that is provided and couraged
required is a really important
one but we cannot rely on
mandatory treatment to force
availability of treatment that's
not I don't think I not view
that as a health care access
person as
a way to achieve that I think it
is
a way to
access the services that may
exist but we have a lot of
problems and in and how
accessing these services so
that she's a comment and I think
going forward it would be great
for for us to do a serious look
at what is what it is years
after our behavioral house
system was dismantled what does
it take to have robust behavior
house service delivery in
communities across the state
what is it take to have strong
organizational management role
based revenue sources that are
stable for these facilities
and so that it to me is part of
this discussion however I think
this did at this discussion
deserves its own
investigation and certainly
there's a lot of marriage in
looking at this but it has to
occur in the backdrop of we do
not have adequate resources for
people who are having issues
today that are seeking
period
on this issue of
the the question I have for you
all.
Is
what
when we do not we have not fully
in our criminal code explored a
wide range and tools at every
stage of the prosecutorial and
sentencing process so we have a
pre prosecution diversion
program that is solely at the
discretion of prosecutors we
have drug court programs that
are authorized and statute there
may be a couple of others i'm
not aware of their specialty
courts depending on an
individual side daniely
affiliations that they may be up
on access like team core
veterans court in certain
judicial districts
but we have not there are many
states that have a much wider
range of programs available at
every stage of the criminal
process and I am curious
what y
is compensated is so important
to our system like what what
makes us start the conversation
about diversion programs at
competition see why do we need
to declare people incompetent
order to pursue this processing
in
I i'm really curious about that
because I e I feel like there we
have left a bunch of tools on
the table that don't necessity
completely removing a person's
right to
their self determination about
their situation thinking managed
her thank you
the resentative subscansky I
think you've got into the heart
of all the issues and I just
like to say that as someone
who's been working on our
behavioral health system has
been affected from the detriment
in twenty thirteen when it was
dismantled we are building back
we have a now gone through a pan
damage
which then.
Really bolstered all the the
things we need that we're
happening weren't happening and
in a way that we need to address
in such a big way but i'm gonna
allow that big question which is
a really good question to just
to someone chair representative
thank you for the good question
the lack of resources
in any aspect not even just this
one is extremely frustrating we
are looking at things like
expanding assisted out patient
treatment and other programs I
will say that for individuals
who are competent but mentally
ill we have behavior a hold
courts they started twenty years
ago in metro court um and we're
slowly expanding a state wide
so this is the one gap and
that's why we're bringing it up
this is the one gap where
individuals are not connected to
resources and i'm not a
behavioral health expert
so we there was the forensic
psychologist and the training we
got that talks about the
difference between the capacity
to say you know what I do want
to work with wrap around
services so what we would a
diversion means we don't want
them in the criminal justice
system we want them is less
involved in the criminal justice
system as possible so for judge
in the civil side orders and to
assist it out patient treatment
then yes the case does get
dismissed because we know that
they're getting some services
and the case would have been
dismissed regardless.
Diversion to me and and it I
wish more than anything it could
happen earlier in it can and it
had doesn't some states but
these individuals are coming
through to the criminal justice
system at various stages so yes
in a perfect world like they do
in minneapolis were revisited
you'd have a one stop shop where
the police could take him to the
friends of navigator case
manager as posted jail and bring
cases but if we can't get until
arrangement then let's divert
him there cause that's another
opportunity to do so if they
agree and not every client is
the same I am not going to say
that it is but at least it's a
starting point so that is why we
ended up with the confidency
small group of people large
number of cases and it's the one
gap in the justice system.
Thank you for that and you know
I think.
That's helpful and I
personally would feel more
comfortable with this if we were
bringing forward a slew of other
tools within the code because I
feel like if you could allow say
the defence to petition for a
diversion program before
the.
Before.
The individual was sentenced to
say or say you had a way to.
Tie the diversion program to the
length of sentence which I know
is available in some courts and
certainly with drug courts and
and those kinds of courts there
are you may be sent instead of
court you may be allowed to
participate in drug court and
then
have your senator.
Have your senate declared you
know sort of that that's what
you've done and you you don't
need to serve any additional
time but.
I
one of the things I struggle
that final thing i'll just say
and I again really appreciate
the discussion but I just want
us to take various seriously the
idea that there's not treatment
available
the the second part of this is
restoring someone to come and
competency I don't believe
equates to restoring them to you
to having a healthy life I think
those are two different
standards as that is your
understands that cracked
and so restoring someone to
competency so that they can then
go through the rest of the
criminal process.
I.
Is helpful so that they
understand decision making
during that process but i'm just
not sure that.
It is where we should be putting
all of our resources to get
folks
if we have an opportunity for
diversion programs shouldn't
they be more robust where we're
actually giving people access to
you long term services so that I
can
have that healthy hopeful life
that we want for them
and ends in which also ties to
that you know there's no
timelines of this bill
and if you want to comment on
that i'm i'm happy to just
encourage
going forward I didn't really
see any time lines tied the
length of an involuntary stay or
competency diversion program are
competency rusteration program
to a potential sentence that
someone may be facing so then
you're in a process where you
are putting someone through this
competency restoration for maybe
a much longer time frame than
the original charge the they
were facing which which again is
is concerning to me because we
are removing the decision make
their decision making ability to
some degree through this process
so so will love your comment
that was my last comment thank
you manager thank you you are
bringing up all the reasons why
we we are addressing and moving
forward with with this this type
of this legislation through this
statute that we have in place
and why we need to change it and
I believe that.
Just as a modication can talk to
you those points that you are
making I just wanted to clarify
i've been wanting to say this
every time I test by this is not
a treatment court this is to get
them less in front of judges and
it the diversion would happen we
have policies and procedures
already and and thank you
legislature gave us short term
funding for eight friends at
navigators to pilot some things
in some jurisdictions but we
want them at arrangements we
can't control what happens
before that's out of our control
at a raymount at that first
setting to divert him to
services not competency
restoration cause the case was
going to be dismissed anyways
and we don't we want to connect
if if they're they come in with
an infection on their arm if
they come in with holes in their
shoes if they come in without
housing.
This the friends of navigator
should be connecting we don't
want them to come see the judge
quite a bit that is not
what we've learned is successful
and then second the time limits
for diversion would be no longer
than a petty misdemeanor which
is six months for a felony the
lowest level is eighteen months
now if
the person to choose is not to
divert and they go through the
confidence he processed the law
as it stands right now requires
new mexico behavior a health to
restore them to competitor and
you are absolutely correct and
saying that means i'm going to
teach you what a judge does i'm
going to teach you about the
process that i'm gonna make sure
you understand that's what their
task with doing the one good
thing about this legislation is
it gives the behaviour halt
institute the option of at least
sending him off for the
treatment plan and possibly
getting in case management as
well thank you you raise
excellent points I appreciate
think thank you
thank you representing
representative chasing
the manager and i'm so sorry in
this most of the discussion but
I did read the bill last night
at the sponsor's request and
it's really interesting because
I feel like i've done i've heard
this discussion or twenty five
years
the late education are who we
are new.
Was the one who sponsored the
bill to get middle health parity
in the mexico with a support of
senator diminishing and
he had make carrier bill at
least five years ago that was
appropriate nine hundred
thousand dollars for the mental
house system so we could keep
people out of jail
will obviously didn't get the
nine hundred thousand dollars
and
we haven't done match about
keeping people with behavioral
health needs out of jail
for me I think what.
We first targeted talking about
this in legislative health and
human services.
I had hoped it would be very
clear that there would be a path
that wouldn't involve the
criminal justice system and I
don't want arrangements to be
the only avenue and and here is
what happened in my district it
was in a constituent of mine but
there was so
a man who was having a breakdown
mental breakdown and his spam
way could not get the mad need
it he ended up killing five
people and day
he's never been declared
competent he's never had to
stand trial
I also shared off a space i'd
stopped going to a law office
and during the pandemic but
prior to that and whether very
very good psychologist who did a
light of competitors testing and
so she had people all the time
everybody was changed up when
they came in for their
competence see testing
I don't know that she ever had
anyone I the extra did that
under contract with the public
defender but I don't know that
she ever had clients who.
Words already involved with the
justice sister are the criminal
justice system.
And.
Also I just want to say that we
were asked sometime maybe ten
years ago I
hope clinton right now
to do the
involved terry placement and
commitment and we had.
All of those with moral
authority that people who were
there the individuals themselves
the families of individuals the
considerable levels union with
disability rights to mexico
they were split.
So the people with moral
authority were telling us to
absolutely divergent pass or
with their recommending and
mostly we ended up doing
nothing.
And and.
I'm i'm sad when I see people
lying in the streets themselves
for them i'm sad for the
children who have to walk by
them on their way to school I
don't think it's good for a
perception of community safety
so.
I mean this is almost rockets in
its I mean we really have to to
approach this and justice the
model I I don't know you talked
about it was at minneapolis who
said that has the program why
don't we just start their men
and chair let's go somewhere
that it's working let's look at
it and see what it costs here
and what we might need to talk
around uniquely let's not let's
not start over because we've
actually been trying to do this
for way to but I really think
senator t p no and
representative for pursuing this
because it's worthwhile it's
absolutely essential.
Thank you represent
representative
thank you madame chair thank you
representative and
you're you're a great
team there
this is you know not something I
am very familiar with it's not
what I deal with on a day to day
basis so but as I understand it.
We have this
there is existing law relating
to the criminal procedures about
sort of evaluations but there's
also
in our commitment procedures
forty three chapter forty three
there's
a law there that deals with
criminal cases how does how do
those interplay and how do we
know
which
which way at court goes how how
does according no which said a
statute to follow.
Thank you madame chair
representative.
I think I understand your
question
but I also think and and we've
heard.
A few times today.
And I think that we're getting
me civil commitment process and
the criminal commitment process
all.
Combined.
So you know again this this.
Amendment to the criminal
procedure.
Is just that track it is just
the criminal restoration the
competency track the civil
commitme.
A fake you and and madame chair
representative I mean but in
that.
Civil commitment.
Statute there is a mechanism
that deals with criminal cases
correct
yes there is a mechanism already
madam chair representative
there's a mechanism already
within the code of criminal
procedure where at a certain
point of prosecutor can move for
civil commitment.
There are all there also other
options for family members that
and and there were some tweaks
to that within this bill as well
but yes it currently the the
prosecutor does have the ability
to move for civil commitment to
answer your question yes thank
you and and madam chair and and
representative just one of
one concerned I have in
particularly for
defense attorneys and public
defenders is you know if there
is a question as the competency.
Um you know on page two
uh beginning online seven we
have a question as the
competency but prior to or
instead of ordering a competency
evaluation the parties agree and
I just think that that raises
some ethical considerations for
the defense attorneys agreeing
to something when there's a
question as to their clients
competency and in that say a big
concern for me
so it but if you'd like to
address that please.
Up representative madam chair I
think this is an issue for our
other scientists sure all right
thank you
energy representative that's a
it's a good question
I know that the miami model has
been brought up a lot this
session I know that it's been
talked about a lot i've met
judge lifeman number of times
now and heard his presentation
about what they're doing there
and in fact miami is doing what
we are actually discussing doing
right now which is they are
their diverting atternment for
misdemeanors into diversion
intermedial health treatment
so we we have it in to
choose a u brought up is we had
we have looked at most other
states and what they are doing
we're not trying to recreate a
wheel here we're trying to see
what's working and how we can
make it work here in new mexico
for our population
we have spoken extensively with
defense council
look pda defense criminal bar
and then also just defense
attorneys who are really doing
this work across the state in in
all jurisdictions
I think the key here is if the
parties agree.
We're talking about familiar
faces within our communities
that we see consistently
I can name
a few of those right off the top
of my head from most
jurisdictions
we're talking about people who
have been doing this repeatedly
who have competency who have
multiple comprehensive
evaluations or competency is
raised multiple times per year
because we're not connecting
those individuals to services
we're just going to keep doing
these competency evaluations
dismissing cases and seeing them
come back so what you're seeing
here is prior to and or instead
of ordering a competency
evaluation of which a lot of
these individuals have already
had quite a few
if the party's agree then they
can move
to a different avenue so that's
really the heart of what we're
trying to do here while I
appreciate this is extremely
complex
we have talked to a lot of our
are stay holders and and I have
I do really really appreciate
everyone taking the time to meet
with them and nobody and share
all their information so I hope
they answer your question
thank you doctor
madame chair representative
it kind of does but I mean the
parties agree aming parties
would encompass the the
defendant.
Ammer herself correct
so that I guess goes to another
sort of hot topic so managed
here representative we bring up
another very very
largely discussed topic which is
the difference between criminal
competency and the ability to
consent to treatment and those
two things get conflicted
especially when we're talking
about a moving through the
competency process so to give
you another
anecdote around this another
area that we see that challenge
is in the competency process
there is been a huge debate for
years and years and years
whether or not a defendant can
sign a release of information so
that the evaluator can get the
information that they need to
complete and evaluation to best
practices so we're even having
those conversations that's
inhibiting our ability to do all
of this and a timely manner so I
think
with if the parties agree right
we're talking about if if the
year and I have it written down.
So constant a treatment must be
both informed and voluntary
meaning that they've received
information about benefits risks
and nature of all options and
the defendant has the option to
decline and and that would be
true with if the parties agree
the defense council would have
that conversation if they're an
obviously i've spoken to many of
them
and they're going to say yes
there's an ethical concern
around that and we're still you
know we're still working with
what that looks like in terms of
that but what I will say is in
other states they've found a way
that like like in the miami
model to navigate that and to
include all of that within their
statute
okay thank you
I was interesting madame chair
and and representative i.
I I still have some current
concerns about whether or not a
party can agree when there's a
question as the competency but
I appreciate the answers in that
thank you all very much thank
you madam chair thank you very
much representative
anyone else wish to
speak thank you man chair and
good morning presenters
sponsor.
Um.
I was listening to the webcast
on the way here it's a lot of
the questions have been asked
that I do want to start by.
Commanding the sponsors a hard
bill it's a very tough builds
very tough issue.
And and let me even few few
dollars out of chair just to
give a brief story so I I grew
up in the international district
is an albuquerque
it used to be called the wars on
now we call it the international
district for obvious reasons
we're very proud of that
community.
It is a hub for migrants from
all over the world easy hub for
asylum seekers
there's a lot of more state
family housing
once upon a time it was based
off based housing so you have a
tons of apartment buildings and
over the last fifty years or so
it's become more
you know what we would consider
lowering compousing.
When I grew up their mancher
you know we would walk to the
circle came down the street now
known as adam's market have read
the news the last few months
everybody knows about adam's
market used to be a circle came.
My cousins and I would walk
there
s eight nine years old writer
bikes walk there whatever my
hard dog was soda
and you would see people
struggling you know so working
class neighborhood
but nothing.
Out of the ordinary nothing that
would offend
in all my sensibilities is a cat
or anything like that
obviously i've seen smooth
my my uncles and cousins my
parents still in the general
area so i.
Drive up and down a lot in when
I started noticing the last few
years is how much that
community.
Has fallen part and it is really
sad
and i've sat here in this
legislature for ten years.
Um.
And we while try and really hard
to find some solutions to find
some ways to address the issue.
Now.
You know I found myself driving
through the neighborhood for
awhile you know just like i'm
gonna go on a dry ominous and we
could see how the poor people.
That was my mentality and then I
said you know I need to go into
walk
it won't be myself back in the
community so I did so but a
month ago month and a half ago.
I
called a friend who was a
firefighter and he just saw
happens to be at I believe it
station five which sundollars in
the central and he said when you
come with us for a day so I did
we walk those streets man chair
representative in what I saw was
nothing short of horrific.
Now I saw people smoking
fentinal from here to there in
front of me with a firefighter
next to me.
We responded to a bond fire that
morning at six in the morning is
really cold there was a group of
fifty sixty individuals right
outside of adam's market.
Burning trash plastic whatever
they can find so you can imagine
the smile.
I saw people in walkers place
are old people at six in the
morning freezing huddled around
he bought f.
And then I saw the other extreme
I saw who appeared to be fifteen
sixteen year old girl.
All of these people or the
people that I saw up close and
personal had been works on their
fees remarks on their fingers
that's probably the pipes that
they used to smoke fent and all
in method whatever else.
So I share that story manager
because we're out of point.
Where we have to strike the
balance.
Between the need the urgent need
of people to access health gear
services behavioral health
services.
And protecting people civil
liberties
now
I don't know how we do that
there's a proposal very gutsy
proposal by
percent of high insertion penal.
Indoors by the governor.
You know I don't know the boats
are there to passed the session
but I can tell you it's a gutsy
move to even be up there
presenting this
now to meet you manage her in
and sponsors
that
well we all have simple
liberties that we must protect
to the death
i'm not sure
there is a civil liberty.
Two rampant drug addiction to be
abused on the streets and
reabuse on the streets and
reabuse on the streets.
And when we car believe
and when we say nope can do this
of liberties.
I asked myself well what about
the people that are on the
streets.
What about their conditions and
I can tell you from what I saw
in the international district
and what I continue seeing the
international district we are
all they may.
All of us myself included.
Now there's some organizations
on the ground to an amazing
work.
There is joint landry down in
trouble neighborhood down the
street who literally runs a
little church out of her house
and let's people pick stands in
her driveway.
There's an equator of the ill
who's a long time activist in
that community who literally you
know during college was feeding
people and giving people
water and you people pick it up
surringes
their incredible leaders in
those neighborhoods.
Doing the work.
But I submit to you manager they
need help
and yes they need money through
our budget process which we are
working really hard to deliver
but they also need tools
to make sure people can be taken
care of and to make sure that
people.
Have each chance.
Again I don't know if this is
the fix I don't know how much
more work this will need to get
into a shape where you can pass
and be locked.
Obviously when they do.
When you do these september
things that there's a budget
impact to that you know we
talked about this yesterday with
another bill that we had here
but I I do want to commend the
sponsor for having the guts in
the courage to bring this
up it's not easy and it'll
probably take a while before we
can get this done but I am
sounding an alarm bill because
this is truly truly an urgent
matter thank you chair thank you
representative for your work and
thank you to your sponsors and
your your correspondence was in
your experts will be here today
thank you speaker at
representative ring
thank you man of chair and i'm
sorry that I was a little bit
late arriving.
The.
When I was a police officer you
know I spoke with the court and
then last year bill tommon
senator I spoke with the courts.
And we met with the a o c and
like before I said you know you
see these individuals come in
and their repeat every couple
months and
I call more nuisance crimes that
they're in the court system
and I said what i'd like to see
you do
you have the power when they
come in to send them for an
evaluation.
Have them evaluated you actually
have most of them or misdemeanor
that they have a year
jurisdiction and send them to
some type of treatment if it's
if it's needed alcohol drug
mental or combination error of
and built how many centered tom
in and introduced to bill last
year though to mandate that and
of course they got no hearing.
The cord opposed it
which i'm ton is surprised.
You know other than they don't
want to be told what to do but
it's time for them to step up
and start doing this
I read your bill and I totally
agree with what we need to do
one of the things I think it's
so late in the session that we
have
of the very slim chance to get
meant through
but what I took the liberty up
and I hope you agree
I took your bill and had a
memorial mate
and I am the number two signer
on here with you
so you know as the speaker today
if he could read it out and then
put it on the table
thank you thank you
representative did you want to
comment on representative
american chair i'm obviously
very affected by this because I
too lived in the international
district when I
lived in albuquerque are for
quite a while
so thank you mister speaker for
thank you for your your support
and what in the words
represent a ream I appreciate
your effort right now
and thank you for the support as
well I think that we are start
sounding the alarm madam chair
and it's loud and even in my
district that I represent here
inside the fact.
My my district goes all the way
down serious road.
And I go out.
To my district.
The.
And I interact a strict
on the ground and these are
issues that we are not
committing to but the points
that I think you're getting to
with representative of rain.
Thank you and I appreciate that
i.
I see I understand where you're
coming from I I don't know where
we move right now and the
process during this hearing but
I thank you for that.
Manshare I don't you know if you
have any other direction manager
thank you i'm represented free
did you have anything yeah
matter of chair
so this is going to be an
interim committee and they're
going to report to the health
committee and to ccj committee
you know on what they're
finished with the
recommendations are and then I
think next year you come back
with the bill
you know of of to fix it
whatever they recommend
representative mean it has been
suggested that we might also
wished at lfc because obviously
there are financial impacts.
A whole littening of things
including making sure we have
behavioral health services that
are well funded in the courts
that have the need means that
they need and there's a whole
little bit of things so I think
that's a very good suggestion
maybe when we're done with this
committee you could take it back
up to the drafters and and get
a.
Makes sense managed here i'll go
up to naf that added and then
represent the blue honest i'll
bring it to you on the floor.
I'm and I think everyone is
spoken except for me and you
know I do want to say that this
is a very impressive in
ambitious and I mean that in a
positive way effort to take on a
problem that my dear colleague
who's has more experience in the
house than I do have said has
been pending for decades really
and we have to get our arms
around the it's just getting
worse.
And it's hard breaking.
But
I don't think we're quite ready
to move on and the spill and at
least that's what i've heard
from all virtually all the
members here I think and that's
not because we don't appreciate
and respect the interest of the
two sponsors and the governor's
office
I know how strongly and firmly
committed she is into in terms
of getting this problem is all
the it is part of our whole you
know it's a whole spectrum of
crime issues and behavioral
issues and many of them are in
our related and we can't silo
them in a way that it because
we'll never solve it that way we
need to be thinking of it in in
us in a whole spectrum and this
is a very impressive first start
I know that people have been
working and just to some more
and others and doctor and
sponsor and governor's office
but I don't see the the that we
have yet coalist around the rate
solution and
but i'm really happy that we
were able to hear your bill and
maybe we could will will
definitely move forward during
the interim i'm chair of ccj
this
interim and i'd love to work
with all of you i'd like to put
together a very robust agenda
where we're talking about this
you know for you know a whole
day if not more and we we can
actually come up with a solution
by the end of the.
To collect around in the longer
session so I I i'm sorry that we
haven't been able to come to
consensus any one of you wish to
say anything before i'm in a row
the bill down but if anyone else
wished to say something before
remove for okay very much
appreciate all the work we're
found sponsor did you want to.
Again this is
serious and
conversation and I appreciate
the time of the committee to
join and have the conversation
with us thank you so much and.
Let's have a good rest of our
session if we can
see that senator idea is here I
understand that there's been
hopefully a compromise.
Thank you madame chair and yes
we did work through the night
and they want to thank everybody
that gave us feedback yesterday
when we are here and we did work
out a great compromise of taking
a buyer or for the courts and
that's what the amendment does
essentially removes the courts
from the the measure altogether
and meets their requirements and
they're here today also to
signify agreement.
So if we could have the two to
eight number that would be great
three nine four dot one okay
we're on senate bill one twenty
nine
senator pedia so would someone
move the amendment for
discussion okay
motion board representatives
second by speaker all right
senator floris doors thank you
madame chair and members
appreciate the opportunity to
come back I know that you are
trying to get to your floor as
well and i'm trying to get back
to finance but I don't want to
miss you so this amendment
essentially and I did explain
the bill yesterday and if you go
through the whole you know I
won't go through the little of
it but essentially there's these
are the changes that are needed
at the moment to stand up our
office cyber security that I
sponsored last year and that we
agreed to as a legislature we
did find that the comments by
the courts were very valid and
we need to find a way to
interact with them at some point
but at this point this amendment
removes them from the
requirements of the legislation.
And they're here today if you
want to ask for their comments
sir
while people are reading justice
did you want a way in or anyone
of your selena
chair members of the committee
shame and back and cheap just
the new mexico supreme court I
want to make it very clear that
the changes that you're being
proposed by my general council
and my intentive of it were
completely supported by the new
mexico supreme court at every
turn.
And that amendments that have
been made
the way our last night.
Thank you just just.
So I have a go ahead represent
your cheer I guess
in order to fix.
What was being questioned last
night has got rid of the
question here so.
That's correct out of insurance
representative thank you
manager.
The.
I'm sorry I didn't hear what you
asked and what did you apologize
here pretty basically
if the problem she was ever was
to court the court should not
agree with him so instead of a
working for the courts just cut
about completely
as as they request that was
their request and we have
decided to honor that okay okay
so I have a question unless
anyone else does
our way young you may but let me
ask well since we have a limited
time.
What about the legislation.
You know we are a separate
energy from the executive branch
as well and i'm not i'd like to
understand why it is if the
courts are which I believe is a
fair statement
you know separate by a
separation of powers kinds of
way aren't we are now charged be
the same argument that I have
last night or or statement I had
last night which is if you want
to do a uh transaction with
state government they're the
executive branch which is where
the dollar site where the
documents need to be filed
pulled in in in put out put
whatever that you need to meet
the minimum standard including
the legislature
so basically we're proposing
what the federal government does
to the states all the time which
is if you're receiving and we
don't like it if you're
receiving money you're
subjecting yourself to our power
is that kind of what you're
saying center for this purpose
yes okay alright I I don't like
that
especially when we're doing it
to ourselves you know it's bad
enough when it's being done to
us and it's very unpleasant when
it's being done to us and
sometimes almost to the point of
offensive and so madam chair
just one
thing to catch up apologies okay
your hep so but the changes that
we did make.
Solve the issue with legislature
also so that this isn't just
about the the court.
So you and that should allow
your fear of what you are
mentioned appreciate that and I
just look to my able staff and
they noticed in the affirmative
so just want to make that point
though I mean we need to be
mindful of that as well
anyone.
Looks like we just lost a corner
but oh oh i'm sorry i'm sorry
speaker don't mean to be out of
handsome guy over
okay go ahead represent a fembry
yes thank you madame chair and
thank you senator and I think is
that
the the fourth amendment item
where
well.
A public body
but we're answering there or
another branch of government is
that.
Um.
May voluntarily comply with the
rules so that's
the judicial area participate if
you choose okay thank you thank
you senator thank you matter
thank you anyone else wishing to
ask questions and that I cut you
off representative
sure okay.
The mentally listed thought I
have is that I think we need to
do a remote year the amendment
in the I moved that we approved
the event
there's been emotion to adopt
the amendment do I have a second
okay motion to adopt on me by
representative of one second by
representative reading is there
any opposition to adopting the
amendment
I don't see any opposition to
adopting the amendment you can
talk some more about the bill p
like.
I don't hear a lot of interest
in further discussions one of
those really exciting topic that
everyone is dying to talk well
it's important though so it's a
member of representatives
chasing whoever do has senate
bill well that committee said
senate bill one twenty nine
second and think thanks to the
sponsor for comment of every
okay
we have emotion for dupours made
by represent of chase seconded
by representative for ramiro in
it is a due pass on senate
finance committee substitute for
senate health in public services
affairs committee substitute for
senate bill one twenty nine as
amended alright and will you
call the role please
representative all con
representative chasey
representative him yes
representative lane
speaker martinez
representative mcqueen
representative reap.
Representative ream
representative
sapansky madam bice chair yes
madam chair yes
seventy zero you have a dupatory
thank you madame chair members
of the committee thanks for
working with the courts
appreciate
all right
anyone here wish to bring
anything else up before we turn
I really want to appreciate all
of you for your flexibility and
willingness to participate
except for one of you in this
