Representative McQueen.
Here.
Representative night.
Here.
Representative green here.
Representative Townsend Here.
I.
I'm
here.
Madam chair.
Present as well we have a
quorum.
Okay.
Wanted to let everyone know
first of all that that Senate
bill twelve made it onto our
agenda and we wanted to do it
then we were asked
to add how straight resolution
fourteen which is somewhat of an
emergency and so we didn't get.
All twelve analyzed.
And it will be Monday and I am.
I want to see I believe that we
have house joint resolution
fourteen as the first item.
On the list is first.
Thirteen analysts this first
okay.
We do have Representative
Montoya we have Representative
Lewis and who also some that are
in chair you are let's begin
with them.
Resolution thirteen.
Thank you.
Go ahead take a vote okay thank
you madam chair I.
as you mentioned
Members of this committee are on
this bill
Representative Daymon Ely
represented Georgene Louis and
Representative Townsend on on
the Senate it's a Senator Ivey
Soto is on this bill as well
he'll be carrying on that side
he which he helped me last year
with the same bill made a couple
changes to it and quickly I know
you're you've got you're short
on time so let me just say this
bill has for moving parts the
first one is instead of a thirty
day and sixty day session we
have it will this bill proposes
that we go this joint resolution
proposes that we go to the
voters and offer that we go to
forty five day sessions
it moves the beginning date of
the sections to the third
Tuesday in February.
the reason for that that's just
something that Representative
Lundstrom asked for we get a of
a new.
We get new numbers concerning
the budget in about the middle
of February and so
Representative Lundstrom asked
that we move the date back we go
to forty five days because that
thirty day session literally she
she gets the new budget numbers
for the new numbers from DFA and
from the governor's team from
the governor's team from LFC
about the middle of February so
we during the thirty day session
we are finishing up our work
which is supposed to be a budget
session with numbers that are
from a previous.
previous information old
information and so
that's the reason for moving to
the third Tuesday of February
also what this bill does is
since we or this joint
resolution it takes way
restrictions on bill
introduction
so that quite frankly the it
doesn't turn out to be just a a
special session for you know
whoever whichever governor is in
office at that time and then
because of the dates are moved
back slightly it puts in place a
new deadline for bills are to go
into effect during the start
time and that is instead of
ninety days out after a session
it's seventy five days out that
way bills would going to affect
prior to the new fiscal year and
with that.
I'll stand for questions.
And it did either of the other
co sponsors wish to add anything
I'm not sure I do I am very
quick you know we we do need to
pay legislature and so that is
working its way through the
Senate in some English issues
about how that's gonna work out
you know I do think that
there's kind of two things going
on one is is that the closer we
get to the end of the fiscal
year the battery just for the
budgeteers and I'm sure
Lundstrom is said that
repeatedly so moving into
February makes perfect sense
from a budgetary point of view I
I have seen some concerns over
the fact that the second session
is not restricted frankly I mean
that's a certain legislative
power that's what we should be
doing and so on for both sides
but I do think chair has talked
repeatedly about and in my
judgment very correctly about
paying legislature's and I do
think this along with the house
sure resolution that would leave
it either to a commission or the
ethics commission or whatever
the compromise is going to be
would be a good thing to have on
the ballot with the voters and
that's why I was thinking
that politics makes strange
bedfellows and this is certainly
one of but I think
Representative might try and I
agree on this and so I would
urge the committee support thank
you madam chair.
Thank you let's go to the
audience and state we'll have a
full first it seems like a all.
The second with regard to
technical and those in favor of
house joint resolution thirteen
please say yes and those in
opposition presale we'll get
that up.
We're ready to go.
Okay we have seventy five
percent support and one in
opposition but we've only got
four people voting here so it's
not and it's not.
Landslide the last.
So let me see of those in
attendance if anyone would like
to speak on this particular
issue so please raise your hand.
We don't have any public comment
and I have first on my list
Representative McQueen.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair representative
Montoya
you may remember that you and I
talked about this year to go I'm
not sure how long.
And it came up in the context
that I think of.
In the third day session the the
party in the minority being
kinda left out because they were
getting messages from the
governor in
You know I know full well that
the party the minority to switch
because I've been in the
minority so I you know with a
with an unfriendly governor
So I you know I I get that
concerned and I I.
All in favor of
Removing the germane this
limitation to the quick quick
short session.
I actually toyed with the idea
of running this kind of
resolution this year I mean it
was it was on my on my short
list of my long list of possible
legislation.
And.
The it as we got close to
session and I was or was laying
down and you can clear that
we're gonna have a virtual
session
I I held off in mentor cemetery
I thought it'd be interesting.
To see what happened in the
session.
We're in the house at least.
We had bill limits.
Which I was a big supporter of
that idea.
And you know we got rid of that
morning floor session.
Where we did all the ceremonial
stuff.
Right so I don't know.
You know who's what college
someone's in turn wants to go to
or what their favorite sport is
and things like that in I you
know I appreciate the process of
the legislature but.
We spend way too much time on
that stuff we tuition.
Yeah the memorials and and I
just because on the on.
And so I think the really
interesting to see where we
stood on this in the sixty day
session with those two factors
the limits and less ceremonial.
In here we are
We in two hours from being done.
And we're slant we're trying to
get things done and we're not
even close.
this bill would be dead probably
probably is that right I mean so
guy go through the house floor
give the Senate I you know.
In.
Yeah so we have significant
I think we need to look at our
process.
I think our process is broken.
I I think the idea the singles
Center can kill my bill because
he doesn't like it runs me the
wrong way.
And that happens routinely.
You know I I think I think the
bill limits in the house and
worked out well.
I think they made the house
members more focused on
priorities.
In any of the house floor is and
France in much better shape than
senator.
So I mean I think that's a plus
I think there are things that we
should do to make our process
better.
But based on the experience this
year I don't think forty five
days is not.
So madam chair of Representative
multi unit any thoughts on that.
Yes thank you Representative and
I do recall that our discussions
there that's discussions were
last year because of we did
introduce this last year I.
we did have this conversation
and we also have a conversation
about the number of days I'm not
sure forty five days is the
right number
I do know during the thirty day
session thirty days is not the
right number
because anything that happens
here is worse than.
And the reason for that thirty
day session at sixteen thirty
day that we had a lot of
conversation during this session
about
antiquated.
Language and and why we've done
it the reason our sessions in in
the spring as because of the
farming community.
and so there there's a bunch of
moving parts here but one thing
that I would say is we have had
a lot of conversation this
session and there is a joint
resolution moving forward about.
trying to figure out a way if or
if a legislator should be paid.
But I I would suggest if we're
going towards a professional
legislature.
Thirty days were.
You know just.
I'm not sure in the party of
whoever the governor is your
legislation doesn't get
considered I don't know why the
people would pay Hey
legislators if we're not.
More a full time I guess
legislators so I I do agree this
is not.
The one answer I think in
combination I think.
and by the way I have to also
admit.
Four sessions a.
With the delimitation.
Representative has streamline
things I think we're pretty much
done with house bill's.
On this side in a week out so
and it could have been done
earlier if we had to because we
we we cut some day short so
I don't know if this is the I
don't believe this is the only
answer but I do believe this is
part of the answer and in part I
think moving the date back is
important to make sure that
since the thirty day sessions
must be a budget session and the
budget numbers are old numbers
right up until the end of the
you know the session in the
thirty day session and we get
the new revenue estimates.
Mid February.
This I believe this may not this
may not help the sixty day
session but I think this helps
dramatically that thirty day
session.
Madam chair I just add very
quickly I know we got a press to
Jenna I would just say
Representative McQueen
if he has a floor amendment I I
would certainly as one of the
sponsors be open that but keep
in mind that the problem is if
we if we have for example to
sixty day sessions result in pay
and it would be a problem I
think in a tracking people run
for this job to expand those
sessions and expect people to
sacrifice their profession
personal wires without
compensation I just think you're
gonna limit that piety and you
could say well should we wait
for that Mexico with the German
point of view I get that I just
think the discussions are
valuable one so I'm I'm open to
suggestions even as we get to go
for thank you madam chair thank
you Representative.
Chairman queen I'm in the same
position I'm not.
I'm not locked into forty five
forty five necessarily but
something has to happen on a
thirty day session
to first off make it to where we
are actually able to put out a
budget during a budget here
that with good numbers and and
secondly I do believe this is a
legislative powers issue
many of you that are here of
your under eight years of the
Martinez administration which
means eight years for four years
you Madam much somehow you snack
something in you don't get a
bill introduced during those
during for those eight years
so.
I I think I'm just from a
separation of powers issue I
think it's important to deal
with this.
Madam chair representative yeah
yeah I appropriate those
sentiments I think I support
everything in the resolution
except the forty five forty five
and I actually you know all all
sure that the first time I heard
the forty five forty five idea
was from then Representative
David guy egos I think when I
was a freshman and it just sort
of a there's a certain logic to
it it's sort of a compromise
between forty five and there are
thirteen sixty yeah so we could
we could tell the voters were
actually not adding days but.
Right yeah I think we need that
dates you know I think it needs
to be sixty sixty
but the rest I support and I
actually you know I'm.
I actually think the legislature
needs to be paid and it would be
nice if we could you know do the
sort of big rolled up all the
one package thing but for
logrolling reasons and
constitutional reasons I don't
think that's possible so I think
we need to do what we can when
we can but I you know I would
vote for this at sixty sixty but
not forty five forty five but I
do support what you're trying to
do so thank you madam chair
thank you Representative.
Thank you.
The next representative bring.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative von Toyota.
My big concern with your start
dates and let me back up the
first person to ever proposes
idea forty five forty five well
as a key piece of a drug and I
agree and I think it's a good
idea and I think we should do
that.
But your start date when were
going into the primary portion
of our election year we have to
file by mid March and so you're
running right over the top of
that we're in session and that's
going to make it difficult for
us to get signatures
I think you need to back it up
but I understand
A chairwoman one strums issue as
well and I'm not sure how we
compromise that something we may
need to look at but I'm in
support of the idea I think we
need to think about that I don't
know if you have a comment but
that's my only comment on it I I
do have a comment on that if I
have I did think about that and.
Of the one thing we've been
doing is there would be time.
Prior to us coming in the
session that we can get those
signatures now it's a little
colder and probably maybe a few
more events are
Doing it would be a little bit
rougher weather but
I'm not necessarily tied to the
to the start date but if the the
leader we put it in the session
the better opportunity we have
for our members on.
On the house Appropriations to
be dealing with good numbers.
Yeah I agree thank you madam
chair.
Next I have Representative night
part.
Thank you madam chair my
questions were answered thank
you.
Madam chair I'm sorry something
went wrong with my audio I
thought Representative night
reset all of these questions
were answered.
Very strange is.
Representative Armstrong thank
you madam chair and
Representative I'm
I'm not going to be long because
I I I agree completely with
Representative McQueen I don't
think the forty five days is
long enough but I I understand
the issue and I I I think we
need to be paid and professional
and probably ninety days to be
honest and
how we get there I'm not sure
but I I worried to sixty days
are so hard to get things
through I worry that were I and
in thirty days is awful so it
fixes the thirty day but none
helped and the the sixty and I
know it'll even out maybe over
time but.
I just think forty five feels
too short because our combined
thirty and sixty feels too short
so I'm I'm struggling with with
that but
I appreciate the the discussion
and Anna I'm to trying to fix
this.
I'm not right there on this
proposed billion thank you.
Vice chair yes thank you madam
chair Sanchez representatives I
also think I'm leaning towards
supporting this idea today
because I also like has been
previously stated certainly I
used to think the forty five
split in the middle is the right
deal but appreciate I know on
our side of the aisle we've
talked a lot about the I feel
limit was a big proponent of the
fight I believe it and I
actually still think it has
brought a lot of prioritization
you know really needed way to
what we actually do and how we
consider I know we felt slammed
by that in house Judiciary madam
chair because I kept thinking
how are we hearing so many big
meaningful huge bills and it's
because we've sort of cleared
the way to really think about
what was monitoring what matters
to our constituents and
communities at home so I I like
a previous commenters now think
that potentially forty five is a
bit tight but I certainly like
the idea and I appreciate all
the consideration you all have
taken and want to keep working
on this thank you madam chair.
So madam chair on that point I
have had this conversation with
the speaker and I I was actually
expecting a.
An amendment.
To turn this to sixty days I
don't know if the speaker is on
but I I was.
I told that I could potentially
expected CS sixty day a proposal
and.
I'm not necessarily against that
it will cause problems with us
getting signatures because.
if we want to to sixty days I'm
sure we we would have to go go
away from the proposal to the
amendment happy bigger than just
going to sixty days on this
On the amendment because we have
to get rid of starting the third
Tuesday of February we have to
and we try to go back to the
regular ninety days for bills to
go into effect
but.
I as I had discussed with the.
The speaker
this is not just my.
joint resolution and other
members on this that are that
that have signed on have
expressed that they would be
willing to to do something as
well so I I have no idea if
that's the.
The will or the pleasure of the
of the committee but it's
Representative Ely express that
earlier Representative Senator
Ivey Soto has expressed that to
me as well so I'm not sure I
would necessarily be against
that I.
It does mean costs go up now
we're we're adding.
Thirty days to the overall cost
and two year cycle but if we're
going to be a professional
legislature and if we're going
to the.
To the public.
During the next election with a
proposal that says that
legislators should be paid.
I just I have a hard time in the
sixty thirty day split knowing
that you know a little less than
half of the members in the
legislature
their voice is not heard.
During the thirty day session so
I I personally prefer forty five
forty five I do believe that it
causes a bigger problem that's
what Representative re brought
up about the collecting
signatures but I A. R. I also I
know don't know about you guys
but I'll figure out a way to get
signatures.
so any help with that I don't
know the will of the of the
committee is back but I think
there is some potential appetite
for that among the signers that
madam chair I could.
I'm Representative Eli I'm
Representative Nibert actually
thought of another question did
you are you on the point that
Representative Montoya okay I I
do think if this were to advance
out of the committee.
That there are other variations
on the theme there is no reason
why we have to have sixty six we
have four forty five forty five.
We could have sixty in the off
year which Walt wouldn't
entirely address Representative
range concern what would help
and then forty five day again
without the restrictions that we
currently have a special session
so.
Sure.
I do think that
it it provokes further just
discussions are allergies so I
apologize so I I think it in
production for the discussion
and I I think I would say is a
co sponsor that I love the
discussion and I'm hoping to so
if it's the floor this is one
where I think we're gonna be
open to suggestions and maybe
some potential for us thank you
madam chair.
Thank you.
I'll go to Representative Nibert
now.
Thank you madam chair sense were
put less than the constitution
or changing the constitution was
any thought given to not having.
A day limit that were in session
and.
Leave it up to the legislature
to determine how long it remains
in session.
No.
Madam chair.
It is another way of looking at
this is no magic that we say we
gonna have a limitation on it
but I I do think that provokes
for discussion on the sponsor
list the one thing about the
Well.
You know what that.
Yes I have not thought of that
so I would say have to think
about that a little bit more at
this point even get an answer.
Further questions you know when
it would be interesting to see.
You know there are number of
legislature's that we for a time
recessed for a time meet for a
time and I'm wondering if those
are in the state constitution so
I think that's that's something
worth
Examining or researching.
We have other questions I I
actually had to talk to Senator
on the phone so I didn't share
Representative Rehm raise what I
thought was an issue which is.
We have deadlines for filing for
candidates and then.
But possibly campaign reporting.
All of those things might be
affected if you ended up moving
back filing dates.
And
Declarations of candidacy.
So I'm not sick I don't think we
would have to
In any way.
Alter election dates but all of
those things that are related
but are in different different
sections you've got the
secretary of state you've got
the counties than the filings
for all offices and so forth.
Representative Townsend did you
think the question here to go
ahead.
Yes ma'am thank you madam chair
I think this is a good
discussion I think so.
I think we all realize that
we're missing the mark.
We all have the news on whether
we should be Hey there should be
a.
We all have issues.
One of my one of my.
Issues that are always.
What was.
Would help considerably.
Is
the Senate currently is four
year terms.
A lot of their issues are
resolved because they develop
relationships that carry over to
the committee and that's not so
damn partners and political it's
about doing the right thing.
And I think we ought it seems
seriously consider two cents one
the length of the term.
And I think staffing offices in
the districts that allowed
representatives to be.
To really have an interaction
where people have a place to go
to make
a difference I think I think
it's.
I think it would be useful to
process so I would just say that
I think our conversation.
Is
this I think we all realize that
a make some changes that we want
to increase our that must and I
appreciate conversation thank
you for.
Thank you what's the pleasure of
the committee.
I moved it it's all second that.
Madam chair I was the second but
yes.
Okay we'll do it that way
Representative Townsend moved to
do past and by circuit on a
second the motion and let the
record reflect that several
people tried to seconded the
motion just.
This so.
I'm not exactly sure if we have
all folks present whose names I
see on the screen so I think
it's probably wise to call the
roll.
Representative Alcon.
Representative Armstrong.
Yes.
Representative Cook yes.
Mr speaker.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Lewis yes.
Representative McQueen their and
explain my vote.
Representative Nibert.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Rehm.
Yes.
Representative Townsend.
Yes.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Madam chair I'm still thinking.
Although yes and I'll explain my
vote as well so what is the
account by a vote of ninety two
we have a due pass.
All right and I would like to
the size of Representative Quinn
I know you want to explain your
uncle had.
Thank you madam chair I'm yes
it's sixty sixty I do appreciate
the effort I just think forty
five forty five would be to
eliminate thank you madam chair.
Madam chair can I explain my
vote as well.
Yes you may thank you I I kind
of feel the same way but I voted
yes because if there's going to
be amendments and continued talk
we may actually get there by the
time we get to the floor so I
didn't want to stop it at this
point so thank you.
Actually those that was my sense
as well that we probably need to
have an opportunity for our
colleagues to weigh in on this
And I don't think forty five
forty five is going to do it I
am more of the sixty sixty
persuasion.
I do like the idea that one of
the sessions is not just
restricted budget session I I
completely agree with that and I
I don't think it's just hard on
the minority it's it's kind of
hard on everybody especially
when.
We have a sixty day session and
then we have a whole new group
of numbers on it Committee and
we're proposing.
Ideas that are really great
ideas and we're then we're
facing a thirty day session
where we have to hope that
somehow those ideas make it into
the call and that doesn't seem
right the way that we're
constituted and and really the
only opportunity we have to
deliberate is the.
The interim committees where we
can really hash out
a subject so what this does it
deal with it here is the idea of
staff.
You're wrong staff for us which.
I don't think it really helps us
to get paid if we and to be able
to put more time into it if we
don't have folks who can support
us in analyzing and I think I'm
just amazed at how well are are
on.
Our chief clerk of the house.
Staff who do constituent service
but they can't do it during the
session and
But people expect of us because
they have it from their
congressional gel our
congressional delegation so it's
it's it's it's tough it's a
heavy left.
So you have to do passed so
we'll have this discussion
further and other thank you all
very much.
Thank you madam.
All right I'm Representative
Baldonado your the reason we're
having an emergency
measure this morning so welcome
and consensus that it's worth
analyzing something that wasn't
in the locator yesterday.
Thank you madam chair and
members of your committee it is
a very worthy endeavor it's
house joint resolution fourteen
Madam chair many of you will
know that the village of those
than us in conjunction with New
Mexico DOT we've been moving
towards a second I. twenty five
interchange along with the
second river crossing to listen
this is.
very much hampered by the fact
that we have on the highway six
exit two oh three and then it's
a bottleneck to just get around
the entire county because of
that and as we grow.
With projects like Facebook and
and Niagara water bottling and
Walmart distribution we we are
feeling the pinch so this this
joint resolution and I do
apologize madam chair and I know
that that many folks had to live
happily to get this thing on the
on the calendar today we were
just working through things were
working in conjunction with the
General Services Department with
the D. O. T. and also with
corrections because what we're
trying to do madam chair the
bill or the resolution requests
an easement of a roadway
easement to the village of
lessons from from GST and so
with the help of of secretary
can Ortiz and secretary Mike
Santa and secretary Lisa to foil
a
we're at this point right now it
took a little bit of a heavy
lift but we're we're getting
there so madam chair that the
the bill is very technical in
regard to the fact that it has
to.
Very in a very boring manner
described the actual properties
it read sort of like a deed if
you will and pages one and two
are somewhere as is
talking about what we're trying
to do and then pages three
through eighteen is all the all
the fun reading just describing
the properties and then at the
very end and we we see the the
the reason the resolutions that
that we end up with you know
transcends identity you have
madam chair secretary or tease I
believe secretary Santa should
be in within this as well and
and then a General Services
Department couple more names for
you let's see here.
we have the general counsel
which is Mr Randall Cherry and
then Anna Silva who handles
facilities management director
for for GST and I I will yield
to them if they want to give a
few points if that's appropriate
madam chair and otherwise that's
my my presentation on on the
resolution.
That's just fine Representative
Baldonado and I invite is it
secretary Santa would you like
to begin with secretary Santa
are either Santa or secretary
can Ortiz whichever one you can
bring in or both.
About is with us I'm not sure if
I see.
Secretary or.
Make mentoring might maybe
Randall.
This is an attendees.
Representative him okay all
right we've got secretary Ortiz
to.
Welcome Mr secretary Santa and.
Secretary or to use.
You.
Good morning madam chair this is
secretary counties I guess I'll
go first very nice to see you
members of the committee great
to see you all I I believe
Representative Baldonado summed
up
the joint resolution and you for
your consideration very well it
wasn't having left it to
communication work between the
three departments both
department transportation
department of corrections and
GST and meeting with the bill is
to ensure that all the security
concerns are addressed we're
department of corrections and D.
O. T. working with the bill
which would be able to continue
the plan design and ultimately
this new I. twenty five
interchange so happy to be here
happy to support and on behalf
the GST we support this.
Thank you so much yeah.
Of all.
Thank you madam chair great to
see you and members of the
committee all to say that the
DOT does support this bill we've
been working with the agencies
mentioned we do have a
significant amount of money
invested in this project and we
like to keep things moving in
the right direction so I'll be
happy to answer any questions if
I can and once again thank you
for having.
Are you ready for us to go to
the audience now.
Representative miss madam
chairman we're ready for that it
will do a quick ten second call
on house joint resolution
fourteen please raise your hands
if you're in favor please vote
yes if you're in favor R. now if
you are in opposition.
Well we had eight people in
favor nine people in favor and
now opposition and let me invite
any of those in attendance who
would like to speak to do so if
you want to speak in favor of
this time encourage you to raise
your hand first to have a great
Martin.
Go ahead Mr Martin.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I'm
Greg Martin the village
administrator with the village
of les Lemass at this project is
a long time coming and only gets
more necessary by the day as was
described the new interchange in
East West corridor is necessary
in our community and this region
to alleviate traffic concerns to
associate with our rapid growth
in this part of the state we do
appreciate the progress that
we've made so far and the
partnerships that we have with
the state and federal and local
government agencies in
particularly the department of
transportation department of
corrections and the General
Services Department we
appreciate
sponsor Representative Baldonado
also bring this forward but it
formalizes an agreement between
the village less honest in the
state in order for us to
eventually transfer this right
away state property for the
purpose of the corridor and
because we have the funding we
needed to happen as soon as
possible thank you very much for
your support.
Thank you next I have
commissioner Gerard sites.
Sorry go ahead please okay good
morning and thank you madam
chair members of the committee
thank you for allowing me to
speak my name Mr arts science I
am the chair of the Valencia
County commission I wish to
offer a hundred percent
supported this legislation and
of the entire project I also am
confident that the entire
commission would also offer
their hundred percent support
thank you to dance.
I have Charles Greco.
Thank you madam mailing strolls
Graham there was also this what
you think Representative
Baldonado for sponsoring this
bill and also secretary or Jesus
sectors of all and secretary
production for older systems all
right now look for speaking in
favor of the bill and also in
also willing to answer questions
if necessary thank you.
Next I just have a telephone
number five seven three nine
nine two zero eight I do it
that's not even a complete phone
numbers so.
If you know who you are.
Madam chair looks like
Representative Fajardo not
picture.
I don't see anybody.
Representative Fajardo are you
here.
Madam chair I am I'm just here
in support of my colleague
Representative Baldonado.
And your village.
Yeah absolutely.
Okay great thank you.
All right let's go to committee
members.
Are there any questions
committee members.
Madam chair.
Representative Townsend.
All if this is the proper time I
would make it the past motion.
You may make that motion at any
time Representative and us we
have a motion from
Representative Townsend second
from Representative Rehm.
We don't have to be ready for a
week and then have to session
after that.
Is there discussion.
I just want to say that I.
Personally live the nightmare
that is the traffic.
Los Lunas and you know that
Representative because I see
here when I'm down there because
I my current contract has been
no with the thirteenth judicial
district and I end up and
District Court down there and I
take back roads I I come down
forty seven you know through
just let up well and.
Anything to keep off of the main
street.
Get.
You've got my vote thank you
madam chair okay what to call
the roll.
Representative.
Yes yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Cook.
Yes.
Mr speaker.
Representative Eli.
Representative Lewis.
It's not too late yes sorry
about that I was trying to win
you.
Representative Lewis.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative Nibert.
Yes.
Representative Rehm yes
Representative Townsend yes.
Yes madam chair.
Yes.
We have a due pass.
Good luck let's get this
Representative thank you madam
chair thank you to your staff
and the entire committee for
putting the rest on this thing
thank you yeah I I think you're
you are the staff of big banks
they're the ones.
Thank you madam thank you so
much.
Next we have House Bill three of
six Representative Lord issue
with us.
Just promoted madam chair okay
thank you I'm and thank you and
thank you madam chair I also
have an expert witness to.
Who is your witness.
The witness is Zach fort.
Fort.
Five seven five number.
That goes with us.
Are you ready to proceed
absolutely ready chairman
anyone.
And thank you.
Thank you madam chair thank you
so much thank everybody for
allowing me to have this bill I
think this is probably the last
house bill coming through good
morning Representative it's good
to see all of you here so what
this bill is doing and sat in
the gun community we had noticed
that there was inconsistencies
on people getting a reply back
for their concealed carry and
some people were saying as
little as two weeks some people
were Senators taking two months
and we did have some people that
said it took over twelve months
so they had to redo the class so
actually did some research with
Zach fort from the New Mexico
she's poor socialization and we
found that other states
states like California Illinois
Colorado and many other most the
majority of them actually are
have a ninety day limit so we're
trying to do is make New Mexico
match what other states are
doing.
We feel that the consists of
only secular consistency what
that will do is it will help
with the GPS system because now
they won't get bombarded with
people calling them and saying
where's my information where my
at they have a ninety day period
to reply back to the people it's
a sufficient time period to
because this is what other
states do the next background
check takes three days the FBI
fingerprint check is three days
so we feel that ninety days is a
sufficient time just like other
states are doing this and
actually spoke to DPS and they
are amazing people and they do
not disagree to this bill so I
think you have that and I'd like
to bring forward my expert
witness to see if it has
anything else you'd like to add.
And.
Yes go ahead Sir.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Zach point
I'm the president of New Mexico
shooting sports association
collectively represent hundreds
of concealed carry permit
holders across the state of New
Mexico as well as dozens of
concealed carry instructors in
New Mexico.
What this bill does it proposes
to very small amendments to New
Mexico concealed carry act I
want to clarify really quickly
that this bill does not alter
the requirement to receive a
concealed carry permit in New
Mexico and it does not alter
where you can't conceal carry
New Mexico all this bill does is
imposed time limit requirement
that New Mexico department of
public safety has to process
applications under current law
connected part of public safety
has thirty days from the
completion of the background
check on an initial application
however there is no total time
on the imposed in New Mexico
yeah this contradicts we found
in other states such as Colorado
California Illinois like
Representative ward said where
they pose a ninety day total
limit to process applications
additionally to the ninety day
out time limit for initial
applications we're also
proposing a sixty day time limit
for renewables there's a shorter
time window for renewals these
are people who are already in
the system and it for someone
who has a concealed carry permit
any type of relevant event where
they would be disqualified from
having that permit or move they
already have to notify the
department of those changes in
their status over concealed
carry permit so then they should
have much shorter they don't
need as much time because it
should be a very short
straightforward process for
someone who is still eligible to
hold their concealed carry
permit because it is on them to
notify affected part of public
safety of any relevant changes
that would change your status so
this is really a what I would do
you as a good government bill
making sure that you know the
government act in a timely
fashion to.
To approve or deny a license
there's nothing in the bill that
would get into that require them
to approval life into the cannot
be completed in ninety days that
is not in this bill so they
would still have to you to be
approved or denied by New Mexico
department of public safety this
is just making sure that the
Mexican part but they do act
very responsive manner which we
believe is a very reasonable
time limits with that I'll yield
the floor.
Thank you madam chair we are
open for questions all right
let's go to the audience now.
And see if there's.
There are people here to weigh
in on this bill will have a ten
second all of those in favor
please say yes to those opposed
please stay now and we'll get
that up right away.
House Bill three oh six.
Okay we just have a few folks on
that too in support in one in
opposition let me see if there's
any of that.
There aren't any of those
attendees who wish to speak.
Looks like I don't see any hands
up.
Yes I do
the other.
Go ahead.
Madam chair you have an older
version of the same it says
would be to promote him to
panelists.
Okay go ahead promote him if you
can do that quickly.
Yes and no okay go ahead Mr
southern.
You need.
Okay can you hear me now yes
thank you.
madam chair and committee
members my name is Thomas out
there in our and the legislative
affairs officer The New Mexico
shooting sports association
representing New Mexico gun
owners and shooters since
nineteen thirty five we support
HB three oh six concealed
handgun license time limits we
feel of these are reasonable
time limits which department can
process all the paperwork
required by the concealed
handgun carry act and the rules
adopted by the department to
implement the act is been a
pleasure to be speaking in
support of the bill please vote
to pass this bill thank you.
Thank you on next Barbara
Chatterjee.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Argha
Chatterjee I'm retired injury
epidemiologist who used to work
at the state department of
health I've been following the
can still have good a program
since its inception my
concern my concern with this
bill is not that we should not
have these kind of performance
measures I do believe that we
need performance measures for
programs like access and the
legislature should have them in
place my question war is what is
the department we don't see any
statistics from the department
can know how they are doing now
and it seems that this might be
something that could be set in
administrative rules rather than
in statute so that if there's
modification needed in the
future that could be
accommodated more easily thank
you very much for your time
thank you Brett.
Mexico Canada's.
Go ahead.
Good morning can you hear me yes
thank you thank you madam chair
and committee members my name is
recognize and representing stop
an L. G. and over eighteen
thousand New Mexicans which are
in support of house bill three
oh six we ask you to vote in the
affirmative on this bill would
also like to send out our
congratulations to
Representative Stephanie lord of
the freshman class for
presenting her first bill in
this session thank you.
Thank you I don't see any
further hands let's go back to
the committee now and I have
Representative McQueen first.
Thank you madam chair Madam
chair representative lord but
you described in a variety of
time frame to people regain
responses do you know why there
were delays like why would it
take you know two weeks for one
person and up to a year for
someone else.
Thank you Representative McQueen
for that question well during
the COVID they did admit that
there were some issues and I
would understand that but the
issues before that it seemed
like there were some possible
administrative issues that have
been fixed since that time.
Okay so those issues thanks
that's good news
Representative Lord what's the
remedy is the time frame is not
that your bill.
Thank you for asking that I'm
sorry Madam apologized on a
dress you last time I possible
nervous is my first time
designing for the judiciary so
what what we have here is there
would have in their paperwork.
The department provide to the
applicant does not meet the
requirements are issue of a
license the department shall
issue a notification.
A denial in accordance with ten
dash eight dash to dash twenty
one of NMAC so they will send me
a letter and I would imagine
like the.
He an appeal process and for
we've been in contact with
exposed to tell you exactly why
they have been denied.
This is something they're
already doing thank you madam
chair so mentors are more that's
not really my question my
question is is under your bill
if they get to ninety days and
they haven't sent the yes or NO
what's the remedy for the
applicant is the and
specifically with the.
Roofing body be required to
approve.
If they blow the devil.
I'm sorry madam chair can you
ask that last part of the
question again from
Representative.
So sometimes you see language in
either contracts or in statute
that if.
Something doesn't happen by a
deadline it's deemed approved
thirteen to died or required to
be pers and so I I my question
is if the hit the deadline
without setting applicant either
yes or no.
What's the remedy for the
applicant.
Thank you madam chair
representative of understand a
question now in most states like
in taxes they only have thirty
days to get there is done and if
they do not send you an approval
letter it's considered a denial
but if you give me a moment let
me check with Zack and see if he
has any more information that he
can add to this.
You're welcome to go to here
exported anytime Representative
to ask him or her to weigh in
thank you thank you so much
madam chair so madam chair of
Representative McQueen thank you
for the question so under the
proposed change there would not
be an automatic granting or
denial of the license that
ninety day what it would do is
give the applicant opportunity
for redress to go to the
department of state my
application has I submitted on
the state has not been processed
you know you need to move on
this application so given
opportunity for redress it would
not automatically grant or deny
a license.
And Mr fort.
I mean the opportunity for
redressal what does that look
like the court action or is that
just calling up the agency and
saying where's my license.
I'm sorry madam chair like to
refer to my witness please.
Madam chair representative
McQueen but it would really it
would be on the applicants to
determine what action would be
best I don't think most people
would seek out of court remedy
on this as you have to.
That would be a very long and
expensive process with this
would basically do is that given
an opportunity to go to New
Mexico part of public safety
image that you have not met for
requirement I ask that you get
moving on this that way we can
resolve things without going to
court I do not anticipate that
would be an issue but that thank
you for the question thank you
madam chair if I may add on to
that what we're trying to do is
we're trying to make this
process simpler so the people
who are applying now know that
there's an eighty that's our
ninety day time frame after
ninety days they're supposed to
send out like they have in their
paperwork already that they're
supposed to send a denial letter
I would hope at that point that
evinces a there's a denial
or but doesn't say anything of
that receive the paperwork they
can now call them and say can
you please tell me what the
issue is.
Actually helped DPS and long run
because you're not gonna get
bombarded people calling before
the ninety day time frame.
Thank you.
Madam chair of the risen lord Mr
Ford thank thank you for your
answers
The I I understand you've
identified that there were some
problems you also state that
those problems have largely been
fixed and I'm concerned
You know if if the bill said it
was team denied after ninety
days of fun with that but
I think applicants already have
the ability to follow up on
their applications.
so I I'm not sure we're fixing a
problem that needs to be fixed
thank you madam chair.
Madam chair if I may address
that the problem has been all
along during this time frame is
the hardest thing in and and DPS
it knowledge is that there's
been a problem it's very very
very hard to get a hold of them
and that's been the biggest
issue is there's no
communication so try to imagine
that you put an application and
you don't hear from anybody any
year goes by now you have to
retake the course and you never
know if you accept are you were
denied you have nothing and it's
it does away from is extremely
frustrating for the people who
are waiting for the application
there is no communication so
this is what we're trying to fix
after ninety days you're going
to know exactly where you stand
so thank you.
This.
Representative finished right.
Yes thank you if you rest.
Yes chair of the.
Yes Representative which.
Manager I'd that.
I thank you Representative.
Thank you madam chair
I'm wondering if this so.
Paragraphs you needs to be
amended slightly because I I
hear what the representative
saying.
But I don't think it.
Based on the responses to
Representative McQueen I don't
think that it.
Really deals with the issue
because the next sentence says.
The license shall not be renewed
more than sixty days after it
expired in index fires on a date
certain and if it's not
extended.
And this is simply a renewal if
it's not renewed that it's going
to terminate on a date certain
and I'm wondering if we need to
add some white page that says.
And the license shall remain
valid until we do Department
determines.
Right it will not be.
Renewed.
Connection with that sentence so
that the licensee and continued
to.
Follow the procedures of the
license and if the department
doesn't promptly Act thank you
continue to to have their.
Concealed handgun license enough
fact until the department
specifically acts and says it's
not read.
Because I I think that's what
the what the representatives
really wanting to get out you
have a.
A person that's filed their
renewal of foreign renewal
license.
That license is going to
terminate on a certain date.
And if they
are are concealed during the on
that date.
That subjects them to.
Potential liability and.
If it's the department dragging
its feet they should be
penalized for
the department store here that
probably in my opinion.
so my question madam chair
representative.
That I capture kind of what your
concern is and and do you think
we need to add some white groups
to this.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative yeah that's
an excellent point because what
happens is and it's very
frustrating so going back to the
original time the apply for
concealed carry as for training
for the no right there's nobody
to get a hold up it's hard to
contact people you don't know we
set the ninety day limit and the
ninety day you're supposed to
get a letter for their own
language and and there and their
information packet is that
that's poster there's this reply
back to within ninety days and
send you a letter you're
accepted or denied you're right
it does get a little bit even
more confusing if you have a
concealed Kerry to win for the
renewal and nothing happens
within sixty days because
they're supposed to be either
send you an acceptance or denial
letter receive my expert witness
has anymore information madam
chair.
Thank you would like to add on
that Madam chair representative
Nibert thank you for bringing up
that point on the renewals I
think it's a it's a very good
point but what I want to kind of
delineate on here is that so to
extend the ability to carry a
license until they until NM DPS
issues a renewable organize
renewal would in effect change
some of the rules around the
ability to carry on this bill
this bill is specifically
looking at the NM DPS side not
on the concealed carry side
other than just filling out the
application the paperwork so if
we would like if the committee
will be committee to amend the
bill but action I do I would not
see that as an unfriendly
amendment to this bill but we
were we try to craft this bills
were very carefully just looking
at what's happening on the side
of an NDPS to ensure that
applications are being processed
in a timely fashion and people
have confidence that they will
have an answer in a reasonable
amount of time.
Chair and in the.
Just one second Representative
Nibert and Representative large
I've just been informed that
your co sponsor is in the
waiting area and I'd like to
have him moved up as a palace
Representative Pettigrew.
So the sentence could you move.
Representative Pettigrew up and
join the conversation as well.
Share it if I can add on to what
what Justin said and that's what
we're trying to do is we're just
trying to deal with the time
constraint that's all just the
time itself to make it easier
for DPS because I don't know how
you guys work I work better when
there's time limits and I really
working at a job I have to get
some of these paperwork through
and we need to get it done
before ninety days of my boss is
going to come over and say why
is it the longest happened to
send a letter out I also want
for the ease of people so that
they know that within ninety
days are going to get some sort
of reply thank you madam chair.
But but madam chair and
representative that really
doesn't address the issue I mean
you tell the department to do it
in sixty days but if they don't
do it in sixty days there's
consequences to the person and
I'm more worried about the
person in the department and yet
this is focus just on the
department that maybe maybe that
we ought to put a provision that
says the department
you know.
Shall not issue a citation
for a licensee who's.
Renewal application remains
pending our.
Or something along those lines
are expected to the bank but and
maybe maybe
if this thing gets out of
committee maybe those are things
you need to think about that
that we can
bill for amendment to accomplish
but the if we're just on the
department that timely.
I mean we.
In the federal
code code of federal regulations
that says that the bureau of
land management shall process
applications for permits to
drill within thirty days.
That hasn't occurred in in over
fifty years it's still the
regulation that says that that's
nice but it doesn't happen so AS
Representative McQueen pointed
out what's the right course here
there's a real recourse for the
department.
Spell your tax that is a person
who is and carrying a concealed
weapon.
R. yes.
Yes there licenses not time we
remove that person is now
committing a crime.
And that person can be convicted
and I'm concerned about that so
I think we need to address that
issue.
to prevent out person who
believes I have a concealed
Kerry license at all their
paperwork is is going through
the process they timely filed
also may get pulled over and the
they have their economic on the
please say you your licenses
terminated yeah but I'm waiting
on you guys to renew it you know
that's not going to be the
defense at and so I'm more
worried about.
The effects on the person the
the that I am the department so
with that I'm sure that would be
my comment with respect to this
language thank you.
And thank you madam chair and
thank you Representative those
impacts on points and if this
does get through to the get sure
that be something would like to
work with you want to add that
into there and also have to go
through their their paperwork
and called DPS and see if there
is something in there that are
ready gives them a fine but that
is an excellent point because I
myself am waiting for my can
still occur.
And my paperwork zoom info
currently I know if somebody
applies for concealed carry and
they don't if they get the
paperback this is L. there
usually is.
Which can involve a court case
of the woods this so like to
move forward with that but I do
appreciate that Representative
and some good coming.
Thank you madam chair.
What.
Yes I have Representative all
cold.
What
long before chair representative
in my questions have been
answered thank you.
Okay that's good I actually have
another issue that all right
where I think you need an
amendment.
My preference would be
Representative that you look at
the council service to draft
your amendment you for we have
this leave the committee but we
do have another bill after this
but if you look at page four
line one.
What essentially what you're
doing is requiring the
department to issue a license.
There actually may be a reason
that.
Is not.
Appearance.
You don't want to order the
department to live to renew a
license if the person is
actually qualified and we've had
a really careful.
Construction of this law and I
was around when it was first
enacted.
So what I would suggest is after
that period.
The period after the word
section you would strike the
period and you would insert this
language if the licensee is
otherwise qualified to hold a
concealed handgun license which
I'm sure that's not a it
doesn't.
Counter anything you're trying
to accomplish but you're you're
making sure that we still have
enough facts the
Qualification to hold the
license.
I'm John I can.
I
So this this is in the
democratic analysis it's not in
the committee analysis so I can
send that to one of your members
so that you get the language.
And what's required this year is
that.
The representative or senator
who sponsored the bill needs to
get the language drafted by that
Legislative Council Service for
us to include in our committee
report so I would like to have
that be part of it and then I I
can email this to Representative
Nibert I'm not sure where you
are with the other language
Representative night right did
you have language for
Representative Lord to take care
of your problem.
Madam chair what I'll do our.
Here quickly as put your your
language down and then maybe add
some of their small white groups
to address yes you are right all
right by the representative and
she can decide what she wants to
do with that.
You're on mute.
I do that so that you don't have
to you're my dog bark or
something.
So if you got my language.
If the license he is otherwise
qualified to all the lights a
concealed handgun license.
Or.
Thank you madam chair that's all
friendly language and hearing so
thank you our guys are so madam
chair let me run it by you again
if the licensee is otherwise
qualified to hold a concealed
handgun license.
What I'll do is add one sentence
to address the issue I raised
and I'll send it to
Representative.
Okay.
That sounds good so I'm
Representative Pettigrew we
didn't give you a chance to
speak at all because you were in
the other
Section of our meeting is there
anything you'd like to say.
Thank you madam chair thank you
committee and now I.
So through this for a multitude
of reasons then and just so the
Representative Lord does know
that that one of our sponsors
was on here and and have her
back if she needed it
Representative will Madam chair
representative of large done and
and our and the fresh and our
expert witnesses done an
excellent job of explaining
never saying and I appreciate
the language of the look forward
to
Getting the changes that
Representative of artists that
are firmly amendments and and
the scene is as Judiciary thank
you very much.
I would suggest that we Raul
this for right now because we
have Senator I am Ortiz eighteen
now on the next bill it gives
you a little bit of time to try
to get that drafted and bring
that back to us because we have
we do have a little bit of time
I think this morning
And I'm with I'd like to get it
right otherwise we're not going
to be till Monday so.
Very much thank you thank you.
Bye bye.
I wanted to
Let members now.
I had announced that we
accidentally put Senate bill
twelve on our agenda for today
and that we were going to have
to wait because of the
analysis required and I just I
just texted my the vice chairman
the chief analyst to let them
now Senator Ivey Soto was
prevailing upon the to try to
get that on consent we haven't
done consent the session and
I'll tell you one of the reasons
very attractive is just to get
it out of the queue of the
analyst because they have so
many complicated bills.
You know as we were talking
about the house street
resolution thirteen.
I think the vice chair brought
up a really good point one of
the reasons the bills we have
before us are so
Consequential and lengthy and
complex is because we were
carrying your of them in in the
house side anyway and
so we haven't we haven't gotten
to that point.
It it is a uniform law bill on
Electronic notary.
I mean that's that's that's it
in a nut shell and
Senator Ivey Soto has talked to
our transactional expert on the
Republican side Representative
night very and I've asked him to
consult with Representative
McQueen those are are democratic
counterpart of the transactional
locked but I'm that is being
proposed and I I will I just
want to let you know that.
I don't know if we'll get that
accomplished today but we can
consider that would diligent so
Senator Ortiz you know with that
let's go to you on.
Senate Bill.
Thank you.
Is to nineteen madam chairman in
nineteen Senator and we'll just
shared.
Thank you thank you very much
madam chairman committee
members.
This bill will serve a little
familiar because we pass and one
in very similar to that last
year.
This is a bill that deals with
the issue of people who have
been able to grow up in the
United States of America even
though they don't have papers
they were there are dreamers
they were brought here by their
families and they were very
young.
They now live here they
pretended our schools we have
paid for their education we made
it possible for them to go to
college we will open the lottery
scholarship to them and then
upon their graduation from
college we find that we eleven
barriers in the way of their
actually being able to practice
their.
Actions to reduce education
repaid for preparing them.
You go to other states we don't
have those barriers in order to
practice so last year we were
able to find
the amount five six seven
professions including medicine
and law we're very years
required citizenship in order to
practice that profession to be
licensed in the.
We're in statute.
We're in regulation this year we
have said in the past with
overwhelming support in both
houses the governor signed in
and then they brought back to me
this year their survey of the
statutes some licensure
build some licensure for.
Professions is included in
statutes and so this year we
brought to you
but I think either fourteen or
fifteen separate statutes which
had provisions and requiring
citizenship in order to be a
license and the bill would
remove those statutory
restrictions on the practice of
those.
Sessions and things like.
Really change
Is a notices on their try to
thank you artistry required
citizenship in order practices
we re removed restrictions that
were.
In the regulations I mean inner
in the statues last year this
year we're.
Last year we remove the
restrictions that were in
regulation this year we're
moving those for whatever reason
and included in the in the laws
in this challenge those
professions leading members will
stand for questions mentioned.
Senator do you have any
witnesses with you I'm not sure
I am able to look to see you as
a thank god and it would be the
other item or just from the in
Mexico immigration law center
who is in my extremely in this
but I'm not sure she was able to
get in or earlier this this
morning.
I don't see it that name what's
in our attendee last.
Let's just go to the audience
Senator okay.
I
We'll do a full ten second pull
those in favor on Senate bill
two nineteen state asking those
in opposition the state now.
We'll get that up first.
So in the audience Senator we
just have one person in favor in
addition so we don't have a
large.
Group.
Is there anyone who wishes to
speak.
Is it was in attendance.
I don't see any with hands
raised.
Let's go to questions from the
committee.
To make a motion for a new that.
A second representative on all
news to do past.
And I'm and the second from
representative Armstrong.
Is there discussion.
Let's let's have a quick call
the roll then please
Representative Alcon yes.
Representative Armstrong yes
Representative Cook.
Representative Cook.
Mr speaker.
Representative Ely.
Representative Eli.
Representative Lewis.
This was.
Yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert.
Yes.
Representative Rehm yes.
Representative Townsend.
Representative Nibert.
Sh.
R. O..
Yes.
Madam chair.
Yes.
Thank you for calling yes sorry
about that I'm in too soon
meeting for.
Eight
eight two two we have a due
pass.
Thank you madam chairman and
committee members.
K..
Senator here committee and get
my bill passed okay.
It also has built her news very
soon Mr Representative wrote on
thank you.
So I'm.
I was trying to explain to you
that Senator Ivey Soto was
He would like to address the
committee about the Senate bill
twelve and.
I understand he's had
conversations with the
transactional attorneys and I I
would not mind getting this off
of our plate so.
Just with that yes.
Okay all right I'll let judging
all right now okay.
So Senator Ivy Soto would like
to join us George and he is
seven C. as in the attendee
list.
Is.
Areas.
Okay Senator Ivey Soto.
I thank you very much madam
chair members of the of the
house Judiciary Committee of the
Senator twelve an axe the revise
Unifor monetarily acts it is a
uniform bills we have departed
in just a couple of places from
the uniform act in terms of
enhanced accountability on the
act it also implements remote
online notarization
using the best practices around
the country we in addition to
that have a level of
accountability with the remote
online notarization that no
other state has and with that
madam chair I'll be happy to
answer any questions anybody has
oral speaker because that thank.
Let's go to the audience in
state
With that quick hello
for Senate bill twelve all those
in favor please say yes and in
opposition the state now.
I'm not sure for sure we had
some folks out there.
Yeah.
Okay hundred percent in favor.
By one percent let me see if
there's some public comment.
Do you know if anybody wishes to
speak Senator Ivey Soto.
Madam chair it would just simply
be the usual suspects Jack
Burton the land title
association the realtors are the
secretary of state's office in
support.
Okay.
So I'm just shared that
committee.
Madam chair you do have one hand
raised in the attendees.
This
is.
Although I was looking for you
Stephen but let's let's Mr and
I'll speak and then we'll go to
the committee.
Madam chair Stephen members of
the committee my name Steven I
CEO The New Mexico association
of realtors we do stand in
support of this this would
really help
yeah especially last year during
the COVID this what would have
to help the real estate process
my dad just turned ninety two
and I had to take a man twice
this last year and if this bill
would have passed the I would
never have to taken out of his
house into the title company
that press.
the business so we definitely
stand and support thank you very
much.
Thank you and we have Mr and I
was.
Raced to a panelists to K.
questions first I had
Representative about going.
Thank you madam chair
sisters question Senator because
I know you got to get back to
you committees and you can hear
my bill yes
We heard a version of this bill
before.
This
rings a bell gang though
certainly madam chair and
members of the committee you
have heard different parts of
this bill before and and so
we've just wrapped them all into
a single bill this time.
Thank you thank you madam chair.
Yes
Representative Snyder.
Thank you madam chair up madam
chair and senator the the repeal
provision section thirty six
I have a pool the statutes that
repealing all the existing
notary sections out of our
current statutes not madam chair
and representative member that
is correct and we have two
different tax right now that the
slightly conflict with each
other we have the notary public
act and then we have the the
current uniform loss under
Terrill acts we repeal both of
those acts and we now have a
single act that is consistent.
And then my second question of
the the forms that that are
provided in this legislation
bear suggestive not mandatory as
would that be accurate.
I'm chair and representative
members this.
madam chair
Malar
the Senators better good job and
and addressing the couple local
concerns but by large its the
you know format that this app
forward in many states are maybe
the most the states at this
point time so I would support
thank you.
Here Representative McQueen.
The past.
Okay we have a motion for a do
pass on Senate bill twelve on
second question.
Representative Snyder will
second that motion.
Please call the roll.
Representative Akan yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Cook yes.
Mr speaker.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Lewis yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert.
Yes.
Representative rain yes.
Representative Townsend yes.
Question.
Yes.
Madam chair yes.
Is that we have and do drugs.
Okay you did it Senator Ivey
Soto right out of her members of
the committee members here all
these numbers here who helped
you out.
And Mister and I am glad we
could help you and your dad and
I'm really all the realtors I
truly understand that thank you.
Members.
I'm I'd like to we it's not one
o'clock.
How about we come back.
At twelve thirty taken our and
see if we can get Senate
Representative lords amendments
adopted.
If she's got those ready.
And we'll see if we have any
news about the agenda on Monday.
Okay how about that we'll come
back at twelve thirty five.
Thank you all recess house
judiciary is in recess thank you
thank you.
Representative rebate.
I think we should be ready to
resume with.
Our house Judiciary meeting we
have a few minutes left before
the floor session do we have
your amendments Representative
Lord.
Madam chair I have not the last
I heard they were being rushed
and and that's the last thing I
heard they knew they had a time
constraint thank you
Representative Chasey oh great
you know I think the easiest
thing I'm I'm may be
What would be easiest for you to
just drop in the share file
right now.
I can email it to or if she
wants me to well that's right I
wanted to email it to
Representative Lord and then put
it in the chair I and then put
it in the Here file for the rest
of us okay so members if you'll
check your email in a moment you
can get your updated share file.
Representative Lord can have her
amendments.
Thank you so much for that madam
chair.
This.
Receive email and also the
faster thank you right right
okay.
Representative night would you
check that.
It doesn't look like what your
language is included.
Yes Sir your the.
I just read it it looked to me
like it addresses.
The the license shall remain
back or the license remains
valid until I realized that the
rebel applications divide I just
want to make sure that the
person.
During the license eight submit
their renewal that they don't
get arrested for.
Carrying a concealed weapon when
their renewal application is
pending R. and this I think that
addresses my concern.
So now I've lasted hold on just
I have it but.
The the.
The amendment says this is your
language if the licensee is
otherwise qualified to hold the
license period if the department
does not timely respond to the
renewal application.
The license shall remain valid
until the department notifies
the licensee that the renewal
application is done more.
So that would give our.
Given the confidence that they
will be arrested and charged
with unlawful carrying of a
handgun while their regal
applications adding your text.
Yes the department doesn't
properly respond to their
renewal.
I somehow it when I was
Looking I lost I had opened I
actually have the document open
will be I'm gonna just go back
and start again.
There we go.
And that provision should prompt
them to.
Timely time we process these
applications for renewal because
all I see there is your language
okay.
Okay.
So.
We are the questions on the
amendment and is that if anyone
is there anyone who is not able
to stay at.
Madam chair I move the amendment
for discussion purposes.
Okay to.
Have the amendment if it was
sent by Legislative Council
I haven't attended yet.
And all second that motion.
madam chair Representative
McQueen it's on that share file.
Sure.
Okay I'm sorry I was being
emailed out.
You know I'm sorry
Representative they were going
to email it to Representative
Lord input and the share file
for the rest this you will take
a moment to let Representative
McQueen with that over.
I sent it to Representative
McQueen.
Thank you very much.
Madam chair we on discussion on
the amendment.
Are you ready to have it now I
do have it now we are a
discussion and so Representative
claim if you have discussions
already had.
So.
Madam chair representative
Nibert and Representative Lord
I think this ammendment is to
two different things if I'm
correct.
Oh one it's saying that.
They will only present the
license if the licensee is
qualified to hold a license.
And then the second part.
Being that the complete sentence
in the amendment addresses
written Ivers concern.
Because first partial sentences
that addressing chair Chasey is
concerned about.
Not issuing the license someone
that qualify the holder.
That's.
Yes it is okay.
Right that but don't we need
that in two places.
When we need that same language
in the earlier in the bill with
the ninety day deadline for new
applications.
Chair if I can address that and
also it Representative night
click here to address this as
well when you apply for your
first license this would apply
it implies that you're you're
going to be a qualified or not
qualified to have the license
but in the second part what
they're saying okay so would you
let me this might be a better
access to when you apply for a
license it's four years.
We are one of the few states
that you have to renew it and
to.
So you already have a concealed
carry permit you already carry a
gun on you know you're doing the
renewal which you have to go
shoot take a test and you send
that paperwork in what we're
saying is is during that time
period if you're carrying and
you don't get a reply because
member there's no time restraint
at all they could never get back
to you if there's no time
constraint and we don't have the
sporty in here you would be
carrying illegally accents.
Madam chair to of course that
makes sense and I had no problem
with that language that was my
question.
Okay can you repeat the question
so that maybe I can understand
it.
So terrorism or that that issue
that Representative diver raised
I think that's reasonable I
think that's a reasonable fix
the the language that if the
licensee is otherwise qualified
to hold a license to me
addresses the issue of we don't
want.
The HSD to simply be up against
a deadline and send out an
approved.
So I think it addresses that we
still have a deadline earlier
deadline in the bill for the new
applicants and I would think we
would need the same language in
the ninety day deadline as we
have in the sixty day deadline.
Madam chair if I may ask for a
quote for clarification are you
talking about just if the
licensee otherwise is qualified
to have concealed carry licenses
out the part that you're
questioning.
Madam chair representative lord
yes.
One for one second to go back
and read that and
This expert and you're still
here do you have any and to
that.
Madam chair yes yeah I might
Your if I'm looking at the
ninety day language it's all
page one hundred twenty five.
Your if that's what the
Representative referring to
that's the official application
and the.
This provision basically says
that the department will issue a
license or deny the application
and since that person does not
have a a license
The department has to do one of
two things.
And if it doesn't respond.
You know I guess you can follow
up but there's no we've already
determined there's no real of
mechanism to do that I was
working by Ken Starr was more
directed toward people who
already have the conceal carry
licenses that are occurring at
and the shares in star was just
to make sure that the license
renewal application at they have
the otherwise.
Have the crew all the
credentials to have the license
at that point in time of renewal
if I understood it correctly.
So if I committed a felony.
During my first two years of
holding that license out
automatically prohibits me from
having that license and so the
the chairs language would
basically sorry you're not
entitled to that read all and
therefore you should not get the
renewal even if they don't
respond
and so I think that address the
the shares concern but the
ninety day up above all page one
actually used for the initial.
The initial application for the
original license and maybe the
expert has a better explanation
but that's how I reviewed the
language.
if you if I may on that point.
Sure go ahead Representative
Rehm madam chair if you remember
when I passed the legislation
about not requiring fingerprint
re fingerprinting on of licenses
we had of Mr Cohn from DPS there
and she explained to us about
wrap back and wrap back is when
an individual is arrested and
they have a statewide sons I
have a private investigative
Lysons
the state if the persons
arrested the next day the state
is notified of that arrest that
would occur in the concealed
carry.
The concealed carry that's all
right here and now S.
legislation are the disqualifier
that would start an immediate
revocation of that license thank
you madam chair.
Thank you madam chair thank the
representative said a great job
of explaining that thank you.
Representative McQueen you have
the floor.
So thank you madam chair
I I still think we have two
different issues the first is
here Representative diverts
issue is a regional issue and
has been addressed adequately
the second issue to me is you
propose a deadline and we don't
want thank you same agency so
that actually proves as we don't
want them to simply send out an
approval.
Because they're up against a
deadline.
And we but we have language to
address that in the renewal
section we don't have language
to address that in the initial
application section.
So I would either one.
I don't think because it the
paragraph is structured
differently I don't think you
can just use the same language
that think about it I would
either one language equivalent
to the language in the amendment
the first language partial
sentence in the amendment for we
could also put in a provision
that if you're not approved in
ninety days your team denied and
that would be clear.
But I still have the concern
that we've imposed a deadline in
the remedy for missing the
deadline is not clear and the
remedy for missing the deadline
should not be rushed approval.
M. madam chair
Representative McQueen on that
point.
All right.
You you can't carry a concealed
handgun without the license you
have to have the license on you
whenever you have the.
Unsealed and got and so the
ninety day provision up above
I mean it does say the face
shall or and no more than ninety
days are supposed to do one of
two things if I mess that.
There's no real recourse and
there's no ability legally for
that person to carry a concealed
weapon because I did not have
the license that one more scary
to have the ability to carry out
license or that economic
lawfully.
And and so.
I see what you're getting at but
but in practical terms if the if
no licenses this year there's no
ability for that person legally
carry that anger.
And so it could be duplicative
if we would want to put some
provision up there like you
suggested that if they don't
respond within ninety days it
shall be deemed to be divides of
till until such time as I they
approve it that that would be I
but that will be it either.
Representative
the language would be fun.
But you're correct that would be
another and thank you my experts
that have something when the
state that's okay madam chair.
R. Madam chair representative
McQueen to address the question
of as far as rushing a license
we are not changing any of the
requirements to receive a
license the applicant would
still have to meet all of the
requirements listed above for an
initial application to be issued
a license of an NDPS issued a
license in violation because
they did not meet all those
requirements specified above in
the statute than they would be
in violation of the statute what
we're just trying to do here is
find a fine point for redress of
a license not being issued as
currently there is no deadline
so for someone who has sent an
application is never received an
answer they do not have the lack
the ability to seek redress
because there is no statutory.
Time limit on how long the it
can take to receive that license
we're not we're not proposing
changing anything and any
license that was rushed that did
not respect and not meet all the
requirements under the tank Act
would be in violation of
statute.
The.
No I I I don't think that the
bill hasn't been fixed to my
satisfaction but I don't have
any additional questions.
Thank you Representative McQueen
just a second let me sing.
Representative Alcon.
Share so in today's world madam
chair and representative do if
you don't get your license in
ninety days what happens.
Thank you.
That great question there's no
time constraint so if you don't
get anything in ninety days you
have no recourse you can't call
them because they'll tell you we
don't have a time limit you
can't seek any legal recourse
because there is no time limit
there's really nothing you can
do and states California
actually do happen writing they
have ninety days to accept or
deny and the one to deny a
letter list is sent to Nylander
sent and it's if there's a
mistake you can yield at the
time thank you madam chair.
So Madam chair representative
claim California basically does
the things this way so did you
look at California's law and try
to copy there's.
I was I'm sorry madam chair what
I was even aware of that till I
did some research on that when I
look to see other states after
this bill is already written
have we're we're in the process
of writing this we found
California Colorado Illinois
this when the state that's not
the top of my but the majority
states do ninety days thank you
question Madam.
And I I am just Representative
McQueen I mean basically so so
what if we do this.
And we say they have made to
respond and they don't respond
and what happens.
With legislation we're not doing
anything really there's always a
you have ninety days to respond
but if you don't respond.
Well we have no idea what's
going to happen next.
Madam chair if I may ask the
question New Mexican bring
forward a lawsuit so you
actually do have something you
can do you can.
Yes and you can start a lawsuit
madam chair.
You can also bring photo
lawsuit.
In a dying here want to.
So the thing is madam chair this
legislation does not mean that
because in ninety days.
you get a license you can bring
photo lawsuit doesn't allow you
that.
There's not in there.
Yeah I do want to talk of you
thank you madam chair what what
the point is and I'm gonna
answer them to call upon my
expert witness now if you apply
for concealed carry permit.
You can call.
Ten months later.
And the answer will be we don't
have a time constraint we don't
have to answer your question.
If you call within ninety days
they're supposed to give you an
answer within your accepted or
you were denied just like almost
all the other states the United
States do when the states that
do that.
So we're for to my expert
witness please be everything you
like to add chair.
Here is for witnesses here
the is yes the game gun control
person or is he a a a a gun
carry instructor.
Qualification.
Representative.
Madam chair representative
account I am the president of
New Mexico shooting sports
association we are in New Mexico
based not for profit
organizations we represent
hundreds of concealed carry
permit holders as well as dozens
of instructors I am not
concealed carry instructor I am
however a concealed carry permit
holder how we represent the
interests we also have numerous
firearm stores and ranges were
members of our organization as
well.
That we just wondering where he
came in as an expert witness
because the I didn't know that
and being the chairman of the
committee something like this
doesn't mean that you know all
the rules and regulations and
the laws of the state in New
Mexico's wires concealed Kerry
is concerned that's what what
worries me a little bit that's
okay I'll let him chair
representative Ely.
I'll I'll let that rest his
expect the unexpected where
witnesses that's the case but.
It's hard to believe.
But I just.
Madam chair and representative
yes right.
I just don't find an answer this
legislation.
And and that's where I'm having
problems.
Everybody.
They were is simplicity.
An existing question over and
over and over here.
And we're still in the same
place that we would be that
since we started.
As.
In nineteen days.
So what.
Basically what I'm saying that's
the way I'm reading that okay
and I can only read so much
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative I think
Representative night Burt would
like to address some of the
issues go ahead Representative.
Madam chair of the the amendment
to the existing stature as I
understand it was slowly dealing
with the renewal of
applications and trying to
address a problem of people who
have a long life Yang Y. thank
you guys yeah.
The license already and we're
we're finding problems and not
getting the renewal time wait up
process I think the the language
in the amendment have the
language in the.
The text of the bill presented
by the representative.
Do exactly that the ninety day
issue is a totally new issue and
it deals with the additional
license and that's well beyond
what I think we were what the
representative was trying to fix
with her legislation here so we
we've kind of got got off on a
tangent a little bit but I'd
like to focus everyone on the
renewal process and the language
has proposed that deals with the
sixty day
Basically they'll bill.
Supposed to issue it within
sixty days
and.
That my concern was of course
what happens to someone if if
their license is not renewed
with about sixty days of and
then get arrested I think the
the amendment that we're on
right now addresses that it has
nothing to do with the
additional Lysons of the ninety
day that we see up above that if
the existing statute.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you I I think what I'm
just say what I'm hearing from
Representative the queen is that
there is probably further
clarification that would be
useful and Representative more
than you know this is never fun
but sometimes we get so far
along in this session but we
still learn what needs to be
done and we can get it done at
another time even though
It might not get done this time
so
I'm.
Let's go ahead and I don't have
any other hands raised let's see
what the pleasure of the
committee and madam chair I
would like to do pass on our.
House Bill three oh six as
amended.
Then we adopted the amendment
Motion to to adopt the amendment
I'm sorry now we you're just a
discussion on that R. by the
motion to adopt the doctor and
I'll second that okay and
because just to be certain we
know who's here I would like to
call the roll under.
Madam chair thank you all for a
substitute motion to table at
this time.
All right the non debatable
motion with the motion by
Representative all con is there
a second to that motion.
All second.
Representative Armstrong so
we're in a motion to table.
Well which we have not yet
amended and the clerk to call
the roll on that please.
Yes.
Representative Armstrong yes
Representative Cook.
No.
Mr speaker.
Representative Eli.
Representative Eli.
Representative Lewis.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative Nibert.
to table it.
Representative.
Representative.
Representative Nibert the motion
is to table the bill.
Not the amendment.
I thought I have a motion R. to
move the amendment and was
seconded before the motion to
table that's true but one motion
to table takes precedence and
it's not debatable.
And they only the the priority
motion that was on the table was
the amendment.
Madam chair.
But I believe the motion to
table the bill is in order.
Are you you have to dispose of
any or more things before you
get back to the bill.
So the motion to table was
abortion to table the of them.
Actually it wasn't what the
motion once but rather it just
because there's some confusion
here let's go back to the
The motion to amend the bill
will do that first.
And then we will take the table
in motion.
Representative Alcon yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Cook.
In a minute yes yes yes on the
amendment.
Mr speaker.
Representative Eli.
Representative Lewis.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert.
Yes.
Representative Rehm yes.
Representative Townsend.
Representative.
Yes.
Thank.
Yes in the amendment.
Madam chair yes the amendment
I'm going back to the gentleman
from stable at Representative
dot com.
Thank you madam chair system to
table the amended bill.
And I second.
Okay we have a now we're on the
motion to table for
Representative October second
Representative Armstrong and
that is not debatable we are
going to take that.
And I start the vote over yes
you should yes we're we're clear
now I didn't confusion
Representative Alcon.
Yes table.
Representative Armstrong yes to
table.
Representative Cook.
No.
Mr speaker.
You will.
Representative Ely yes to take.
Representative Lewis.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert.
to table Representative.
No to table.
Representative Townsend no to
table.
By Jessica Benham no to table.
Madam chair.
Yes.
We have five to five Madam chair
of movie do pass on house bill
three oh six just a moment.
Thank you.
Okay we'll try that again.
Will you call the roll plays on
the do passed motion.
Representative Alcon.
Representative Armstrong no.
Representative Cook.
Yes.
Mr speaker.
Representative Eli no.
Representative Lewis.
Representative McQueen.
Representative Nibert.
Yes.
Representative Rehm yes.
Representative Townsend yes.
I.
Yes to explain my vote.
Madam chair.
No.
We have a five to five.
Kind of puts this in limbo and.
vice chair to explain her about
is meant to say madam chair and
Sanchez I appreciate the
conversation I do support your
efforts I voted yes but I would
want to see some of the
comprehensive fixes on the
remaining issues that were
raised today and not quite fully
ethics to propose amendments
thank you madam chair and
Sanchez.
Madam chair.
Yes Representative every.
if we added the language that
Representative McQueen but
desires would we then be able to
pass this bill I mean we have
the language from Legislative
Council I think we could fit in
there and get a a amended
amendment down to you.
I'm actually Representative
agree we need Representative
right will start Representative
Rehm it it's time for us to join
the floor session we're already
late but you can certainly try
to do that in and out we'll have
we're going to have the beating
regular length meeting on Monday
and then on Tuesday after right
now closed labor meeting that
Judiciary Committee is fine
eight for at least a couple of
hours on Tuesday as well so
you know that.
That the possibilities always
exist.
So we're gentleman for today and
thank you very much thank you
bye bye.
