Representative.
I mean.
We came in the main causes of
this kind of.
Ramble madam chair here.
Chair.
Welcome everybody I'm sorry for
the wait was.
Business.
Baseball.
So thank you for your patience
we'll start with.
Mexico.
I apologize your.
These develop a complex because
I think we forgot to put his
name carved out the first day
and so and the more he might
think we're trying to tell them
something subliminally.
Anyway very good to see all of
you and thank you for your
patience again and we are on
house bill twenty one gun
violence victims advocate
program Representative Garcia
the floor is yours thank you
madam chair members of the
committee madam chair house bill
twenty one allocate funding in
dollars for the hiring of a
victim advocates of homicide and
violent crime in law enforcement
agencies throughout our state.
You madam chair in the two
thousand twenty two session we
were able to secure funding
thousand dollars for this
initiative and madam chair it
was a fight to death in securing
that amount.
You wouldn't believe madam chair
why do we want to create these
advocates in our law enforcement
communities.
And simply put.
To seek justice for the killing
of our loved ones and to keep
the grieving and surviving
family directly connected.
Directly informed.
And directly engaged to the
ongoing investigation for
however long that takes until
the culprit is apprehended.
Madam chair had there been a
victim advocate when my god son
Juan Carlos Romero was killed on
February seventh twenty
seventeen.
We might have captured the
culprit then.
And also avoided the collateral
damage of Juan Carlos's sister
Victoria Romero dying of cancer
in August of twenty twenty at
the ripe age of thirty two.
To this day we have yet to find
the killer for one cards.
Madam Juan Carlos was a block
away from the front tier
restaurant shortly after having
a late dinner at the restaurant
after classes and studying at
UNM the entire day.
He was working on a masters in
philosophy with the intent of
teaching philosophy at UNM.
The bullet pierced his upper
stomach his wallet iPhone and
personal items were intact.
Madam chair with federal mental
the only sibling of Juan Carlos.
Became the family contact with
APD the upgrade police
department she provided contact
information on on the friends of
Juan Carlos and Facebook pages a
potential suspect and his
girlfriend who put up
disparaging comments about Juan
Carlos shortly before the
killing.
It was stressful for Victoria.
Calling the detective weekly for
updates on the case with no
return calls.
She came down with cancer nine
months after the killing.
She eventually succumbed to the
cancer in August of twenty
twenty leaving behind a five
year old son.
The couple of the kids Juan
Carlos took two lives.
The my compiled in implement a
childless.
Madam chair things are different
now in the APD homicide criminal
investigation division.
Thanks to more counter and new
leadership in the C. ID.
On August twenty one on August
the twenty twenty one four
years.
After the killing of Juan Carlos
my complied as and I had the
first sit down meeting.
With not only the detectives.
But the whole leadership of the
homicide division.
Then commander Dennis the for a
then deputy commander Kyle hots
up.
Kyle as you probably know with
the chief investigator of the
elected officials house
shootings.
Invernal County and on the
whole.
At this sit down meeting on
August twenty twenty one the
long behold the first victim
advocate of the homicide
division Terry with us the
guardian angel hours arriving
fans.
Was there.
Terry was brought on board only
weeks before that August twenty
first sit down meeting.
When my complies and I.
I let my experts reflect on what
the hiring of our first and then
it cuts has done to help
resurrect forgotten cases.
Infuse hope in our survivors.
And enhance systematic
investigating or homicides and
violent crime cases Mr chair
like to yield to my first thanks
for.
money because signs of the New
Mexico state for justice a
survivor based organization
comprised mainly of a.
To kind of females that have
lost the a teenager or young
adult to.
Homicide.
So yes.
Thank you.
Yes I was affected by a violent
crime and I've witnessed first
hand the urgency of having law
enforcement based victim
advocates within police
departments throughout the
state.
When my son was murdered on July
twenty twenty one.
He was shot and killed by
somebody he thought was a
friend.
He was left in Arroyo and his
body was found almost two days
later.
I was in a state of shock and
trauma.
And I have so many unanswered
questions but nobody seems to
have answers the office of the
medical investigator was my
first point of contact.
But they weren't of much help at
all.
The detectives though I believe
for thorough in their
investigation weren't willing or
able to provide any information.
And the legal process was often
overwhelming and confusing also
keep in mind that the brain's
cognitive ability to function at
this point has been
significantly impacted by
trauma.
What this bill in place
adequately trained victim
advocates what operate as the
compass to helping families
navigate the entire process from
point a the notification of
death to point Z. the trial
victim advocates would also act
as the bridge of communication
between oil my APD DA's office
and the family therefore also
eliminating assumption simple
first false perceptions of
criminal investigators and the
efficacy of police departments I
strongly agree that big to mad
the kids within the police
departments would be an
invaluable asset to all of the
agencies families need K.
resolution and closure the and
the only way we can give them
that is if we relieve some of
the load from the investigators
and district attorneys thank you
thank you Monica next madam
chair I have commander George
Vega.
who heads up the APD homicide
division.
Member.
Thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is George Vega
and I am the commander the
criminal investigations division
with the Albuquerque police
department I was brought into
the division in January of
twenty twenty two and we're a
victim Center division and we're
looking to establish trauma
informed practices to better
serve the victims of violent
crime.
Before I go any further though
I'd like to thank everyone here
today for their previous support
line encouraging continued
support.
I would also like to recognize
two individuals and thank them
for having the courage to be
here with us today and share
their story that's Nicole Chavis
and Monica signs the terrorists
thank you for being here with
us.
Within my division I have units
such as the homicide unit the
armed robbery unit human
trafficking unit crimes against
children unit sex crimes unit
child exploitation detail the
multi agency task force and the
missing persons unit and of
course the victim assistance
unit now.
As you can see this division
investigates some of the most
violent crimes in the city.
In twenty twenty one the
Albuquerque police department
experienced a rise in homicides
and cases in homicide cases and
lower clearance rates.
Chief you know look at the issue
and hired our first victim
advocate Terry Stewart this
who's also here with us today.
As we look at the issue we found
that there was a gap in service.
For the surviving family members
of violent crime as we continue
to evaluate the because we
recognized that invest the
investigating detective was the
contact point for the victims
this this left less time for the
detective to actually invest the
investigate the case and they
were having to deal with the
case and the family and
everything that came along with
the case.
Today we have more victims kids
serving our city.
And they're dedicated to serving
the victims of violent crimes
and also now domestic violence
when we first launched the
program we had advocates only
helping those family members who
live whose loved one was a
victim of homicide with the
support of state local and state
leaders I have branched out the
victim advocacy to all crimes
that are within the division so
you can see how busy they are
they're touching crimes such as
robbery crimes all crimes with
children involved they're
touching the homicide still and
sex offenses so they're
extremely busy.
With this with with that support
within the coalesced addition it
freed up our detectives to
investigate the crime and the
victims are given the
appropriate services and I'm
happy to say that our clearance
rate is now ninety four percent
so when folks ask me what
contribute to that it's not just
one thing but it is definitely
part of the victim advocacy
that's now there to allow that
freedom more detectives to do
this to do the work now that
that solves the crime.
With that I would just encourage
your continued support and this
it really helps the police
department and and supports the
victims of violent crime thank
you thank you commander next
manager we have a Terry worked
as of I'm here with the Medicaid
in our state and the guardian
angel over survivor families
Madam.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you so much for
allowing me to be here today and
share with you why I believe
it's so important to have these
positions in place and to serve
the many families that we're
touching.
I also want to thank you for the
support you gave us last year we
were we were able to hire a
violent crime victims advocate
in at that position into the
unit and I'm here to tell you
how we kind of operate and how
things
Work at the department
In twenty twenty two like a
commander just mentioned we did
see one of the highest clearance
rates that we've seen in a while
and in the meantime and in the
background are advocates for
serving all of those families
detectives do an outstanding job
investigating sometimes some
victims of detectives are very
naturally good in communicating
with victims some of them not so
much but we needed to have
something that was stable for
victims to understand where
their case was in the
investigative phase of the
process.
Sadly there are still a lot of
families that the cases haven't
been solved yet but that doesn't
mean they don't deserve
communication from the
department and also just
respecting dignity as we
continue to try to solve those
cases.
Law enforcement is the you know
the front door of the of the
victims coming into the criminal
justice system and
like the testimony before from
Monica is you know people don't
always know what comes next in.
What to expect so are advocates
are available to help answer
their questions immediately
after an event has occurred
and it's really important to
their healing and their trauma
that these questions are
answered and many times the
questions get re ask and we can
continue to re answer because
it's very difficult sometimes
when you are suffering from
trauma you very forgetful and
sometimes not taking very good
care of yourself and you are you
know just experiencing the most
intense grief that anyone could
ever imagine.
So again violent crime brings
extreme trauma to a victim or
surviving family
and the community as well every
time I can tell you this every
time there's a homicide or
violent crime and someone's been
impacted in the past it brings
it right back to them the
feeling so overwhelmed the
trauma and that's you know it's
really a very unhealthy for all
of our victims in the community
to have to keep brief re
experiencing all of that.
Emotional devastation were
compounded and complicated when
the criminal justice system
fails to meet their needs
not having someone return their
call makes victims feel this
that the police department
doesn't care or that no one
cares the
interpret that and so many
different ways so we'll just for
us being able to touch base with
them and giving them just the
basic information like we're
your case is still active we can
have someone call you back that
is just so important for them to
continue to have some sense of
hope that they will get justice
at some point.
So the Albuquerque police
department has established
victim centered practices and
trauma informed approaches and
serving our victims we want to
make sure that victims and
survivors of family sorry for
ever impacted or treated with
cry with all respect compassion
and dignity.
some of our outreach and
referrals that we're able to
help families with right away R.
helping them with filling out
their crime victims reparation
compensation applications we can
do that over the phone
we can also those funds that if
the if the family is or the
victim is if the application is
approved this allows them to
have very much needed benefits
of the need immediately things
like.
A funeral expenses and
occasionally crime scene cleanup
those kinds of things that you
do can't wait and postpone that
those things need to be
addressed sore advocates are all
trained on how to help with
emergency funding if somebody
needs to be re located or if we
have a situation just where
someone needs emergency services
we can.
we can intervene quickly our
department does meetings forty
eight hours after every homicide
and other violent crimes and are
advocates are
At those meetings and first on
the agenda at those meetings as
we are given this next of kin
and from a notification
information so that we can make
contact with that family right
away some of our detectives have
our information and they give it
to the victim out notification
so sometimes we get calls
within hours of the event
happening.
So we can also help
victims navigate through the
criminal justice system
and know what to expect next
investigations sometimes can be
very lengthy and they're very
complicated they have all kinds
of questions about when my crime
stoppers no just lot of
different areas but we can help
navigate them through all of
those pieces.
And
most importantly I feel is we
can also be a connector between
their detective and sometimes
the victims haven't had very
good success in reaching their
detective and so we can we can
find that detective an acid
detective to contact the victim
or vice versa sometimes the
detectives come to me and asked
me if I can contact victim and
let them know we also help
schedule meetings those kinds of
things as well.
another important piece is that.
Once an arrest is made victims
then end up with the district
attorney's office and they have
a lot of victims advocates there
so we can do a warm hand off for
that big done so when I know
there's a recitation I contact
the victim let them know this is
what's going to happen next
you're going to get a call from
the district attorney's office
and I can introduce them to
their new advocate and it's
really helpful to because that
relationship between our
advocates in them sometimes our
victims get confused and they
don't know who to call but
always answer the phone and we
can smooth out whatever their
issue as quickly and that's
really important.
I also want to mention to that
while the crimes may occur in
Albuquerque are victims
surviving families many times
with outside of Albuquerque so
we have to access resources in
other areas of our state or even
other states
for example you know we've of
people young people.
Everybody comes out of tricky
for a concert or party or
something and then something
tragic happens but their family
lives in another area of state
so we're able our victim
advocates are able to
to help serve them as well I
also have cases that are the
victims are outside of our state
we had a of with a woman who was
assaulted during an active
homicide and so she lives in
Colorado so I've contacted
victims advocates in Colorado
and they're helping serve her
needs for trauma support and
therapy.
And another really important
note is are victims of crime
victims assistance unit is also
prepared to respond to critical
a large critical incident if
needed and we also have
relationships with other law
enforcement agency advocate so
that we can support each other.
I think that's a.
Thank you so much again for your
continued support thank you
Terry and lastly madam chair on.
We have a Frank Zubia director
The New Mexico crime victims
reparations commission.
The kind of a focus on the
funding and will benefit from
that funded us thank you good
afternoon madam chair members of
the committee but again Frank
Zubia with the New Mexico crime
victims reparation commission
thank you for the opportunity to
speak with you today
my agencies cover kind of an
anomaly madam chair members of
the committee we we we are an
agency that fund a hundred and
forty three projects statewide.
Those projects consist of
domestic violence shelters rape
crisis centers scenes sexual
assault nurse examiners sorry if
I use acronyms I apologize
Child advocacy centers we we
pretty much if you were a victim
service provider in the state of
New Mexico are crime victims
reparation commission somehow
funds you we primarily provide
individuals to provide direct
victim services to those
individuals we currently fund I
law enforcement projects across
the state department of public
safety where we have four victim
advocates.
Of the Albuquerque police
department Los Alamos Bernalillo
sheriff's office and the Los
crucis police department but we
did receive a little
appropriation last year we were
able to enhance some of those
projects across the state we are
able to get the money out fairly
quickly one of the biggest
challenges and I just want to
kind of give kudos to the
Albuquerque police department we
actually started a pilot program
and it was priority processing
we can actually make a
determination on a homicide case
within seventy two hours to
determine eligibility so
Albuquerque police department
was our pilot project and in
this is truly unfortunate our
compensation program provided
compensation to two hundred and
seventy five victims of violent
crime.
Last state fiscal year we
expended over a million dollars
I just funeral and burial.
We
When we compare that number to
our counterparts on a national
level it's.
They're surprised at how much we
actually pay for funeral of per
capita right indeed they're
amazed at that because
historically our organization
would pay more for medical
expenses and counseling and now
our biggest expense and has been
for the last five years his
funeral.
I'm in New we we work closely
with all these law enforcement
organizations also with the
district attorney's office
victim advocates because we also
fund victim advocates there and
prosecutors across the state as
well.
One thing that I want this
committee to know is that we are
an agency that administers
federal funding to a lot of
these projects unfortunately our
federal funding is being cut
last year we cut all of our four
hundred forty three projects by
twenty two percent we're also
anticipating an additional cuts
of fifteen percent for FY twenty
three.
So I ask that this committee
continue to support victim
services across the state and we
ask that this particular
funding be supported by not just
the legislature but everyone
else because everyone will
benefit from it thank you madam
chair.
Madam chair that doesn't with
our expert testimony with that
we stand for questions thank you
very much Representative let's
go to the audience those in
favor please raise your hand.
All right and.
I'd I'd like to vote for for
those in favor but I please try
to keep your remarks brief we do
you know we did get off to a
little bit of a late start so if
you could be as brief as
possible for anyone wishes to
speak in support.
Many school co president New
Mexico.
Representative Garcia for Davis
we have a lot of calls.
Others want to do and this is
what we do right.
Well advocates to.
They don't.
Act.
How to get a funeral expenses
and anything so.
We have a sixteen point eight
percent spike in deaths of
twenty twenty one eighty five.
There's so many of them.
Do not have it's just.
Thank you do hoping consider
this for.
Thank you would anyone else wish
to speak.
Sure.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Michael
Chavis I am the co founder of
Robbie Mexico where a homicide
advocacy group and this is my
son Jaden he was seventeen years
old when he was killed I I drive
by shooting and I will tell you
that this was the most
catastrophic traumatic the fax
to me.
Family into a lot of the
community.
Especially those on a high
school when he was killed we had
no victim advocates not at the
DA's office and IT PED I was
lost at the moment that they
took me in the white room to
tell me that my sentence.
And that he didn't make it.
I was lost.
the second thing I asked is if
he could be a.
He's an organ donor he needed to
go there and the first thing
that an officer said right
behind me very unemotional
because that's what they did
with all day is I'm sorry his
body is part of the crime scene
you can't touch it.
victims of homicide cannot be or
they have to go to online.
His body is not here so you
can't seem.
I was lost I have no.
Know where to go no one ask
questions to three hours later
when I got home.
For homicide detectives with
homicide across their backs
walked in the house trying to
ask me a million questions from
there it just seemed like a
world wind and not having
advocates to call not having
anyone to turn to again was very
traumatic now there's Terry
she's doing an amazing job APD's
doing an amazing job because
they can call them it gives
those detectives the opportunity
and the time to solve their
cases to make those arrests to
have those interviews I was
constantly bugging and I was
putting my homicide detective
and they're working night and
day there are points where my
homicide detective was hiding in
the bathroom working on the case
for has been on vacation and
this is what they do because
they're still over one.
They're trying to help us as
victims as much as they can
because they are heartless but
there is only so much they can
do now I know with Terry and the
advocates there APD it is help
tremendously the victims right
and in my group and the New
Mexico cristatus for justice
have had answers and they had
somebody to turn to so they're
not just relying on us already
gone through traumatic events
have read those again so I am
very much and may thank you.
Speaking on condition.
Favor my name is Valerie
Martinez.
My sister was killed in two.
In two thousand two.
we did have a victim advocate
thankfully to the district
attorney's office that helped
work helped us walk through that
entire process we needed that
and I need you know this
committee to understand how that
works because our families
basically stand stepped on a
eleven landmine and our entire
family are Lujan lives blew up
we had somebody to be able to
help us state these are the
things that you have access to
help us fill out an application
to see the R. C. and be able to
help us walk through the
criminal justice system.
A lot of the advocates me on
that because there was only one
in the eighth judicial district
at that time most of our
advocates came from volunteers
this is not just and Albuquerque
or Santa Fe issue this is the
New Mexico issue.
Lots of families.
And I would ask the committee
said this.
Anyone wishing to speak in
opposition.
Let's get back to.
A request from the US the more
information.
You are Madam chair members of
the committee approved I recruit
organ and vocal where American
firms what I'm looking for
Lauro your program but women are
all the governor with the mark
of the purple for one of our
women are the local women voters
Mexico are some of us were in
the room requirements could not
thanks for the fact that we
wanted from the fund for all the
people who worked on the well
our hearts go out to all of for
from one to four law alright our
our hold your health needs when
the school went across the phone
with not more when
whatever I where comma one one
of the welcome to both for and
Mario are for for for for for
for the following up on the
first graph.
After the the problem one
million other problems
we heard from the representative
your doctor will workable
no court for back home but it's
not worth part of Paul are will
help former board from for
certain things so I prefer fund
very very important for our full
four nine current global corn on
court we'll go through the whole
I thank you very much.
Thank you miss mission I also
see someone are a link that's
New Mexico crusaders for justice
so please identify yourself
before you speak.
New Mexico crate crusader.
Hello.
Is there a problem madam chair
they don't have the correct is
to switch to differences they're
not they're not congruent to the
can't speak on this okay I'm
sorry
Mr crusader mystery state here
there's a disconnect between
your resume in our resume and
that's the best I can do so
unfortunately we're not going to
be able to hear you today but
thank you for participating we
do note here support for the for
the bill thank you.
All right let's get back to the
committee Representative McQueen
and then Representative read.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair of the.
Garcia I just a question
regarding the wording of the
appropriation.
I I read it several times
It I figured out my biggest
issue but
it says five million
appropriated to the crime
victims reparation commission.
For expenditure in twenty four
subsequent years to fund law
enforcement based advocates for
victims of homicide in their
fight crime.
Are those the same thing the law
enforcement based advocates and
the reparation commission.
Madam chair Representative
McQueen
They're two different.
Thanks
the the the funding agency for
the hiring of with the Mavic
within existing law enforcement
agencies throughout the state.
And the funding.
will.
The
appropriated to the New Mexico
crime victims reparation
commission who will then.
take requests for proposals in
issue grants to these entities
that are applying for the
funding that will be available.
Madam chair representative
Garcia so essentially the
commission is
Services collation for the funds
that's correct.
And check thank you madam chair
thank you observe.
Representative Reeb Madam chair
representative I guess so I was
not aware that there was this
lack err gap in services across
the state a I guess I never
really experienced that were I
work to so it it saddens me to
hear Nicole story and other
victims stories about not having
that services I know how
important it is I had the same
question that this
representative had about the
funding and whether it should go
directly to the law enforcement
agency or not but I think you've
answered that of but just a
question I just have is how many
law enforcement victim advocates
are there currently in the
state.
You madam chair I yield to
either Frank or.
Some of the other experts thank
you read more into it Madam
chair representative free but we
currently fund I projects would
we actually receive the funding
originally last year there were
many other organizations law
enforcement organizations across
the state that work eager to
apply but once they found that
it was not reoccurring funding
they pulled back because they
could not sustain these projects
if it was not reoccurring
funding so that was a big issue
that we we worked closely with
against service organizations
across the state with the
funding that we were wanting to
get out Madam chair
representative read we had ten
additional law enforcement
organizations that were.
Eager to apply but again
sustainability issue was
obviously that was the biggest
concern so they pulled back
we're hoping that with these
five million dollars
appropriation because it's over
several years that would also
give us the sustainability and
also seed money for these
organizations to ultimately
absorb those positions Madam
chair representative I I think
that's great because I I get
what you're saying law
enforcement prosecutors don't
have the the time to spend that
victims need in these you know
horrible.
Crimes that occur I know where I
worked at the DA's office we
sent our dust you know advocates
out to the crime scenes and to
the victims but I'm sure in
Albuquerque or I mean even in
smaller is it sounds like that
is not always possible
especially with me and
dispositions probably her very
full also so I think it's great
to and I appreciate that you're
looking to fill these gaps in
services I I just really you
know have a heart for crime
victims and and if they don't
understand when what's happening
going through the process as
these witnesses testified it
it's a horrible horrible
experience and so I I support
this and I think you for
bringing this forward.
Madam chair representative read.
The the planet thousand dollars
created to positions full time
within APD amber Bernalillo
county.
And then the other was other
entities like the Los crucis
pose Department the Farmington
Police Department the state
police and what was the other
one.
Los Alamos the Los Alamos police
Department that then utilized
the the the hiring of the of of
advocates within APD in brown
county.
Came out two hundred fifty
thousand each and then Senator
Ortiz came in with fifty
thousand dollar request for them
related
activities within the homicide
divisions.
But they did not hire a full
time or even part time but the
use the funding for the
Connecticut related issues and
needs within the homicide
division Madam and madam chair
the cherry on top of the cake is
that a P. D. madam chair
leverage their a hundred fifty
thousand and through their
budget.
Made adjustments in their budget
and brought six more advocates
on board the region with the
hundred fifty that they got from
this funding thousand brought
money that we appropriated last
year Madam chair representative
thank you I appreciate that.
Representative Alcon.
Thank you madam chair a would do
best on house bill twenty one.
The move move by Representative
Bill Clinton seconded by
Representative Sapan ski I do
have one more person wishes to
ask a question Representative
Romero thank you madam chair
thank you Representative thank
you to all the advocates here
today for your testimony
I'm really grateful to learn
about these programs I just have
two questions one is just on the
federal side with the deductions
of funding is there an
expectation that that will
change that we can see these
supplements coming back and and
whether or not they be
reoccurring and if we can
anticipate any of that happening
chair representative America yet
to Frank.
Madam chair Representative
Romero it fluctuated so I'm
going to give you just a general
perspective with regards to the
voca funding in two thousand
eighteen we received twenty one
million dollars subsequent year
we received twelfth septic when
you're receive tet so a just to
keep flooring and unfortunately
there was a decline it was the
the crime victim Fund consists
of fines fees and forfeitures on
a federal level and.
There was a declining because
most of the those they were
convictions they were being
placed on first offender
programs so there was no
convictions so there was no
finer fee assessed so that
ultimately depleted the crime
victim Fund unfortunately that
meant that there's less funds to
be distributed across the
country there was a vocal fix in
two thousand one July first of
two thousand.
Invoke I'm sorry victims of
crime act sorry I apologize
thank you for letting you know I
the Tories for acronyms
to the victims of crime act of
voca fix was July of twenty
twenty one which with that now
stabilize the crime victim Fund
it's gonna take awhile before
our agency or any organization
that actually administered that
federal money we'll see that
we're anticipating that that'll
be in FY twenty five.
Thank you madam chair thank you
for helping us understand that
and I guess just on the budget
for how the distribution would
work with the five million is
that focus I know you're talking
about pointing these recurring
positions and you also talked
about a funeral expense and some
of the other expenses does that
come out of this fund or the
separate okay so they are
separates more so for the person
piece that we're looking at
thank you madam chair missing
you not okay answer that for me
thank you.
Any other questions okay would
you call the roll yes.
Representative upon yes.
Representative Chasey yes.
Representative Eli yes.
Mr speaker.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative Nibert yes.
Representative read yes.
Representative Rehm.
Representative Representative
should pan ski yes.
Madam vice chair yes.
Madam chair yes.
Have a due pass thank you for
you madam chair thank you very
much.
Right we are now on house bill.
one thirty nine eliminating
court fees and.
Senator something of a.
Welcome Representative Lara
Cadena and we have
she says is vacant.
Yes okay.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I'm honored to be
here today with the Chief
Justice of the New Mexico
Supreme Court Shannon Bacon and
Representative lack of enough in
south central New Mexico right
here today on house bill one
thirty nine house bill one
thirty nine is both
straightforward and expensive as
we move towards a policy that's
the right thing for New Mexicans
in our judiciary H. B. one
thirty nine eliminates the state
mandated posted unification fees
in traffic and criminal cases.
It's real and significant for me
that the judiciary is and always
will be a third branch of
government.
As we've heard today and another
conversation of fees com and
somewhat in a haphazard way fund
programs that we've said our
value add to New Mexicans it's
my fundamental belief that if
these programs bring goodness to
our communities and our
constituents if they're part of
the function of the governing of
New Mexico then we need to
adequately fund them in a
consistent and clear way it's
also my understanding that if we
are going to operate courts and
the judiciary then we should not
be pulling the revenue for the
operation of that Judiciary from
the backs of New Mexicans
overwhelmingly cannot afford to
pay for us so we thought madam
chair and committee I'll turn to
chief justice here to lay out
why with her leadership the the
courts are ready to move in this
direction.
Thank you very much madam chair
Representative.
This bill has profound impacts
both on the people that can
least afford to pay these fees
but also on how we are budgeting
and performing
with the members of our
community so house bill one
thirty nine would eliminate
state mandated posted you
occasion fees.
assistant criminal traffic cases
I want to be clear this is not
about fines you all set the
fines he said the punishment
we're not trying to eliminate
that these are fees that
automatically get tacked on to a
wide variety of violations a
broken tail light you're paying
for quarter automation for
example.
The elimination of the funding
affects a variety of entities in
the state of New Mexico the
largest of which is the
judiciary about eight million
dollars of our budget comes from
the funding.
if you look at it trying to look
at a stagnant number and I'll
come back to the numbers here in
in just a moment.
The fees that are assessed under
the the state system these are
not Municipal PC service fees
that have been imposed by the
legislature to be collected
cannot be waived.
So it's not as though a judge
can magically wave a wand and
say you can't afford this let's
wait it they are mandatory.
Even if judges were given the
discretion to waive those fees
then you put the judge in the
position of deciding which of
these programs is actually valid
it needs the funding so I a
judge would be sitting in court
saying well I think the brain
injury fund is really important
but just what the judiciary's
computer system is more
important to me so I'm only
going to assess the fees on the
computers that puts judges in an
untenable position it also makes
them debt collectors which is
equally untenable and largely
the judiciary is the debt
collector here and that is one
of the reasons we have brought
this this bill forward.
the cost to the judiciary.
Of collecting fees in in New
Mexico is not in this
insignificant.
AOC staff has done a really nice
job of putting a dollar amount
on what it costs the judiciary
to kind of run around and try
and assess people's ability to
pay get them to pay they're not
compliance we bring them back in
we put our money new program
they're not complain again we
hunt them down and ultimately a
warrant is issued for their
arrest that whole system in the
past three years has cost the
judiciary over four million
three hundred ninety six
thousand dollars.
So that is the definition of
good money after bad.
We're spending millions of
dollars to collect a fraction of
that which has been assessed.
So the the consequences there is
significant in terms of our
budget as well.
it also creates really unstable
revenue prediction for the
judiciary and all of the other
entities that are fee funded.
I'm over the from FY twenty
seventeen to FY twenty twenty
one the funding across the board
has decreased more than three
million dollars.
So it's great uncertain if
you're trying to determine what
are our needs when we come
forward with our base budget for
example we have two guests year
in and year out as to what to
that actually
might look like and it's just a
might and so that reduction is
is significant some of the
entities that fall under this
umbrella started out with the
funding budgets of about three
million dollars
and they have dropped
precipitously to half a million
dollars or started at two
hundred fifty thousand dollars
and now are receiving a hundred
and twenty nine thousand dollars
and these are all in and
agencies entities of branches of
government that the legislature
has decided these are important
to New Mexico but not important
enough for us to look at general
fund money and that that doesn't
really make sense these are
important to your constituents
and their eight important to you
we should be funding these
programs through the general
fund.
But because we're doing it
through fees were largely paying
for these things on the backs of
the people who can least afford
it.
And that's the the non fiscal
but the human cost of this.
It has a disproportionate impact
on lower income defendants if I
were assessed a fee.
A I probably have a lawyer that
would get rid of the fee.
But B. I would just and here's
the twenty five dollars but for
people who can't afford it their
assessed the feet and it
compounds over time and it grows
and grows and grows and
ultimately the failure to pay
summonses issued and then if
that doesn't work the court will
have to issue a warrant for
failure to pay so let me tell
you what happens if a warrant is
issued and we spend that for
over four million dollars
running around trying to to
collect this and get somebody to
compliance of if the warrant is
executed on by law enforcement
that individual who hasn't paid
the fee can pay off their debt
it doesn't create revenue which
just at a deduction from that
which they purportedly OO they
can pay that off by sitting in
jail.
And they get paid federal
minimum wage.
For eight hours a day.
So it's about sixty some odd
dollars a day.
We pay over a hundred dollars a
day for that person to sit in
jail so the state is paying
money for somebody to get their
balance to zero getting the
balanced is here doesn't mean
they're actually receiving a
paycheck and they're paying the
money into the general fund it's
it's a it's a bit of it I shall
be.
The US government eliminated
debtor's prison.
Almost a hundred years ago.
And this is nothing but a back
door to a debtors prison.
so we ask you to support this
bill because.
From the economic perspective
again we're throwing good money
after bad there's no oversight
to how the money is spent.
HSC Senate finance DFA LFC have
no oversight of this money the
judiciary simply a conduit which
the money passes through and we
did with dole it out to all of
these entities you have no idea
how they're they're spending
that money but also it's not a
and an adequate way to meet the
budget demands of these
important branches of government
and or agencies and then finally
as I've emphasized it is
We're doing this on the on the
backs of folks the committee
support.
Madam chair before we go to
public comment if I might add
two final points one is that we
know intimately understand that
there are important purpose
throughout New Mexico's
government that are currently
funded again in this haphazard
inconsistent way by fees.
We have a delayed implementation
on H. B. one thirty nine so that
those agencies and those
advocates and those leaders from
across our communities can go
and make the case for why there
programs need to that clear
consistent and significant
revenue that would come out of
HB to our or our general fund
secondly I do want to be clear
and accountable that in the
first draft that we reviewed out
of AOC and with this bill we did
not include some fees that are
currently assessed by the
municipal courts when we got
into for their conversations
that without a as the sponsor
that pushed my allies here and
champions at the supreme court
and AOC to be intellectually
honest and to save these
arguments supplied to the
statewide fees that they
currently we're pulling in and
we just reading that we also
needed to apply those same
arguments to the same fees again
statewide mandated post
education fees they're currently
collected by the municipal
courts so those three primary
fees would be the judicial
education fee the automation fee
and the detention fund the US so
in this situation we're treating
the municipal courts just like
any other court but they are
implicated to some extent in
this bill with that will stand
for questions madam chair.
Thank you Representative and
thank you Chief Justice of those
in favor please raise your hand.
Okay quite a number there all
right those opposed.
Okay so let's hear from the
propose a request that you be as
brief as possible
Madam chair and members of the
committee as a victim of violent
crime with my son being murdered
on to me it just feels like the
criminal yet get another house
and the victims are left with
the sort of the state.
I understand the idea of this
and I respected but the
penalties are any non payment as
it is so now we're gonna take
away the fees that the criminals
are accountable for because we
feel bad for them.
Unless there is certainty that
we have funding in place for us
that's crime victim.
There's no guarantee that
there's going to be any funding
so I understand and moving this
and and I agree with that but
unless that's actually put in
place before this is passed we
have no guarantee of funding we
just told you how much we
appreciate the funding that we
received for getting
The state office so you know
just as a reminder most victims
are also lowincome.
Without services on without
programs and most victims here
in New Mexico are also people of
color like my son so just a
reminder this is not a guarantee
in in the last that's in place
you're again taking things away
from us crime victims and re
victimizing
Speak in opposition.
Okay here.
I'm sorry.
Of.
members of the committee sponsor
an uncle of the.
Not exactly opposition more
New Mexico I survivors of three
for moderate injuries and one of
the first person.
Yes.
the person for very very for the
frontier and those of you for a
very long time in the bill for
a.
Access
two hundred pounds twenty seven
medication.
Two thousand legislation
for the last fifteen years.
So as a budget for the purpose
of.
Now for people with disabilities
and lost my fellow I know that
one one thirty nine has a field
hospital one thirty eight one
three nine thanks of house bill
one thirty eight the back in for
the free research fund for be I
just have.
Representative.
Who
is
have the highest rate at times
the that the for a moving
violation because it's five
dollars.
The for the I believe that the
program is very important that
the opportunity to examine the
other streams for Perkins
service fund it's very
important.
That of because of the issue of
that I would be greatly improved
my life.
That's a lot of.
we often low income are people
with multiple disabilities.
Been sustained by the and injury
and in New Mexico the statistics
for the motor vehicle accident
resulting iterations featuring
about so every twenty one
seconds.
One revenue stream for programs
and services that support
facilities to help them improve
their outcome is very important
of this administration so I
don't exactly stand in
opposition.
Representative but what I've.
Is awareness thank you very much
chairman.
I.
Is there anyone else who wishes
to speak of yes miss.
Valerie Martinez madam chair
members of the committee.
Again I want to the I want to
speak in opposition to this
particular bill because as I
spoke earlier when my sister was
found we have one advocate that
helped us through some of this
funding helps so that those kind
of programs but it also funds
the crime that.
That's super important because
we know that in this state the
cry of the rape kit backlog is
for many years backed up we are
currently up to date but there's
no guarantee that they can stay
up to date have there been
testing in my sister's case he
had a great the perpetrator had
raped a woman five weeks before
had it been tested my sister
might be alive today.
Thank you anyone else in
opposition.
those in favor and.
yes okay sorry about that there
are three hands raised
Meredith nation Meredith are you
an opposition.
I.
Meredith are you in opposition.
Chairman four okay so those of
you who are not in opposition
please take your hands down.
All right so we have ed.
Jealous Gillis ed.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Is
there.
Madam chairman and co chair
members of the committee my name
is at Dallas my company help net
LLC in Los Alamos is contracted
by the New Mexico Human Services
Department to provide fiscal
intermediary services to the
Rangers Services fund which gets
funding through court fees.
At in years past I worked as a
case manager in the B. I. S.
program I've been working in the
B. I. S. a program in some
capacity for more than twenty
years.
I'm also a certified brain
injury specialist trainer I want
to speak in support of the brain
injury community to say that I
have seen many people helped by
this fund eliminating the fees
that support this program.
Will hurt the brain injury
community it is it's important
to understand that the B. I. S.
a.
Brain injury services fund
program is a payer to payer of
last resort that means that the
the the brain injury program
only pays for services when no
one else will so Medicaid won't
Medicare won't private insurance
won't if this bill eliminates
the funding for for this program
and the program and the program
goes away participants in our
program will have no other
resource to pay for the services
they receive.
This could cause this could
cause some harm the fact that
anyone of us could find
ourselves in need of this fun
cause brain injury can happen
can happen to anyone of us car
accidents falls strokes as a
member of the public I think we
need to ensure that this program
is secured and funded we support
incorporating social justice we
support that we support what
this bill is about because
people are just because people
are disabled are often impacted
by fines and fees and lower in
lower income levels we support
anything and everything to make
this a better place to live and
help people with disabilities
have a higher quality of life.
Thank you very much for your
time and consideration thank
you.
Thank you Cathrynn N..
You're in you are you speaking
in opposition.
Catherine.
Yes I am okay
please proceed.
I am a member or participant of
the
Could you give us our for your
full name please.
Yes my name is Katherine Nicias
and I am a participant of the
brain injury program.
Thank you.
You may speak.
is so I I am more reiterating
some of what the other people
have already mentioned and
specific highlights to that
would be the the the program
funding has enabled me
particularly to receive health
care I am on Medicare and
currently disabled due to both
an acquired brain injury in a
traumatic brain injury and I've
been on the program for about
two and a half years and it is
enabled me to
acquire services that Medicare
would not pay for that my
physicians felt were necessary
to propel my healing and without
that program I don't think that
I would have made half the
improvements in my nervous
system and cognition etcetera
that the treatments have
provided that being said it's
been extremely beneficial and I
know that there are people who
are worse off even than me and I
I I worry for them should we
lose the funding as well as for
myself because the therapies
have been some beneficial and I
spend it however with brain
injuries recovery can look like
years from most people because
the brain is a very slow healing
or again and so
I hear the concerns of the bill
that is being requested to be
altered or changed you know the
financial aspects of it and who
it affects and of course nobody
wants to you know create more
problems for our financial
issues I mean money is
you know you're trying to
allocated to the most
appropriate
Resource as a resource to the
most appropriate programs
etcetera and I hear all the
concerns about you know just
putting judges and positions to
make decisions etcetera and so
instead of cut my my thought
process on this is that instead
of cutting funding are cutting
the the fees you know finding a
better allocation for a better
resource to find the funding
something that's more stable to
support what it was saying you
know if we could have you know
maybe if we can participate in
the general fund or whatever it
is that we need to do to it to
maintain these kinds of programs
because people who are
injured with brain injuries it
it's a long process and there's
just so that it's a very complex
injury and it requires multi
disciplinary services to attend
to the the very unique and
specific needs of each
individual and without this
program myself I would not have
been able to have made the that
the gains that I have
now that doesn't mean that I
want someone penalized for it
You know it is financially
penalized so if there's some my
my my process on this is that if
we can not and and to support I
forgot I had I don't recall
those Valory someone saying it
you don't remove the resource
without having something in
place this.
Of the program financial needs
so if you know if we can before
if if you know the.
If there is a way to
secure our financial.
Support prior to removing our
amending this bill because my
understanding this goes into
effect February first and and
and just from a very personal
perspective I cannot afford the
funds now to continue
the therapy I do not have the
financial support to pay for the
therapies that I am currently
receiving so that means as of
February first that goes away
from me and now I'm and I just
found this out today and
you know so I'm not prepared to
figure out what I'm going to do
there are other members on this
fund that I know received
assistance for housing there's
just various different ways that
the brain injury fund
truly supports people who were
injured and so what I'm asking
is.
You know if you want to if if
the system can improve itself
and we can find a better way to
allocate resources or or to to
obtain those resources to
allocate and more
Catherine do could you wrap it
up yes I'm I'm just that's where
I was at the edges if we could
please find a way to secure the
funds so that the people who are
dependent on them are not left
wanting and needing thank you.
Just a clear just to clarify I
believe in the presentation we
noted that there was a delayed
implementation so this will not
happen for about a year is that
correct Chief Justice madam
chairs members yes we've
implemented a year delay in
implementation meeting the fees
will be delivered for the next
year and it will give every one
of these entities the
opportunity to present their
case to HFC and Senate finance
and
shore up the pieces that will be
dancing thank you to clarify
madam chair to be July one
twenty twenty four that actually
comes out to about a year and a
half thank you madam chair okay
just wanna make sure everyone
understands that all right those
in favor who wish to speak very
briefly.
Please that's there are a lot of
hands up and so if you're gonna
say the same thing that the
previous folks said maybe keep
it I agree how's that because
we've got a long you know day
ahead of us so yes Sir over
here.
Thank you
very much on pop.
This.
Not too much time to just
passage Vance racial and
economic justice I.
Thank you Mr chairman.
My name is Paul Spencer from the
water New Mexico and also a
commitment interest actor I
understand in favor of this bill
is so much that it is the intent
to to save the state money in
ways that losing it because of
the oversight and fix that but
we at the very community need
those funds so I hope that you
guys can redirect being out for
us to make sure we get that so
I'll be cost savings and more of
a oversight having
real consequences in real
Accountability thank you welcome
this certainty.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Jason
class of the ministry of office
of the courts simply just and
support of this bill because of
the courts should be focused on
the administration of justice
not be collection centers for
the funding of these important
government programs we support
full funding for all of these
programs and the funding is not
for fun thank you.
Yes.
Madam chair members of the
committee on some of the of the
Czecho with administrative
office of the courts the person
in charge of collecting this
money and forcing the financial
sentences
I see every month what we
collected what's going out and
so I also stand with Nicole
Chavis and Melanie Martinez and
the people from the brain injury
fund they deserve consistent
funding of and it's not
something that our our fees are
provided to them and I
appreciate the committee support
thank you thank you.
Next item chair members of the
committee Ricky Chavez on behalf
of the New Mexico employers
association madam Chief Justice
and the sponsor we thank you and
they made all the points for us
we stand and support thank you.
Okay R. is someone over here you
have to raise your hand so I
know who wants to speak.
Today madam chair representing
Benny are.
A few if the actions of New
Mexico we stand in full support
I think a couple of the state
couple of things we agree with
everyone else's student support
but reducing that of many of the
people charged with these fees
and fines and who suffered from
them are
have not committed any crimes
yeah and for have served their
time and this please find that
these can result in perspiration
we have enough people now we
don't need to send people to
death for this.
Thank you you're welcome.
Yes ma'am.
Madam chair and representative
my name is Gail curl.
And I'm just here to say
something briefly about friend
of mine the young father who is
in prison for a year and a half
that did not committed violent
crime
whether or not it doesn't matter
at this point however he had if
he at the end of this time he
didn't realize it until it was
late he was supposed to get out
what is certain date and had
gotten his housing is there P.
together he'd gotten a place to
help raised his four year old
son and then what happened was
he was told he had to pay this
he he called to the with his
voice shaking over the phone
because he had COVID twice
seriously while he was
incarcerated and had dealt with
not getting the correct medicine
and not being and being in
isolation he also had his wrist
broken having been jumped by
some other guys in there and do
had to deal with since he was
filing a grievance against some
guards who he felt were just
treating him and others he had
to deal with her their
hostility he was petrified of
staying in there longer because
he could not afford that fee he
didn't know if he would come out
of that prison by staying there
for months longer that he had to
do it so I fully support this
bill and I don't want to see
anybody else go through that or
anything works.
Thank you.
Yes miss and then we're gonna
move over here and we're gonna.
Hopefully be chair members of
the committee my name is direct
numbers look strong well
teachers New Mexico we strongly
strongly supported a bill to
many New Mexicans are.
Should not have to be forced to
choose.
So that many reasons expense to
support thank you.
Over here.
Chair members of the committee
again Frank Zubia within Mexico
crime victims reparation
commission we are not in
opposition of this bill
everyone was surprised because I
know the HSD is done we believe
the judicial reform of the one
that we are though one of those
agencies that is an unintended
consequence with regards to
passing bills should you choose
to pass this bill.
We will lose a
significant revenue streams of
we and our our organization to
introduce legislation in two
thousand fifteen to get penalty
assessments because we were
getting the need of the
appropriation from the
legislature in order to meet the
needs of victims across the
state so I asked the legislature
to pass this bill thank you also
consider the victims that will
ultimately be affected thank you
madam chair members of the
committee.
Deborah and then we'll go to the
next in about seven hundred and
the registered lobbyist for New
Mexico voices for children
action plan in the state
instruments part of this bill.
I and I and the cash at a time
in my adult son who's an addict
was struggling with addiction
and without stable housing unit
up to two warrants for failure
to appear on driving without
insurance each warrant as a
hundred dollars there was no way
for him to pay these warrants
and even even know about the
hearings because he's had no
permanent housing his whole
entire entire life my addresses
his permanent address so in his
this case when he is not doing
well we don't hear from him
there's no way for him to even
know about it if you certainly
can't pay for it any of the
transportation to get to that
account thank you thank you over
here of the gentleman you madam
chair members of the committee
thank you I'll keep it brief I'm
sad by Johnny with the American
civil liberties union of New
Mexico you're speaking on behalf
of them in support of this bill
I think one point I would just
like to quickly touch on since I
haven't heard him mention at is
the concept of accountability
when it comes to fees so if a
wealthy person commits state
traffic violation and they get
convicted and they have to pay
their feet they simply maybe ask
their parents for and move on
with the rest of their lives and
who knows probably don't feel
the impact as much for some of
the low income can get trapped
in a cycle of that they may get
on a payment plan may miss a
payment they made them get
warrants which would come with
another hundred dollar fee so I
think that when we talk about
accountability we're seeing that
one class of people are being
held accountable to different
way than.
I thank you again on behalf ACLU
NM we strongly support this
bill.
Yes.
Members of the committee on
and you start to judge of the
traditional district thank you
madam chair counties I also
stand in support of the bill for
all the reasons why I Chief
Justice bacon and and also want
to add that I to believe these
programs are incredibly
important and deserve a more
solid consistent stable funding
streams thank you.
Chair members of the committee
thank you for your help reduce
the risk for this money.
Number of policy on the New
Mexico voices for children
requires a mix packs and budget
not to study the issue I.
Four million three years from a
purely fiscal perspective when
it comes to fees are criminal
justice system in fact the ones
reference in this bill that you
isn't worth the squeeze.
According to the Brennan center
for justice for every dollar.
Select group on the news is a
dollar seventy fees also known
reliable source of government
revenue as a significant portion
of the of the revenue they
generate goes on correct even
though the issues is what this
comes from the government's
perspective.
In New Mexico are.
The right one collected that in
counties throughout New Mexico
correlates with the populate
within each county this
relationship underscores how
funds and fees tend to be a
serious problem for communities
that can least afford it
concludes fund these are only a
prepares a rational mechanism to
fund our government government
but it also functions as a
regressive tax rates are twenty
and most vulnerable families
thank you.
Thank you.
If
one more person.
there are some additional hands
on line are all the hands
showing in support if not please
take your hand down.
Okay so we have district judge.
Dan Brandt Bryant.
District judge Brian.
Yes madam chair correct me if I
mispronounce streaming.
No ma'am that was perfect.
Is this say simply that I stand
in support of the bill.
You've heard all of the marriage
and I'm not going to waste any
time.
Thank you.
Thank you judge.
Of Meredith nations.
Madam chair members of the
committee I want to thank
Four leveraging our I'm working
on behalf of the native women
voters and American forces
number two women report more
workable very important we offer
are going back to lead from the
fund where are programs that
reflect current I
From a personal point four
the work order for
people who are suffering poverty
another problem part of Kerr for
you the card right before thank
you actually helped them to
restore their lives and their
families live and one ability to
pay for career so I I honestly
where we definitely both from
the for funding for create more
funding for those programs but
what part of the.
Thank you miss mission judge
Franchini.
Judge Franchini.
Yes ma'am sure my name is Nancy
Franchini and I'm a District
Court judge and Bernalillo
county as well as the president
of the district metropolitan
court judges association and I
stand in support of this bill
thank you for your consideration
thank you there's a person named
Bob.
Fortunately there seems to be
only one Bob up but it's.
Thank you hi Bob would you give
us give us your full name.
It's it's Bob Ali A. L. P. hi
and thank you for hearing me I
just agree with everything the
supporters at seven I just
wanted to say that thank you
great thank you Bob
Max pines.
Max.
I think you need okay great
you're on muted now Max yes yes
thank you so much for hearing.
My name is Max opined from the
law offices of public defender
one of the trial attorneys the
Albuquerque office I agree with
so many of the in favor of
comments I think you're
consideration on behalf of so
many of my impoverished and
indigent clients who can't.
Can't keep going unless we stop
keeping them down so thank you
so much thank you Alexander of
Taylor.
Miss Taylor.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is
Alexandria Taylor and I'm the
executive director of the New
Mexico coalition of sexual
assault programs we stand in
support of this bill and as an
organization that represents the
sexual assault programs all over
the state that's been working on
fully funding these services the
past two years of the
legislature we believe all of
the comments in the room today
are worthy of full state funding
and really hope that this is a
moment where we re center
justice and look at making sure
the well being and value of all
New Mexicans including victims
of crimes and the others that
benefit from these five and fees
are no longer receiving
piecemeal funding but are fully
funded by the general fund thank
you thank you.
I see of person named
Micaela Upton.
Ms Upton need to on yourselves
thank you hi can you hear me now
yes okay I just wanted to say
something was my colors he's
extend IT I have worked in
service coordination with a
brain injury service fund and I
agree with a lot of other saying
I believe that this bill is
definitely
Important and meaningful but I
don't want to see any signs be
remove from those that are
really needing a brain injury
service fund funds I know if the
funds have been cut previously
and each time that they've been
cut miss meant less services for
those that we are trying to help
that are experiencing the need
for the services they need for
their brain injuries so
I stand in support of the bill
as long as there's funding that
can be guaranteed to continue to
support the brain injury service
fund.
Thank you I think that concludes
oh all of our commenters so
let's come back to the committee
is there any concluding words
the panelists like to say before
we go to the committee.
No matter.
Thank you.
Let's see I have first on my
list Representative Eli.
Thank you madam chair that
equipment at your question about
the bill itself in terms of my
understanding this does not
apply to felony cases that
correct.
Madam chair committee members
this applies to all state
mandated posted education fees.
So madam chair this would
include felonies.
Madam madam chair
Representative fees are really
tacked on to to felony offenses
this is largely done in
magistrate court for traffic
offenses
the punishment that is meted out
in felony cases by way of
legislative mandate that's a
very different animal than fee
funding in in in traffic related
click cases most of this money
comes out of magistrate court
which by definition are not
felony courts.
Madam chair at appreciate the
clarification so this.
At thinking this is a really was
trying to understand is that
this bill really is going to
affect traffic cases and and
misdemeanors things that are
that are processed through mac
courts and municipal courts.
Madam chair representative
largely yeah that is yes that is
the case madam chair can can you
provide a little insight into
the types of
fees that municipal courts would
still be permitted to assess
should this bill pass Madam
chair representative I'm I don't
have a laundry list of those
fees but this bill is very
specifically designed to allow
municipalities under their home
rules yes establish whatever
fees they would like do we think
that is philosophically
consistent with where we are
sure but we're only asking for
those fees that are mandated by
the legislature on this by the
state to be eliminated at this
point we hope that the
municipalities will have a
different conversation about
these issues in in coming months
and years but we have not
eliminated the municipality's
ability under home rule to
assess their own fees and madam
chair just to clarify if you
look to page twenty six line
sixteen you'll see that what we
said very explicitly is that no
hard shell speaking of the
municipal courts no court shall
assess posted education fees
previously authorized by statute
and now repealed so again these
that are implicated by the
repeal if they'd like to enact
something similar that would be
on them to pass local ordinances
and get it and and madam chair
just to clarify
Much smaller but yes under the
criminal conviction these there
are smaller fees tacked on to
help felony cases
that would be seventy five
dollar controlled substances for
the hundred dollar DNA fee five
dollar domestic violence fees
including the seventy five
dollar crime victim reparation
fee but there is a list whether
it's applicability to felony
cases again this is a much
smaller pool of fees that are
assessed what it does it is part
of the legislation.
Madam chair.
But I think there's another
angle with you know the the
mention a couple of of angles
one I think for us is
legislators.
We have to I think come to grips
with the fact that we are
appropriations body that's one
of our jobs fundamentally.
And so to the extent that these
programs exist and the funded by
public dollars.
Right now the legislature has no
oversight over these funds we
have no accountability no
reporting.
madam chair to the then chief
justices point that the the
money going in these funds is
wildly erratic depending on on
the year.
but I think there's also
something to be said for us as
appropriators.
Deciding which programs we think
are valuable for New Mexico and
and using the appropriation
process to to bear that out.
So that's one been by to this
this bill from the legislature
perspective.
The other one madam chair is.
What I would you know describe
more as a moral question I think
that we as as legislators need
to come to grips with.
As I recall from the summer I
think there was a report to LFC
that I that I remember reviewing
that says basically eighty
percent of all criminal cases
are are public defender cases.
which would indicate to me that
eighty percent of those officer
indigents and.
So these funds.
This revenue.
It's it's being sourced off of a
group of people that that maybe
I think we should ask more
questions about now what do we
think that the the fines are
stiff enough I think that's a
separate dialogue.
Because a lot of times of yours
well you know if if the
perceived as five hundred
dollars and then the the fees
are a hundred ninety seven you
know really it's a seven hundred
dollar hit to the defendant and
are we given a definitive pass I
think the question is no the
better question is should the
should the W. I find for a but
first you first D. W. I. B.
popped up seven hundred.
I think that's where the dollar
is the center
Madam chair I will also say you
know one of the comments I heard
and and maybe I can
Put a of us of a humble
challenger for the the Chief
Justice of she doesn't a
disbarment for doing so.
I'm not insensitive the public
comments I heard centered around
the importance of many of these
funds.
So I think we have responsibly
look at that too as legislators.
And so madam Chief Justice I
guess Madam chair justice what
my challenge would be as I would
hope that you would you would be
willing extent you can to help
advocate for those funds for
these groups moving forward and
and I know this is one of the
Courts priorities and I hope
that you would stick this in
your pocket and keep an eye on
it as we go through the
appropriations process moving
forward to make sure that these
groups are being taken care of
because the reality is with and
maybe I should say this out loud
but allows or small groups that
have a lot of political pool.
And so to ask them to come
advocate for funding that's
vital for their local
communities the big gas.
And along those lines Madam this
is lasting all finished with
this is just a a a a mild
suggestion.
For the sponsor man to justice
to consider right now the
effective date is July one of
twenty four.
And the reason why I think
that's problematic is and and
maybe the public understands
maybe don't.
Right now we're going to the
budget budgeting process for for
a state budget that'll be
effective July one twenty four.
So what that means managers that
you're telling these groups that
this funding is going to be a
limit on July one twenty two
thousand twenty four.
But you're also telling that
that right now the early as as
we're talking is the time that
they have to be advocating to
get in to HB to to make sure
that the funding is there by the
time that July one two thousand
twenty four rolls around.
And so Madam I would just a
suggested changes maybe consider
changes July one two thousand
twenty five is not given in the
full year including the interim
to advocate for funding for
these programs that I that I
know I think everyone's panel
with reserves are vital and so
just a suggested change their
chair thank you.
Representative Romero.
Thank you madam chair thank you
for freeing for the legislation
I just have some questions on
some of the logistics and some
of the
Out of
in favor and oppose
so one thing I've noticed that
the judicial education fund is
also in this bill that's kind of
irrespective of the because
we've seen that legislation
other
committees I just wanna make
sure that that's duplicative in
this bill or is that separate
funds that you're trying to
change the ownership of for.
Madam chair representative and
members.
Judicial education is more in
large part fee funded right now
in a matter what you do with the
other judicial education bill
which is moving it on into AOC.
Say that doesn't pass we still
don't think judicial education
should be funded so they're
related but they're not
dependent upon each other I
think is probably the best
answer I can give you so madam
chair Representative to justice
that's they're just
complementary do you need this
bill in order for that one to
coincide or vice versa.
Madam chair representative okay
thank you
my next question is about the
brain injury services fund where
madam chair
Representative is that come out
of in this bill.
Perfect.
While you're looking for I'll
just madam chair madam chair.
And Representative.
Page sixteen money twenty three
and you can see it's a page full
of strike throughs and it's
they're treated the same as the
other fees that we're putting in
this legislation.
Thank you madam chair
Representative do we know what
the budget is for that that fees
that are collected from this
program so madam chair
representative as the Chief
Justice looks up to the
information that we have it's
important to say here that we
certainly hear and consider the
deep and incredible testimony
brought today
what is so striking to me is
that again this funding whatever
fee we look at is inconsistent
they are not able to budget
accurately and that it it can
change again the tenor of the
program and services that so
many New Mexicans rely on
because of how inconsistent it
is also data we're sharing today
comes through FY twenty
seventeen to FY twenty one I
when I got into this was
imagining especially hearing
testimony like this that we were
talking about revenue that was
potentially in the millions of
dollars when we look at this
list of incredibly important
purpose from TV and sexual
assault services and victims
funds these are each bringing in
no more than a couple hundred
thousand dollars with wild
swings from year to year that
might go down by half an up they
have so I'm sure she just as
well have the numbers that we
have here again no oversight or
accountability to where that
goes we trust in programs like
this that they spent those
dollars well but again these are
unfortunately I have not been
fully resource not been fully
funded and and deserve much more
in the big picture.
Yes madam chair representative
the brain injury fee which is
under HSD by the way it's it's
not entirely without muscle HSD
it's just a small piece within
that agency
the brain injury fee and twenty
seventeen that the amount that
was passed through under fee
funding with three flight
slightly over three hundred and
thirteen thousand dollars in
twenty twenty one that plummeted
to a hundred and eighty six
hundred eighty seven thousand
dollars so you have a forty
percent drop.
In what's actually being
collected through fee funding
and that demonstrates the wild
unpredictability of the
budgeting for an important
program like the brain injury
fund it's a just a quote that
one of the individuals I think
online who spoke in opposition
said we need to find a better
way we posit that this is a
better way because these
important program should have
general fund funding not the
funding that wildly vacillate
and then over time has greatly
diminished thank you madam chair
thank you Representative Chief
Justice I guess that gets me to
my next question because I'm
looking through all the strike
throughs that traffic safety
judicial education verison a
jury and witness fees spring
injury court facilities
I'm I guess when you add it all
up it could be in the millions
but that said madam chair
there's no appropriation
attached to this bill I'm
curious if you're working with
LFC with probation and building
the deficit into a budget and if
there isn't a sustainable amount
of funding or one time funding
to make these programs for what
do you envision for this and how
do we fill the gaps in chair
Madam chair representative our
second referral is indeed to the
House Appropriations Committee
and in part I think as as leader
lane said we hold an immense
responsibility as appropriators
and for those of us that don't
get to sit on that well regarded
committee I am grateful that we
will have some of these
conversations on display and
with clarity again there in
front of that body of but it was
a decision to look at at the
budgets as they were turned in
for this budget cycle it's
important to say that we are
advocating for special
appropriations now and that we
are ready to stand side by side
with these programs to justify
and provide compelling arguments
as to why we not only need to
replace these meager.
Funds that were coming in
consistently but to actually
fund them to the services they
need what really struck me last
time I was working on this bill
was learning from the sexual
assault providers about their
budget for shortfall that was in
the millions of dollars with
that without a fee implications
like this I remember the time
myself and other legislative
thing including chair Thompson
we're looking to put junior bill
money just to help cover the
gaps for sexual assault
survivors and and we had to ask
out loud but if we give you some
couple hundred thousand dollars
would that affect your overall
budget appropriation and sure
enough when they put they were
million short in what it took to
get support for survivors part
of the justification was that
they've had a couple hundred
thousand dollars into your bill
money so fees or not on the
table this list of programs is
crucial to the lives and safety
and survival of many New
Mexicans and I hope that we can
all call on our relationships
the leadership I see in this
room and others to really make
sure we're looking closer to
have a budget that reflects our
values and morals as New
Mexicans.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative I might I really
appreciate that look forward to
helping advocate on that how we
can do that and before it gets
through the house that we have
that sort of wrapped around my
final question is just about how
the current assessed fees are
going to work after it's removed
and sort of the logistics of
what when it goes away those
that are still on the books
following fees
if you know how how are we
reading this these records
we have expended ideas is that
does that fall in that category
and then to you know what what
how is that remedy to and are
we've just done collecting them
for this next fiscal year
pending this bill's passage.
Madam chair representative
members of the committee there's
a language in the bill that
allows somebody to come forward
and say please just you know
eliminate my fees a judge can
also do it on their own we did
not build in kind of an
expungement approach to this at
the state of Washington took
that approach and they tried to
repay all the fees that has ever
been paid over the course of
time and it was a billion dollar
project
we didn't think that that would
get much traction here so we
have gone with what we think is
is an important to measure for
the people that you know thank
thank you the Czecho was is
spending will.
Countless days and hours with
her team hunting these folks
down we will stop doing that and
then her warrant Division can
focus on the the serious violent
offender warrants rather than
people who fail to pay the fees
so there's a pressure relief
valve in there but it's not a
can to expungement thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative Chief Justice so
as far as just for those that
learn about the law and what
happens next should we pass this
bill they basically if they have
a fee or fine on the books they
just wait until the expiration
date and then it goes away is
built in to that Madam chair
representative if you look on
page six section three it's our
new material that addresses as
line twenty one the court again
by phone motion or by defendant
petition may waive fees Acosta
says prior to the implementation
date so prior to July one twenty
twenty four so there is a
process again it is not
automatic it's not expungement
but both we hope with the.
Brand spanking new judicial
education body said it passed
this law and the kind of
consistent training coming out
of the Judiciary that again the
judiciary themselves might make
that motion or a defendant would
bring a petition to have that
fee waived thank you madam chair
that's it for me thank you so we
have Representative nine Rehm
Nighbor and Chasey so
Representative ring madam chair
and and Chief Justice budget
I've already shared this so what
I'm gonna do is make it more of
a statement than a question but
feel free to respond up.
I have discusses with the Chief
Justice in the AOC and here's
part of the problem that I see
with that.
Of.
There's a discussion about
accountability.
If if the problem is
accountability than the bill
should be.
towards accountability.
What I see is is this is a user
fee this group is using the
court and these fees are for
dedicated things that occur
either as a violation or
whatever but their user fees to
go ahead and spread it out
across if you will that
taxpayers who many of them are
not in traffic court I think is
unfair.
Of.
When we when we look at how the
fees are assessed in court
in the justice's gonna tell said
currently they're mandatory I
have been in court and seeing
the judge either of suspend the
fees convert on the
to
time served convert them to
community service.
And while the well we say that
isn't what the proper as proper
procedure is
I've also found that it's best
not to question the judge on
their judgment.
So
you know I think community
services always been offered I
A. C. that the court has always
been over backwards to work with
the defendant to pay fees to
convert them to do however.
My biggest concern in
Representative Lane said that
is.
What is the financial status of
the state.
July of twenty four July of
twenty five and we know with oil
and gas the revenues go up and
down.
And I agree this is not a stable
revenue but of of we can't
predict that we will have money
at that time.
If
if we were really good to fund
those programs I think this
needs to be an appropriation
bill which is difficult because
you need to change it
and you need to get an
appropriation and seeing if they
were moving together would make
me more comfortable
because I think so many of the
programs that the fund or our
our
very important.
Anyway rather than questions
asked my statement thank you
madam chair I don't know yes
thanks thank you Representative
Representative Nighbor.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative.
I'm probably not going to take
the advice of
My learning council down all the
way.
I'm probably going to say
something.
At first what the judge said
through the justice even more
important of but.
Madam chair and representative
of Chief Justice you said that
you get a lawyer to get rid of
the fee and my limited.
Experience with traffic
citations has been almost the
exact opposite.
When where and Representative
number of people before the the
courts on traffic citations were
generally trying to.
Get the judge to enter a
deferred sentence and impose the
costs and fees and then if you
don't get the ticket with them
so much time then the charges
dismissed and goes away and and
most most of my the folks I know
for for.
Paying the the court costs and
fees as opposed to getting
provide enough my question is
If you impose the fine then
don't you have to have some sort
of guilt associated with that to
impose a fine.
Madam chair representative
members of the committee for a
fine certainly but we're not
talking about fines were talking
about fees which are of very
different animal
fines do get bargained away or
converted into community service
and the like fees do not fees
are mandatory judges don't have
have that discretion when I'm
talking about the things go away
those who have money can make
the entire problem go away they
can make the charge go away
those who are representing
themselves were represented by
the public defender don't have
that luxury.
But but madam chair and and.
Madam justice.
If if now you take this away the
court has no mechanism to deal
with those requests they either
find you guilty or innocent.
And if they find you the other
set of the charges of course
there's no fine but if you.
It if you just want it to to
like you said go away.
It's often times been a lot
easier to make those things
Mexico way when you agreed to a
deferred sentence and pay court
costs and fees and and so.
I just want people to understand
there may be some some things
that happen this may not be as
disciples duralite the fees it
may affect how defense lawyers
defend their clients before the
courts and and the ultimate
outcome that's how I kind of see
this might seem incorrectly I'm
chairman and and chief justice
Madam chair representative the
judge with fines can still defer
the sentence and you can pay the
fine.
That doesn't change that
practice work again we are only
talking about fees we are not
talking about fines and fines
you can still with say you get.
You're speeding a hundred and
ten miles an hour you go in
front of a judge you can still
differs that sentences have will
pay the fine I'll keep my nose
clean and then the charge will
go away and will be on my
insurance that system will still
be available it just will be
fined and.
Okay so line will still be there
and is available for the judge
to use their discretion to
determine what to do with that
fine okay Madam chair and chief
just as I I hope that's correct
because.
It always seems to me that if a
fine is imposed that means that
you are guilty of the
infraction.
At whereas just paying the fees
and cost it's like it.
You know long as you don't get
pulled over you're you're you're
fine and and not that I have a
lot of experience in that but I
have had several I'm wondering
Representative how many speeding
tickets you have now.
You can look at you can look it
up online I'm sure of.
I I I.
We ought to move on to another
such.
madam chair and and the
Representative you all mention
that it costs to about a million
for each year to collect fees
fees and.
My question is and I didn't hear
a total sum of the actual fees
collected you gave us some
figures for certain funds three
hundred thousand maybe went down
a hundred eighty seven but I
didn't hear a total do you have
a ballpark figure of.
Each year what's collected is
that two million ten million
thirty million.
Bear with me because it's really
really small print.
Let's see if I can get right.
Hurt here.
What's the thing that madam
chair and representative Nibert
As I got into this endeavor I
also thought those numbers would
be very clear easy to pull up
back in right and they're not
and I think it speaks to the
discrepancies and how their
assessed how they're collected
how they remitted to the state
and back to different bodies
but.
It's buffered to provide that
number yeah so in I'll I'll give
you the breakdown
I'll give you.
Compare contrast FY seventeen to
FY twenty one.
FY seventeen we collected a
total of eight million nine
hundred and forty five thousand
six hundred and sixty dollars
and fifty three cents.
In twenty twenty one we
collected five million six
hundred and fifty one thousand
four hundred ninety five dollars
and eighty two cents.
I can repeat that number I I
know I said it quickly.
That's just fees purely fees at
M. Madam chair and chief justice
the that decreased and surprise
me because of what's happened
last couple years and and we've
had certainly lasts a.
Well less people on the road
till recently and so that that
doesn't surprise me if a large
number of these fees are result
of traffic citations as you've
already pointed out.
I may be one but
My last my last question is.
It was pointed to on on
Well I have to two questions it
was stated that the state pays
more than the fees to keep
people in jail and I'm
wondering.
The it's would seem to me that
the counties are actually paying
a lot lot of that not the state
because I would imagine most of
these and these.
The folks who are opting to go
to jail instead of to pay the
fine or the or the fees that
they are opting to be detained
for short periods of time in a
detention center and so we would
actually be the counties that
are picking up that
incarceration costs not not the
state of New Mexico without the
actors Madam chair
representative two things first
it's a government that is paying
for it so that's fair but people
don't opt into going to jail
they don't raise their hand and
say Hey judge I can't pay this.
We spend four million dollars
chasing them down we expand law
enforcement time chasing these
people down and then a judge
puts them in jail so I just want
to be careful nobody's raising
their hands a pretty please put
me at MDC's fund to pay off my
fines.
But yes so it's government it's
so it's it's corrections as a
whole and it costs a lot more to
keep that person in jail than
any amount of money that they
can pay off on a daily basis so
it's it's really upside down.
And then madam chair and the
Representative my last question
is you pointed to page twenty
six line sixteen through
eighteen and I just want to get
a feel of.
No court shall assess posed to
judicata fees previously
authorized by statute I just
wanna make sure that if there
are.
Bonds that we would be required
four yield or certain other
things that happened after their
conviction but are imposed on
them financially they would
still have to meet those
requirements that's not going
away in this Madam chair
representative that's correct
does not fall into the category
of the kind of these tacked on
fees thank you madam chair thank
you Representative good to see
you again Chief Justice thank
you representative
Representative Chasey.
Of madam chair.
We have a motion by
Representative Chasey for a do
pass and it's been second by
Representative Romero if you
wish to say anything.
Senator love to debate with
motion.
But if.
Not to maybe we finished with
this no there's one more person
okay.
So Representative Alcon.
Thank you madam chair I just
wanted to clarify a little bit
of what's happening here.
In my life the in the course of
the if somebody came before me.
And they entered a plea of no
contest or guilty of the
citation and
I do feel I could take that
please and then I could do for
the fine which is what the
Dollars for over ten of ten
hours so forth and then they
would have to pay the federal
the success but the fees that we
are No Way the.
With this legislation.
If the defendant it goes before
the judge and the judge says I
am going to go ahead and do for
your find a place to a ninety
day probation you're going to
walk out of there without the
the nickel but you would have to
be Hey for the ninety days for
the six month that the judge
this.
You are on probation.
So reversible the way it works.
I just want to clarify that we
are not more or less a few
little confusion there.
So in with this going on life
would be a lot easier for a lot
of people it's just the people
over that to learn how to behave
for longer periods of time like
myself.
But with that the that is here
that the last thank you I just
have a few comments
I think having confidence in the
judicial system is very
important for people.
And really that has been eroded
for various reasons and not
having anything to do with our
New Mexico courts and.
When people see these kinds of
inequities were people with
income.
An address these problems very
quickly and people with less
income and who are poor become
increasingly saddled with all
the drama associated with being
hunted down and pursued for fees
not for the fines which is the
penalty that's what is what
makes them accountable these are
not an accountability mechanism.
There in enterprise mechanism
and if we are now looking at the
courts and other governmental
entities as enterprises I think
we are off base and this has
been in place for much too long
and I'm very glad that we're
moving away from it really we
have to have confidence in the
court system that people believe
it is a fair system and there
are so many who have suffered
from this program and who lost
that confidence and that is bad
for us as a country and as a
state so I think this is a very
and for portent for step the
next very important first step
is ensuring that those valuable
programs.
Are funded adequately and I
think many of us here on the
panel will work to support those
efforts as well thank you and.
This call the roll.
Proceeding with the vote madam
chair.
Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane.
Mr speaker.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert.
Excuse me could you repeat that
now.
Representative read.
but I'd like to explain.
After we called
Representative Rehm no ma'am.
Representative Penske yes.
Madam vice chair yes.
Madam chair yes.
Madam chair you have six yeses
and three knows.
Representative reporting like to
explain your vote we have a due
pass on your bill.
Representative
I think.
Thank you got
I do understand the concept and
a and I support the concept of
of getting rid of the fines but
I can't supported until these
viable programs are funded or is
even leader laid suggested it
started you know another year
out and so I wanted to explain
more about.
Thank you Representative.
Thank you very much for your
presentation very much
appreciate.
Our our final item we're gonna
get through this agenda.
House bill one seventy five if
you.
We're gonna be fast.
I.
The not.
Yes.
It
think what is going to join us.
Over here
in.
I.
Okay.
All right Representative Romero
the floor is yours were on house
bill one seventy five crime
reduction act changes and fund.
Thank you madam chair thank you
members of the committee happy
Friday hopefully this will go
through quickly I'm introducing
house bill one seventy five it's
making very minor changes to a
requests that we put into
statute in twenty nineteen in
being able to reduce crime this
grants is been very successful
throughout the state and how
it's been funding criminal
justice coordinating councils
how it's helped facilitate
Requests actions across the
state only one County hasn't yet
to be touched by this grant
opportunity and with me are
experts Douglas carver who I
think many of you know well if
you sit on the towards keep
corrections and Justice
Committee and Linda Freeman she
still here maybe I should be
back.
for any questions that you may
have and I will defer to my
experts introduce himself and to
let you know about what's going
on with the requests thank you
Representative thank you madam
chair members of the committee
it's always going to be at House
Judiciary
my name is Douglas carver and
deputy director of the New
Mexico sentencing commission and
in the interest of time I won't
go into the intricacies of this
bill distributed overview of the
bill is the commission sponsored
bill we brought this bill
forward because in the four
years I guess it is has been
since house bill two sixty seven
was passed in twenty nineteen
that's the bill that amongst
many other things included the
crime reduction grant tax how
the act is operated has differed
slightly from what's in statute
there's some legacy language
from twenty nineteen when the
bill was amended that should
have been taken out at that
point and wasn't we've had very
good feedback over the years
from the various entities to the
we've given grants or who would
like to have grants and there
wasn't a grant purpose in the
bill of so we've added a couple
of new purposes for which
requests can be
for witchcraft requests can be
made so it's a bit of a claim of
Phil it's a bit of a looking
forward bill one of the big
changes is that so we're asking
for dedicated fund for the
grants to create a crime
reduction Graham Act funds right
now the grant monies get
intermingled with the
commission's budget which causes
our auditors always scratch
their head every year the causes
of the
our budget to look a lot bigger
than it is because we have now
it's two point three million
flowing in and out of our budget
so be a lot cleaner for many
reasons for there to be a
dedicated fund the language of
the fund we've modeled on the
violence intervention program
fund which was created.
Last year as a non reverting
fund with the small on three
percent
that could be used for
administrative costs to
administer the act ironically
enough the violence intervention
program fund was modeled on the
crime reduction grant act.
Bills.
But they got a funded we didn't
so we part of what we're doing
is coming to you with the
request that a dedicated fund be
created for this act he said the
full support of the sentencing
commission and it was also
endorsed by the courts
corrections and justice
committee and madam chair
members of the committee and
happy to stand for questions
about the bills were discussed
what we've done with the crime
reduction requests over the last
few years thank you madam chair.
Thank you very much let's go to
the audience all those in favor
please raise your hand.
Okay
and all those propose.
All right so we have a few
people who wish to speak do you
wish to speak in favor you just
wish to raise your hand.
Okay.
You have the forty short court
the administrator of the Courts
one of the purposes of this
that has for expanding the grant
purposes is the sharing of
digitized data the AOC has done
a lot of work with data exchange
which is the platform that
justice partners can use to
share data we think this is a
very important initiative and
that is a very useful for data
partners justice centers around
the state to be able to share
the state so for that reason we
spoke to the thank you.
Yes yes my name Senator grants I
also work with the
administrative office of the
courts in addition information
division I am the product owner
of the New Mexico did it change
and I support this bill and
everything that Selena also said
thank you thank you.
For anyone else okay is there
anyone online who wishes to
speak in favor please raise your
hand.
Okay I don't see any is there
anyone online who opposes this
legislation.
Okay I don't see any hands raced
all right we go back to our our
our presenters do want to wish
to conclude and we can then go
toward included we stand for
questions thank you madam chair
okay any questions from the
committee members
Representative Chasey.
Their second.
Of do passed motion by
Representative Chasey second by
Representative el Cajon.
Yes
I do have any of I'm gonna keep
this in mind.
Any further discussion all right
clerk would you call the roll
please proceeding with the vote.
Yes.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane yes.
Mr speaker yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert.
Representative Reese.
Yes.
Representative green yes.
Representative Fenske yes.
Madam vice chair yes.
Madam chair yes.
You have a do pass wonder thank
you madam chair thank the next
office appropriations of
Medicare it is indeed okay good
luck thank you.
Right.
Right all right so our agenda is
concluded just want to know we
do have I don't know four five
bills probably on our agenda.
Monday reform start.
Have a real.
Body of laws to look bills to be
looking at so pretty soon I'm
going to be suggesting that we
start we're not working on the
weekends just be aware we're
gonna have to start really
digging in we have a pretty
heavy.
Which is so much fun and so we
are now adjourned.
