Who is I don't know what your
title is our director of the
administrative office of the
courts well welcome and I said
excuse me Representative.
I know that but I didn't think
we needed to point that out
Representative just help.
and I don't know if you have
some others in the audience who
are here to help with their
questions anyone introduce them
yet I'll leave that up to you
when that's appropriate but the
floor is yours are you going
first Mr Courtney
one second I need to do the
role.
Thank you madam chair proceeding
with roll call Representative
Alcon.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane.
Mr speaker.
Representative McQueen.
Representative Nibert is here.
Representative read.
Representative Rehm.
He's here he's.
Is here Representative semansky.
Madam vice chair here madam
chair here thank you.
All right.
Mr Courtney or doctor Courtney
the floor is yours thank you
very much madam chair good
afternoon everybody thanks for
for having us today
I'm John Courtney deputy
director over the legislative
finance committee and I'll be
working off of the presentation
that is titled what works in
criminal justice thank you all
should have a copy kind of a
blue banner at the bottom.
the only reason who's our senior
fiscal analyst for public safety
is over HFC right now she may
come and join us if if she gets
out early are there appearing
Department public safety today
so let's start on on page two if
you will what what I'd like to
do is just give you all an
overview of of the research that
LFC is done over the last decade
or so
you know we typically have a
some sort of public safety or
criminal justice evaluation
research project going and so
you'll see a lot of reference to
to what we've learned over the
years in so far as
what what seems to be working in
the criminal justice system
maybe what hasn't worked so well
along with trends and and the
most recent data
and we'll also talk a bit about
how our FY twenty four of the
LFC budget recommendation kind
of fits into this framework of
of research so yes just for an
overview whilst will talk about
recent trends and
causes and I say because I seem
I mean more risk risk factors
potential solutions and then
some specific recommendations to
improve improve the criminal
justice systems outcomes and you
can see those listed in we'll go
through those kind item by item.
so if you'll turn with me to
page three.
Thank you you'll see a few
things on this this is violent
crime rates in New Mexico versus
the US New Mexico's and and read
the US's and and flu on the
bottom and property crime rates
to the rates of violent crime
rates in property crime rates
you'll notice that around twenty
fourteen twenty fifteen we
started to see an increase in
those crime rates
for violent crime they've stayed
pretty high through twenty
twenty property crimes started
to to fall a little more one of
the things you'll probably
notice pretty quickly is that we
have data through twenty twenty
where is the twenty twenty one
and and twenty twenty two data
for more recent statewide data
is unavailable right now due to
a a switch and data systems from
the Unifor uniform crime
reporting to the national labor
system if you'll turn to page
four I just wanted to touch a
little bit on the progress
that's been made there
the department of public safety
there's a mandate that requires
law enforcement agencies to
provide crime reports to DPS
in October of last year only
twenty three we're reporting and
in January of this year that's
up to seventy four so we're
making pretty good progress
there's also in the omnibus
crime bill that you passed last
year
in an incentive for one Forsman
agencies to comply with the
statutory reporting requirements
and I also want to talk about
something in the LFC budget you
know we hear a lot about about
data data sharing data needs
both the LFC and executive
budget recommendations this year
include significant money for I.
T. systems STPS supporting
statewide systems for
intelligence plus blood policing
and for criminal justice
information system and so
hopefully we'll see the stood up
in the next few years feel turn
with me to page for.
I will talk a little more about
the data that we we do have
three twenty two
If you look at the most recent
data available we see decreased
activity activity at all levels
of the system even though crime
has has still increase since
twenty fourteen this is a key
finding of a twenty eighteen LFC
report on the Bernalillo county
criminal justice system you know
we know that clearance rates are
clock crime solve trended
downward that's plotted on the
graph there on the right
in blue against the violence
crime violent crime rate which
you can see that those are
moving in opposite directions
and this is the first domino in
the system if we have fewer
crimes solved it makes sense we
would have fewer justice
involved individuals
participating at the subsequent
levels levels of the system and
you can see some stats there
through diversion programs
number of cases prosecuted an
alternately fewer finally prison
finally crime prison admissions
and I'm missing the population
of the present drop and and you
know this is all this is all
connected
If you'll turn with me to page
six I just want to this is out
of our volume one and I think
you know the LFC produces a
number of budget books volume
one two and three or forty one
is a policy analysis and has a
lot of really good data in there
this is one of the charts from
there and this just shows that
the you the legislature's
continue to make traditional
public safety funding a priority
if you compare that with we see
General Fund in quick total
general fund increases on the
dotted line the solid line is
all all the public safety slash
criminal justice agencies
the other thing to mention is
that in twenty nineteen the
legislature of going back to
data the legislature passed the
crime reduction grant act we'll
talk about that a bit more in
some of the some of the
probation that are permitted to
to continue that this year
recommendations made to continue
that but also created the data
exchange which
sits at the administrative
office of the courts and has a
really good resource for data
sharing.
Let's see and then I just a bit
more on on history of of recent
events in twenty twenty one the
legislature passed the omnibus
crime bill this are promoted
l'enfer unfortunate recruitment
retention and some other
initiatives so if you'll turn
with me to page seven.
So the the LFC recommendation
and the executive recommendation
also
is is continuing to make
general Uh investments in the
criminal justice system
you'll see are not poco into
some of these a little later
there is money for public
attorney workforce capacity
recruitment and retention
they're targeted pay increases
kind of across the criminal
justice system I here we talk
about
public safety so Judiciary DPS
officers dispatchers corrections
officers targeted pay increases
in in the existing
recommendation that go above
either and the LESC case the
average five percent that's
built into the the the budget
recommendations
And then continued funding to
support new entities responsible
for law enforcement training and
continued funding of crime
reduction requests so beyond the
city the system operating as it
should
what else do we know that's
effective at addressing issues
in the criminal justice system.
If you'll turn to page eight.
Some of you attended the LESC
interim hearing and Silver City
this year and heard from Dr
Jennifer Tolley actions and
condoms to Texas a and M. and
she came in and talked about
what works and deterring violent
crime presentation lined up with
with a lot of our research
specifically she concentrated on
improving certainty of being
caught talking about how that's
a much more powerful deterrent
than severity of punishment
she also talked about addressing
root causes specifically
regarding substance use
disorders this figure of the San
page right here is from a to to
twenty eighteen program
evaluation that we did that came
to the same conclusions if we
can address root causes or or
risk factors and improve
swiftness and certainty that
should lead to to better
outcomes.
So if you'll turn with me to
page nine hundred how could we
potentially do this and this is
a very simplified
version of the criminal justice
pipeline and those of you who
practice law know that we've got
some really detailed figures and
and some of our reports but just
for the sake of today's
conversation I wanted split this
up into three areas addressing
this risk factors pre arrest
where we have an opportunity to
address things
during rest or in the judicial
system and then the third piece
incarceration and reentry so
Thank you can see some some of
the recommendations that are
kind of consulted from our our
reports
in previous years there of the
root causes and pre arrest we
talk about increasing
participation prevention early
intervention evidence based
programs and this goes you know
this isn't just drug courts it's
not just substance use courts
this goes very far upstream in
some cases there are some early
childhood programs that have
been proven to
to reduce future future
involvement with the criminal
justice system as all talk about
it well the issue with those
those are long term investments
that you're not going to see a a
bang for the Buck immediately
with the criminal justice system
there
with the rest of judicial system
increasing the probability of
being caught increasing
participation in diversion
behavioral health treatment and
also increasing the
effectiveness of the system and
we'll talk about an example from
Bernalillo county that we found
in twenty eighteen
where we we saw some good
evidence that they were making
some progress and finally
incarceration and reentry
increasing participation and and
what works as far as programming
goes and incorporating Medicaid
coverage for those about to be
released and I'll talk about a
proposal the agency has on the
table with the Feds right now to
do just that.
So let's jump into associated
risk causes and risk factors on
on page ten
if you're really interested in
this I've been encouraging you
to go back and read our twenty
eighteen operative County a
program evaluation really dive
into this there but just the the
highlights here that
there are risk factors
associated with future
involvement with the criminal
justice system and future
outcomes that are not outcomes
that we want to see substance
such as substance use disorders
you've probably heard folks talk
about adverse childhood
experiences
you know the I think the other
thing I'll say is that these
risk factors doesn't necessarily
mean we'll have criminal justice
system involvement but it raises
the probability of involvement
it can start early in life with
dramatic events that occur in
childhood including experiencing
maltreatment witnessing violence
substance abuse or mental health
problems we're having family
member attempt or die by suicide
according to the CDC the the
prevalence of aces can have
tremendous impact on future
violence perpetration
victimization New Mexico
children have more aces than
almost any other state are you
can see the table there on slide
ten children with three or more
races which is a threshold
researchers use for high risk
almost a fifth of our children
fall into this category compared
to about one in ten nationwide
many of you also know that New
Mexico has a some of the highest
substance use disorder rates in
the nation our far above
national average and and and
some counties even higher than
that the the chart there are the
data shown on slide ten.
So let's turn to slide eleven
have how do we address these
risk factors for prefer personal
justice system involvement we
can start early by delivering
evidence based early childhood
programming for some programs
have been proven to affect both
substance use disorder and
future criminal justice system
involvement the drawback here
again is that these benefits are
long term meaning you you may
not see immediate impact on the
system but there's also good
evidence that access to mental
health care and substance use
treatment can can reduce crime
Dr Dilley Act when she came in
to talk to us and Silvercity
also brought an idea to the
committee around improved street
lighting and and greening of
vacant lots to potentially
reduce crime I think doctor
poker and who's in the audience
today center a bit of research
on that too so in addition to
the investments we mentioned
earlier
I was just FY twenty four budget
rack it reflects these
priorities and concerns on page
twelve.
Any you'll see these tables
throughout at each level and
these are just kind of the
highlights of a few highlights
that we wanted to pick up for
you you know number of home
visiting programs that could put
evidence behind including first
family partnership which is
probably one of the most well
researched House social programs
ever
No there's been research showing
reductions in abuse and neglect
fewer rest of the mother
reduction in child arrests by
age fifteen if we keep going
down this chart you'll see
medication assisted treatment as
an effective program
the we learned recently that the
corrections department is
planning to run a pilot and
study the
medication and assisted
treatment in prison which is
been a recommendation from our
reports for number of years
so there's some money for that
there's a a special
appropriation for improved
street lighting and and
improving vacant lots and you
know we're a Medicaid expansion
state and so you know if that
research holds up from other
states hopefully we would see
some some benefits from
increased access to mental
health care one of the things to
mention here those recent LESC
report
where we did a secret shopper
survey led by Dr Ryan tone who's
sitting behind me and about
fifteen percent of the time we
could call and get an
appointment and those numbers
were lower for behavioral health
providers and so even though we
have great coverage with
Medicaid Medicaid expansion the
actual access to providers it's
a challenge for
Continuing on to page thirteen
so we're moving through the
system now our initial arrest
and the judicial system.
So again you're operating under
the
the notion that increasing the
likelihood of being caught can
work to deter crime this can be
done a few ways more police
that's you know in some ways the
easiest way
for the kind of Morrison was
clear research I should say you
know this also comes up with
concerns around use of force
there are specifically
strategies that rely and
concentrating on on people in
places and in twenty eighteen we
had some some interesting
research and bring the county
where UNM's I just are found the
five percent of arrestees made
up for forty percent of all
phony rests in the in the last
seven years so concentrating on
on people places here's a map
from that same report that show
it's a heat map of.
Responses to
shots fired.
And so when you dig into the
data run people in places you
you find some interesting things
and crimes can be concentrated
in certain areas of the city or
certain times of day
and systematic analysis of these
issues can help please be more
proactive about patrols and
could potentially reflect
targeted actions
we also know that certain
diverse in treatment programs
associated with the courts have
good evidence of effectiveness
including drug courts.
So on page fourteen these are
just a few stats from the twenty
eighteen evaluation that I
mentioned to me to follow up in
twenty twenty one cured the this
data kind of reflects what we
saw on an earlier slide we're
reported felonies remained
relatively high you can see
criminal justice system and
Operations at these other levels
arrests convictions and
admissions into staying flat or
even declining
in this evaluation we found
increased response times for
police decrease proactive
policing of lower treatment
court participation rates you
can see those data there on the
bottom of slide fourteen the
bottom right and failed cases
that were connected to evidence
collection problems.
And if you'll turn to slide
fifteen I know our director
Peppin will we'll dive
specifically into pre trial an
annual tool subsequent to this
presentation I want to point out
a few recommendations we had
coming out of that report in
twenty eighteen also a specific
to pre trial services
some of these are around our.
Accuracy so local jurisdiction
should regularly calibrate the
risk assessment tools monitor
provide that feedback to the
public
I know that you UNM's I just are
conducted a validation of the
second districts re risk
assessment somewhat recently but
haven't been done in twenty
eighteen now I it's possible
there wasn't enough data to do
it by then
I increase transparency is
reporting requirements to
provide metrics on success
specifically in terms of
outcomes and performance so
these are things like release
right appearance right
pre trial intervention right
concurrence right and I think we
collected on a lot of these
things many states will
incorporate the state into a
dashboard so the public can
access those two some guard
rails on decision making some
states have a statue to specify
that assessment results can't be
the only consideration to be
used in in that decision process
and then finally leveraging best
practice to improve
outcomes I believe six states
have statewide Court reminder
systems and there's research to
show that behavioral nudges to
help lower failure to appear
rates were FTEs.
so continuing on on page sixteen
another recommendation coming
out of that report was developed
the need to develop strong cases
you know we found that seventy
percent of the time from a a
pretty big sample we took from
twenty eleven to twenty
seventeen
basis stopped because there
issues with evidence collection
AP at the time was piloting a
practice where they had
paralegals working to collect
and prepare evidence for
prosecution they've since
expanded that program and I
think I've been working with the
the DA's office on that also
it's my understanding I also
want to mention another approach
from Harris County Texas
prosecutor prosecutorial pre
authorization
We're just counties taking
approach for prosecutors receive
a phone call from arresting
officer who listens about the
circumstances surrounding the
rest in the evidence that's been
collected and then requests
authorization for arrest if
circumstances would result in a
conviction what this results in
is very few cases in Harris
County that artist Mr or no
action basis there save a
comparison study and and the
link is here and the online
version if you all are
interested
we're in twenty eleven Harris
County Texas had less than one
percent of New action cases they
had a comparison of New Mexico
from some select counties and I
think we have twenty five
percent or so of no action K..
associate page seventeen we're
back to that
That table this time for us rest
in judicial system so the LFC
record has a twenty six million
for recruitment and retention of
for law enforcement
there's also continued funding
for for drug courts
and some special money to pilot
some programs to help increase
participation in those courts
since that's been an issue
there is some money for improve
pre trial services and treatment
courts and then money for the
crime reduction ants.
Reduction requests that we
discussed earlier.
So if you'll turn with me to
page eighteen refer now to
incarceration reentry
no one thing to keep in mind
that I I have to remind myself
of and I I learned.
The first screen just as
reported for LFC back in twenty
eleven most of the people that
we put in jail a prisoner or
coming back out ninety five
percent of the market are coming
back out and you know that this
is a population that's going to
face a number of challenges
including job training substance
use disorders the need for
treatment housing you can see
there at the top of slide
eighteen some stats about the
the significantly higher
occurrence of substance use
disorder mental health disorders
in prisons compared to the
general population
Another data point I wanted to
show everybody on the right page
eighteen we also have this
population in prison called our
police eligible inmates all.
A previously known as in house
parole lease this means these
folks have served their time but
they don't have a plan of pool
meaning they don't have a place
to stay and you need that
propane and two to be released
from prison those numbers have
started to creep up recently
after having been down for a
number of years
and if if you extrapolate that
out if we have ninety two and
House parolees throughout the
year you know and and prison
costs a hundred or so dollars a
day
you're looking at four five
million dollars for for that
population alone
so you know getting a good pro
plan having the resources for
supportive housing once folks
are ready to reenter the
community it is really important
the other thing I want to
mention at the bottom of page
eighteen the older somebody gets
the less likely they are to
percent of eight and I know that
there's been some discussion and
and this committees about a
geriatric parole medical parole
you know these folks often are
in New Mexico prisons and and
they are receiving medical care
from general fund are not
covered by Medicaid they're not
able to be covered by Medicaid
and so I know there's been
proposals around increasing
participation those programs to
public see cost savings so if
you'll turn with me to page
nineteen.
And we're almost through
this is some of the highlighted
funding from incarceration
reentry
that includes twelve point three
million for evidence for
research based programming the
corrections department
appropriation a special for
supportive housing in reentry
and then a pilot program that
the
HSD is proposing to the federal
government through their
turquoise
of care eleven fifteen waiver
application and what this would
allow is for
folks were in in incarcerated to
sign up and be covered by
Medicaid thirty days before
release I'm pretty hopeful
that's going to get approved
because California was just
approved for something similar
going back in ninety days rather
than thirty days
So that should that will if that
goes through that should be a
help with getting folks covered
as far as services go and then
on page twenty this is just a
summary of of the overall FY
twenty four budget in judiciary
there's a increase of twelve
million or six percent TPS has
an increase of eight percent
corrections an increase of one
point five percent remember that
their population has been
dropping is that spits looking
like it's starting to stabilize
nevertheless there they're still
looking at a an increase there
and then eighty four million in
special appropriations I I
highlighted a lot of the the big
ticket items another one I
didn't mention it was twenty
three million General Fund three
million total to MCD for us have
C. treatment and six point AOC
to operate remote remote in
remote and hybrid judicial
proceedings
Senator members that that is.
The end of the presentation I've
got some additional resources
after that last slide starting
on page twenty three were you
can find a link to all the
criminal justice related reports
that we've done over the last
gosh this is probably what for
five years if you keep going
back there's even more but I if
you're interested in in any one
of these topics are want to dive
deeper it's certainly encourage
you to to do so and and feel
free to reach out to the folks
here LFC if we can be helpful
anyway.
Thank you very much John RT I
think you're listening at the
plant I think that's fine that
madam chair and vice chair
members of the committee I sent
a number of doctors to I'm not
going through them page by page
so don't worry about that there
are number of people here from
AOC but I wanted to do some all
the we'll see if you have
questions that require their
expertise I do also have doctor
Tucker and who's your from the
strip for Social Research and Dr
Chris Moore from the Santa Fe
institute
we have an occasion funded
studies at the I just are not at
the Santa Fe institute and then
a lot of research independently
on data provided by the courts
particularly Bernalillo county
where we have the we have the
highest volume of data.
And we'll just a sense of from
the consortium members passed in
twenty sixteen the new rules are
implemented in twenty seventeen.
As the courts across we're
literally and by job definition
in the middle of this process
between.
Arrest and incarceration and
release we've all right in the
middle a lot of what I think
interest legislature's certainly
a lot of the bills are coming
before you that relate directly
to the courts have to do with
pre trial what happens when
someone's arrested.
In order to address that mainly
and I'm happy to answer
questions about any aspect of
pre trial they have questions on
but without knowing what your
questions are I'll try to
briefly go over some things such
as the the public safety
assessment the data relating to
pre trial release
I can discuss the rules that
apply that are broader than what
you often hear in the press
But if you want to know about
detention the detention as a
person of course and that kind
of thing.
With regard to the PSA I'd start
by asking you look at the cash
for that was provided to house
bill seventy four this you
probably didn't get with your
FIR because we provided this to
the LFC as part of our analysis
of house bill seventy four but
it does have a brief description
of how the PSA came about to
really good one page summary of
the reserves and where we think
it's some kind of black box I do
magic or something it's not just
an awful lot of research.
Whatever we talking about a
group of your.
No this one looks like that
that's next so this one looks
like this okay HB seventy four
it says on the top okay thank
you that's the one.
Again as we need to has thank
you.
And up to with this one briefly
but the front page if you read
the.
With the research came from that
develop the public safety
assessment was developed by
Arnold ventures
and sometimes correctly it's
called the colonel tool which is
actually a public safety
assessment I'll probably call
that for the PSA
the final tools become kind of a
catch phrase for bad things I
suppose but it is the same thing
it's a public safety assessment
if you turn it over to the next
page we'll see in in one graphic
representation what is scored by
the public safety assessment is
only nine factors that it
considers and not online apply
to everything we're concerned
about there are two concerns pre
trial that we try to measure
when gauging risks of that
address consent appropriate
conditions of release.
And those two things are FTA
failure to appear what's the
risk that the person will not
return for all of the schedule
court hearings failure to
appear.
If there appear then of than we
arrest warrants issued in their
picked up but that's a failure
in our system we're trying to
predict in pre trial the risk
that they will not fail to fear
NCAA the next risk factor that
we grade ourselves on as new
criminal activity that's
arrests.
Other researchers reported the
best if we knew about conviction
data on the NCAA's on the rest
but we don't.
That takes more research to to
get into how they turned out the
only study than anybody's done
occurred in Los Angeles county
of people arrested on NCA's
rather on pre trial release
about a third of them got
convicted.
so that but that's not that for
New Mexico we don't have that
yet but I think we're going to
get there but anyway we're
gauging risk for those two
things for you to appear in
criminal activity but we succeed
the person appeared from the
court appearances and they
didn't get arrested for any new
crime.
In their pre trial period.
Does your call on the for and
VCA that's new violent criminal
activity the public should
desist also scores people who
have a history that shows that
risk for violent responding.
and that creates a little flag
actually with the actual public
safety assessment looks like as
it gets to a judge of interest
maybe on this is there is a list
of a bunch of crimes fifty one
of them what are considered
violent charges so if you get a
flag for M. D. C. a review score
for previous violent conviction
one of these fifty one thanks
that's from Bernalillo county
that's which puts this quarter.
Mexico I'd like to turn your
attention to this document the
where with all the color boxes
on it.
This is the public safety
assessment this is what the
judge gets when they get a
public safety assessment.
This is what our people do
overnight after someone's
arrested so the next day the
judge will have this in front of
him or her.
With you madam chair to get
there because I don't have what
have been your tapping system
thank you okay great.
In two.
Two in the very back so yeah
very last section in the staple
together so you can kind of from
through them as a section the
first thing I want to tell you
about the public safety
assessment is what it does.
Attempts to find to find an
assessment of an individual's
likelihood to succeed if they
are released.
And under what conditions some
people if you release them and
just try and come back next
month this is your court date
but the best chance to succeed
some people need much more
restrictive conditions of
release that could include
interaction with virtual
services it could include drug
testing at the risk you
structure could include
electronic monitoring with an
ankle bracelet so there's a
variety of levels of supervision
that the PSA recommends.
What does not do it does not
recommend whether a person
should be detained or not.
One of the things that's most
poorly communicated I believe to
the public is that when a person
has before judge of to the
restaurant and the judge has the
first appearance with that
person the judge does not have
the option to detain that person
the judge must release that
person and the judge must decide
what conditions of release most
likely to get the person to come
back to court.
Have a TA and not get arrested
not having and see it.
The only way the judge can have
access to the options.
Of keeping someone in jail is
the public but that district
attorney filed a motion to
detain the person and then if
you place a land there's a
hearing in at the hearing the
district attorney must
demonstrate that that person is
so dangerous.
The two dangers to be released
that's what the constitution
requires so the judge can no
matter what they think of the
person in front of them and they
can score in the in the most
significant restrictive box
under the public safety
assessment the judge is going to
have to order the person
released on less the prosecutors
brought a motion for detention
then they stay in detention
until there's a hearing and at
the hearing the judge will
determine if they are detained
or if they're released already
may I ask you a question.
Session funds.
R. four releases on.
you know I should have this
members right somebody behaving
those.
Transaction fourteen but I don't
know.
The staff.
What section section thirteen
thank you sorry about that.
The.
It's been so long that I don't
look at it anymore I mean I read
it but I don't read.
so there you go that's the
constitution requires so.
Looking at the Bernalillo
county.
Matrix that is used for the
public safety assessments done
so those six those nine the nine
factors that point score however
many factors that check you get
a number one two one three six
no scale one to six on the other
up and down scale as you can see
from the left tab this failure
to appear scale hello you go
down the higher your risk that
you will appear.
Left to right is new criminal
activity scale the further to
the right you go the higher the
risk according to the assessment
that you will get arrested for
new crimes Care just to clarify
who is scoring this pre trial
services the court the court has
pre trial services Kelly's the
statewide director for trust
services and you funded pre
trial services which will be in
every district so we're two
thirds of the way through
implementation but then the
county was first and then just
the that brings up a point that
needs to be made with regard to
what you're looking at here so
you see what the two numbers and
what the score the general see
these boxes and this person this
fictitious person has a violent
flag you see on the top that
will red flag they scored for in
VCA that wrist to committing
violent fence you see the risk
that the answers to the
questions the money factor is
yes or no.
Can you see where they scored
and in this box and in this case
they screwed up for more NFTA in
the six and criminal activity
this is a risky person right.
That's what the assessment is
telling the judge of the six on
the floor.
It has a lot of other
information it's all covered in
rural for a sec I for one have
to talk about that decide to
process this is one bit of
information a judge has been
setting conditions of release
but they need to know about this
particular scale as this was the
first one we did.
We did it in twenty seventeen
when the public safety
assessment was not even released
to the public so we were a pilot
site at the time was finally
released to the public in twenty
eighteen and we did two things
wrong.
That will be fixed in the near
future one in the red boxes with
this defendant landed to see
that it says detained or
released a chain of custody
requirements might release with
Mexican additions right that's
not the appropriate language nor
is that what the school is
actually recommending but it's
recommending is the highest
level of.
supervision that the court can
impose is appropriate to someone
at this risk level.
And then you also see the all
the other boxes state our our
with the PML level.
and and
Those pre trial monitoring level
that's the level of attention we
give to someone on pre trial
release.
And the ones that have a PMR
number should not say our our
that's sort of a shorthand way
for saying they're not going to
not going to be detailed enough
to not the detention route
walking around so they're
responsible for themselves but
it really gives most folks the
wrong impression that we just
let him out the door and say see
you later.
To do that with people in the
green boxes.
That's what we do with those
people when they score that low
that's what we say see you later
come back next month but anybody
in one of the other boxes the
score indicates that there
should be some type of
Pre trial supervision with that
person the lower the lower
further left and up you go and
and more significant the further
right and down you will look
like this in the near future but
the red boxes the state This PML
for.
Your risk level is the highest.
Posters are are in the green
boxes because that's what we do
with those people we say Galle
come back when we tell you to
other people but some of us.
For the judges do this all the
time absolutely not this is not
buying the judges in any way.
It's great they are trained in
what is behind these boxes what
they mean at a glance they can
see what instrument with which
they become familiar over time
is talking about the risk level
this person that's not only have
when we get the first bill so
that the next page I think it's
on the back page actually this
is called the background
investigation report of the I.
R. I prefer if I go to short
and.
Matsen prior criminal history
this defendant has to date
Federal appears to get convicted
the arrested
on probation for the violations
of a patient percent shorted in
here but all that information is
contained here in this part of
what the judge gets when they
get that chart of box the a
chart of that's on the other
side.
This particular defendant has a
long and sordid history of that
the judge take interest in
knowing where and they have that
person sitting in front.
But this returned and the public
defender or and identified a
defense attorney if there is one
get this information to this is
been overnight.
Well whatever persons arrested
the comparison of the militant
course immediately the
information is sent to outside
about cricket center our unit
which has the these reports and
send them back to the court and
the judge has these when they
have the person in front of them
the next day usually in
Albuquerque they do it in house
but the same report same thing
as I said it'll probably change
a little bit in the near future.
so that's what the judge grants
when they get the Arnold who
they get a PSA to get that
report of the boxes and they get
all the criminal history and
that along with everything else
the judge what to consider
because of the judge to say I'm
going to release you these are
the conditions in the region
really sure by Supreme Court
rule one I'm very in condition
that's always impose and
everybody is so committed to
crime.
So if you get arrested we have
an insulation layer Authority
violated one of the conditions
of release because there's less
identifies otherwise would
probably cost of believe
committed another crime while
your lease
that really doesn't bode well
for your likelihood of
continuing to be released but
that's a different a different
issue down the line.
Well I guess I should address
that.
When the prosecutor sees this
case gets maybe they get the PSA
maybe still no because law
enforcement contact in the state
we arrested this really bad
person.
They can file a motion for
detention that's in the rule
five four oh nine.
The file the motion the motion
says we're gonna have a hearing
at the hearing the defendant is
entitled the represented by
counsel of course and the judge
will listen to any either side
has to say about whether this
defendant meets the condition of
the constitution that they're
too dangerous to release under
any other conditions we gotta
keep them to protect the public
what a protectier particular
victim.
And
so doing but this attorney on
the defense during the two of
them of the rules of evidence
that can bring in.
These reports they can bring
back whatever they want.
So if there was a failed
prosecution of an individual for
really dangerous crime but the
victim got scared and and left
the jurisdiction so the DA was
frustrated in their ability to
prosecute that crime does not
conventional a crime the PSA
will see that crime rate because
not conviction we don't we don't
rate that against people we only
grade a basis on which a
different was convicted but you
can say this person is
escalating they just got
arrested for this particular
offense last year.
We're certain responsible for
another offence and our they're
so scary about them that's
cleared right away if they do
that in front of the judge the
change of mind on they'll come
from the judge and tell the
judge that those kinds of things
can be brought in for on line
when the to the the district
attorney is trying to detain
have the person detect.
put in detention the stay there
until we go to trial list of the
funds from the motion later to
get amount succeeds but that's
not normal usually they're gonna
stay in jail than until they
have a trial of the to go to the
case is resolved.
For the people with the thank
the motion to detain is denied
they are released judge will
right this second version to
release and off they go under
whatever conditions of judge
sets.
There's another rule five four
three and that says if you're on
release doesn't matter if you
had a detention motion are or
anything else on releasing
violent a condition of release
that person is proper for the
judge to answer for the
violation of the conditions of
release one very common way to
do that is get arrested right
for another crack the restaurant
right released one prime the you
go before the judge who can
reconsider the conditions of
release on your first charge.
But not any longer in that case
no longer the the presumption of
the constitution that you will
be released doesn't apply the
judge can do whatever the judge
thinks is appropriate that is
let's out again on some
conditions of release impose new
perhaps more restrictive
conditions of release or send
you to jail to go to trial and
the judge can do this it brings
a motion for all the stuff that
happened on the judge's own
motion one of the very few
instances which a judge alone
can bring a defendant in and say
you're you're going to go to
jail because I I you did violate
my recommendation to release.
Just because you got arrested
for crimes which I find this
problem because and I'm not
going to trust you anymore off
you go so those are the best
with us for the scene in which.
The trial.
Release is brokers in all courts
across the state whenever
defendants arrested for a crime.
and in any case all the folks
who have the public safety
assessment and whatever else
thanks for bringing to court
arguing about the conditions of
release for the defendant so
I hope I made it clear judge
doesn't have the opportunity to
detain unless the DA brings a
motion and there are other.
Exeter the result in detention
when depending institution gets
arrested or or something else
happens.
I provided you a one pager.
Honestly that's this one it's
really not that great except as
a link.
To this thing which is
In which Dr Gehring and drive
more participated this is the
validation study.
That was referred to earlier.
This the where the studies work
is use any kind of risk
assessment tool and public
sector session is one of them
there are many others.
And
you find smart people know to do
statistical analyses with all
the data on your Senator been
released in this case it turned
out to be a little more than ten
thousand for the initial study
when you ask them some questions
please tell us what the data
shows most important to us well
it's for all very important but
is it predictive
risk of failure to appear as a
protective arm risk of new
criminal activity getting
arrested and then there's a
biased because it might be
hybrid grossly biased.
For race for gender for
ethnicity for for various
factors and I know that the guy
would love to answer any
questions you have about that
because some instruments
particularly ones that use
arrests that instead of
conviction data turned out to be
highly biased because a rest
interactions tend to be less
Objective than conviction that
so that's why the public should
disabuse conviction that another
it turned out the study was
published in June of twenty
twenty one but it's been used in
Albuquerque for those ten
thousand cases less productive
both for FDA in NCAA I was not
biased for the factors that were
finalized good news for us we
didn't tell them they have to
find this we told them because
for the data shows because it'd
said it's protected but it's
biased we would have gone to
Arnold and said why issue tool
being unfair what what in our
data how can we adjusted so that
we remove that bias there is
things we were done we certainly
would just add that slice let's
keep going but we could you want
estimate that's productive and
that's fair that's not biased
that's what we have according to
the those cases.
you have to wait a little while
to do best doctor Courtney
mentioned we have done studies
in the other fifteen to eighteen
counties I forget which we've
implemented pre trial services
because you need about cases in
order to have a valid number of
cases to evaluate so and they
have to be cases in which the
public safety assessment was
done.
That the person had their pre
trial period which could be
eight months could be fifteen
months it just depends on the
case finished and then we know
during the whole pre trial
period if they succeed or fail
FDA in a new productivity.
So I suspect that we will either
be directed by the legislature
or just funded by the
legislature to do a validation
study statewide community ready
to do that in fiscal twenty four
we certainly will be ready in
fiscal twenty five I think best
practices are to do it every
three to five years.
I have to go back and double
impending over again too but.
Rest assured that the
independent experts that we gave
the entire data set to protest
that it was valid risk
assessment tool that's very
comforting to know since we're
using it will be using its
statewide reusing about.
Two thirds of the criminal cases
statewide now because that's
about how much we covered
Real quickly gonna go through a
little bit more of a power point
it's got a blue cover.
Have to.
Right below something public
safety assessment PSS.
This point has information
about.
The constitutional underpinnings
of sorry do we get there.
Representative.
Or if you don't have one but.
I think you should have with.
Okay
so I know you want to pursue
this and read all about where
this all comes from and why the
U. S. recorders report think
deporting to recognize
constitutional title is to the
presumption of innocence and
released before conviction
except when she was just so
dangers we have to protect the
public and that's a very
difficult balancing for judges
but that's what they they
balance.
The risk to the public for
particular victim against the
defendants right to be released
in the brings a motion to detain
because a DA is trying to prove
that too dangerous to be
released.
With.
In the the study I want to point
out real quickly on page
thirteen I this thing.
You have a lovely pie chart most
of it is big is blue.
The blue part of the people who
didn't have any trouble with any
problems at all in pre trial
release the other colors are
what they got arrested for the
one two didn't make what the
NCAA was if they got arrested.
Of the ten thousand two hundred
eighty nine felony case all
felonies in other jurisdictions
outside Albuquerque because we
implemented them in twenty
nineteen after we do felonies
and misdemeanors but so far the
data internally was only
felonies.
Only people who get arrested for
felonies and come before the
court but you'll see there is
the people who got a new charge
whether on pre trial release got
arrested for a first degree
felony just a few of them you
can even see that little slice
of the pie there were thirteen
of them at a ten thousand cases.
One tenth of a percent basically
second grade felonies the run in
fourteen of them one point one
percent and third degree
felonies another hundred ninety
or one twenty percent promote
together three percent.
The people released.
We're charged the first second
third degree felony.
If we could perfect the system
but we we get rearrested for
anything.
Despite diligent police activity
but we're not we can't predict
human behavior perfect.
I know that the governor said
anyone victims this too many
okay that's great I wish that
all the parts of the criminal
justice system could work
together so nobody was ever the
victim of a serious crime.
But the system we adopted at
least some Bernalillo county
over the ten thousand cases that
were that went through the
system up until March of twenty
twenty.
A first degree felony arrests
there were thirteen out of ten
thousand and if we can do better
we'll do better but thirteen
I have to try.
That's about the best.
to see in the chart trying to go
a little quicker.
Let's talk about the potential
that occurs in Butler County
because everybody's concerned
about that because of the story
in the public that seems to be
we don't care such as the just
you come in with the psycho you
come in the lecture you come in
we let you out well
You may have more access to
money if your riskier criminal
but I don't have that on that
I'm telling you there's no
relationship between how much
money is in your pocket how
large balance you can read up on
your credit card committee your
risk for failure to appear for
new criminal activity.
On page eighteen is a very
interesting chart.
This is the data from twenty
seventeen to twenty twenty two
so up until last year.
Five years of that it internally
County.
Representative this chart shows
is that in the cases where.
The safety assessment greeted
people at the highest risk for
new criminal activity.
What that chart looks sort of
like this the ten person that I
showed you before.
Of the people graded in the red
box is the highest risk.
The district attorney brought a
motion to detain in less than
eighty and less than twenty
percent of the cases.
One out of five the order to
detain poor in the most the risk
is box the other eighty percent.
Jessica this is a release let
them out there in this data that
about the eleven people who we
offended at the fill only one
level in that that.
Of course the phone when
releases were requests for for
service sorry but that's that's
that's more data than you
probably want.
When the district attorney
brought a motion in the twenty
percent with a brought a motion
they got granted the motion
eighty percent.
But they didn't bring a motion
eighty percent of the cases
rated highest risk for far left
you'll see some green bars.
the the district attorney
brought a motion and twenty five
sorry.
In a number of cases that rated
in the lowest risk category that
about twenty five percent time
those motions were granted to
the public safety assessment
told the judge these people on a
very low risk but the
description felt they were very
dangerous the committee made a
good case that they work to
builders M. twenty five percent
of the people that Lois Riess
got the paint.
in Albuquerque that means there
was something involving a
handgun but that's I don't know
what criteria the district
attorneys is because despite
being as they've never told
anybody like this is when we're
going to bring attention but
that's a story on detention
motions the second judicial
district we'll hear people talk
about let's use the New Jersey
model New Jersey is that the
same level of granted.
detention motions as New Mexico
last year in the second district
attorney succeeded fifty six
percent of the time.
In New Jersey it's fifty four
percent in the last study and
the study was fifty two percent
nationally and in New Mexico
outside of the only of county
and in Brasilia county DA
succeed about fifty percent of
the time a detention motions
under systems
that required otherwise require
lease.
The last thing I want to touch
on and
No not really here to take a
position on rebuttal
presumptions but you have links
to research all of our
representatives interested in
that are found in the power
point including some more recent
material on the federal system
and some some information from
the same folks from Santa Fe
institute and that in the.
At the UNM
looked over the data again to
see what would have happened had
the legislature adopted previous
proposals under bubble
perceptions and I urge you to
look at that data as those bills
come before you see can be
willing for.
The last thing I really wanted
to point out to at all was is
probably in this are at this
point but we have a January
seventeenth twenty twenty two.
Document that you received from
your legislative finance
committee.
From the PH these over there who
looked at current and went back
into the twenty eighteen study
that was referred to earlier by
Dr Courtney they went back and
looked at Burnley again updated
in January of last year and
charge a lot of interesting
things such as violent crime
rose in Albuquerque between two
thousand twelve a two thousand
seventeen and then it leveled
off hardly seems like a good
case for showing that the that
the changes to pre trial because
a rise in violent crime when it
pretty much leveled off in
twenty seventeen when we
implemented these reforms it's
true homicide rates have gone up
consists of what's happening
around the country in the
pandemic and I hope post
pandemic and let's hope as the
pandemic goes away those
statistics go down with it
One of the important findings in
the report according to me is
the funding that pre trial
release doesn't appear to be
driving crime in any significant
way in Albuquerque all the
people arrested for violent
crime four robbery property
crimes to make up a very very
small percent I'm talking one
percent or two percent maybe all
the people get arrested for
those kinds of crimes all the
time so if we're doing something
wrong for not quite getting it
right.
we're certainly not driving the
crime wave that that is
happening on the certainties
proceed to be happening in
Albuquerque by the people that
are released pre trial people
Charlie's point not the ones in
the public to a high degree to a
very high degree they succeed in
the pre trial period they come
back to court and they don't get
arrested when they do get
arrested that that'll show the
overwhelming majority of get
arrested for for three felony a
misdemeanor or a petty
misdemeanor crimes sometimes bad
ones but not usually the kind of
thing that the public is most
concerned about which is a
constitutional people people
getting injured a serious injury
threats to threats to.
People.
So I'm not minimizing the the
danger that can arise from four
to be funny but I'm saying
they're not getting arrested for
the kinds of crimes most often
drive our concerns about public
safety.
I think I'll stop there madam
chair there's other information
I gave you but you can read it
all and see what you think but I
really would like to answer
questions you have about any of
that or anything else for doing
the courts with regard justice.
Thank you both.
Should I infer that we have
experts in the audience of
questions about the tool in the
viability so for doctor more and
is it doctor here I think all
here and he's here as well and
Dr more they're here because
they have done a lot of work in
this area some of which we
encourage them to do some of
which I did because after all
it's a matter of important
public interest rate they don't
work for me and they'll give you
honest answers some of which I
don't like your but you know
they're very honest and they'll
tell you what the data shows if
you want to know what the data
shows with actual case
information shows they would
tell you doctors have the
opportunity desk again as well.
Since the study of the ten
thousand that that came out
Representative to over fifteen
thousand cases but the findings
are very consistent again.
Very few people arrested for
serious crimes or on pre trial
release thank you very much and
thank.
Representative.
Thank you madam chair but just a
couple questions
Mr Chairman spent in these you
talked about the judges having
no choice.
Unless the DA me promotion.
I guess that I think a lot of
people are here that in state
the judges have no choice.
Well but.
You know that the DA is her
driving the card here and if
they think the person should be
detained there's there's nothing
limiting their ability to bring
that motion is that correct
Madam chair representative on
the claim that's exactly my
point not that the judge has
ruled that this guy's here's an
important role but we would like
to district attorney under our
constitution anyway the way you.
He passed the constitutional
amendment and the people passed
it to the district attorney to
decide who so dangerous we
should try to keep chair.
M. and then chairman suburban
the the you said the the dust in
the the the PSA the Arnold tool
for the dangerous people they
they only brought motions twenty
percent the time a little less
than twenty percent over five
years yes so madam chair and
chair representative and Mr pope
and that
you know first speaking as a
real estate attorney not
criminal are practitioner that
seems inconsistent with my.
Mental image of the overzealous
prosecutor why is that
percentage fairly low.
Madam chair and Representative
McQueen you would have to ask
Miss the district attorney.
But I believe there are
decisions are driven largely by
the involvement of of what
weapons firearms in cases of
someone as a drug possession
case but they provide a gun in
the trunk.
Well doubling a motion that
personal property depending on
their criminal history some they
don't have a bad criminal
history those for pretty low on
the public safety assessment but
they'll probably get a detention
motion in the second judicial
district.
The.
I can't tell you why the disk
Attorney.
Chose not to bring a motion
eighty percent of the time on
those cases I can tell you that
I have heard description is say
something to the effect that I'd
they don't they don't think the
public safety assessment has
great value.
And perhaps that's why because
if you don't think it's value of
them by it affects your decision
making we think it does a great
value and that's why we give the
to the judges and everybody else
when someone's for release and
madam chair Mr from on on the
public safety assessment.
Is the quote unquote Arnold
pool.
Desist just what you've chosen
to use is it like a software
package could you choose
something else I mean is it
established by statute or is it
just a vendor Madam chair
representative maclean
there are probably nine percent
risk assessments used by
different courts around the
country.
the Arnold the Arnold pool the
public safety assessment in our
view is the best we adopted it
the speaker rule says a court
can consider any risk assessment
the court has approved for use
and for much of other factors
when they when they determine
whether someone should be
released or not I'm not really
sure that the gentleman what
conditions a person will be
released under when they're
going to be released.
We believe and I certainly
believe that the public safety
system is the best tool
available to us the best
research.
It's being used in the places
that are doing the best job of
implementing pre trial in a way
that we think is the way it
should be almost everybody out
monitor those who need attention
between those who are the very
dangerous
and so we were encouraged to use
it and our experience tells us
as the data shows.
I think it does help judges
identify ways in which people
can be monitored supervised on
pre trial release that.
Maximize your chance for success
because because the rest rates
are.
It's pretty standard some people
do better they've been at it
longer some states
and the things which are getting
arrested R. of the it's not a
wave of violent crime by any
means there were we would look
at why we're missing those
people but we're.
By and large residential and
pretty well and the conditions
are working the PMR one two
three four are working whether
applied properly.
Chair Mister president
sometime ago I I read the
relatively recent
New Mexico Supreme Court case
that dealt with conditions of
release and it's sitting on my
desk in my office so I don't
have it to refer to but in
reading that.
It is it if I recall the
standard was something to the
effect of that no conditions of
release would ensure the public
safety.
In.
What I thought was weird about
that is.
I think you could easily do
conditions of release
that would ensure the public
safety even for the most
dangerous people.
The issue is.
Whether or not they comply with
the conditions of the lease
relates so it the the opinion
seem to be saying well you have
to craft conditions of release.
But it seems to me like the what
the judges are tasked with.
Predicting the future on which
is a difficult thing to do is
whether or not an individual
will actually comply.
Is that.
The the the light on the Madam
chair representative claim yes I
think that you're driving at the
critical point and that is
the judges make an
individualized assessment of
this information helps but
they're making an assessment
based on that person and yes.
They're trying to protect if
they could if they would comply
with conditions of release
We're supposed to let people out
but dispersed to be detained if
they're too dangerous to release
right and we're too dangerous if
the matter what we put on them.
They don't care they're not
going to be bothered by this
conditions to cut off their
ankle monitor the committee nor
the condition that the amount of
a firearm they're going to
ignore the restriction to house
arrest they're going to go out
and do whatever they want to do
which Representative their
history shows it's a great risk
for an offense perhaps violent
offenses so therefore we should
keep income fund but you're
right about that.
Madam chair the scope and the
you know.
In the recent campaign there is
lots of rhetoric about revolving
door in catcher lease and
I would just like to observe
that the data you presented
do not does not paint a picture
that that's what's actually
happening that we have a system
this largely effective that
when district attorneys move to
detain the violent
defendant they're largely
successful.
and that.
When people are released and
under certain circumstances
there
Offenses on the print in the pre
trial period.
fairly minor.
Fortunately of course in our
system our political system.
Thank you only takes one right
to make a campaign commercial.
And and people would be outraged
and.
You not
that you understandably so we
don't want criminals to re
offend.
but I mean this pie chart is
Is compelling data looking at
the looking at the whole picture
so madam chair Mister president
thank you for your presentation.
Representative Martínez.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Mr president good to see you as
corny we appreciate you
apologies for walk in late
But I do have a just to to go
out from my colleagues
questions.
I understand that we you
presented is perhaps
Different than what.
Gets reporter what we see now
the way I think about these
issues red is we can't simply.
Crime is very complex community
public safety is very complex.
You need the enforcement side
which includes law enforcement.
Prosecutors public defenders.
Actions county jails.
then you have all the support
systems that you need I mean we
know.
We know that in our county
detention facility we lost I
think four or five people to.
essentially just complications
from drug withdrawals.
But that's another critical
aspect.
All of Force equipment the
supports for people
particularly.
Substance use disorder
treatment at its most basic
level detox medical detox
etcetera.
I understand the data you
present.
But I'm also.
Responsible to constituents.
And whenever comes and tells me
I don't know my car's been
broken into again.
Right because then stole.
My house was broken into what it
is my belief.
Those numbers may not be
but it's still the reality for
those people here become a crime
that's a reality right doesn't
matter everything else runs
great the fact that it happened
to you makes a little different.
And and I don't want to have you
like rehash because I I know
that my questions probably would
you priority answered them
earlier that you know what my
tardiness shouldn't.
Impose and everybody else times
but.
When you.
When somebody is released
pending trial.
Because.
The tool that's available and
the circumstances available to
the judge.
Dictate that perhaps that person
should be released awaiting
trial.
What are the released to.
I would assume that a lot of
these folks have drug use
disorders probably.
I would assume they don't have
the nine to five job or even a
full time job if anything I
would assume their housing
circumstances may be
complicated.
What are the released to.
Madam chair.
Madam chair Mister speaker this
depends on the particular
individual very often conditions
of release will include showing
up for work so that pre trial
services is going to check and
see if you go to work we're
going to school if you are
enrolled in school pre trial
services going to check if you
went to school because violating
a condition the stop doing those
things
It depends on the individual and
the risk level that they present
as a judge determines them.
The in the most severe cases of
risk but someone has to be
released of their candy
electronic monitor they can be
bordered even without electronic
monitoring to stay within a
certain place could be the house
could be their neighborhood what
can not exclusions are not go
within six blocks of their
alleged victims home for example
I stay out of that you're not
allowed in that area for you
can't leave the county and then
these are all depends on the
risk level the person presents.
Protest services which is to
support their court people third
task is to monitor compliance
with those conditions over the
sub you're not released to and
see halfway house or something
where you you live there during
a pre trial period is no such
thing.
Go back to your regular life but
you have to comply with whatever
conditions the judge imposed
and.
The higher risk level the more
likely that involves reporting
to interacting with our pre
trial services people to see if
your maintaining in a way that
the judge can require you to
maintain in order to be.
Can involve a limitation on
associations depending on if
you're associations are what
help you get into trouble with
the criminal justice system it
just depends on the individual
but your lease to continue to
live under the conditions
imposed by the judge when the
judge said conditions of.
Madam chair in this rapid so
looking at this
Second judicial D. A..
Presentation so.
Twenty one percent of.
That.
Okay full no.
Thank you okay.
So this is this is above.
And out by the from the second
judicial district attorney's
office.
And I don't know the year on
this.
Updated.
Updated this week it looks like
her last week.
The twenty one percent.
Of folks were released.
Pending trial.
Are charged with the offenses to
twenty one percent charged with
the offenses in about half of
those are violent.
So when you see some of these
folks are release a regular
lives.
Again I'm making an assumption
but I'm assuming these are not
folks that work at the
university and and the eagle
coach their kids little league
team and they've got I've ankle
bracelet.
And folks school check up to
make sure showing up to work I'm
assuming these folks don't have
that life and.
What are the release to see you
said the release to the regular
lives if their regular lives
involves.
Again drug use disorders
violence.
Housing issues food insecurity
what are the committee to.
And I'm assuming most of these
cases.
Are those cases not The Little
League dad.
Madam chair and Mr speaker yes
many of these people have
previous involved with the
criminal justice system
We make a distinction between
those have been arrested in the
US have been convicted because
convictions show that you did
what you were cues up and arrest
sometimes can be misleading
with regard to a person's
history I will tell you that the
the way in which the district
attorney's office in this second
district has presented
information in the past
Has caused some concern but not
just me if you look for example
at your LFC reports last January
there is a history following
January in which the district
attorney's office disputed
presentations made in the LFC
report
For example that their
conviction rate on cases for the
broader pre trial detention
motion that failed was only
sixty percent forty percent of
those cases want to kept in jail
because it was so dangerous
never resulted in the conviction
they disagree with that.
The LFC ask for more information
they got.
Call it targeted data but did
not give the the
The whole supply of information
on the case data that would be
needed for an independent
assessment of their claims which
is what we do this for them
everything.
That same problem occurred
within the institute for Social
Research published information
that was I guess found to be
critical of the disk attorney's
office and that the same problem
when the just returning your
minority report in twenty twenty
to a commission that from
justice Travis shared the
response from the issue for
Social Research pointed out that
we just don't think you are
fairly assessing the data so I
don't think that thirty nine
percent of the people who get
arrested who failed did not get
the paint a pre trial detention
motion our reserves for new
violent offense.
It's possible but that's not
what we've seen in the data.
If that if that's the case then
we should look back at the folks
would deny detention find out
what happened with them and I
think that work is a on going
now that is.
People are granted detention to
go to jail well worry about them
anymore because they're not at
risk for new product but we but
I would I would want to look at
it before I could really
respond.
As if this were the most
accurate way to present the full
the full data.
In that madam chair Mr speaker
at I just want to add to it and
and our twenty eighteen report
on on the Bernalillo county
criminal justice system I think
your point of of the fact that a
lot of these folks have
significant challenges and needs
we say a number of best
practices through the American
Bar Association naps the federal
government the federal
government could federal
government pre trial services
program offers guide McCord
citizen in the dust or law
enforcement to figure out this
is really our job is to figure
out how to fund.
And build those programs I mean
the the reality is I mean I I I
you know slide show hands if I
did this quick if I do the
survey right now I think most of
us would raise our hand when we
would if we were to be asked how
difficult if we found it
difficult to provide services
for a loved one or a friend or a
neighbor I mean I I can I can
tell you from at least three or
four situations where somebody
was ready.
To to go to treatment and it was
impossible to find the
opportunity I find it hard to
believe that folks who are
who are reading the first well
folks that are offending.
Just you know just some of these
you know the the typical
offenses we we hear about.
Come to the table with a wide
array of issues they're dealing
with and so I just I keep I keep
questioning.
Not that they should be locked
up pending trial here read the
been accused of stabbing them
not being convicted.
But what are we releasing them
to and that's I think the crux
of the problem here what are we
releasing people to.
To ensure that they don't re
offend while their case.
Is awaiting trial I mean that's
just the basic government ****
function madam chair is what are
we releasing people to and we're
all suffering because we were
not sure what we're releasing
them to.
and it would be my hope that
judges as they're making these
decisions understand that they
have to have something to
release people to and if you
don't have something to release
people to.
It might be better to hold
people.
Assuming.
In your view they may re offend
because there's no support for
them.
I don't know as a parent I may
want.
My.
Adult child.
Who is involved in the criminal
justice system already because
they may have a drug use
disorder.
Might be I I I might be better
for them to be sitting in jail
now that's complicated for me to
say because we know NBC's got
its share of problems which is a
whole other issue.
But it might be better for my
kid to be sitting in jail than
to be living in the streets
because there's no support for
them and they've been released
and they're going to re offend
and then they're going to deny
the motion.
For release because every
offended perhaps.
perhaps in a violent way and I
know there's not agreement on
that issue madam chair I could
not agreement in the state
constitution on that point
Representative I just what I am
doing on that point I we have
not mentioned the state
constitution which defines the
parameters through up through
which people are released and
they're very specific and it's
the items that already was
describing which is the the
prosecutor has to show by clear
and convincing evidence that no
release conditions will
reasonably protect the safety of
any other person or the
community so I I I have on that
a little frustrated with these
conversations throughout the
last month or two where you know
or even throughout the whole
year because I have rarely heard
anyone mention that the
underpinnings for most of all
these activities that have been
on going R. isn't state
constitution and that was
changed in twenty sixteen and
there was a lot of discussion
about what was going on so not
withstanding the fact we may
think it's better to have
someone who has a substance
abuse problem or not a great
place to have to be released to
there are standards in the
constitution that limit what the
judges may do and I C. already
has Madam well in order to
manage I I have the floor so I'd
like to take the floor back then
chair on that point I understand
that but the constitution does
not operate in a vacuum and
we'll hear about the second
amendment all day long soon
enough it is not operating in a
vacuum you gonna take the
circumstances in front of us and
make a common sense decision
making sure that it's a
constitutional decision.
But also you can just released
people out into the wilderness
when there's no support for them
out there so also up there early
on the floor.
For a good one at the committee
no manager that we do very often
make a room when a person is
released refer them to services
that are available and
Bernalillo county is pretty
robust compared to most places
around the state they've done an
awful job of trying to grow
favor how services Scott
has some news the behavioural
health specialists that we have
employed at the embassy is here
he could drive for very long
time about that but we do you
don't order someone to become
drug free when released in pre
trial you tell them don't get
arrested and come back to court
right those are the things we're
looking at post trial we can
order you to treat we do lots of
things if you're convicted of a
crime what we refer a lot of
people in pre trial to services
that can help them succeed on
release of and bank account is
one of the places where there's
a lot more than most places.
I so that was a doctor told me
he had some information that was
relevant to what the speaker was
asking about I'm always gonna
say so maybe I should mention it
but if you wanna hear from him I
think it had to do with the the
the well I don't know what has
to do with.
Okay why don't we move on I I
think
already made the point and and
that is they were self
evaluating and we have.
Their data I think that was
essentially the point that was
being made.
Representative Romero.
Thank you madam chair thank you
again for the presentation and
as I get to hear from everyone I
learn more and come up with new
questions
I just I'm trying to understand
the listening but.
What you described in this
between seventeen and twenty
twenty on the pre trial release
date of saying the judges are
doing a great job of.
Keeping violent offenders out of
our communities and then the
filing rates rising
so how do we reconcile the two
are we having an addition of new
criminals every day out what's
this what's the story behind the
data were saying we're not
releasing them so how are we how
is the prime rate rising the
same Madam chairman and vice
chair this presents a conundrum
that I I find myself in when for
example earlier this week the
deputy Attorney General is
presenting as the former deputy
district attorney in Albuquerque
saying.
This is one of the powerpoint
presentation was sixty percent
of certain kinds of crimes
reported forty percent of them
get indicted and forty percent
of them get convicted so in the
end of the day for all the
convicted people eleven percent
of the likely crimes that are
committed thank and I don't know
was point was with regard to the
with the courts can to I support
increased public safety I think
there's lots of things we should
we could be doing none of that
is something we do that is the
courts do I can only tell you
what happens when people are
arrested and they are charged
with a crime in the system that
we're responsible for before
they go to trial when they go to
trial when they get sentenced.
If the community has become so
frustrated with with law
enforcement that they don't
report crimes were thank.
It may be that the courts
contribute to that problem
because reporting is just let
him out anyway that is simply
not actually with the data shows
we do that a lot of people out
but we take great care to let
them out under conditions in
which they won't get requests
from the fence if you think
they're committing crimes rather
than release and they don't get
arrested.
I don't really know how to
answer to that that.
I do accept at least these
people are on some kind of a
monitoring we might have a
better chance of that they would
get arrested then.
All the crime that doesn't get
arrested for but I can only tell
you what happens when they get
arrested and they come to us and
we're doing everything we can
we're open to any idea that will
help us to try to make them
successful and not committing
new crimes and not failing to
appear in in identifying only
this to the dust help those are
so dangerous we we just what
amount and and I I do think that
the judges are doing a good job
at that much better than they
are perceived to be.
You may also hear from Mr
Courtney on this question thank
you madam chair Madam by trade
you know I I point back to our
reserves eighteen and twenty one
specifically slide slide I.
you know violent crime rates are
are still relatively high you
know statewide they may have
fallen a bit but it's it's more
of a plateau.
But if if the system isn't
responding in kind you have this
domino effect where you have
fewer and fewer violent
criminals being
arrested basis San
prosecuted you know in in FY
fourteen we use to put away
about a thousand
violent crime
present admissions per year in
FY twenty two that's down to
between six to seven hundred
according to the New Mexico
sentencing commission the good
news is it is that you see a
bump from from twenty twenty one
otherwise it was just his
continuous decline
And between twenty one and
twenty two you've you've seen at
the slight increase.
So madam chair
And experts just thinking
through how getting through the
system of things and what we can
do to sort of focus on.
You eliminating this the at
least the violent crime surge or
even lower the plateau as it
were.
Is that it I mean we've been
putting increased amount of
funding into policing into
public safety programs crime
reduction programs are we just
waiting to see the effect of
that right now madam chair are
we trying to I mean we're we try
to meet these targets of of the
the programs that are working
continuing to grow the programs
around the state that we are
seeing the data where the trend
is good what what are we missing
at this point and are we just
waiting for the data to come
back that what we're doing is
working
what is the recommendation right
now for what needs to be done
today that has yet to be done on
fixing the plateau so that we
can get to a lower number and or
you know like you said the
perplexing part of it as are
some of these externalities
just.
Parts that were still
understanding I just like to
hear about you know what we can
do to fix it chair.
And a chairman vice chair I
think it's an excellent question
it's absolutely not a not a
simple or straightforward
question I think the the
legislature has has made
criminal justice investments in
public safety investments at a
priority going back and a number
of years I think there are still
things outside of the somewhat
of the control of
of state government you know one
of the things that we pointed
out in twenty eighteen is when
the the department of justice
comes in
to provide oversight to
Please agencies.
The crime rate tends to go up in
the city's for the first year to
end if you dig into that there's
a redirection of resources at
the police department we saw
this first hand and we went out
on on right along swear if use
of force was
sorry if this if an officer used
force during
traffic stop or something they
would essentially being taken
action for a number of hours
that have to meet with the
monitor and there is no
mechanism to replace that that
officer and and more on.
and there be you know I I think
there are some some.
Promising ideas that are are
continuing continuing to what
reflected in the budget you know
among those even though it's
it's somewhat boring is the
compass idea of of statewide
data sharing in real time access
to data know how how do you know
where you're going to go if you
don't know where you are and
right now statewide we do not
know where we are
hopefully the DPS wide DPS is is
doing a I think a lot of the job
I'm trying to get us to to where
we will no again and hopefully
we'll have some some data around
that sometime soon.
Thank you madam chair I think
just on the final question we
talk about violent crime and
then just on the idea of
property crime I think these are
the personal sort of revolving
door things I know that we hear
a lot of our community quite a
bit is is you know and I think
going back to the community
about the fact that this is
happening at a higher rate here
in New Mexico than across the
country as far as thinking
through maybe not so much pre
trial detention.
But perhaps the programs that
exist and and this idea of the
revolving door is that reality
for property crime for a lot of
the drug crime that we've you
know the addiction that we're
criminalizing at such a are we
is that is the system in place
current to address what we are
seeing on you know with the
levels of crime and property.
I'm sure that I'm meant by trade
I'd say it it it depends
specific especially specific to
to substance use treatment you
know we know that there's just a
excess capacity and and
to courts and has been for a
number of years now those
numbers are are coming back up
and and one of the things that
the LFC recommendation did try
to prioritize this year was of
funding to include improve that
participation we also know from
and I think I mentioned this
earlier
but it's worth mentioning again
you know we did a report on on
access to behavioral health and
our primary care services a few
months ago and that was specific
to folks on Medicaid and I I
told you earlier that you know
HST has this idea with the feds
to start covering folks
incarcerated thirty days before
they're even released now it
what we found was that fifteen
percent of the time we could get
an appointment and those numbers
were even lower for for
behavioral health now to get in
in the budget there are some
some investments to to try to
improve upon that but as as for
Martinez mentioned this is this
is a bigger issue that's that
speaks to
the health care workforce in New
Mexico it speaks to the rates
that are being received by by
providers through Medicaid and
so that's that's going to be
something that that we have to
take the number of approaches I
think that to tackle madam chair
just to clarify to I guess on
the data which wasn't clear to
me is there a higher recidivism
rate on property crime or is
that is that all correlated.
That's a good question.
Representative according to our
data from these fifteen thousand
release folding Defense about
eleven percent of the felony
charges that are property
charges.
That are you know the total
number of property values that
are charge in the community in
Albuquerque about eleven percent
of those are charged against
people who are currently on pre
trial release a check.
So that's the number I can give
you for for violent offenses for
us.
That's the most common side
chair members chair I believe
that that says yes most common
failure in terms of re arrest
that we have that category
property crime thank you madam
chair I think eleven percent is
that doable.
focus for targeting you know how
it is that we handle some of
this and from a programmatic
perspective something that we
could absolutely address I just
want they think the public to
understand that the eleven
percent is what we're talking
about for that recidivist
category of folks that.
Come through perhaps that
revolving door that's not to
meet the ninety percent of the
folks that we are able to
perhaps work with to to make
sure that they don't percent of
eight so I really appreciate the
data and the conversation and
and being able to have that with
our community as well about how
we can FINS you know the trends
that we're seeing get going in
the wrong direction and and what
we're doing to to really try to
solve that for that thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative I have
Representative Nighbor L. com
and and representative of.
Thank you madam chair
Madam chair thank the speaker if
the person on the head when he
said we have to.
Go back home and in the dress of
folks to elect us and when they
are.
In increasing numbers.
Subject to.
Criminal activity whether the
property crimes or or violent
crimes again Sir person.
Their perception of criminal
justice at all levels is.
It is personal.
and they don't know they don't
care whether the judge's
appointment the DA of the dust
point at us or or anything else
all they know is if we have.
A society.
That.
Seems to be increasingly
violent.
Increasingly less respectful
toward people's property and
they're looking to us.
To.
Do something.
And quite frankly I sit here and
have have have some ideas of
what we can do with that
We we do as a society have to do
something and and unfortunately
government.
Is pretty an apt to touching the
hearts of men and women.
Of the we can ask people to be
good treat their citizens with
civility respect.
But.
We have an increasing number of
people who refuse to do that so
we're we're in a real quandary
I've I suspect.
Madam chair and help in the your
present a lot of data and.
In call revolving door you
called a release whatever the
the people are being touched by
by a crime.
People that have been arrested
and are still on the streets I
don't think anybody would would
argue that point it's happening
and speaking reported.
And
You know I I certainly would
have some thoughts on that but.
It seems that the we're all
struggling with the with what to
do and and maybe the DA needs
more resources so that eighty
percent of those violent
offenders.
The case is made by clear and
convincing evidence that was
read earlier that this person.
Cannot be subject to any
conditions of release that
would.
Protect society would protect
people would protect the victims
of their former prime what it
would have the.
And and maybe maybe those
resources need to be there.
From my perspective being.
Two hundred miles away from
Albuquerque
It appears to me.
I don't have any real insight
into the criminal justice
system.
But it appears to me that that
things work differently and my
judicial district than in the
judicial district that you're
talking about today.
I don't have a statistics to
tell you but it's just my
observation maybe right at maybe
roll.
Same same constitution.
I would argue less resources in
the DA's office.
I would argue a different mind
set of the judiciary.
And may be different outcomes
for the communities.
So you know I I I hope that.
I hope that all of us whether to
do is you judicial branch the
executive branch the the
Attorney General the district
attorney's.
The legislative branch somehow
we have got the all.
Figure some of this stuff out.
So that when I go up to
Albuquerque and spend the night
in a hotel room I don't have to
worry about my car being in the
parking lot the next day.
The people that live in
Albuquerque don't have to worry
about whether or not they're
going to be assaulted as I
walked home from work.
The people don't have to worry
about.
The things that they have
acquired and are in their front
yard or backyard or in their
house are going to be missing
the next day.
Somehow we we have to accomplish
that because that's one of the
rules of government as I see it.
So I I don't have any answers I
can just sit up here and
expressed my frustration but
there is one thing that I wanted
to ask you about.
The for our Attorney General
became Attorney General I had a
brief conversation with him
about some potential
legislation.
Legislation to overturn a
Supreme Court decision.
And I don't quite understand the
particulars.
But I couldn't believe that that
our courts are pre venting.
Law enforcement from using data
off of ankle monitors to
determine the whereabouts of
that person and using that to
then show that a crime was
committed yet.
I understand the spring courses
at that.
I guess that person has a
reasonable expectation of
privacy is to that data and I
can't see that for the life of
me.
Because that ankle monitors put
on by the government.
For the government.
And so how can the court arrive
at a decision that says that
they have a an expectation of
privacy with respect to that
information reporter to get to
the root of this of all things
that data that's collected off
an ankle monitor ought to be
used by the government to make
sure that those people are
conducting themselves in
accordance with the very
stipulations that are attentive
to their release.
And if it can't be used that way
why even have the income on.
Madam chair Mr chair
representative either you might
be surprised to find that I
agree a hundred percent and when
that came to my attention can do
tension of the Chief Justice at
the time
we put a stop to any notion that
we would refuse to provide
electronic monitoring data to
law enforcement requests so what
we do it turned out that in the
second judicial district in
Albuquerque which is not a place
where we implemented pre trial.
They have been resistant
requests from the disk Attorney
law enforcement through the
district attorney for
information on electronic
monitoring I didn't know about
that but when I found out about
it we said the you can't do that
so we adopted the NSO P. AOC did
for every electronic money
program throughout the state
because in order just
Albuquerque where that's done
all the places we implemented
pre trial and then the second
were pre trials act.
And now if a person's
intellectual monitoring this so
I have to tell you I don't know
the Supreme Court cases
separately saying it's possible
the district attorney was
representing what he understood
to be the position of the folks
at the court the second District
Court in Albuquerque about the
M. P. if that's the case he's
probably right for a while I
think that was the position it
changed.
sorry right in October of two
thousand and.
Twenty one.
We've got to do the approach it
is appropriate to electronic
monitoring if a person is a cuts
off think a monitor their
outside this illness with the
commensurate isolation.
That immediately to the on call
judge because usually is going
to happen overnight.
Yes a judicial warrant warrants
issued with sisters violation we
got places where we find the
notification to law enforcement
to give us a place we can send
the warrant and then you'll know
an hour ago this person after
their inclusions owner they
entered the exclusions on but I
kind of think a more we'll tell
you where the ankle monitor is
if they're still wearing it or
where it is after what's the cut
off.
If you need information for the
investigation of an active
criminal investigation will give
you seven days a data on the M.
P. maybe you need to know if the
defendant is going to a certain
place because that's where drugs
are sold and bought I don't know
whatever they but I'm also going
to do is fill out a one page
form that says would like
information for the state for
the last seven days and it has
to do with an active
investigation.
We take the word for because one
of my I have to second guess the
law enforcement agency.
We give them that information so
I it's it's.
This along SO P. it's got all
kinds a screenshot Senator Kelly
could tell you all about it.
It tells our folks.
This and the court the court
folks this is what you do with
regard to the credit monitoring
data and you provided to law
enforcement when they requested
in an investigation or of course
we're warrants issued will tell
you where it is or where it's
going because after all judges
decision in order go rest this
person what if you find them
arrest them so
The action by the legislature
and result in a reversal opinion
from the Supreme Court of.
At the direction of my Chief
Justice we adopted what I
believe is the right approach to
how we share electronic
monitoring data with law
enforcement that and you know
people argue that it is the the
they have a privacy right in
their whereabouts.
They're in a different situation
than here and then on the with
regard to how private that
information is after all we're
monitoring them for good reason.
So
This is a permanent fix.
Madam chair Mister president I'm
I'm pleased to hear that mmhm
maybe that may be the reason why
I haven't had subsequent
discussions with the now
Attorney General to to continue
to advance such legislation but
you know I I do feel
strongly that if that's a
condition of release so I'm glad
to hear that you are working
with law enforcement because we
one of the I mean frankly the
public.
Needs to know that if these
people are out on those
conditions and I have that
article monitors monitor that
they can feel that.
Opioid people are reviewing that
make sure that a victim of crime
is not going to be redacted mais
and that.
They are.
Meeting the expectations of the
court with respect to that
release so I I think that's
important information chair
representative I'm very briefly
after that to mention that
important part at the time
monitoring only occurred
actively during the day people
at work Monday through Friday
and.
I don't know what we're
monitoring should have occurred
but it was it took a while for
that information to come back to
the court to that action to be
taken even a serious violation
of electronic monitoring
conditions.
Source so right away we start up
an entire new unit.
Electronic monitoring unit and
they work.
The.
Twenty four hours that they work
overnight all weekend weekends
and holidays and they monitor
the the alerts we get from
electronic monitoring where ever
the person is so we're doing are
trying monitoring and.
Sandoval county or San Juan
County those reports coming to
that unit in Albuquerque in our
office in the middle of the
night and this is a serious
violation that cut off ankle
monitor they'll be requests for
one from the judge in San Juan
county or wherever and that goes
to law enforcement in San Juan
County we would ask that we're
the ones to send these when
these violations happen so
and you funded it the
legislature funded it we we just
grant money or how to do it to
begin with that we can to
legislature's a could you please
give us money so we can continue
doing this of course should so
those monitoring not just during
the day but all the time now for
people who are electronic
monitoring.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Mr.
Thank you all representative of
Oakland.
Thank you madam chair.
The thing that bothered me about
this is a.
That four percent or whatever it
is that the the the felony.
Those are what make the
newspaper.
And we by the newspaper because
we like to read about.
Stuff like this.
The color for the papers of
course print that they don't say
nothing about the eighty two
percent that successfully are
out on release on are losing
about it but in the old days
again with the judge long long
time ago.
W..
It wasn't that.
You had the a cash bond would
you would.
Set the need you know you get
out of jail you had three
hundred Bucks a thousand dollars
depending on the crime
independent
But it was the judge.
I was going to.
Do it all you'd pay a bunch
person okay.
But new cash money that you
paid.
Or the bonds person.
Guaranteed that you were not
willing to commit another crime.
The only thing that happened was
that the cash was it was for but
that if you did come back to
court the only thing that
happened to us.
If you didn't come back to court
the bonds person would get money
for it as it.
There is no guarantee that if
you paid big Bucks or you had
the or you will you be to are
you paid a modest person the
bond you out that you would not
commit a crime there was not a.
And I can always get and I can
tell you obviously and in my
life that we might that I'm
sitting on the bench I saw a lot
of people that.
We're out on two or three
months.
That's a lot of mileage people
that care with the state bond
for the same person on two or
three different cases.
So what's the difference.
There is no difference the only
thing is that this is exciting
for me to the newspapers that's
all there is to it that's all we
hear.
We only hear about that small
percentage you never hear
anything about the success.
And of course you pay your two
Bucks for the paper or dollar
hundred reduces to pay and and
they happily sell in the to the
advertising and
The culture make it look bad.
But it's so different than it
was before the only thing is
there's no money involved.
There's nobody getting rich.
bonding people.
Are you.
The likes the bond bonds people
that basically.
That market is basically dried
up.
You can see it I mean the people
that we're doing bonds are not
that is the successful people
that they were before.
That was two other visitors and
act.
But that left I just had to say
that because that's what I see
because.
It's the only thing that is
interesting today's world is
that four percent that committed
a crime or whatever that small
percentages but not the success
rate.
So with that in mind madam chair
and thing else to say I said
this before.
thank you representative
Representative Representative
Sapan ski.
Thank you madam chair
You know I I look at all this
data and.
Probably primarily talking to Mr
Courtney and asking and asking
you some questions madam chair
But it and I love this LFC
framework of really.
Providing kind of these these
moments of in the faces of the
criminal justice system and
looking at it through that lens
right and you know.
Thanks to the leadership of Mr
speaker and so many we've done a
lot on sort of the.
Three arrests the root causes of
crime we still need to do a lot
more.
And I think in the last few
years we've spent a lot of.
Time and energy I'd be seeing up
law enforcement resources and we
need to continue to do that we
need to continue those
investments and community
oriented policing retention.
Training
budget but you know to.
The point made about you know
where are we where we sending
people to but is the system we
have created.
It is it's fragmented it's not
really evidence based
It and so I I struggle with this
because I.
I can think back to you know two
thousand four.
Working on and
Medication assisted treatment
that the MDC right.
Aside.
Whole big that and M. CD was
going to do a pilot project in
two thousand seven we were
delighted and then you know I
almost had to chuckle when we
hear again there might be a
pilot pilot project at MCD which
is great which is great I've at
our age I am in full support of
that but it you know it it feels
to me we have spent.
Is so much time litigating the
pre trial issue the numbers that
what is what what is that
balance what is the right tool
over the last few years that's
where a lot of the Energy has
gone.
And
You know I look at
we just I think for the very
first time in a long time got a.
A post release housing site in
Santa Fe it's amazing it's a
huge accomplishment how did that
take twenty years and it it's I
don't know maybe six budget I'm
not sure
And.
You know we have we know that
programs like parental
visitation programs in
corrections settings works but
yet we've pulled back on those
investments you know
PBN J. doing services for
decades and in those of them
pulled back.
I'm so this is not just a long
rant is but you know I look at
things like
Madam chair and and Mr Carty of
five percent of the arrestees
make up forty percent of all the
felony arrests in the past seven
years and I'm assuming those are
not just like the same people
that are always in the wrong
place at the wrong time right we
know we know that that these are
the folks that really need some
targeted intervention
consequence lady
So it and you know I think.
We also where'd you say Mr
Courtney that ninety five
percent of people are.
Going to be released from jail
or prison and that is a reality
that we as a society need to
grapple with.
and so I you know I look at I
look at the proposed investments
even in the slide back in the
order in maybe I'd love to get
your comments.
Madam chair Mister Courtney on
the you know the.
Relative spread of investments
across the different parts of
the criminal justice system
because I think what I see is
the places that people get
released to.
The community resources are the
low always the last to be
invested also the treatment
resources within facilities that
that there's sort of an
afterthought and so I'm just
curious like what what you see
about thirty thousand foot level
when you're looking at the the
spread of the investments across
the segments of the system sure
Madam chair representative the
it's a good question.
And you know it we have got a
relatively the LFC twelve
thirteen years now I can
remember back in twenty eleven
when we were first doing
research on on the corrections
department where we found two
very interesting things one the
at the time they weren't
spending all of the money that
that they were appropriated for
community corrections for
purpose just just like the ones
you're saying supportive housing
etcetera and to some of the
programs that we we know should
be working and and our evidence
based we're working as intended
which which gets to the point of
you know not only is funding for
the program important but but
for the fidelity to the model
and and making sure that the
programs are being delivered as
as intended
you know I'd I'd say there's
been a an ever increasing trend
on the part of the legislature
and and the LFC to
To direct money towards things
that work based on evidence he
if you look at the last ten
years of our budget guidelines
you've you've seen somewhat of a
transformation we're you know
analysts are given direction
you know this has to have some
evidence behind it or at least a
plan to to look at how it's
doing so it I'd say you know
we've I think we've seen
improvements in investments over
that period of time but you know
significant challenges still
remain the fact that we have a
hundred people in the
corrections department serving
the remainder of their full
sentence
Inc in the department at a
hundred thirty day.
More like sixty seventy per.
Well it at a much higher rate
than they would be on
supervision I it's is concerning
the
you know I I think director
patent engine that Bernalillo
county's probably more well
suited for services of people
coming out of an NDC or people
being released from the
corrections department just
because they're it's a it's a
urban center and there tend to
be more services available there
I think there's there are.
services there are funded but
under utilized and and vice
versa their services that are
are muted the
That probably need to be start
up
and so it's
I'd I'd say we've we've made
progress but we still have a way
to go madam chair representative
thank you Mr Courtney.
I am madam chair I would I guess
I would just say like.
The question of.
To release or not it is such a.
A a small unit it is small slice
of this this issue right the you
know the the the reality is if
you keep them they may be in a
facility that is not fully
staffed that may not be safe.
That maybe they don't have
access to treatment programs
maybe they don't have access to
continue of course of treatment
that they were on.
You release them and and maybe
they grow on every offender
maybe they
Are have lost their job is in
that point maybe they're going
home so that so it's sort of
like how do we if we to me it's
like if we really want to reduce
crime.
And help our make sure that our
community members feel safe we
need to know that no matter
whether this person is released
or if not there will be engage
with services that there are
resources available but
if they have children they were
minimizing the impact on those
kids
it and that systems of you I
mean this is probably the
closest that I did that I see
that gets to it we've tried so
many times of these task forces
and you know we've had I don't
know how many and
I just I would say that I I
would really like for us all to
kind of.
Stop litigating this one issue
over and over come together and
create a plan that is about this
whole system and what the
resources we need to deploy our
throughout the system within
facilities and in our
communities thank you madam
chair.
Representative Reese.
For.
Madam chair Mr Kevin I just want
to really quick go back to this
ankle bracelet information
because I if you made it sound
like it was so easy to get any
information that you needed on
somebody on an ankle monitor but
don't you still have to have the
probable cause that that
particular person has committed
some type of crime or violated
it and it's not like I could I
could look is I'm a prosecutor
and I'm thinking okay about
going for sentencing or going to
go in on a defendant's case we
go back and look at this
information and see how it's
done as ankle bracelet did he
actually get close to where the
victim lived or what was he
doing I can't get that
information.
Is my understanding and my it is
that changed because when I
spoke with AG a of course he he
said that information isn't just
readily available to somebody.
Prosecutor cop you still up to
probable cause.
Here Representative re I think
you're actually I think that's
correct I think you've got a
it's it's group with regard to
the conditions I mentioned
before like a like act local
service station but we also
haven't been approached by the
crippling of prestigious
Association or somebody to say
to us okay this is great but we
would also like to have this in
fact the well when asked where
we give we give it to them but
we haven't had a great
experience where they come to us
and say.
This would be helpful for.
Sensing and have a discussion
about releasing that information
I know that but the dust would
not want to get is all of the
information about all of ankle
monitors all the time because
would be overwhelming I mean
I've got fifteen people do this
overnight down in Albuquerque
you did fifteen people and
every dust madam speaker Mr I
totally get that but I would
just want to know if I was
prosecuted somebody and I hadn't
really heard anything for six
months I know how I used to do
it as I'd want to know okay I do
occasionally be checking in and
saying I want to know how this
person's doing I want to know
where they've been going have
they been by the victim's house
had they been by the school of
the child you know I'm not
assuming you're programs going
to tell me that so yeah I I
guess are you saying I could get
that information chair
representative under the SOP
those are the major violations
for which we would request a
warrant which would be notified
of the dust if I were ever there
turns and on force right away
Kelly will speak where is.
Lasted a little bit about I
don't know if you can answer
representatives of questions in
greater detail.
And and you know that's I just
again back to Representative my
first question is this this is a
government you know you're
getting on an ankle bracelet or
an ankle monitor because you're
bored in jail and it's the
government is putting you on
that I just I guess I'm I'm I
felt that maybe weren't
fourth right about really what
information was accessible
because madam chair Mr seven
units really talk about how you
have to have probable cause that
the defendant has violated a
condition of release or
committed a crime so the act as
so just just to be just one I
can't just get whatever
information I want.
Right it's been a while since
this appear that's why defer to
tell you she does with the seven
day so that's okay the artist
talking about for our after
hours electronic monitoring on
it and then also during the day
the local project programs law
enforcement has an active
investigation going they can
contact us and request up to
seven days updated they want
right now sure that fairly
quickly and that's provided to
them if it's GPS data that's
really outside of an active
investigation there's a process
the DA's office can I support
for the information you provided
so in it is available I would
say since even after this SO P.
and we met with one person and
is expanding this year we only
received one request.
So we do educate folks we work
with long form they have
electronic we have done that
It adds.
But we also don't having we get
about sixty nine thousand words
so far from for actors in this
unit
the information is there and if
there is a violation like we
have yes it is true violations I
have internet solutions and is
with the victims we are
immediately responding to those
requesting benchmarks and
sending them directly to law
enforcement okay so madam chair
ma'am so even you don't have to
have probable cause.
Is is where the legal question I
think for the I'm not really
quite sure what we should do we
if someone wants to know about
the defendant there's not an
investigation going on or
something like that that is
really an issue that I think is
taken up with the usual point in
the free trial programs that
supervision but there is an
immediate.
There's an active investigation
going on specific benefit you'll
find to the point alright so
madam chair so I'm just looking
into public because this is a
lot higher than let's even say
reasonable suspicion so if
somebody I guess.
I don't know I guess I'm just
confuse what I understand
nobody's come to you and ask for
that information but my
understanding from speaking
with.
AG two R. as in in my reading of
what happened that you have to
have probable cause that the
defendant has violated
conditions of release or
committed another crime or you
won't have access to that data
so I mean if if it's just
something we we haven't been
asked to you know I mean I'm
fine with that answer I just
trying to understand what the
burden is to get that
information Madam chair
representative of the look at
this question because I'm
building my members being jogged
by someone who's not here that
when the legislature funded us
then acted a certain guidelines
about how the information would
be released and that are simply
follows guidelines.
I have read in a while but I
have also had the AODA reviews
come to and they were seen say
we need this stuff for Senator
whatever in these courts will
give it to us if that were
happening I would know about
that so I believe we're
compliance with the statutory
restrictions whatever they were
that the funding was based on
and if we're allowed to were
open to discussing any other way
which law enforcement needs I
can tell you that the the the I
agree.
That these people are the people
that we have the highest concern
about and that there's no reason
we wouldn't tell the court about
information generally you can
assume that we're compliance
otherwise there would have been
a violation hearing at some
point
so you know it's not we're not
going to somebody cuts subject
matter or they go to the school
and not allowed to go to when I
can say well given another
chance that we're going to
that's a violation that we're
required to make a action can I
make a suggestion and maybe that
is we do some follow up when we
get you amendment because kind
of a great doing we think this
and we can't thank you if that's
alright with that perfect okay
so if we could work on this.
Yes and my recollection is there
something involved about this
but I'm not going to get into
that cycle to where I'm talking
about what I think I remember so
of anything else that that's
alright yes madam chair if we
could just maybe get these
guidelines yes and kind of
understand absolutely really
confused on this that this
hundred percent okay back yes
Sir.
I don't see anyone else on the
list I want to thank you both
and I just want to conclude by
saying
I grieve ever everybody.
Which is a rare thing I mean
obviously.
Enforcement is very important we
need to be funding our law
enforcement folks probably
better and ensuring that they
have the tools they need to
arrest people promptly and and
follow through on all the
prosecutorial stuff as well and
we need treatment programs and
other co you know post release
programs that will allow us to
manage folks who are on the
release the the constitutional
amendment I was referring to
that was enacted in twenty
sixteen it was a very
controversial thing if you
remember justice Daniels was
actively involved in providing
information and you might even
say advocating for the he might
object to that term if if they
were still we're not sure who
would.
Advocating for at and I had a
lot to do with what was
perceived as unfair kind of just
you almost it might say
disparate treatment that people
with money have the ability to
bond out and others who did not
have money and so on so I won't
go on one thing but definitely
the public is rightfully
concerned about what appears to
be an increase in violent crime
I don't think any of us dispute
that I think we all need to kind
of pull together and come up
with a multi faceted approach
because that's really what's
going to do it there's no one
silver bullet that's going to
address this thing it's a whole
array of things and I'd I'd love
it and our committee could come
together and come up with a menu
and an array of items that will
help Albuquerque and every other
part of the state deal with
something that's a very
legitimate problem so thank you
so much for participating we
appreciate your time and we are
adjourned for today and we have
a relatively full agenda on
