Senator is a.
We're in house bill what we need
to do roll call.
Representative local.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane
Mr speaker.
Representative McQueen.
There Representative Nibert I'm
here Representative reeve.
Representative Rehm.
Representative semansky here
madam vice chair.
Madam chair here.
Very good thank you so we are on
house bill one fifty three
livestock larceny separate
offenses Representative Ezzell
is here and she's presenting a
Committee sub we worked with her
on some language that we help
for work and so if someone would
like to welcome Representative
you if somebody like to move
discussion of chair I move of
discussion the committee so
thank you so the floor is yours
Representative madam chair
members of the committee thank
you very much for allowing me to
come back here to this bill is
important the changes that we
made with the language that was
presented by Representative
McQueen and Representative did
not part of working with the
attorney general's office I
think is I pull for all parties
concerned and also with the New
Mexico livestock board is starts
on page hello got to get turned
over here it actually starts at
the very very top of the page
for the words that it and when
Colin changing to page five.
The value of the stolen
livestock is two thousand five
hundred dollars or less is
guilty of a third degree felony.
The value of the stolen
livestock is greater than two
thousand five hundred dollars is
guilty of a second degree felony
for the value of the stolen
livestock is greater than twenty
thousand dollars and multiple
livestock or stolen is guilty of
a second degree felony in this
sept if show constitute separate
offenses but no more than three
per currents madam chair that is
the changes that we made thank
you so much Representative we're
not going to the audience
because we discussed bill
Representative McQueen.
Thank you madam chair Madam
chair Richard Representative
Ezzell
to.
Basically trying to get the
language clear which I think it
is I I did just one note for the
record it's a pretty harsh panel
right normally you gotta get to
twenty thousand under the the
larceny Act which is which is on
the previous pages you got a
steal twenty thousand to get to
the second three penalty under
the under this bill if you steal
twenty thousand you're you're
looking at as many as third as
phase three second degree.
Phillies so you know the that's
all.
That's the intent of the bill I
think the language reflects the
intent
it is for yourself.
Thank you Mr thank you
Representative other
representative wishing to speak
on the proposed amendment for
the okay happy to entertain a
motion you madam chair all
maker.
I move that we.
Who passed house bill one fifty
three as amended provides
subsidies are that we do not
passed house bill one fifty
three and that we pass of.
Most House Judiciary Committee
substitute for house bill one
fifty three.
We have as our second.
we have a motion by
Representative line for for do
pass committees in a second by
leader lane would you call the
roll Senator Representative
Alcon.
Representative Chasey.
Yes.
Representative Lane yes Mr
speaker yes.
Representative McQueen yes
Representative night there.
Yes Representative read yes
Representative green.
Yes ma'am.
Representative semansky yes.
Madam vice chair.
Madam chair.
Yes.
By a vote of ten to zero we have
a do not pass on house bill one.
Thank you
very committees.
Let me do pass madam chair
members of the committee thank
you for letting me to come back
and get this very important
piece of legislation through I
appreciate it.
Okay next on our agenda is house
bill two ninety seven
Representative Lara Cadena is
going to be participating
online so if we I see she's
there that's great and you'll
recall this was a bill we heard
already we provided
Representative Lara Cadena some
input and I know she's been
working on some changes and
she'll be presenting those
changes to us now the floor is
yours Representative Cadena.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I would
just like to quickly review the
substantive changes that are in
the committee before you I also
appreciate that we got a very
thoughtful inexpensive right up
on that in the committee
analysis.
Of first I really wanna
appreciate secretary the foiling
settle for the time she took
with myself representative
Nibert and experts to really
express and explain some
considerations and concerns she
had I want to highlight floor of
the ways we've works those
concerns into this committee set
up Representative before we go
forward could you cite the two
to five number just to make
sure.
My apologies madam chair it's
two two five two eight six point
two.
House Judiciary Committee self
for H. B. two ninety seven.
Thank you you can proceed
thanks.
Thank you.
so first of all the secretary
named of an important concern
about potential conflict of
interest well we first heard
that as something that might be
considered a financial conflicts
that didn't seem relevant as
this advisory board will not be
reviewing financial decisions
investments conflicts of
contracting exedra so what we
realized is that is that we
actually need to establish and
and disqualify folks for
participation on the board or to
be hired by the board if they
had a conflict that was inter
personal in nature so we've
defined family and some other
terms and then made it clear
that people cannot be on the
advisory board or staff to the
advisory board if they have that
interpersonal relationship with
someone that's under the
supervision of the department or
employed or contracted to
perform the duties of the
parchment the next one that felt
really important to the
secretary is that we had
included a provision and and
House Bill to ninety seven that
key findings from an
investigation would only be
shared back to the department
with the
consent of the person under the
supervision of the department of
the secretary felt and was very
compelling in our conversation
with myself and experts that if
we've invested these resources
to investigate something that
happened and the department is
of course intentional in
improving outcomes over the long
run that they really felt it was
important for them to have all
of these key findings return to
the Department so our compromise
was that someone under the
supervision of the department
can give written consent to have
the full findings including
there in may identification
number name date so the extent
provided to the Department
especially if they might be
seeking resolution based on
those findings or if they do not
consent to the invites person
which share those findings but
with that key personal
information redacted so either
way the department gets the
findings it's either a set of
full findings with the person's
consent or.
Or to a doctor findings but
still keep funding so the
department can consider those as
they work to improve their long
term outcomes.
Thirdly the someone important to
the victim services office at
the corrections department had
asked that we have
representation on the board the
included someone that had been
impacted by a crime in New
Mexico another words of victim
so we've added one of the
appointments lots to to reflect
that request accordingly.
and then lastly the secretary
wanted to make sure that of
course we weren't touching any
labor or employment practices or
situations but that also that
there could be key engagement
from union leadership in the
advisory board process so we
change the appointment structure
slightly with those you
appointments to reflect the
request of the secretary also of
course then that are you
moving on we had lots of
thoughtful feedback from
Representative McQueen you'll
see that reflected in the
appointment process the
replacement of a board member
should there be a vacancy and to
the commitment to staggered
terms including from the
beginning I'm also thankful to
represent just a Penske as well
we've included requirements the
board members followed the
government to contact act and
the gifts Act moving on to the
Representative lane and Nibert
we've clarified the process for
written consent upon releases
and really making sure that we
are upholding protection of
information that needs needs to
it needs to be protected in
those ways
and then moving on finally to
Representative leader Cheney
sees contributions that had to
do with clarified some language
of protecting people that may
participate
or file a complaint or
participate investigation
fermentation for doing Ezzell so
again I've highlighted the top
level changes I was glad to have
shared the strapped with the the
majority of the committee
members over the last week as
well as the secretary and I'm
here today to stand for
questions I can see on my resume
that are expert Barron Jones is
in the front room front front
row of the room I'll have him
raises hands and he's also
available should we need to
answer any questions with his
insight thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative for
that clear and concise summary
questions from the members.
Representative Chasey thank you
madam.
Thank you very much madam chair
representative I really want to
congratulate you on all of the
hard work and I appreciate your
ability to bring the corrections
department to table and get
feedback you said one thing
that.
I don't think was contemplated
originally and I and I just
wanted you to.
Clarify that.
You said that there will be no
fiscal oversight involved in
this but this advisory board is
that is that what you said madam
chair.
No I didn't I didn't say that
today but the clarification was
that last time in the committee
the secretary had names that we
potentially needed financial
disclosures and in our
conversations what we really
fleshed out is that the are in
our minds the threat of
potential conflict of interest
wasn't financial in nature this
is my support is not reviewing
contracts or potential bids are
R. F. peas but that there was a
significant potential conflict
of interest because of family or
interpersonal relationships so
what we've done is clarify for
example that if someone has a
simply currently under the
supervision of the department
they would not be eligible at
that time to serve on the
advisory board we also clarified
that if someone had a parent
that was working in the
corrections department they
would also not be eligible again
to be on the advisory board for
to be.
Thank you madam chair.
That if they are original
definition of family somehow we
forgot siblings and children.
Representative Lane and I agree
with their close I caught both
of those independently and we're
able to make sure that family
definition was as expensive as
it needed to be.
I know you gave me the
opportunity to review this Madam
chair representative and I
appreciate I'm I'm just thinking
some of them.
Recent
And I know you we have all
received email not you miss
because we mail from of those
who are incarcerated
Rick was in regard to either the
Food and nutrition or health
care so do you envision this
advisory board looking at those
kinds of providing feedback and
and examining those kinds of
issues Madam chair
representative.
You madam chair and
representative I don't remember
one of the key components of
this is really attempting to
compel the corrections
department to go to rulemaking
process that would include
things around calorie counts and
the provision of nutrition as
well as the provision of
healthcare but madam chair
you'll see on page three of this
committees of as we've outlined
the responsibilities of the
board those are four big
responsibilities that we
expensive in nature and purpose
of the the first one I would say
would captured is designed to
catch all including the kind of
concerns you've heard about and
that's to the UA compliance with
relevant statutes rules policies
and procedures pertaining to the
Department so of course the
provision of medical care
constitutionally
required delivery of medical
care to people under the
supervision of the department as
well as the nutrition and
calorie count they received will
be under the supervision
department would certainly be
within the scope of the board
and that's percent.
Thank you very much madam chair
thanks again so much for your
hard work on this that that's
in.
Thank you Representative a
leader Martinez I mean a speaker
Martinez thank you venture we'll
do not pass on house bill two
ninety seven body do pass and
House Judiciary Committee subs
to browse the two ninety seven
very good any other comments
before we take a vote all right
you call the roll Senator
Representative akun.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane yes Mr
speaker yes.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative Nibert yes.
Representative.
Representative green.
Representative is asking.
Madam vice chair.
Madam chair.
Yes.
I vote.
Zero two thousand
seven
as a substitute for have
Yes funds go up thank you
Representative Representative
Lara Cadena you have a do pass
on your committee sub look
forward to hearing about it on
the floor thank you and get
well.
Yeah.
If you like we could switch to
for today.
Yes.
Bills.
He can start after money.
Right.
So.
House bill twenty seven and we
have madam chair on the.
On the hot spot here in New
Mexico right all right thank you
very much madam chair and
committee members this is house
Judiciary Committee said well I
have a house committee sub yet
some house committee substitute
for house bill twenty seven in
the for some reason it's a two
to four number the two to four
number is two two four eight
four seven point three so we'll
move out for discussion purposes
go ahead thank you madam chair
driving a little bit outside my
usual lane of expertise so I
hope you'll indulge me I think
we have on line a person named
Colin bailo if Collins there
maybe he could raise his hand
and we can elevate him to a
panelist Colin works for the
office of the superintendent of
insurance and has been very
helpful to me and trying to put
this bill together
in short what the bill does is
eliminates the copay
requirement in any plans that
provide for diagnostic imaging
The hand moving forward and it's
similar to what we talked about
on the floor where you have to
go into each insurance for
health insurance provision and
make that adjustment so it looks
like a longer bills and what it
really should be
what prompted me to file this
bill madam chair was actually
contacts from constituents who
shared stories where they would
get a screening mammogram and
that under the affordable Care
Act for most people is there's
no cost sharing no co pays and
so on but if there was some
anomaly or there is something
unique about their breasts or
they had a history or they had
had breast cancer and we're in
recovery and they needed a
further testing like an MRI the
escape Spence associated with
that was quite high often so it
could be several hundred dollars
sometimes one would have to go
in for a you know every six
months so it you can see the
expenses accumulating and.
I think the the reason this is
an important fact is it's a
discouraging meant for people to
go and get the tests that they
need if they know they have to
pay five hundred dollars or six
hundred dollars and I think we
also know madam chair that if
you catch on breast cancer early
like all virtually all cancers
the survival rate is much better
and also the long term expenses
SO to associate with treatment
are generally lower so short
term this may seem like it might
be more expensive but long term
it's it's a benefit to everyone
involved both the patient and
the various providers so with
that madam chair I'm happy to
stand for questions.
Hey in the audience to have
folks here in favor house bill
two twenty seven.
And we have any opposition.
Okay let's go ahead and hear
from those in favor we'll go to
the zoo I have done is.
Thank I think in the past my
daughter has a diagnosis
diagnostic ultrasound and then
three.
Q. I've had this for a while
since that anyway he has that
scheduled yesterday.
And this kind of thing is so
important for people and so I do
hope that communities have.
Thank you go ahead good
afternoon members of the
committee and I am just
delivered and this and you're
speaking for preparing and
rocking.
I paired into the rocky mountain
supports breast exam Health
fridge as an important point of
access for health care coverage
across the state and yes it has.
Okay thank you very much go
ahead thank you madam chair and
committee members ninety eight
often staff attorney at
southwest women's Law Center
insurance coverage for breast
exams is a wonderful step you
can take to further support the
health of the co and this is why
the southwest women's law center
stands for in support of this
bill state thank you so much
thank you for.
You madam chair members of the
committee my name is Jennifer
roughly I'll definitely
executive director for the
commission on the status of
women we support this bill and
stand in favor of you supporting
it as well for all the reasons
that were previously mentioned
and then for personal reason my
mother died of breast cancer and
I think anything that can be
done to
that early detection is
incredibly important and that's
one of the things that medical
providers have been able to show
account for that is so thank you
for your time and please up vote
yes.
Thank you do we have any with
online.
Yes I really I thought I would
have thought so there might
maybe actually.
Okay let me get my okay do you
want you could read it for the
chairwoman Lisa for.
Go ahead.
To distribute your self they
also.
Thank you Rebecca birch Susan G.
Komen first I'd like to thank
the committee and members of
madam chair for allowing us to
testify and would like to think
chairman Chandler for her
support and leadership on this
issue and many have noted early
detection is really important I
think the most critical thing to
know about this bill is the
mammography alone cannot
determine whether or not you
have a cancer diagnosis follow
up exams are necessary to move
into a cancer diagnosis and
treatment so without this
without being able to provide
assistance to many women who
need the follow up imaging
stable for go about it that
in the G. and we'll end up with
a later stage Gallegos with much
for outcomes and as the chair
noted much more much more costly
for the health and the health
insurers and health care system
overall we stand in strong
support and thank the chairman
for her leadership on this issue
thank you.
Next Nancy partridge.
Thank you committee chairs
Thank you Representative
Chandler for carrying this on
the I am a native New Mexico and
and for generations of my family
here or here in New Mexico
I'm what's known as a provider
which means I don't have breast
cancer yet but I will because I
had lobular carcinoma in situ in
nineteen ninety nine.
Since then I've been required to
have not only screening
mammogram but also I follow up
testing such as ultrasound and
MRI.
And those communities very
expensive last year's bill was
sixteen hundred dollars
I've got another friend who had
a regular screening mammogram
and her follow up Custer
fourteen hundred dollars I've
got another friend who is a
three year survivor has to have
follow up tests multiple times a
year last week's bill was five
hundred dollars per breast I
have another friend who's a two
time breast cancer survivor and
she just had to have follow up
tests every year for twenty
years that she said to pay out
of pocket for.
when women have to make a choice
between paying for these follow
up tests or paying for their
rent or buying lunch for their
kids at school.
They're gonna picks around to
our lunch every time and delay.
testing.
Until it's possibly too late so
I do ask that you give this a do
pass.
Thank you so much I think that
includes our public testimony so
let me go to members of the
committee now unless unless
madam chair you want at anything
after the public to no madam
chair thank you members.
Representative Penske.
Thank you madam chair madam
chair so I I heard this bill and
health the first time around and
I think I just wanted to kind of
go through the change that
you're making because
it's it looks to me that you
are.
Removing costsharing but no
longer requiring coverage of the
benefit is that right madam
chair madam chair Madam chair
representative out was flagged
for us as a is an issue.
It really I think it was not our
intent to you know at supplement
require plans going forward but
if the offer if that's if it is
offered through the plan we
require that it not be cost
shared AC thank you thank you
madam chair madam chair so then
I would assume that the fiscal
impact of this legislation would
now.
Would now be zero funds
instantly Madam chair madam
chair Madam chair representative
I think very close to zero and
that was one of our concerns
when we were we didn't realize
you know there were some
disconnected or so yes and I did
confirm that I also worked with
former superintendent till who's
now working in LFC does to touch
base with him to to get a read
from him and he he thought that
would cut down on the costs
significantly Madam chair
representative.
Thank you for that madam chair
and
I think my final question is
just.
Originally OSI had noted
concerns about
The repeal of the language.
At bottom of page nine in the
bottom of page ten that that
may.
trigger at I guess is a loss of
the grandfathering under the ACA
for different L. of that cost so
Madam chair and and madam chair
I'm just wondering is that still
the case or is that no longer at
concerns madam chair and
representative I believe that's
no longer the case but if Colin
is on the line we could ask he
and he they're not if this is
not an agency bill but he did
provide technical assistance
madam chair and representative
Senate so is he on the line
maybe we could ask him to
respond to that madam chair to
get an accurate answer followed
by we you true in your life.
Sure madam chair you able to
hear me yes going.
Great thank you yes we we did
give this a look and madam chair
at because it's just focusing on
the costsharing and not on the
budget requirement we don't
believe that this will trigger
it.
Thank you thank you madam chair
thank you are there any other
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair and Madam
chair of my only question is.
So we're not requiring it to be
part of the insurance coverage
but if they do choose this type
of coverage it has to cover
these additional our subsequent.
Seizures correct met madam chair
I think of maybe a better way to
put it is if it is whatever the
terms of the plan are in terms
of coverage there could be no
cost sharing in terms of these
follow up diagnostic exams I
think that's a maybe a more
accurate way to put it madam
chair representative certainly
more articulate them off hi
Patricia of it Madam chair madam
chair the of.
The cost for the issue if I
understood the other question
it's about zero is is that the
cost to the insurance providers
or is that just a cost to the I
by law firm that is self
insured.
That's a good question the way I
looked at the of fire had a lot
to do with the public plans that
we were impacting and it was
they they showed very high we
couldn't do a financial
assessment on private companies
Mr madam chair and
representative but what what you
know there's the public
employees reach retirement
insurance and then there's the
public schools insurance you
know there are a few and my
sense in talking with the LFC
focuses Act that cut down the
costs significantly and is not
likely to have a significant
financial impact HM Madam chair
madam chair I guess with respect
maybe smaller.
Companies are smaller policies
there may be be some impact but
you might not have an estimate
of what those would be Madam
chair representative no but can
I make the point you know
there's you pay now or you pay
later and I think you pay more
when you pay later so I think
this is a good investment madam
chair and representative.
Madam chair representative I
certainly I think I support
this.
I I haven't heard anybody push
back against and usually I would
by this point in time so thank
you Madam chair representative.
I.
Survation over the years
you know it seems like we start
out with a bill requiring a
certain coverage and then the
health insurers don't want to do
that.
And then eventually.
It becomes standard and and the
thing that never made sense to
me when
we were I have first are the
tobacco settlement revenue
oversight committee we were
getting so much information from
health.
Care practitioners about the
Linkage between tobacco use and
various cancers.
And and of course there's loan
cancer and so forth.
And yet in the beginning this is
no longer the case but in the
beginning.
The health insurers didn't want
to cover.
Retention that the or cessation
products like.
You know what's the government
the nicotine patches the
nicotine patches the nicotine
gum.
But they were covering the cost
of someone getting lung cancer
and and so you made the comment
that it's ultimately cheaper for
the insurer.
Certainly better for our entire
economy and wealth public
health.
To help people recover or not
get them in the first place so
eventually I hope that this
becomes really standard
I've you know I I think a number
of us to probably have those all
you have to come back for
another.
Another
Yes after the the mammograms so
I hope eventually this is just
like the bill that we had on the
floor about the to the marchers
and and tailoring the treatment
to the individuals genetic make
up I mean we have a long way to
go to
Find.
Really the full spectrum of care
and of course we're learning
things as we go so we need a
motion on this and do not pass
on the original bill and to pass
on the committee says so do I
have a motion sure I've moved we
do not passed house bill two
ninety seven and a do pass on
the house Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill two
nine seven this twenty seven
twenty seven okay eight I think
to ninety seven was just ahead
of us yeah I think that's what I
know that's what we just did.
Okay.
And so we have a proper motion.
Representative Eli.
A few.
Is there.
Getting I'm getting the sense
there's no objections.
Is there any objection to the
proper motion okay seeing none
please show all members present
voting in the affirmative and
you have a due process of the
committee staffer house bill
twenty seven thank you so much
committee.
This is.
Alright so thank you very much
and thank you Peter Casey for
assuming the reins for a little
bit there house bill one thirty
two I think I'd mentioned
earlier had been rolled at the
request of the sponsor so we are
now on house bill two thirty
four.
Amended robbery in organized
retail crime
artists Committee isn't system
went to go ask Representative
Matthews competencies and in
commerce so if if folks someone
wait wait a minute or two to so
she can get here.
I just talked to she's
presenting right all my gosh
okay so miss Matthews
Representative is presenting and
calmer or somewhere else we can
do it okay great excellent okay
cool.
Great great speaker.
Thank you Sir.
Thank you.
The.
The smart.
Market you'd have to.
All right speaker the floor is
yours we are on house bill two
thirty four.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee because with two
thirty four.
Is a result of several months
work with of some some of our
largest and smaller retailers in
in in the state it relates to
the issue of organized retail
crime.
is probably all members know
this is an issue that's been in
the news quite a bit
you've got these organized
retail crime rings that
you know think about going on
Facebook marketplace and being
able to buy a brand new drill
for.
You know pennies on the dollar.
a lot of these
items are stolen from
large and small retailers and
they are they are still in in
in order to to really I think
fuel the drug epidemic that we
see in our state
and the result is millions of
dollars in losses for these
retailers the reason why I'm on
this bill
even though that's very
concerning through the people
work in these establishments
right think of the.
Elderly person who is the
greeter at Walmart and often
times they'll be the once
confronted by people as they
walk out with with merchandise
to the tune of millions of
dollars a year I've got a couple
experts here with me who can
answer any questions the
committee we have with that
manager I'd like to turn it over
to them to close our
presentation and then go to the
committee.
yes thank you good afternoon
madam chair members of the
committee my name Sean Sullivan
I'm currently a director at the
attorney general's office I'm
here on behalf of the G. rel
Taurus who strongly supports
this legislation hi my prior
role I work with the second
judicial district attorney's
office for nearing a decade I
was the supervising attorney of
the division that prosecuted
Rocky percent of the felony
crime Bernalillo county so use
in that role that I came to
understand then to this problem
I won't belabor the point I
think it's fair to say all the
stakeholders are very interested
in finding a piece of
legislation that is robust in
scope but also legally sound and
so on to that and we took to
heart a lot of what the fiscal
impact report noted and I think
that serves as the basis for a
couple of the amendments that we
had so I'll be happy to answer
questions about the amendment in
the bill itself so thank you for
the opportunity to speak.
This Madam chairman members of
the committee my name is rob
black I am the president and CEO
The New Mexico chamber of
commerce we became involved with
this issue a little over a year
ago when many of our retail
members came to us and ask for
help
they were very concerned about
the impact this was having the
the organized retail crime is
having on their their employees
there their team members as well
as their customers and to give
us a little bit of a scale of
the impact we're talking about
it was in twenty nineteen there
was a national survey done that
around so just under sixty eight
sixty nine billion dollars worth
of drugs were stolen in the U.
S. from retailers that number in
twenty twenty one a recent
report was just released by the
national retail federation
Senator number's gone up to
ninety four point five billion
in those two years.
we're estimating in New Mexico
the impact on our tax base is
just over eighteen point six
million dollars annually to
state and local taxes that we're
losing to the organized retail
crime in New Mexico so as you
think about the context of the
FIR we don't talk about what
that looks like of that lost
revenue due to the crime.
The problem is getting worse by
that same survey by the national
retailers twenty seven percent
retailers across the country
song increase I know Garcia
organized retail crime incidents
and twenty twenty one eight out
of ten retailers reported that
violence and aggression
associate with or see increased
over the last year so that's
eighty percent of retailers
saying that violence has
increased as it relates to
Garcia in in that in the
country.
we surveyed our the voters here
in New Mexico at the beginning
of the year we asked them if
they'd witnessed shoplifting
personally in the within the
last year forty percent of New
Mexicans said they had
personally witnessed it in the
last year that's a level of
criminality that is disturbing
as a in in a civilized society
and an increase again as we see
higher levels of risk around the
use of violence it becomes even
more disconcerting seventy six
percent of retailers say that a
criminal has threatened to use a
weapon against an associate.
And forty percent of asset
protection managers around the
country say that organized
retail crime has used a weapon
to harm an associate so that's
forty percent of of those asset
protection manager so again.
The threat is is severe and I'll
end on a an example of where how
this crime affects things in in
a way that you may not expect
one of the main items that is a
popular to steal and be resold
on the market is baby formula.
Think about baby formula is it
when you erase the.
Do by date and you still working
correctly if you stored in a
place it's hi that that degrades
the nutritional value value of
the baby formula.
It degrades it and then that
baby formulas resold on the
secondary market or sold
overseas you will have a mother
feeding their child and that
child is still starving because
the nutritional value of the
road and that's the risk that
these organized retail crime
crime syndicates create a health
care side and and you can look
at a variety of other types of
of goods that are stolen but
that's that's an example of a
public health impact that may
not be top of mind when you
think of this particular issue
so I appreciate the time today
thank you.
Thank you I understand that
Representative Matthews had a a
little video I think it's only a
minute and a half so I I think
we should play that if we do
have it set up to go if that's
alright with you you Mr speaker
right.
When it comes to retail crime
officers are interesting petty
shoplifters using violent repeat
offenders sometimes armed with
guns and bullet proof vests.
Just days after a suspected
shoplifter opened fire on an
Albuquerque Walmart and then
pulled a gun on this agency
security guard when trying to
make off with the case of beer
officers of the measure are
taking measures to crack down on
violent shoplifters we we've
seen an increase in violence
shootings in retail centers and
so it was important that we step
up operations now a PD says that
has made one hundred and fifteen
arrests for organized retail
crime over the past year these
arrests turned up three hand
guns eight stolen cars and more
than twenty six thousand dollars
in stolen property well the FBI
is looking for fifty one year
old lenders only Cerro the F. B.
I. says and they found these and
hundreds of other a possibly
stolen items at his home and
storage unit detectives believe
he's involved with a violent day
in Albuquerque.
The this try power tools and
types of things that you would
find at your local home depot
stacks of suspected stolen items
more than three hundred bottles
of alcohol fifty one fire arms
into several thousand rounds of
ammunition now in the possession
of the FBI the FBI saying that
this case is a prime example of
how the violent games they go
after are related to the crime
many of us see every day we say
right that we have become
problem if we say we have a drug
problem we say we have a retail
theft problem well that's very
circular right is very cyclical
because these types of things
can be used as part of system
the FBI says in this a money
making it task forces the same
group that seized in the record
one point one million Sentinel
pales in Albuquerque last
September you can make more
money stealing from businesses
and then they can selling drugs
or guns the Attorney General to
more of Albuquerque law
enforcement is business leaders
say retail crime is out of
control and they are demanding
changes it is more profitable
now to go in steel.
From our local retailers than it
is to sell drugs and guns in New
Mexico.
Madam we do have an amendment if
you want us we can move it out
yes.
Yes Mr speaker mentioned move
member number one.
To.
House bill two thirty four as
amended the two to five numbers
two two five four zero eight
point three.
Madam the amendment addresses
The concern about double
jeopardy and then it also ads.
Well
the new a new paragraph twenty
six shoplifting as provided in
section thirty dash sixteen dash
twenty.
and then we numbers the the rest
of the bill and my experts can
can further explain the need for
the amendment if the fifth
please you thank you Mr speaker
of before we just discussed the
the bill in the amendment why
don't we go to the audience and
first let's ask who wishes to
speak in opposition to the bill
please raise your hand okay I
see if you we'll start over
here.
I have read my daughter's
activity that.
Right now to speak.
So I'm hoping that you'd go to
pass this.
Her testimony interim committees
about this I understand why it's
been brought forward.
For more already on the books of
people.
The staff and.
People with firearms for that
matter imminently all of this is
going to it's very frustrating
and costly but I don't think
adding new categories of crimes
can actually stop this behavior
the strategy of throwing more
crime categories we have enough
these partial penalties that
already existed these very real
issues is tempting but I think
you missed the boat I wish I see
as many bills brought forward
supporting communities and their
needs jobs housing programs
child care medical care food
insecurity let's throw our
efforts toward actually might
make a difference for our long
term versus just making us feel
like we're doing something right
now anything even if it's
something that hasn't been shown
in the past to do to help us
thank you thank you fair and I
think I saw your hands up I'm
good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Barron's all them ACLU the
New Mexico senior policy
strategist the ACLU of New
Mexico the problem member of the
New Mexico state pollution the
ACLU and the New Mexico state
school listened respectfully
opposes legislation for the
reasons that I have already
stated we appreciate the
problems and concerns that
brought this effort for however
we don't believe ace the two
thirty four will solve those
issues instead of like Diane
said this on repeated what the
set of creating more crime need
to invest in our own mental or
behavioral health infrastructure
that we know that has been
gutted he's here we talk about
that what happened in twenty
twelve this bill will have a
disastrous impact on our already
burdened criminal legal system
in the state our jails are
extremely unsafe and packing
people mourn their is not going
address the issues that those
details are facing and on a more
personal note on this bill
probably and and I can speak for
those personally about twenty
years ago on I was arrested for
prime that I did not commit.
And the the Russian officer and
told me use that us with the
loan to the targets right left
and that would be taken at the
bargain even though I was
innocent so for a very harsh
prison sentence for a crime that
is no longer.
With that I will to the please
this bill thank you
Yes.
Madam chair representative my
name is Julie ball and the
district defender for the first
two days should district for the
law offices of public defender
and we would have has this bill
for a number of reasons
I already mentioned but the
contact covered by the new crime
of organized retail crime is
already criminalized in all
criminal parents if you look at
the programs definition
organized retail crime it's
already covered by shoplifting
in our city.
As well as conspiracy or
accessories.
Criminal
Contact as far as the organized
scheme.
that is already covered by the
racketeering statutes so there's
no reason to created new crime
finally the new organized retail
crime to racketeering.
Would require proof.
Patterns of a pattern.
So if it would be almost
impossible impossible because
just by adding that is what
we're already have this it's
already criminalized on the box
that large in the definition of
robbery to include one why it
goes against the company.
Definition of robbery and also
this contact is already
criminalized with the has solved
and unsolved battery I tried
several different.
And we would.
Thank you anyone else wishing to
speak just over here.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Nikos
dollars I have a few concerns
with this legislation of the
main concern I have is with the
expanded definition that we use
in the office offering I know in
previous presentations there was
reference to.
We do is to the point of view of
the State that nineteen ninety
three part of the bill decision
had prime Harmanpreet and not
robbery so I don't know what we
would want to expand the
definition definition of robbery
in this case we try to meet the
standard that really doesn't
apply to this case my biggest
concern when you expand the
definition of robbers especially
when you add the line which is
now in the report to in effect
in the state from a fat really
waters down in my opinion the
definition of all right and what
has continued to me is the fact
that it has on the juvenile
population to the crime of
robbery is one of the crimes
listed in the statute that would
qualify you for youthful
offender status so if you are
you from from the ages of
fourteen to eighteen and your
convicted of a crime or fraud
you can face adult sanctions so
now we're talking about
something as simple as effecting
the escape from the because the
from the scene of a fact I can
be a fourteen year old walks
into a convenience store steals
a candy bar attempts to escape
but that can for and could be
charged with the crime log I
don't think we're looking to
charge fourteen year old
stealing candy bar from retail
stores as.
With a four given sanctions into
an adult system but that's
exactly what the language of his
respect.
When you add to leverage or to
affect yes people staff you're
expanding the definition to be
watering down the definition to
the robbery in such a way that
you expanding the opportunity
for juveniles to be sentenced as
an adult and I don't think that
that's what this legislation is
trying to do thank you thank you
anyone else in the audience
wishing to speak in opposition.
Let's go online would you raise
your hand if you wish to speak
in opposition.
Okay see if you hands coming up
Luke's folder Campos.
Good afternoon chair members of
the committee my name is Lucy to
come because I'm policy director
with gold futures and we work
with individuals that are
currently and formerly
incarcerated we oppose this
legislation because we feel that
it is not getting to the root
causes of why people are
engaging in this form of
activity especially when we're
using the spam the.
Example of baby formula we feel
that there are other ways and
means to reduce this activity we
have also just seen a bill
passed a very necessary bill to
address our correctional system
and so thinking of how with the
conditions that people are
living and within our jails is
also very concerning that would
continue to criminalize folks
and bring them to that system so
for those reasons of the many
reasons that have already been
expressed we respectfully oppose
this bill and we ask that you
vote against it thank you thank
you
Jonathan.
Thank you chair and and
representatives I'm my name's
Jonathan Ibarra I am a public
defender and the vice president
of the New Mexico criminal
defense lawyers association I'm
a former prosecutor and former
District Court judge with with
all due respect to that of
Sanchez and you know my my
friend Mr Solomon I don't think
that.
Redefining robbery for the way
it's been defined for decades
make sense as other people have
said the this will just this the
all of these actions are already
criminal the bigger problem I
think that the call they that
needs to be considered is that.
How this statute is going to
actually be used you might have
one or two wheel locking about
like in those videos but really
what's going to happen is really
poor people who are just
shoplifting to live two you know
for food and things like that
that's who's really frankly
going to get charged with this
because that's the easy people
to charge and so I don't think
it's appropriate to do this I
think that this doesn't fix
anything and it causes
significantly more problems than
it fixes thank you very much
thank you anyone else online
wishing to speak in opposition
no one okay so those in the
audience wishing to speak in
support please raise your hands.
Okay Jason.
Madam chair members of the
committee recessed as a
president and CEO The New Mexico
resell Association this stands
for the legislation review of
retailers of more people than
any other industry Mexico
generate over sixteen billion.
Product tax each year in fact
nearly a quarter of the jobs
were supported by retail.
retail stores across New Mexico
are growing concerned about the
growing impact will be felt
pride at the impact it's having
on our communities we proudly
serve the individual for those
mention before lawsuits drive up
costs for retailers and in turn
increase prices for consumers
items stolen from Canada from
low cost easily that's the
reserve eight hundred project
designer clothing and high end
later this results practice also
safety threat for workers I just
a person that my brother works
at a retail store opted in Santa
Fe I think we've all probably
experienced you know that we've
been in stores but every day he
comes home with stories of it's
not you know just once or twice
a day this is fifteen thirty
times a day and he tells us the
stories of you know I see a
person ever you have the same
person every day and you know
they have a machete you know
they have a weapon there's
there's nothing that we can do
so the status quo is clearly not
working said here to region
pathway.
Thank you
yes ma'am.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Carol and
when New Mexico state police
from a law enforcement
perspective as it relates to
retail organized crimes we
continue to see a spike for
those who are committing these
crimes this is because these
criminals face little to no
consequences for their actions
these continued there continues
to be the issue that criminals
know that they can get away with
these crimes therefore the next
track next crime they commit
will escalate and become more
and more violent.
In twenty eighteen a gentleman
by the name of Michael for a
healthy an older gentleman.
Loss of loss of life over forty
dollars and some change he was a
store clerk at the Smith gas
station in Edward this is not
just a crime of opportunity to
shoplift this was a well planned
out attack by a group of
criminals they carried out the
robbery and Mr Pelkey ultimately
lost his life over forty eight
dollars and some change citizens
of New Mexico are witnessing
these crimes being committed in
front of us creating fear as a
citizen of the state and the
citizen of New Mexico we should
be able to feel safe in our
communities.
This piece of legislation will
create consequences that will
serve as a deterrent and it will
create real consequences for
those who choose to ignore the
law thank you thank you anyone
else in the audience yes of
Jason.
Thank you madam chair members
pages we specialize with our
previous manager recovers this
Madam chambers dances for
legislation there is a gap in
the loss the needs to be
remedy representative shop in
this this in the northeastern
and realized retail that is more
serious than simply somebody
going in New Zealand forty
dollars with.
because this is a cruel and I
need to be addressed with this
bill does address that gap on
your program managed
to.
Yeah and valuable for factors.
Thank you thank you anyone else
in the audience wishing to speak
in support.
All right we'll go online and
those online wishing to speak in
support please raise your hand.
Okay I see Celinda Gonzalez.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee my name is selling
them on salads and I service map
chair of the state and local
government relations for the
home depot I'm here in strong
support of house bill two thirty
four the home depot the world's
largest home improvement
retailer and in New Mexico the
home depot is proud to have more
than two thousand one hundred
eighteen associates thirteen
stores has an annual economic
impact to New Mexico of over
seven hundred and eighty nine
million dollars.
We are encouraged to see the
legislature addressing the
serious issue of organized
retail crime the home depot sees
a critical need for this
legislation to be more
appropriately.
Two more probably come that the
rapid growth of organized retail
crime and the threat poses to
the community.
To be clear organized retail
crime is not petty shoplifting
the staff for to read not set
for need these are sophisticated
criminals are recruit
individuals to steal from
retailers big and small and then
resell stolen goods to fund more
serious crimes I have seen house
bill two thirty four your
clothes pools that allow these
criminal organizations to force
thank you for staff thank you
appreciate it JD Bullington.
JD.
Yes madam chair members of the
committee this is JD Bullington
speaking on behalf of the
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce's supports this bill I
think we all know we have a
major worsening problem with
serial aggressive retail states
it's demoralizing the public
employees are scared employers
feel helpless and the serial
aggressive retail please do this
as the state police officer
stated because they don't
believe there's gonna be any
consequences for their actions
and that's why they should be
met with felony level charges
madam chair members of the
committee there's a key element
of this bill that we all should
focus on the inability to
aggregate the value of the
merchandise they steal is a
loophole in our current criminal
justice statute that's being
exploited prosecutors must be
allowed to charge someone for
retail staff based on aggregated
value of what they still over a
period of time the chamber
believes this bill move things
in the right direction and would
actually like to see the period
of aggregation be longer than
ninety days thank you so much
thank you JD anyone else online
wishing participate speak in
support of the bill.
I don't see any other hands
raced so we'll go act Sanchez or
anything you'd like to add
briefly representative Matthews.
Madam chair members of Canadian
apologize for being late start
up another hearing
I'm sure that we had some really
excellent people here hearing
their formation about it so I
and I know with a jump it to a
pool without knowing what what
else is been been said so I will
I think we are at a point to
stand for questions.
And we need to move I'm sorry we
need to move the adoption of the
committee substitute the
amendments that sorry and we did
move it for discussion is our
motion to adopt the amendment.
The and seconded move five of
speaker Tina second by
Representative.
Are you seconding the okay Sir
discussion on the amendment is
our discussion on the amendment.
Thank you Sir Representative the
manager of questions on the bill
but one of them arises from the
Missouri okay from the
appropriate at this time then
chairs and Matthews
As I I'm looking at how the
amendment fits into
The bill in on page five of the
bill we have you start with the.
record caring act we've a
definition of racketeering and.
Is there is
maybe I'm misreading this but
racketeering just as appears to
be a list of other crimes are
there is there some other
element that turns a murder or
embezzlement indirectly tearing.
For.
I I I don't maybe I don't
understand how racketeering
works.
Madam chair representative
I'm just the Sean Sullivan to
comment on that
Madam chair representative
racketeering is really a
coordinated scheme among a group
of individuals in order to
really extract an illicit profit
of some kind so
what you're really thinking of
is the commission of any one of
those enumerated crimes two or
more times with the intent to do
one of four things under our
statute what qualifies
racketeering and so for example
of the way I think about this in
the context of a shoplifting
organized retail crime.
What a partnership or LLC and
they were selling clothes that
was their business they went to
the flea market nasal close.
Part of what they did in order
to get those clothes is walking
to target the day before shop
with those items off the shelf
take those items to the flea
market and sell them really what
you're doing is you're
committing one of those
particular funds or what we're
proposing to be part of a crime
shoplifting in order to derive
illicit proceeds and support and
enterprise so that's really what
racketeering is the benefit of
racketeering is that the
forfeiture Act applies and so if
you find someone guilty of
racketeering work group guilty
of racketeering you can try and
forfeit the illegal proceeds the
instruments that they use to
commit that crime it also has
some civil remedies as well so
racketeering is really about an
enterprise that's committing
sort of illicit activity and
madam chair I might add to that
I it is always helpful to me to
think about it thinking about
back in the I think it was the
seventies in the eighties the
federal government passed a law
called Rico racketeering
influence correction organized
for you Representative and we
used to basically deal with and
respond to the mafia and other
groups like that that were.
Organized committing crimes and
it was designed to be able to
reduce their influence and it
actually did it was very
successful Rico was a very
successful approach to doing
away with organized crime.
Madam chair representative
expert where can you point me in
the definition where it says
enterprise or where it says
repeated yes so under.
Thirty dash forty two dash three
which is the racketeering
statute that's on my page six
it defines racketeering as any
of those axes enumerated twenty
six twenty eight acts and then
what you need to do is go to the
definition section which is
subsection C. and D..
And it defines enterprise as
sole proprietorship partnership
corporation Xcerra or any
loosely group of individuals
associated in fact although not
a legal entity and then you get
to subsection D. which is the
pattern of racketeering and
that's where you get at least
two incidents of that
racketeering meaning two
incidents of.
Larceny embezzlement receiving
stolen property in order to
accomplish one of the prohibited
activities in subsections a
thirty and then that has a full
list of specific intent actions.
So that's what that definition
comes from so so Madam chair
representative expert I I I I
see those definitions but I
don't see that language in a.
Racketeering means any act is
chargeable for indictable under
laws in New Mexico and
punishable by imprisonment for
more than one year involving any
of the following with offenses.
What I don't understand how have
seen the work into the the
Phoenician.
yes Madam chair representative
and I actually believe I have
the full racketeering statute
because what you're seeing in
this bill is only the piece of
the racketeering statute that's
being amended to presumably
include organized retail crime
and shoplifting if you were to
look at the full racketeering
statute which is thirty dash
forty two dash for that lists
all the prohibited activities
under the racketeering statute
and so that's the easiest way to
think about it is it's the
commission of two or more of
these predicate crimes in order
to benefit some enterprise by
doing any of the four things in
that subsection so you're not
seeing the full statute in this
bill only the piece that's being
change which is essentially the
definition section.
So the Madam chair
representative expert it's
thirty forty two that for
correct.
Okay
I'll have to read through that
let me ask you
Are we still talking about the
amendment we are Madam chair
believe it or not okay.
So the amendment at shoplifting.
but the the intro to the area
were reading shoplifting says.
Racketeering means any act the
federal center a punishable it
by imprisonment for more than
one year.
Is shoplifting.
That possible by imprisonment
for more than one year Madam
chair representative if it's
between five hundred dollars and
twenty five hundred dollars it's
a fourth degree felony if it's
between twenty five hundred
twenty thousand it would be the
third in the twenty thousand or
above it would be the second re
felony so what this contemplates
it is that it would only be
those violations of felony
shoplifting which would serve as
a predicate crime and
racketeering it would not
encompass the example of a candy
bar being stolen which is
presumably less than two hundred
fifty dollars which would be a
petty misdemeanor so would only
be those felony shoplifting.
Madam chair representative
expert should should I.
The concern that doesn't say
that the chicest shop of what
lifting as provided in section
three dash sixteen dash twenty I
which which I haven't had the
opportunity look up yet so I
don't.
Yes madam chair representative
it it does say under
racketeering subsect subsection
eight any act that is chargeable
or indictable under the laws of
New Mexico New Mexico impartial
by imprisonment of more than one
year that's the definition under
our statutes of felony so it
does implicate only felonies.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you we're still on the amendment
Representative review are you on
the bill are on the okay on the
amendment both okay well let's
talk about the amendment
Representative free.
Representative I I just try to
make sure I'm understanding and
then transaction.
An individual charge of the
violation of section should not
be able to violation of the
sanctions and isolation for
those retail price.
So when you talk about violation
of this section are you talking.
Shop with talking.
retails cried.
That makes sense chair
representative.
The madam chair I I think of as
Mr Solomon to respond Madam
chair representative you're
correct it references
shoplifting the subsection do
falls under thirty sixteen
twenty and so when it says an
individual charged with a
violation of this section it's
referencing shoplifting really
what it's trying to do dress the
potential double jeopardy issue
what it is saying is that
somebody who is charged with
shoplifting and organized retail
crime cannot be punished for
both because shoplifting would
be a lesser included offense
organized retail crime it would
be a double jeopardy violation
to punish them for Paul so
that's really the section
adequate fencing and madam chair
and Representative.
I think that pops Act offices
have been.
Teachers shoplifting they
haven't made it to the second or
third one.
Defense attorney or storage for
your smart person walking in
match for just the kids need to
shoplifting so they're about
double jeopardy will fly you
would not be able to charge
seven hundred organized retail
crime this kind of reverses Act
funds years.
Madam chair representative I
think that that is a possibility
you are right about the legal
conclusion that should there be
a conviction on a petty
misdemeanor shoplifting for
example it would not then be
used as a predicate for the
aggregation portion I think that
there's ways to charge it
differently for example where I
come from Bernalillo county one
of the ways that you can do that
is proceed via summons right and
so in that case there wouldn't
be a case that potentially is
filed entail you have that
aggregation over the threshold
another example is you simply
wait on bringing that case until
you can have an arrest warrant
so there's other ways to get
into the system where you
wouldn't necessarily plead
guilty to a petty misdemeanor
shoplifting and madam chair and
representative and I understand
that and.
This is the have this thank you
sorry about that if you maybe
have a situation where.
You're thinking this is an
organized retail crime but I I
guess my experience
a shoplifting the time they are
some of those and then they come
in and they just plead guilty
and so I just want to make sure
that you would understand this
amendment could actually have
the opposite effect and kind of
not help the situation and so I
just wanted to double check that
that we understood this was
applying to shoplifting to and
not just the organized organized
retail crime part and
racketeering but shoplifting and
you could be prevented by any
smart Attorney person or someone
is just guilty of shoplifting
pleading guilty and you would
just be done at that point and
madam chair representative I
think that that's right I think
at worst we're at the status quo
I am what you really think
through in your prudent with the
way that you charge these and I
think you get around some of
those concerns thank you madam
chair thank you Representative
Representative Alcon do have a
question about the amendment or
the bills amendment then okay I
do have a question Senator.
of the representative we would
get it entered currently but see
Mr Michael if there are that.
That
I think it is okay you tried to
move Larson the.
Well on the organized retail
crime.
With those guys in the shop and
if.
What happened to the if the
court okay.
And you can not reach that for
you.
Regions that Larson the feature
that you're looking for but
they're not charging them of
shoplifting so therefore you
lose the whole case.
Madam chair representative I'm
not certain I understand the
question well basically what I'm
saying is normally an officer
will charge.
More than one.
tired of the criminal complaint
drag.
In order to make sure that they
get at least something you have.
In other words.
This but a lot of the to the
there was that this is the
marijuana it also tried to
position of paraphernalia and so
forth okay in this case used as
void and charging the organized
retail crime should not charging
the shoplifting.
So therefore we needed to the
courtroom from the judge you
can't prove that one that you
charge.
You could not go back into human
for shoplifting.
Madam chair representative I
think that you certainly can
charge them with both organized
retail crime and shoplifting
that and that's why you see the
change in the language says that
you cannot punish them for both
it's the double jeopardy
violation to punish somebody for
essentially unitary conduct what
you can do is put on the
charging document organized
retail crime count one
shoplifting count to presumably
you bring both of those counts
to the jury the jury listens to
the facts and determines which
of those the facts better fit
and then if there's a conviction
on both what the judge does is
simply vacate the lesser
included charge so you're not
punishing them for ball and not
running afoul of the double
jeopardy violation so you can
absolutely charge them for both
you simply can't punish ripple.
but does.
I.
Thank you Representative.
So we have Representative
suppose on the menu on the
amendment madam chair thing what
Madam chair representative what
is the purpose of adding what
what was the rationale for
adding shoplift shoplifting to
the.
The list of potential
racketeering.
A sense what category of
current.
Would not be covered by
organized retail crime that
would be covered by racketeering
or vice versa what is what is it
that's trying to capture.
Chair of Representative Madam
chair representative of one of
the things that we took to heart
in the fiscal impact report I
think we heard it today in the
public comment was the concern
that by only having organized
retail crime as a predicate
crime under racketeering that it
essentially requires up proof of
a pattern of patterns and what
that is really getting at is as
follows take for example section
three a one that's one of the
things were saying would be
organized retail crime it
includes when an individual
works with someone else to steal
an aggravated aggravated value
twenty five hundred or more from
one or more retailers over the
span of one year so potentially
to prove that you can have
multiple instances of
shoplifting right so really to
prove organized retail crime it
could require a pattern of
shoplifting's well then when you
look at the racketeering statute
as we discussed earlier that
requires a pattern of two or
more of those predicate crimes
and so we can get very tricky in
terms of charging it can get
tricky for the courts in
determining if you've met that
predicate crime so by adding
shoplifting what you do is
really you clarify it and you
address those situations but the
example that I gave earlier
where you're simply stealing to
benefit your own organization
maybe one time maybe two times
but you don't have that actor
gated piece under the organized
retail crime so it's far simpler
the other thing I'd say about
shoplifting is it's frankly
curious to me why it's not in
there already if you look at the
enumerated crimes under
Fund racketeering you have a
larceny you have investment you
have receiving stolen property
so you have a lot of the stuff
related offenses already simply
not shoplifting I think that
that makes the statute more
robust and and it's really what
we're seeing on the ground.
Madam chair representative then
why not remove organized retail
crime from.
Racketeering.
And replace it with shoplifting
Madam chair representative I
think there are situations where
organized retail crime would
serve as a predicate
we talked about subsection one
which would make it tricky
because multiple instances of
shoplifting is what makes of
organized retail crime if you
look at subsection for for
example someone who recruits
coordinates organizes supervises
directs manages or finances
another to undertake those that
doesn't necessarily require more
than one event that could be the
leader of one of these organized
retail groups requiring a
booster to go and still product
on two occasions so that's for
user approved that's organized
retail crime two or more of
those in order to essentially
support enterprise would be
shoplifting so we're
understanding that there are
situations where organized
retail crime is not the
appropriate predicate crime for
racketeering but there certainly
are situations where it is.
Thank you madam chair and
representative and.
And so with the shoplifting
being under racketeering is
there a dollar value than
associated with the shoplifting
that would be.
Considered as a predicate crime
for racketeering Madam chair
representative for that we go
back to subsection eight which
requires any of those the new
rated twenty seven twenty eight
crimes up to be chargeable or
indictable and the loss of New
Mexico and punishable by
imprisonment for more than one
year statutorily that means that
it's a felony crime and so the
dollar amount is five hundred
dollars or more so if you
shoplift four hundred and ninety
nine dollars on two separate
occasions as it currently stands
you would not be in the
racketeering realm because it's
not a felony
So five hundred dollars is the
short answer.
So madam chair representative if
you organized a ring.
To for lack of a better word to
shoplift a number of items that
were under five hundred you
might be charged under organized
crime not under racketeering
Madam chair representative
that's another gap that we're
trying to address with this
legislation that's where the
aggregation piece comes and so
if that were to happen and you
were to shop with two hundred
fifty dollars on occasion one
two hundred fifty dollars on
occasion to within that three
month time period you could
aggregate and charge the
combined amount which would be
five hundred which would be a
felony which would presumably
take you under the racketeering
so there's a lot of gaps in the
way that that the shoplifting
the robbery the racketeering
statutes they don't really speak
to each other and so that's
really what this bill is trying
to address.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative thank you
Representative any other
questions on the amendment we're
still on the amendment.
I don't see any it was moved by
speaker Martinez I wasn't sure
if I had a second because that
multiple signals over here do we
have a second
of them moving of the amendment.
I'm sure we do have a second.
Thank you
a motion by Representative
leader Martinez speaker Martinez
and seconded by Representative
Sapan ski.
Any opposition to the amendment.
So with the record reflect that
everyone present has voted in
favor of the amendment
next further discussion on the
bill I have Representative
revision and Representative.
Thank you madam chair
Representative so I like the
concept of this bill obviously I
understand there's issues huge
problem that we've got to deal
with with this retail crime
theft it's I guess for me it's
the way the whole bills
organized it's it's seems very.
Everything started to get there
so I guess my first question
would be.
Why is robbery included in this
and not just put in the robbery
statute to where you could re
define it or you know have
difference you know ways it
could be used and so putting it
in this bills is confusing to me
because I do understand that
there was a case law and I I
disagree with that K. all that
you should be charged with
robbery on a situation where a
merchant you know is is a cost
it or whatever and so I I
actually like that part that we
could charge robbery excuse me
chair and representative on a
situation like that but I it
seems like to me it should be
not in this bill but in a
different bill.
Madam chair and representative
It is section two comes first
because it's the earlier number
and then caught a fire assuming
this bill is passed from the
minutes codified into the law
books it will be able to set up
in a different way I can't say
for sure how the car fires going
to do it but but it's here first
because
it's part of what we're trying
to fix in the situation of
organized retail crime.
and Madam chair representative.
On page three.
Nine fifteen section C..
If an individual commits more
than one shoplifting offence
within that period of ninety
days
What is Madam chair
representative commits means
that arresters at a conviction
or is a pending charge can you
elaborate on that please.
Then chair of our deferred to
The experts.
Madam chair representative it
certainly doesn't mean
conviction because if you read
further what it's really talking
about is the ability for the
prosecution to charge in a
certain way and so were pre
charge of this is really simply
talking about a separate
incident the actual commission
of the shoplifting whether
arrested or not because there's
situations where our pre
Taylor's will observe
shoplifting but simply not call
law enforcement whether they
don't think they'll be
responsive whether they're
trying to develop their own sort
of book on this person so it's
just talking about the separate
unit of experience actual
commission of that shoplifting
whether arrested or not okay
thank you madam chair and
Representative an expert for
that explanation and so
what is the explanation for
picking the ninety day period.
Madam chair representative
Because in the federal court and
in the magistrate courts the
period of time in which you have
to prosecute is much shorter and
the ninety days is a reflection
of the fact that that court with
these misdemeanor charges is
going to be moving much quicker
and and trying to get in moving
cases along in a way that
doesn't happen in the District
Court with felony is most of the
time at least in most of the
jurors most of the districts.
Okay and and madam chair and
representative of it normally
you would have a good six months
to prosecute a magistrate court
I'm so if we expanded it to more
of the six month period.
it would give a longer period of
time to aggregate these up if
that's what we wanted to do
madam chair expert
Representative eighty eight
ninety days seems like a I I
guess I'm I'm I understand what
you're saying but it.
You believe that the ninety days
is is a sufficient time to get
these organized retail crime
individuals Madam chair
representative.
We we looked at this how
carefully and our goal was to
focus at this level which is
pretty much the misdemeanor
level.
Was to focus on those
individuals who are repeat
offenders frequent offenders.
And as opposed to.
Focusing it on someone who's
very occasionally.
commits this crime or thank you
Mr crime because their family
needs food or whatever we really
looking throughout this statute
there is potential with this
bill.
To focus on the repeat behavior
and more serious the P. behavior
as opposed to.
In golfing
and occasional R. shoplifter is
somebody who's having a bad
month or whatever into this and
so we deliberately chose.
At the misdemeanor level a
shorter period of time because
we thought that would help us
Nero the so that we would be in
fact looking at the people who
are very much repeat offenders
as opposed to.
People having a bad six months
of life.
And madam chair representative
an expert.
I notice just in a lot of
jurisdictions I know Santa Fe
does this and I think it's
mention that Albuquerque and
another seven I think settlement
agreement that they want to rest
some misdemeanor shoplifting
charges so most likely madam
chair and representative of
their summonsed into court how
do you keep track of these
people that are being summons
into court and might plead
guilty or Representative
probably that's most the time
what happens at in that ninety
day period is it that you're
focus that you know these are
probably people that are in some
sort of scheme on organized
retail theft type of scheme or I
I just noticed that the the some
of these people in a lot of
jurisdictions that are not in
the jurisdiction I was in
because it's a lot smaller but
these larger jurisdictions and
so it this you know this
Albuquerque McClinton settlement
agreement that how do you how do
you of the get past that since
are not arrested on.
Madam chair I I will defer to
Mister Sullivan because he was
actually involved in doing this
work in the second judicial
district and madam chair
representative I think there's
really a couple ways one I
touched on earlier which is a
lot of leases larger retailers
have their own very robust in
house investigative farms and so
they they really know the
eventual offenders and self
there is a scenario in which
they could certainly document
and memorialize these
misdemeanours shoplifting is
until it reaches that critical
mass where they could then loop
in law enforcement to either
submit an arrest warrant or
whatever so at that point you've
already ensure that you've got
the aggregation piece down I
think the other way to do it is
and I know the way that the
second judicial district
attorney's office does is it's
our metropolitan division which
is the conduit through which the
summons flow and so ideally
you'd have someone metropolitan
division running criminal
history checks and saying of
this person was arrested for a
misdemeanor shoplifting on day
one here they are again on day
fifty let's talk for felony
Division about aggregating these
and pursuing a grand jury
indictment or criminal
information so I think it can
really happen both ways and
madam chair representative and
expert and and and I think yet
Albuquerque that it sounds like
that would possibly work I I did
have a conversation with the
district attorney in Santa Fe
they don't even really look at
these and they are like well I
guess we could hire prosecutor
to you know look at these and
maybe prosecute eminent I feel
like a lot of these might slip
through the cracks you know.
Pretty easily
and so I don't know if it's just
jurisdictional madam chair
representative expert but is the
main problem with this and the
larger places like Albuquerque
and Santa Fe.
They're organized retail theft
you madam chair
Representative I could just Mr
Mr black to comment on that
Madam chair representative from
the the speaking from the
chamber and and working with our
our our retailers around the
state they're they're seeing
this across the state whether
you're Hobbs let's crucis
Rossell it is a again so it is a
pattern and and we're seeing not
only that it's happening just
within New Mexico overseeing.
Operations that are project
across multiple states and so as
was mentioned a lot of the
especially the larger retailers
has Sarah is sophisticated asset
protection programs we're in
fact it's at the chamber we set
up an online digital database
platform that retailers can
upload security footage upload
pictures of of criminal activity
that they can store and then
provide law enforcement it's a
way for them to categorize that
information in a way that makes
it easy for law enforcement to
act on these cases and what
we're seeing is a lot of this
happening from Colorado Utah
Arizona through New Mexico into
Texas and it and it's a a route
so it happens throughout the
state and and and multi state.
Madam chair representative we
could commander Jones can also
provide some insight into how it
looks.
Good afternoon madam chair.
Representative so that's exactly
what we do have a connect
partnership that we work with
most well maybe not most but a
lot of the retailers in the
Albuquerque area other connected
obviously throughout the state
some of the bigger retailers
some of them mentioned in the
video that we watched and what
we see is that there is a
continued that is traveling
throughout the state and we see
that there's multiple crimes are
being committed in other
jurisdictions whatever talk
about districts for
jurisdictions for law
enforcement go
and they're impacting the
retailer through impacting the
business as a whole and it's
it's a very accurate true
statement that they have these
real best revoke excuse me
robust investigative elements
that are tracking individuals
who have you know if we were to
aggregate these crimes be
upwards of twenty five to fifty
thousand dollars.
On some of these more prolific
offenders Hey and thank you for
that Madam chair representative.
The kind of the last area I have
is kind of the more general
specific statute question
understate the reams and.
And the fact that you are
required to charge the most
specific statute in these cases
and so
have you considered the draft to
be amended toward the two crimes
are distinct enough that and we
don't have to implicate this
rule madam chair expert I'm sure
that's who's going to be
interesting.
Yes Madam chair representative
up you're correct you do course
charge on the more specific
statute I just think based on
the nature of what these crimes
look like in actuality they
simply do look very similar
organized retail crime however
is not shoplifting of course it
has elements of shoplifting it
has this the taking of
merchandise that doesn't belong
to you but then it's it's far
more right it's the resale in
the secondary market it's the
the people fencing it through
brick and mortar locations like
flea markets pawnshops Xcerra so
just based on the nature of the
crime I think shoplifting is
inherently a lesser included
offense
we could probably make an
argument that there's ways in
which shoplifting perhaps as a
separate distinct offence under
a block further analysis but I
think I think that based on just
the nature how we see these
things committed I think that
they are pretty clearly in my
mind at least necessarily
included offenses okay Evan
thank you madam chair and expert
I can and going through some
scenarios in my mind right could
see this being an issue but
You know I think I accept
your explanation for what you're
saying
And I think that is.
It is madam chair thank.
Representative Representative
McQueen.
Thank you madam chair
Madam chair representative Mr
Sullivan so so robbery consists
of that that anything in value
so there is no.
Value thresholds.
Anything.
For the large so Madam chair
representative robbery is
larceny plus the use or
threatened use of force or
violence.
So larceny is one piece of that
for that piece there is no value
threshold.
Of course.
That larceny without more is
just that it's Larson it's
really the threatened use of
force so madam chair Mr Solomon
I guess my question I understand
that the element the use of
force or the threatened use of
force but it could be a candy
bar.
Madam chair representative
correct that could be the item
value okay so
In the but expanding the
definite definition madam chair
Mr solvent that I I guess the
scenario that the run through my
head is
teenager shoplifting at bit a
candy bar the store security
guard.
Season drugs and by the R..
He Russell street and runs out.
That seems to me that that's
force and that's to routine this
I'm a value into the affected in
this case.
So that that the.
Simple that was cited by member
of the public
It seems possible to me that
that could be charged as a
Robert.
Madam chair representative the
way that I hear your example
there certainly that fast but I
don't see the force instituted
by the offender on the victim so
as to effectuate and escape what
I hear you saying is that he's
wrestling free from the loss
prevention officer that
instituting the force so I think
that there's some distinction
there I also so the cemex
service so when it says the use
of force to retain anything of
value it doesn't there's no
victim it's just the use of
force to retain something of
value.
Madam chair representative there
necessarily has to be victim
really what this is getting at
is how it doesn't make sense
under the law.
To where an offender can go into
target.
Hold the gun up to the store
clerk and take his wallet and
that's armed robbery yet if you
takes an item off the shelf and
is walking out when the loss
prevention officer says Hey let
me see your receipt then that
person pulls the gun how that's
not Robert that is how our laws
construction that's the issue
it's trying to get at so.
Madam chair Mr seven I
appreciate that but my simple
didn't involve again.
Madam chair representative your
example would be simple robbery
not armed robbery but you are
correct but it's still.
A third degree felony for
stealing can.
With the use or threatened use
of force correct.
Madam chair representative just
the of course larceny of the
candy bar would be a petty
misdemeanor shoplifting
punishable by only up to six
months which would never happen
actually so madam chair
representative so I am.
This is one those bills that the
more I look at it the more
concerned that becomes.
Madam chair
Representative in Mr Solan
Each three.
Why are we striking section C..
Madam chair representative that
was the original draft in which
the purpose of that the so
on line twelve Madam purpose of
the sub divisional draft that's
the statute why re striking
section C. in the current
session correct Madam chair
representative of the initial
reason why we sought to strike
subsection C. is that the plain
language is very confusing for
charging purposes what it says
is an individual charged with a
violation of this section which
is shoplifting shall not be
charged with the separate or
additional offence arising out
of that transaction I think the
intent of that was to say you
wouldn't charge someone multiple
times for shoplifting based on
multiple items but the way that
that reads is for example if
you're committing a shoplifting
with another group of
individuals you could not charge
shoplifting or conspiracy or if
a gun was pulled in the parking
lot on someone you couldn't
charge shoplifting and
aggravated assault so that was
the initial reason for striking
it we recognized the potential
double jeopardy considerations
which is why the amendment in
subsection do this was placed in
there so
Chair Mister so and
I never thought about this for I
don't know if you were here for
the cal discussion theft of
livestock so certainly we're
looking at charging multiple
offenses what I see that as
protecting as someone steals.
try to make the math easy ten
thousand dollars.
And so they haven't hit the
twenty thousand dollar
threshold for the second degree
felony but that could be for
third degree felonies.
Madam chair representative I
think that
so the livestock examples really
question about sort of unit a
prosecution would be what it is
in the case of what we're
talking about here's double
description basis I agree that
that is a way to read it which
is I think what we're trying to
alleviate with the amendment
suggesting that it could be
charge but double jeopardy what
absolutely prohibit you from
being punished for example with
shoplifting and organized retail
crime.
So
Madam chair of Mr told.
Find your your kids in the store
steals four watches each worth
twenty five hundred dollars.
Is that one's only or for
felonies Madam chair
representative asked shoplifting
currently is and this would not
change that the shoplifting is
based on the value of all of the
items stolen so for twenty five
hundred dollar watches I got
into law not because I'm great
at math but ten thousand dollars
would be between twenty five
hundred and twenty thousand so
would be a third degree felony
is so madam chair I think that's
the intent and I think that's
with the existing section C.
this is trying to clarify that
you can't charge for the same
transaction the same theft you
can't charge each item
separately you have to you have
to aggregate them and I don't
think we should take out section
C. because I think that
prohibition is still important.
And and the madam chair again
like never really thought about
this before but we just we just
reverse that for larceny of
livestock that you can in fact
do this with livestock that if
you if you stole
Three house each worth over
twenty five hundred dollars that
would be three offenses now.
It's it's for health care in
that but that's what we're
getting at
and I.
I I don't think the amendment
which talks about two different
crimes is the same as a section
C..
And madam chair representative I
certainly I appreciate that
perspective I think that when
you look at double jeopardy
analysis one of the things that
the court looks at is did the
legislature intended to punish
these crimes separate the
easiest way to tell is if it's
explicit in the statute which is
an example of the livestock
which is the legislature saying
we want to charge the separately
If that's not clear then you
really go to whether or not
these offenses are lesser
included greater included
offenses so there is an entire
analytical framework under
Swofford versus state that deals
with just that type of concern
so I certainly appreciate where
Representative is coming from
but I think those protections
under W. double jeopardy clause
are still in place.
So madam chair Mr Sobel just one
last time I don't think this is
a double jeopardy issue I think
it's a multiple offense issue.
And I I think you're making a
mistake taking that language
out.
Thank you Madam.
Representative others folks with
questions members of
Representative hill OK
Representative Alcon.
Thank you madam chair I'm just
curious about one thing at the
public defender's of money that
was in opposition saying that
the region of lost time to book.
We get to where you're get in
here without having to change
the the slate did you hear that
there.
All Madam chair representative
yes I did hear that it so I'm
just curious is it.
that is a possibility.
There's maybe that that the fact
that law enforcement this not
charging.
The crimes correctly the if
there and that's why we need
this legislation we need to do
to law enforcement have charged
the proper crimes to get there.
Madam chair
Thank you would have been here
to hear the public defender you
understand where I'm coming
from.
Yes I I saw a public defender in
the hallway of the while ago
Representative
Madam chair.
These crimes the first of all
it's a question that activation
without the specific statutory
language I think that's a fair
statement.
And if you don't aggregate them
do what you have is what's
happened in Albuquerque on the
Clinton agreement which was a
settlement under the former
mayor under judge Baer gadgets
to make a more very
the page shoplifting was
downgraded to if somebody was
was caught shoplifting they
would get a ticket and I don't
know if this came up in the
prior talk but it will give the
ticket and so what would happen
when you have a police force
that doesn't have huge amounts
of resources
because we come in and say we've
got somebody here because I'm
shoplifting and the police
wouldn't come.
And quite frankly I think you
can make an argument I'm not
saying it's by any means the
only reason but I think you can
make an argument that the spiral
of shoplifting we're now you
walk into stores Senators cages
for the for the goods and so
forth started with.
The fact that we downgraded
shoplifting to something that
was only gonna have a ticket and
the people started coming in
with bags and filling them they
walking out now let commander
Jones talk about that a little
bit but that madam chair I I
don't think that's what I heard
to publish for the state
That.
But that is about the the finish
a.
That if you look at the books
can you do the list that to.
You can get to the start of this
a to look at that here by using
what is already available in the
book.
Madam chair representative top I
think.
That's simply an incorrect
characterization we do not have
an aggregation statute on the
books and so what can happen is
someone can shoplift four
hundred dollars on ten
consecutive days and that person
will be charged with ten
different misdemeanor offenses.
So that we don't have the
statutory rubric right now to
address the visual shoplifters
in the way that this bill
proposes.
And madam chair representative I
would I would definitely echo
that sentiment I I don't think
it's a lack of knowledge on law
enforcement's part I think
really what it is is that
there's a lack of our ability to
aggregate staffs from people who
are hitting stores sometimes the
same store multiple times over a
period of time in ninety days
were there racking up an
aggregate theft amount of over
twenty thousand dollars and that
would be something that would be
charged with multiple
misdemeanors instead of what we
feel from the Albuquerque's far
would be appropriate as a felony
aggregated.
So okay the madam chair just one
question on the low so how many
four hundred dollar shoplifting
charges do you have to have with
the activated it is a ninety day
period to reach this aggravated
charge.
Madam chair representative since
the threshold for felony is five
hundred and more we would have
to have to four hundred dollars
yes in order to meet that felony
threshold there was the ninety
days of thank thank you madam.
Or go to speaker Martinez I
wanted to let everyone know that
the sponsor has ruled house bill
two eighteen low income public
utility right so people in the
audience I don't want you unless
you're really fascinated with
this conversation feel
compelled.
Yes exactly.
Okay Representative speaker
Martinez thank you madam chair I
I
I want to bring is back from the
weeds and I want you all to very
clearly describe what the issue
is particularly in my hometown.
And then it re explain very
briefly.
Why this is part of the solution
Madam chair representative.
Madam chair representative
that's it.
That's a great question and I I
really think the people on the
ground are better to describe
this than I am that's fine and I
would start with command and I'm
gonna sit it's one because if
it's all three of you were going
to get different angles bringing
to be back in the week so if one
of you could just.
Tell us what the issue is why
this is a solution.
Madam chair Mr speaker.
Two things I think from my
perspective is what this bill
really does.
One is I have seen time after
time after time.
Basis come into our office where
the shop with that amount is
just under five hundred dollars.
These individuals get credit
time served please at their
arraignment and they have a
blank check to go back out and
re offend.
With the aggregation please you
no longer have that blank check
you have the potential for
aggravation within that three
months as a deterrent to your
behavior to go and shop with
four hundred dollars the next
day that's one piece the far
more important piece to me madam
chair Mr speaker.
Is I have sat in enough pre
trial interviews where I've had
to explain to victims law of
loss prevention employees
primarily that we cannot charge
the offender with an armed
robbery because our case law
does not allow us to charge of
that person with armed robbery
these people had guns pulled on
them when they're simply trying
to ask for receipts and they
can't understand why this person
should not be held accountable.
Just like they would if they
Rolf the person of their wallet
this fixes that there's twenty
five other states that have the
retention for the use of force
to effectuate an escape in their
books New Mexico would catch up
to those states with this
legislation I think there be
enough prosecutors who would be
happy to no longer have those
conversations with victims thank
you madam chair and
representative and experts
I know that.
This was one of representatives
priorities over the intro I know
that the New Mexico chamber of
commerce had a this is a
priority can you describe for
this committee the process that
you went through to come up with
this piece of legislation and if
you were so kind as to share
with us who all it is that you
met with and I would hope that
it was the office of the public
defender in the dust and law
enforcement and others Madam
chair representative.
Madam chair representative thank
you for the question
I got involved in this a little
bit in the prior.
Session id where this issue is
sort of floating around I became
interested well let me back up
it is thirty day session and
Representative green had a bill
for that he introduced.
It's
very different than this not is
not as broad and that is not his
own compass sing I think
and of the since his thirty day
session is there would have to
be a
bill would have to be on the
call in order to be considered
and I know he was very
interested in it I went to the
governor's office and I said I
think this is a very serious
issue I have been talking with
Mister black in others I hear
from constituents constantly
about seen people stealing
about being concerned about
going to go buy groceries and
there's this random violence
happening in our streets in our
stores
and
and indicated I would be willing
to to to work on it and was told
that the.
The governor was not interested
in putting it up.
It kept putting in a bill on
this issue in in the thirty day
session I continue to work with
Mr black and
Over the summer and so forth I.
That number conversations and
conversations that contact with
Mr Rehm Representative Rehm we
were never able to stop you
right there I just I want to
know I I I I appreciate you
giving me that.
Who do we're at the table she
recovers a table where the where
the public affairs at table.
Madam chair.
Where the public defenders at
the table public defender was
not at the table was at the
table was the attorney general's
office okay both the prior
Attorney General including the
task force and then the current
Attorney General
through Mr Solomon we met with
Mr Solomon we meant with the Mr
Grayson who is a deputy Attorney
General now the second judicial
district had second district
attorney's office had a great
deal of information about this
crime we work with
the city city this the city
police and worked with Mr
Martinez who is not a policeman
but he works at those folks and
we worked with him we had
conversations with sheriff the
sheriff we had conversations
with many Senator the district
attorney's association the
district attorney's association
governor's office and the
governor's office thank you for
that so you heard your
opposition parties the office of
the public defender's and
there's a number of others
what I don't want Madam chair
representative is for us to.
Find.
Obstacles for a potential
solution now I know this is not
the solution is as part of a
process.
I think you all have worked very
hard.
Over the intro.
I know because I was pulled into
at least two or three meetings
and it is very frustrating to me
Madam chair and representative
and experts that.
Twenty three days for the end of
the session.
We're still hearing well.
Maybe this is not the solution.
Maybe this is not part of the
solution.
I heard in public comments that
people of color will get swept
up people of color are the ones
asking for the receipts.
Working for minimum wage which
by the way probably needs
entire.
And yet.
And yet.
We.
Risk not finding a solution.
Madam chair I'm gonna ask that
these good people at the witness
table meet with those who said
they oppose this bill and anyone
from this committee but as a
problem.
Which part of the language to
fix this.
No one is going to get tagged
for stealing five candy bars.
No one is.
It's the guy suing I drill from
the home people of course and I
forty only to drive across to
review bank home people just to
another five drills and flash a
gun as he's walking out of the
store to somebody's grandma
probably a woman of color who is
working for twelve dollars an
hour because that's all we can
pay.
And I'm sorry I get provided.
But in action is not the
solution.
And I will not sit here.
And allow for hypotheticals are
wild.
To the rail.
A process that has been a long
time coming going all the way
back to Representative right.
So madam chair respectfully I
will request that the sponsoring
the experts go to the room next
door with whoever it is I need
to go into and figure out what
language we're gonna put in here
and come back with the
substitute bill.
At the next available time thank
you.
Thank you speaker I do have a
few more people on the list
first Representative Chasey then
Representative night and then
Representative McQueen had a
question but it may be much Mr
Representative my claim is going
into the room but I will let
just one question before we
conclude so Representative
Chasey thank you madam chair.
And
Representative I I share the
frustration the speaker just
Expressed but we did talk about
this in courts corrections and
justice system and we were
trying to figure out a solution
to avoid jet double jeopardy or
the
The.
And I I apologize I've had to go
in and out because I've been
needing to talk to the Senate
finance people for other buyers
that I need to be putting out
But.
The issue of of having
I could charge for stealing
candy bars so but I had got an
email today from the public
defender's office saying that
they're the simple solution
might be to put it felony
shoplifting under racketeering
and I don't know if that solves
your problem but that is I
wondered if that had been
discussed while I was out of the
room Representative yes it was
brought up by Representative
Sapan ski actually I believe
that okay that was what your
question to our okay.
If there is an elegant solution
so that in fact the district
attorneys can charge that.
I know you need for them to be
able to charge yes thank you
madam chair Mr Mr Solomon
response sure I briefly yes that
madam chair representative that
adding shoplifting is a
predicate offence and in
racketeering was part of the
amendment that was accepted so
sweet thank you.
Okay
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative
The speaker more eloquently said
what I was intended to say that
was it seems to me.
But there are some pretty good
mines up here and down there
that could probably get the same
whipped into a format that would
be acceptable we all recognize
that we have.
Problem that frankly.
Has to be dealt with last year
the year before but certainly
this year and I would hate to
see us.
Move this down a year or two
from now before we do anything
so I will I too would encourage
you to.
What some of these good minds we
up prosecutors got others that I
think could.
Get a product that is not going
to be subject to a lot of
concerns and we could get this
cross the finish line if we act
quickly like we did
Representative Cadena is bill
earlier today at and she got
together with the number of us
we got it knocked out so I would
encourage the sponsor to.
Thank you bye so the speaker and
work with the some of us and
let's get this thing done thank
you madam thank you
Representative McQueen you had
one final question I said I
accommodate thank you madam
chair my question of the Senator
Representative Mr solvent.
Click the certainly concerning
that you can't charge arm
robbery someone flashes again
uses account on their way up.
Presumably that's assault with a
deadly weapon.
Madam chair representative
correct instead of being a
second agree on property to say
fourth degree aggravated assault
punishable by up to eighteen
months.
Thank you mentor thank you so
what I hear is there is a
request that we that you
consider rolling the bill and
working with with others to
tighten up the language is is
kind of what I'm hearing so I'll
just to conclude I am always
very skeptical like I think a
few of my colleagues about
creating new crimes.
I do think there may be a whole
hear that warrant some
consideration in terms of
tightening things up because of
these you know organized efforts
to at Drake going to resell
establishments and and you take
out a lot of merchandise so I am
open to considering such a pro
to he got some suggestions here
I'm certain if you reach out to
the public at turn defender's
office they'd be happy to work
with you let me know if that's
not the case but I think it will
be the case and there many
members here I thought
Representative reed had a lot of
great insights given her
experience and I'm advocating
should be happy to help as well
so thank you very good
discussion and appreciate the
work you're doing on this bill
thank you we'll see you again
I'm sure.
We are working off the committee
madam chair we're working out
the committee says is that.
Of and it is kind of understand
where I am procedure we do it
well we are with you I believe
we have an amended bill and then
you offered an amendment not
just up so you have an amended
bill okay thank you very.
So yes and.
Probably might be cleaner to
bring us up back if you do come
back with some changes okay
thank you very much thanks a lot
thank you for your committee
thank you for.
We have our last item on the
agenda with that we had
they were available to the over
the of a lot now the last is in.
No such luck Representative.
For
the motion yes so we have I
don't think I can do what you
did twice today.
I'm worried about you now.
Representative read
we have house joint resolution.
And I'll avail Representative re
join me okay his license.
And second.
Right.
Are you ready chair I am ready
we are ready thank you thank you
madam chair members of the
committee
My co sponsor Representative
Rehm and I are here to present
our house joint resolution nine
which is basically a joint
resolution where we're trying to
allow
the issue of bail to go back
onto the ballot for voters to
look at
in November eight in November
eighth of two thousand sixteen
there was a proposed amendment
article two section thirteen
which read it would allow bail
to be denied for a defendant who
was charged with a felony if the
prosecutor can prove to a judge
that the defendant poses a
threat to the public it would
also provide the defendant who
is not a danger to the community
or a flight risk cannot be
denied bail solely because of
the defendant's financial
inability to post a money or
property bond and I think
everybody remembers madam chair
members of the committee when
this was on the ballot
I myself and I think many others
that have expressed concern to
me made people believe that they
were voting for something that
would actually give judges more
discretion in holding people
holding people are dangerous
criminals in jail and in fact it
really actually did the opposite
so this house joint resolution
nine brings back the ability to
Lao the judge even in magistrate
court to set conditions of
release for dangerous
individuals are for individuals
who keep committing crimes while
on release and for criminals who
fail to comport it also
discusses that excess bail shall
not be the state the state's
excess bill should not be
required but bail may be denied
pending trial after hearing if
the court finds by clear and
convincing evidence no release
conditions will reasonably
ensure that appears of a person
or protected the community
so what this does is it gives
the proposed amendment would
give judges the power to keep
those who need to remain behind
bars so they're waiting for
trial from the community.
in addition another big thing it
does is is I think one on
intentional thing from the
amendment was that you had non
violent criminals getting
arrested let's Santa Friday or
Thursday and they might not have
a first appearance until the
next week and there was no bond
that could be placed on them so
if you got picked up for a
criminal trespass on Friday you
would sit in jail all weekend
until Monday in order to get in
front of a judge and actually
get your your bond posted where
is originally you could just get
a bail bondsman and get right
out of jail and so that that
took away that that issue also
C. were allowing I guess non
nonviolent offenders to be being
held up for no reason whatsoever
so what I like about this is
that it does take it back to the
voters because I think there are
a lot of people and people in
the state if you aren't happy
with pre trial detention and
want to have the ability for
bonds to be posted to deal with
people who are repeat offenders
for Committee twenty burglaries
and then can be put back in jail
by a magistrate when there's
another burglary or in addition
if they violate their conditions
of release
and we also can then have
sureties back in place if the
the citizens vote on it to where
when people do fail to appear
for multiple cases you can you
can actually go out and find
these people and bring them back
to court and get these
individuals picked up I know
there was a fiscal report at it
said it would lead to more work
for everybody my eight disagree
with that members of the
committee madam chair because it
it really simply is not the case
of pre trial detention is what's
really led to a lot of work
there so much prep in making
sure those documents are filed
the discoveries dealt with where
is when you go back to the
system that we we were.
Under the measure court
addresses conditions of release
at their first appearance and
they whether it's a misdemeanor
let's if it's let's say if it's
a felony they go back in for
prelim their conditions of
release are dressed again and
then we go to provide over back
up to District Court and there's
an arrangement the conditions of
release or drastic and so
they're getting lots of
different chances to address his
conditions of release and
describe why if somebody's
indigent they should not
actually have like a no bond or
high cash bond so I think it
actually is less work for
district attorneys offices of
public defenders because the
requires less violent emotions
and actually paperwork for pre
trial detentions the pre trial
detention hearings madam chair
and Representative are extremely
costly we have to put one
secretary loan on those when I
was at the DA's office we have
to put one attorney alone on
those that we didn't even have
the staffing for so it's it's a
really complicated issue so
that's why I think it's
important at this actually go
back on the ballot and let's let
the voters decide of so that's
what I have to say about it but
I would defer to my co sponsor
Representative ring ring madam
chair I ask D. A. Sam Bregman to
give us an example of what
he's seeing down and in his area
I go to the the second bolded
area an examination of twenty
eight hundred and forty five
give finance with that night pre
detention motions of showed
approximately one in five of the
release defendants were charged
with the new offense committed
while their original pre trial
detention motion is still
pending to date these office
offenses comprise eight hundred
forty seven cases forty nine
per.
That which are violent and then
he gave the examples on the next
few pages of
of several of these individuals
You know I'd rather you go ahead
look through it or I could read
every one of them but I think if
actually seen this document
before Representative in okay
other conversation on a similar
issue I remember correctly so
thank you for that I appreciate
it
so before we come back to the
committee I'd like to go to the
audience those wishing to speak
in opposition to the proposal
please raise your hand.
Bear in.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee hi my
name is Barron Jones I'm
representing the ACLU of New
Mexico because I started because
I I get a lot of north and I
talk of guests on some of these
bills but I have advised the
most heinous crimes in the world
including watching my older
brother you murder several my
friends have been murdered I've
been project and we opposes
legislation because we believe
that it is return the state back
to the two tier bill system way
that is so destructive to New
Mexico communities and families
and we believe that
while there this is to be
addressed we just have to be a
bit more creative than locking
people up the wrong way issues
that have a motion so thank you
all please go this is the fifth
thank you.
Anyone else in the audience
wishing to speak in opposition
anyone online wishing to speak
in opposition.
Okay.
So let's start with Jonathan.
Thank you chair thank you my
name is Jonathan Ibarra again
public defender and the vice
president of the New Mexico
criminal defense lawyers
association I.
Very much oppose this amendment
it has a number of issues I
think it's bad policy to have I
mean there's a reason why
there's a reason why we went
with the interest agency and not
slight risk that originally the
bail can already be set the
rules allow for bail to be set
on cases where there's a concern
about a flight risk there's this
will cause I think I'm kind of
just stand by by Representative
re saying that this will help
with detention hearings when
this will absolutely because.
Hundreds more detention hearings
all the time
it it would cause significantly
more of these types of hearings
that have to happen very quickly
I think you know with having
magistrate courts where they're
not courts of record having
being able to yield those
because appeals under these
types of things are record
appeals that have to happen
quickly and we don't have that
ability I just think there's
there's so many problems with
this.
With this particular resolution
I I I just I can't even begin to
guess all of them except for the
fact that it will cause a whole
lot more people to be sitting in
jail costing the taxpayers money
it will cause a whole lot more
people to not be in the
community where they can be
working and and doing that sort
of thing costing the taxpayers
money it's it's just problematic
from front to back thank you
thank you Cathy Rocke.
Madam chair members of the
committee on Cathy Rocke I'm
speaking on behalf of the league
of women voters New Mexico of
the eight supports alternatives
to incarceration our concerns
that that data that's been
presented their conflicting sets
of data on the extent to which
increase the tension would to
reduce crime and in particularly
violent crime.
Our our jails many of our jails
are already understaffed calling
into question our ability to
handle additional detainees
properly.
those who are detained are not
necessarily convicted of the
charges for which they were
detained and never the less
their lives employment families
have been disrupted by detention
so we would encourage you to
vote now on H. J. R. nine thank
you for your time thank you
anyone else wishing to speak in
opposition that looks like
that's all anyone in the
audience wishing to speak in
support of the bill.
I don't see anyone.
Anyone online wishing to speak
in support of the bill please
raise your hand okay I see
Carla.
Carla.
Hi good afternoon madam chairman
and members of the committee
it's Leri Sonntag years.
Speaking on behalf of part of
the New Mexico business
coalition in support of H. J. R.
nine.
Out repeat offenders who are
being released under the current
rules are wreaking havoc and
while some would argue it's
maybe a small percentage that go
back and re offend.
I won't go through the the
stories of those who have been
killed or otherwise seriously
hurt because they they've been
in the news enough to know we
have a problem.
And for those argue that there's
already a system in place to
allow for bail that certainly
true.
But it is not working and the
bill reform that was passed
through a constitutional
amendment as this bill sponsor
mention indeed had some
uncertainties with what people
are voting for the need to
reform.
And the ability for denial of
bail and the worst circumstances
that too that's this bill is
targeting allowing voters to go
back and have another state
we're not talking about people
that are being released to go to
work and be a productive member
of the community we're talking
about a repeat violent offenders
who have a record of repeat
recidivism and in fact we have
numerous examples where they
have within weeks of being
released on bail kids or
otherwise injured New Mexicans
we urge you to support H. J. R.
nine and give voters another
chance at bill reform thank you
thank you
JD Bullington.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee this is JD
Bullington speaking on behalf
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce madam chair members of
the committee if violent
criminals happen to get arrested
they usually face no immediate
consequences in the Albuquerque
area prosecutors moved to detain
defendants in just sixteen
percent of felony cases and even
among the most serious cases
judges released half of those
people pre trial twice a day
police arrest someone who has
been released pre trial for
committing a new crime.
Policy of pre trial release is
creating new victims every day
it's just not working.
Later Albuquerque chamber of
commerce supports this
resolution because the gesture
judiciary cannot continue to be
the sole overseer of this issue
area this resolution would
ensure the legislature has a
seat at the table to provide
direction I would pre trial
detention is appropriate thank
you.
Thank you JT
anyone else online wishing to
speak in opposition I don't see
anyone else online so just go
back to sponsor anything to
conclude before we go to the
committee.
Madam chair the only thing I
would say is it is number one
issue in my constituents is the
repeat offenders and you know I
was here when we passed the bill
will bond amendment and it was
promised that that would fix it
it hasn't done that thank you
madam chair thank you
Members of the committee
questions.
I'm looking at you
Representative Representative
McQueen and I'm looking at you
Representative Oaklawn I don't
wanna miss you this time I'm
will I know you are.
Clear Representative
We have the presentation on this
issue
from the administrative office
of the courts.
Him that they had.
Thorough
detailed.
information with statistical
analysis.
And I think this issue.
Is not what it's been made out
to be.
I think receiving
The input from the Albuquerque
district attorney.
You know.
Singling out a small number of
individuals is not as reliable
as the details to school
information we were given.
And I'm just not convinced that
this is.
The solution to the the crime
problem that we all acknowledge.
So I I I me I just I'm not ready
to put this to the voters thank
you madam chair thank you
Representative vocal thank you
madam chair it was the whole
dad's.
Over and over again it to the
same people.
Come into the courtroom over and
over again.
It said bond on them over and
over and over again the bonds
men would bottom out of it.
I never made news that this
survey.
I wanted to distance from the
group division.
Thank you happening everyday.
That the develop that.
This because somebody paid bail.
Does that mean they're not
committing crime.
That's what we're trying to do
here we're trying to say that we
have available on demand we have
somebody that's responsible for
that not going to commit crimes.
this is not going to happen.
Because like I say over and over
again even the same bonded was
caring for three bonds on the
same person.
Over and over again.
Somebody who has enough cash
would pay.
Your forecast bond for himself
or herself.
So the and it's not that it was
just what magistrates court.
Some of these people were in
different courts throughout the
whole state.
So I I'd like.
If you're pregnant that's five
people were six people are
really horrible.
But.
That the only people of the
world that that I would do.
That settlement payment madam
chair I I I really don't think.
That this is the way to go to go
back to that old system begin
that honestly it wasn't working.
And at least now the judges have
to make a decision if they send
somebody home well this is a
buddy home but we've had at
least.
Of the like I said if there's
nobody taking care of those
people at paid cash for freedom
on demand they were doing their
own thing anyway.
So I just can't see where we're
going from here and the I don't
know how to phrase that into
question Mr affinity Reba you
can enter of were thank you
madam chair Representative I I I
do understand what you're saying
but what what I recall and I'm
sure all jurisdictions are
different
I think one thing having a bonds
and does it our bondsmen at
least in the area I practice and
would go and pick up these
individuals and one off their
bonds what the one thing it did
do was stop that revolving door
of a prosecutor and it that a
person he was out committee and
twenty burglaries and put them
back in jail to where we could
actually get a hold on their
cases and save the taxpayers a
ton of money because we could
usually result that in a plea
well they were not committing
twenty more burglaries so it was
very easy for or judge could
decide on their own whether to
actually just revoke bond and
and basically not give them a
bond or give them a high cash
bond there are a lot of options
it gave magistrates and also
District Court judges so while I
understand your point
Representative madam chair I I
disagree because I start
practicing in nineteen ninety
six and I've seen this get from
worst worst worst worst why
retired last year and the only
thing that's changed is pre
trial detention and when you go
in on pre trial detention and
you're asking a prosecutor to
basically prove a negative that
there are no conditions that
will reasonably protect society
I mean I I think Madam chair
representative we just have to
look at where we are right now
and this isn't working and the
majority of New Mexico doesn't
believe it's working so why not
give it back to the voters and
let them make that decision
respectfully Madam chair
representative and madam chair.
You know the only guarantees
that the bonds but had.
Was that that person would be
there in court that's the only
thing that bothers person just
to get rid of the.
That that person goes back to
court the thought is that small
version does not have to
guarantee that the that the
defendant is not going to become
one of the.
Okay the.
Tax money that that person rate
that the guarantees that
versions with the government of
these people live with the
guarantees that they're and
what.
What and the only thing that for
food.
The bond.
They failed to appear.
Madam chair representative
respectively I've seen bonds
then come up to me and say this
guy just got arrested again and
we signed off and I want to be
office bond I've seen that
hundreds of times.
So I ate I don't know I I
understand your argument and but
I think there's another side to
it the the Madam chair
representative setting off on
the bond does that mean if that
anything happened all of the
month is that by the minutes
alone are responsible for that
person.
That person is still out there
on the streets.
So I think honestly.
I think we need to let the
dentists do their job.
And the it's.
That in my mind that.
In the few years without the
does.
The move.
And know if there but.
But I mean so that everybody
else.
But the I think the this the.
Representative Mike Zabel the
benefits are not all that
horrible.
So sometimes you have to.
Play it by ear and this you have
seven people here that's the
reason that this not two
thousand people that didn't make
this list.
Madam chair absolutely
Representative I would I would
say that when the bonds been
does asked to get off the bonnet
they go to jail and they have to
go back in front of it generally
District Court judge in that
District Court judge will
generally in my experience keep
them in which does save that
next person from being a victim
of a crime or possibly possibly
actually committed another crime
that's exactly it madam chair
the bonds then asked to get off
the bond.
Who asked you will find that
person.
Madam chair representative the
bonds then we'll go bring that
person in to the court the
bondsman could not find that
person that's why you want off
the bond so therefore law
enforcement has to go out
looking for this person after
the judge issues warrant Madam
chair representative right they
they don't want to be
responsible for the money that
they put down but they also
don't want them to be arrested
again and and then basically be
responsible for any else or any
other crime they may commit so
we always work for the bonds and
they would call Madam chair
representative of state
discussed at committing crimes I
don't want to be a part of this
because he's getting get in
trouble ensure they have a
monetary interest in it but
actually benefits the
communities to in life in my
view.
And then a vote
of Representative Alkon I've
seen the bondsmen and our county
actually bring them to the
detention center and rebook
command and get off the bond the
and and and madam chair that is
correct sometimes like I said
earlier but then again most of
the time.
it is the judge has to issue a
warrant.
And the law enforcement festival
out looking for these people Hey
and that you know
at my last book madam chair if
you don't know how many times I
thought it'd be the judge I
should be the bonds that they
make some money thank you madam
chair.
Thank Representative of anyone
else Representative Eli thank
you madam chair.
Of so madam chair the read of
this proposed constitutional
amendment one of the changes I
see isn't
of an additional standard for
the court to be able to detain
someone pending trial and that's
what I would you know in common
parlance described as a flight
risk is that right.
Madam chair representative yes
can you explain why that needs
to be added as a as an
individual
option for a judge to retain
some of pre trial yeah madam
chair and Representative Lane of
in the use of the pre trial
detention motion one of the
things that uses the Arnold pool
there are three components of
the Arnold tool one component is
his past history of appearing in
court or not appearing in court
and his flight risk
unfortunately on the Arnolds
tool we're only using two
components and we don't use that
last component.
Madam chair so at one of from my
perspective one of the things
that the current constitutional
provision Mrs I think it it
loops and violent criminals
because we're talking about the
safety but what it doesn't do is
in my from my perspective is
Lupin career criminals who are
nonviolent.
And that's just as much an issue
we just got done talking about
retail crime
and so you know that's.
That right there I think is is
reason enough to consider this
change
I think we we've got to get
serious about tackling career
criminals.
for going to curb.
The crime issues that we have in
our state and you know it at it
is mildly frustrating me that
we're.
You know we're coming down to
twenty something days left them
and we still haven't done
anything to address what many
New Mexicans fills a problem
with our pre trial release
system I see this is a viable
option.
so I I hope it passes on this
committee thank you madam chair.
One else.
I'm a little confused by the it
does this bring Representative
bring it back to the the the way
the constitution read prior to
twenty sixteen.
No madam chair and
representative madam chair no it
doesn't it takes a more back to
put the federal law is and
there's a lot of case law on on
how that works.
So what I found a little
perplexing in our conversation
was there was a lot of emphasis
on re offending but in our
conversation and and the
discussion and and re offending
on in a violent way re offending
by you know shoplifting or what
all these various kinds of
things that of course our
important things to be concerned
about but they're not violent
and they're not not appearing
but.
We're instead we're amending the
constitution to talk about
whether or not the person might
be a flight risk but the
conversation we're having is
about people who are recidivists
so I'm trying to understand how
this amendments gonna address
recidivism people who are
chronically food service because
it doesn't seem to address it to
me.
Madam chair I would I would take
you to the simple sincere you're
seeing individuals arrested for
auto theft released and then
arrested for murder but they're
not there if.
Senator they're not flight risks
because they were re arrested
obviously they were obtained
they were available.
So that's what I'm trying to get
a I don't believe this
accomplishes what you contended
accomplices
and just as a I
worked at the legislature when
twenty six in the twenty sixteen
when you know Justice.
Daniels was active and others
were very active in what I
remember was the people who were
coming to propose these those
amendments they were the
prosecutors of course and you
know people who have genuine
concerns but it was filled with
a bail bondsman.
That that's what it was they
were opposing the change that
was being proposed because it
with those folks are preying on
people and that's what they did
and I was musing to myself
because Mr do you should I get a
lot of people come to see me I
would I'm begetting cards left
from bail bondsman.
And I've been wondering I
thought I better has some to do
with this constitutional stuff
we're looking at and I think
that was a horrible system it
preyed on people.
And I would do not want to go
back to a system where we're
relying on for profit companies
to do essentially what is a law
enforcement function that is
make sure people appear so I
cannot support this amendment on
a number of spaces I don't think
it achieves what you would chief
and it just brings back that
whole horrendous system of bonds
mentoring on poor people so
anyone else have a common
question.
I'm happy to entertain a motion.
Yes Representative vocal.
Okay yes.
Jobs.
Lucien.
Nine.
That was nine one yes it's nine
nine we have a motion to table
the proposed a resolution would
you call the roll Senator
Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane no to table.
Mr speaker.
The.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert.
Nine.
It's.
Thank you Representative read.
Representative Rehm no ma'am.
Representative Penske yes.
Madam vice chair.
Madam chair yes.
Madam chair you have five yeses
and Ford knows with the table of
H. J. R. nine thank you your on
resolutions but tabled.
Thank you.
You're welcome okay
I think we are we are done for
today and look forward to seeing
you on Friday we are.
