Is.
Representative Lane.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Alcon.
Representative green of here
meant by your amero here chair
Chandler here.
You have a poor yes thank you we
have two items for consent that
I'd like the the committee to
concur with one of them is
Senate bill three thirteen
relating to children and acting
the revised interstate compact
on the placement of children.
Didn't I say the thing about
also sorry.
No well we're I'm probably
income here and at this point
Senate bill three fifteen yes
Representative madam chair I
make a motion that we do it to
pass on the Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill nineteen and two fifty two
and a do pass on Senate bill
three one five year ahead of me
Representative.
Do we have a second second.
And this is on consent so
there's no discussion would you
call the roll.
Representative semansky yes.
Representative read.
Representative Nibert.
Representative McQueen yes.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative Lane
Representative Chasey yes
Representative Alcon.
Representative Rehm yes.
Vice chair Meryl yes chair
Chandler yes.
Five seven zero so we thank you
very much we have passed
hello Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bills
nineteen and two fifty two and
Senate bill three fifty three
fifty.
And we have no other business so
hi we are returning this meeting
thank you very much you want.
