My goal is to go through kind
of.
How we operate
Introduce people, um, answer
questions.
Talk about the schedule, that
kind of thing, so why don't we
start by taking a role, so, um,
I'll ask Karen, who is our one
of our committee assistants,
Karen.
Um, to do that.
Representative Abaha.
Present
Representative Chavez.
Present
Representative Hull.
Present
Representative Hoffman B. Hill.
Representative Martinez.
Yeah.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen.
Representative Ree
Here
Representative S Sapansky.
Here.
Madam Vice Chair.
Madam Chair
Here we have a quorum, um, so I
thought we'd start with each
member introducing
Themselves and then we'll have
the staff introduce themselves
and then we can talk about some.
items, so why don't we start at
the end with Representative
around this way.
Madam Chair, Alan Martinez.
Representative for House
District 23, which is the
northern part.
Riorentcho in the western part
of the Tunbr.
Good morning, good afternoon
now. My name is Nicole Chavis.
I'm the representative of
District 31 in the far northeast
heights of Albuquerque.
Good Afternoon, I'm Matthew
McQueen, House District 50.
That's the southern half of
Santa Fe County in the Placitas
area in County.
Um, I'm in my 11th year in the
legislature.
You
Good afternoon everyone, Rena
Sapansky representing House
District for um really pleased
to be here.
Uh, Madam Chair, I'm Andrew Reid
and the representative from
District 64, which is Curry,
Roosevelt, and Chavez, which is
Clovis, Portalis and Roswell.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, I'm Bill Hall from
representing District 3 San Juan
County, which is Aztec,
Bloomfield in the eastern side
of San Juan County.
Great to be here.
And I'm Representative Christine
Chandler. I'm from Los Alamos. I
represent.
All of Los Alamos, parts of
Santa Fe and parts of Sandoval
County.
I'm the chair of this committee.
I think this will be my 3rd year
chairing that happen.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Good
afternoon, everyone. My name is
Michelle Beta, and I'm
represented representing
District 69, which the six
counties listed here, and if you
could think of Mount Taylor and
extended open arms, that's my
district. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative and uh
Representative Hoffman V Hill.
Very much, Madam Chairman,
members of the committee,
everyone here, I'm Jay Hoffman
B. Hill, a state representative
District 15, North Valley of
Albuquerque. Thanks for
Everything Happy to be here.
Well, great. As I said, I'm
really excited. Why don't we
start um with Karen, you can
introduce yourself.
Hi. My name is Karen Romero.
This is my 2nd year with the
legislature and my 2nd year with
a judiciary, and I'm excited to
work with all of you guys.
We have 2 support folks over
here, if you could tell us who
you are and what you do, that
would be helpful.
Welcome. Glad to have you,
gentlemen in the back are 2, we
have 2 attendants or 3.
Share with us who's gonna be
supporting us as our attendants.
Oh, OK, great. All right. Is
that everyone?
OK. Anyone else who's gonna be
supporting the committee?
All right, and, um,
representative Romero, you've
joined us. Thank you, Madam
Chair. So great to see everybody
and I'm glad we're starting on
time this year.
Um, my bad, um, Representative
Andrea Ro
northern Santa Fe County House
District 46, um, from the Wake
Valley, uh, through to the city
of Espanola, um, city of Santa
Fe, from, uh, and we represent
for solving problems.
Well, I'm, I'm thrilled to have
Andrea a representative Romero
back as my vice chair, um, so
we, we have, I, I can tell we
have a great committee I've
worked with some of you over the
summer, some of you in past
sessions, a couple new people,
but I'm really confident that
we're gonna do well all well
together and we have.
great backgrounds to support um
our colleagues uh through the
judiciary Committee, so just a
few, so I'll talk about a few
things. There's a list going
around where I'm asking you for
your your preferred email and
your phone numbers um.
Phone numbers are especially
important cuz we'll put together
a text group text, so I can let
you know if we're running late
on a meeting or you know, some
kind bit of it, I have found
that people tend to look at
their text messages more often
than maybe their email, so
that's gonna happen and that's
we'll construct that list and
we'll be through that mechanism.
This committee meets Monday,
Wednesdays and Fridays in the
afternoons, but we also meet
often on Saturdays and at some
point we will get to a place
where our where our workload is
such that we will be meeting on
Saturdays and um, you know,
trying to do the work of of um
the legislature, so that's not
unusual. Um, we have a rule. I'm
just going through some
administrative stuff, so we have
a rule if people.
want to amend a bill, and often
we get amendments to bills that
we're gonna be hearing. We, we
request that they come to us 24
hours in advance and that allows
us to get the proposed amendment
um into the system and out to
the members, um.
So speaking along those lines, I
have to remind myself every year
of this, but we have a share
file.
through something we call, I
think citrix.
So what happens is our agendas
and the bills that we are going
to be hearing or put in the
system through citrix in advance
of our meeting and you all will
be given access to that if you
haven't already, probably those
of us who are incumbents should,
should have access. So remember,
be checking citrix um or uh
analyses are in citrix, so the
committee analysis will be put
in citrix.
Ye are individual majority
minority analysis. And sometimes
department, you know, reports
are put in the agency reports I
think are put in as well. So
just be aware, I forget about it
every year, but um that's how
you, you wanna keep up to date
in terms on, um.
So that's one point I want to
make up to you, yes, uh
representative Queen
Madam Chair, on that point, um.
A couple of years ago, the
legislature passed a rule.
That
In keeping with the 24 hour rule
that most house observed.
Um, when a
Uh, amendment or a committee sub
is made available to the
committee. It will also be
posted on.
Um, that rule was not enforced
in the last session, uh, due to
objections from the council
service.
Uh, we have clarified those
objections.
I'm being told that that rule
will be enforced.
So that's a new practice.
That's great. OK.
And that happened to have been,
so that's why you remember it so
well.
Um,
So, um, you, you heard reference
from Rosemary that she's like
that we have committee analysts,
so that that is, those are
committee reports that are done
in a nonpartisan way, so that's
the committee on analysis and
then each side has their own um
partisan analysis, so we have
the Democrats and we just met
one of our Republican analysts.
Everybody gets along great.
Everybody shares information.
It's our intent to make sure
information gets out to everyone
in a timely way.
If that doesn't happen, I would
like to know about it, and I
would ask that you make the
assumption it's not intentional
cause it's not, um, we.
Strive very hard to make sure
there's a level playing field
and everybody has the
information. Um.
Let's see what else um.
We are having a special meeting
tomorrow.
Uh, it starts at 2 o'clock.
Wherein we will be briefed.
I, the Supreme Court justice and
others, you know, staff
undoubtedly will be in
attendance on the status of the
5 pilot projects that we funded
in our special session. That's
kind of the centerpiece of this
meeting. I've asked staff um to
prepare.
Uh, um, a presentation to us
before the Chief Justice
presentation where they simply
give us a little tutorial on
what assisted outpatient
treatment is and what civil
commitment is just so everybody
has the same foundation. Some of
us who were meeting during the
summer through CCJ got a lot of
information on that and probably
are well versed in it, but you
know, just to make sure we're
we're more or less on the same,
um, you know, have the same
basis to be making decisions,
we're gonna have a, you know,
half an hour type overview from
a Megan Dorsey and I believe
Cameron, um.
Is going to from the Senate is
going to give us that briefing.
I think it is going to be in the
house chambers, but I need to
confirm and I'll, I'll let you
all know. If not, we can do it
probably in this meeting room
and.
I, I had hoped that maybe the
Senate might be joining us, but
apparently that's not Senate
Judiciary might be joining us,
apparently that's not possible.
So we may do, um, but I, I
think, you know, we're gonna
have a very busy session, uh,
this year, this is no news to
you, uh, you've been reading
about it, I'm sure and you've
been talking to your respective
leaders, you know, we are going
to be focusing on.
Of public safety.
Criminal competency, you know,
those sorts of things and it's
likely we'll be to try to
develop some crime package on
the house side that we can get
hopefully wide and general.
Bipartisan support for that we
can send. I'm still trying to
think through how we're gonna do
the package and all. I'm gonna
be speaking with the speaker,
obviously, and, and my, um,
ranking member representative
Reed, I'm hoping to have a good
collaborative relationship.
With her as I did with um
Representative Rehm, um, so
hopefully we're, you know, we're
all gonna be, we're not gonna
agree with each other on
everything.
But I think we're gonna agree
and interact with one another.
I, I, I sense that right away,
and I know many of you have done
that in the past and we're gonna
have a collaborative, but not
always.
In lockstep, and that's
understood and accepted and
everyone's gonna to respect
everyone's points of view.
Um, so did I miss anything?
Anyone have any questions that I
didn't touch on.
We are having our committee
dinner on January twenty-ninth.
6 p.m.
get the details in terms of
place.
The like
Trying to get to our dinner
early because we have new
members and also, and we won't
get distracted when we have a
lot of bills sitting waiting for
us to be working on, um.
So
Anything else I missed.
Questions, any comments? I'm
happy to listen to suggestions.
We do run fairly.
Tight meetings, meaning often we
of course encourage public
participation.
Uh, but we will make sure
there's, you know,
evenhandedness in terms of how
much time people are, and I do
time people and I do a lot a
certain amount of time for
members who wish to give us of
the public who wish to give us
input, we're interested, um, but
we also need to do the business
of the committee.
