is our consent calendar, very
exciting. We.
We have one bill, um, frankly,
I've forgotten how we do it.
Yeah, all right, well.
Typically, it means that the
majority and the minority have
conferred their comfortable move
passing the bill out by consent,
so I think, why don't we just
accept a motion to approve
Senate Bill 124A and I think
that will cover us, OK?
All right, I'll move to Peru.
Very good. All right, let's call
the roll on the consent
calendar.
Representative Abeta.
Representative Chavez, yes.
Representative Hall.
Representativeachman B. Hill.
Yes.
Represented Martinez, yes.
Speaker Martinez, Representative
McQueen.
Representative Reed, yes.
Peter Sapansky.
Madam Vice Chair, yes.
Madam Chair,
Yes.
Madame Chair Dupe, Senate Bill
124 is amended. OK, so I'm, I'm
gonna just touch on a few
housekeeping things. So, for
tomorrow we had scheduled Senate
Bill 81. That is going to be
rolled to Monday, but in its
place, we are putting in um
Senate House Bill 586, OK? And
that is a hospital consolidation
bill, OK, and that's spy agree.
of the majority and the minority
of on the committee, all right?
Um, we
There was a bill that we
received House Bill 386, we
received a late amendment, and I
never heard back from the
sponsor as to whether he wanted
to roll it? Did he wanna move
forward?
Without the amendment, I just
don't know if he's playing.
It's on today's calendar, um,
it, it's Hernandez, Bill.
369. Yeah.
Uh, we're OK with the late
amendment, or, well, that's
fine, but no one told me they
were OK with it, including
Yeah, and I never heard back
from the sponsor.
Planning on me.
OK.
OK.
OK.
OK, well, I, I hope we're all
gonna be equally good with
amendments going forward
No, we're not. OK. I mean, I'm
just saying, you know how this
plays out, you know, this.
Yeah, cause sometimes we agree
to roll. I'm just saying.
What's good for the goose is
good for the gander, and we're
gonna be having these come up
and I want to make sure
everybody's treated consistently
going forward, OK, very good.
Um
Yeah, and, and occasionally
we're OK with that, but I just,
if it's a big amendment, then
we're gonna have to talk about
it. OK. So, um, next on our item
on our agenda is uh House Bill
348, water law violation
penalty, and we have
representative Ortiz.
Um, the floor is yours,
Representative Ortez. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you, members
of the committee. I'm here to
present a House Bill 348, um,
this is to address the no fun
issue of water theft. No problem
at all. Uh, the bill, I'm just
trying to be funny, um, Madam
Chair, the bill strengthens our
water laws by increasing
penalties for violations and
improving enforcement measures
right now, there's a penalty of
$100 a day uh for water theft,
uh, that was in.
composed in 1907, so it has been
a uh a bit of time uh since
we've addressed this issue, uh,
this bill increases the penalty
to $2000 a day and will adjust
annually for inflation, but the
bill also allows penalties to
begin accruing uh from the time
that the Office of the State
Engineer provides notice of a
violation. Uh, those penalties
accrue, uh, but they aren't
collected until a compliance
order uh becomes final after a
hearing.
Together these changes uh
reinforce the importance of
responsible water use and
hopefully will deter violations
that could threaten our limited
water resources, and I have two
experts uh with me today, Madam
Chair, um, Liz Elizabeth
Anderson, our new uh state
engineer and Nat Jaris who is
the legal counsel.
At the office of State Engineer
and Madam Chair, we do have an
amendment.
Would you like go ahead.
Move the amendment for
discussion, so moved.
It would be helpful to hear the
202 number. Madam Chair, that
202 number is 231917.1. OK,
that's what we have, right?
You'd like to explain the
amendment. That's, I will. Um,
so the amendment changes two
parts of the bill, um, that, um,
issues that were addressed by
stakeholders in previous um
hearings, uh, first, uh, the
Pecos Valley Artesian
Conservancy District were
concerned about uh that the
previous version of the bill
would have done away with the
requirement that compliance
orders be uh be served by
certified mail, um, I think the
OSC thought that um,
Sometimes sortertified mail
isn't possible in rural areas,
but in this amendment we bring
back, uh, the, the compliance
orders will be served by
certified mail, um, and but the
OSC can also serve in other
ways, if that isn't possible.
The second change um arises out
of comments in the Senate
Conservation Committee where a
companion bill was heard, uh,
the bill, this bill includes a
safe harbor provision designed
to protect farmers and ranchers
who may over divert on their
water rights.
but have no other violations um
from being subject to high
monetary penalties, so, um, what
we heard was that the provision
was unclear, uh, and so this
amendment
clarifies that.
And with that, Madame Chair,
we'll stand for questions.
OK, um, let's go to the
audience, those wishing to
speak.
In opposition to the bill,
please approach the gentleman
with the microphone.
I don't see anyone.
Those online wishing to speak in
opposition.
to the bill, please raise your
hand.
I don't see any hands raised.
Oh, I see one hand raised. Um,
someone named Sanders.
And if you would limit your
remarks to one minute, please.
Can you hear me? Yes. Oh, sorry,
my phone said it my mean my
screen said it was muted, um, my
name is DL Sanders. I'm the
former chief legal counsel for
the state Engineer, um, and I'm
just a big I represent John in
Mexico, uh, who is interested in
this particular bill, uh, but I
also represent the city of Las
Vegas and EBID, um, among other
individuals, but in this
particular instance, we have a
small aquifer down in southeast
New Mexico, um, and then we also
have the larger aquifer.
the, uh, and so both of those
aquifers we have rights in.
There's a very limited supply
down there. We are well aware of
people, and when I worked for
the state engineer, the same
problem existed. The long term
problem that existed in uh and
people just are not having any
disincentive over divert. And
once that water's gone,
particularly groundwater, you
can't replace it, it's gone and
you can't replace it. So when
you dewater aquifers is cause of
significant problem, and there
has to be a favor or opposing.
In favor. Oh, OK. OK. That's
that's that's disturbing that my
comments not that clear. Well,
I'm sorry, but that we are in
opposition, so I was very
confused about what you were
telling us, but I thought you
said you saw none. I'm sorry,
you said none in opposition and
then in favor and I raised my
hand, so I apologize I
misunderstood. OK.
All right. So when I heard you
say, you've been in the business
for a long time. You're part of
anacia and the like, and you're
in favor of this.
No, yeah, it's groundwater for
the city of. OK, very good. OK,
thank you.
Those in the audience wishing to
speak in support, please, uh,
um.
approached the gentleman with
the microphone.
And your remarks to about a
minute.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, John Thompson
registered lobbyist for the Rio
Grande Conservancy District, uh,
Middle Reed Conservancy District
provides irrigation, flood
control drainage from Cochiti to
Bosque Dell Apache.
Particularly in the Middle
Valley, Madam Chair, water is a
finite resource. We need to
protect it.
Uh, these statute and the fines
are
Quite frankly, really old for
lack of a better term at the
moment, and uh we stand in
strong support and ask that you
pass the bill. Thank you.
Good evening members of the
committee, um, Madam Chair,
thank you to the sponsor for
bringing this forward. My name
is Rebecca Ru. I'm the
infrastructure advisor in the
office of the governor and uh I,
I won't belabor the point, but
1907 was a whole long time ago
and um I know our uh team at the
office State Engineer has
identified this as an issue that
needs to get addressed for
years, and we just urge your
support and help us keep this
moving quickly, um, so that
In the remaining time of this
session, we can get this done
and not have to be back here
again, trying again next time,
next year or the year after, uh,
the deterrent effect of having
higher penalties is good for
every single person in this
state that uses water. I'll
leave it there. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Good evening, uh, Madam
Chairman, members of the
committee. My name is John
Romero. I'm the water resource
allocation program.
Director and the water rights
director, and
As wrapped water rights
director, I see the direct
results of illegal water use,
theft, and of water.
theft of water and the drilling
of illegal and bad or unusable
wells daily. The amount of time
and resources the OSC and others
put to enforcement of illegal
water use is very high. We see
this on a daily basis and it
takes a lot of state resources
to combat illegal water use and
the bad illegal well drillers.
We really need this bill to help
us do our work, and it gives us
the tools to protect our
precious water resources. I
support this bill and I urge
this committee to support this
bill so that we can be, we can
do our jobs more efficiently.
Thank you.
Anyone else in the audience
wishing to speak in support.
I don't see anyone. Well, we
know there was one person online
wishing to who spoke in support,
um.
Those wishing to speak online,
please uh in support, please
raise your hand. I, I see 3
hands raisedrisha.
Snyder
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Tricia Snyder. I'm the
rivers and Water Program
director for New Mexico Wild and
a registered lobbyist, and we
stand in strong support of HB
348, um, ensuring our existing
water laws are appropriately
enforced as the foundation from
which we must build a secure
water future for the state of
New Mexico. This bill is long
overdue and we urge the
committee to issue a due pass.
Thank you.
Next, um, Marla Schultz.
Good afternoon. uh Marla
Schultz, uh, registered lobbyist
for the Albuquerque-Beralo
County Water Utility Authority.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, we stand in
strong support of House Bill
348, water law violation
penalty. We would like to thank
the sponsor and the state
engineer for bringing this
important piece of legislation
forward. The Office of the State
Engineer doesn't currently have
meaningful penalties to deter
illegal water diversions and
drilling activities. Water theft
depletes
our water supplies at the
expense of lawful water rights
holders and illegal drilling
creates opportunities for
contamination of our water
supplies. OSE's current
penalties were established over
100 years ago. We need to give
that office the tools to
effectively administer water
rights in our state and House
Bill 348 is a great first step
in that direction. Thank you.
Thank you. Um, and one last
person.
Angeli bean, if I said that
right.
Good evening, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Angeli Bean. I am a
senior policy advisor with
Western Resource Advocates. WRA
stands in strong support of HB
348 today. No matter what your
priorities are related to water
management in New Mexico from
the environment to agriculture
to industry, it is clear that
without the ability to enforce
our most basic laws, every all
other work breaks down. It's
hard to convince anyone to to
conserve water, participate in
short shortage sharing or any
other innovative water
management tool needed to
address our water challenges if
they don't believe that the
basic rules are being followed.
This bill gives the state
engineer the power to do its
job. I urge you to support this
important legislation. Thank
you.
Thank you. Um, all right. Let's
go back to the sponsor, anything
else before we, yes, thank you,
Madam Chair. I would like for
the state engineer to actually
say something very quickly.
That's OK.
Yes.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you to our
sponsor. I think she did an
excellent job.
Um, getting us started on this
and summarizing it and along
with all of the supporters, I
think I don't want to take any
of your extra time. I just want
to say that this is the the most
important bill for the Office of
the State Engineer, really
critical for us to get this
through and thank you for your
support.
Great. OK, thank you, um, madam
Engineer. I'd like to move
adoption of the amendment.
OK, we have a motion to adopt um
the proposed amendment and the
202 number ends in 171.1.
Um
We have a motion, we have a
motion in a second. Let's call a
roll.
Well, actually, does anyone
oppose? Why don't we just do it
that way. I don't see any
opposition. All right, so you
have an amended bill.
Sorry
OK.
Discussion of the amended bill
members.
Madam I'd like to make a motion.
Well.
OK, uh, Representative Hall.
Thank you, ma'am. Madam Chair,
Representative, experts.
Good deal. I don't have a
problem with it. What are some
examples of water theft.
I
In my part of the world, it's
people walk back up to uh.
Fire hydrants.
And stealing, um, what, can you
just give me a couple of others
that you'd be out trying to go
after uh Madam Chair.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative,
the examples that Mr. Romero was
alluding to include, uh, let's
say somebody uh brings in an
illegal well driller from across
the state line or something, you
need a license to drill a well
in Mexico, as you know, um,
drills an illegal well and tries
to sell as much water as
possible in a short amount of
time to the oil and gas
industry. That that is
happening, um, they don't have
some water, right, we can get
repayment of water from them for
that is totally illegal.
So if we can't make it
financially hurt, there's no
disincentive. That's one
example, um, similar types of
activity to provide water for
cannabis grow operations. We've
seen a growth in that in the
past few years. Those, those are
just two examples.
And then uh Madam Chair and
representative and experts, is
there like a
A hotline to call this in or
will over a year.
Something like that to report.
When we witness water theft,
venture Madam Chair
Representative, there's not a
hotline, but we will get calls.
Our water masters, staff are out
in the field, uh, you know,
we're getting meter readings,
meeting with water users on a
regular basis and if somebody,
uh, you know, looks up online,
hey, I want to call the office
of the State engineer. They will
get our Watermaster staff right
away and we'll get people out
there to check on these things.
And last question, Madam Chair
and Representative experts, so
If, if we see, we have a lot of
water drilling that goes on in
my county. I don't know how much
of it's legitimate. I don't go
up and ask for their.
Permits, but if someone feels
that it's improper, we can just
call and y'all will send someone
out to check on that, man.
Madam Chair Representative,
that's exactly right. Uh, the
drillers required to keep the
permitting documents at the
drill site at all times, and so
that happens frequently.
Somebody sees a drill rig, not
sure what's going on, they call
our office. We go out and check
it out and uh make sure it's
legitimate.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Anyone else before I
hear from Representative
Romero's motion.
I think we're ready for a
motion. Madam, I'd like to move
house bill, um.
Like this move to do pass on
House Bill 348 as twice amended.
Yes.
All right, so we have a motion
for a due pass on House Bill 348
as twice amended, made by
Representative Romero and I
think it was representative Ree,
was that right? or represent a
popular video. It was down
there, OK, um, we can call the
roll. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Abeta, yes.
Representative Chavez, yes.
Representative Paul. Yes.
Representative Hoffman B Hill,
yes.
Represented Martinez.
Yes.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen.
Representative Reed, yes.
Peter Sainsky, yes.
Madam Vice Chair.
Yes, Madam Chair, yes, Madam
Chair, you have a due pass on
House Bill 348 twice amended.
You're welcome.
Next item is House Bill 443.
18 year olds delivering and
stocking liquor.
Representative De la Cruz,
Chairman De la Cruz.
Thank you, Madam Chair. May I
begin.
You may begin. Thank you. Thank
you, Madam Chair, for letting us
bring this bill forward 443.
Uh, members of the committee.
Uh, how's 443 really, what it
does is amends the sections of
the liquor Control Act of 1984,
it's an antiquated law.
That does not take into
consideration present conditions
that exist.
Uh, and let me start first by
letting you know.
Chairwoman and members of the
committee that at present.
At present, an 18 year old can
drive a semi truck.
With alcohol.
If you have a CDL license.
You can move alcohol anywhere in
the state.
If you are 18 years old,
however.
You can't drive a large panel
truck or van.
Any anywhere
To deliver alcohol.
Nor can you stalk alcohol as an
example in a grocery store or
convenience store.
And so I like to refer to this
bill.
Let me back up, Ma. I apologize.
I forgot to introduce my expert
and friend, Keith Hartnett.
I've known Mr. Hartnet many
years, uh, Mr. Hartnet is the
CFO.
Of Admiral Beveridge, uh, and
Admiral Beveridge is a large
distributing facility of of
beverages, not just alcohol, in
my former commission district.
Uh, man, I like to refer to this
bill as as an employment
opportunity bill.
Because it would expand
employment for 18 years old.
To be able to do similar work to
other 18 year olds are doing
right now, delivering alcohol in
semi trucks, big trucks.
And so
Madam Chair, just to give you an
example, a driver right now
that's not 18 years old, that
would work for, say, the company
that uh Mr. Hartnett is with.
Earns approximately $52,6206038
an hour up to 60,000 a year.
So that's not bad pay for an 18
year old. Manic with that, uh, I
will let Mr. Hartnett say a few
words and then we'll stand for
questions.
Madam Chair
Those on the representations
there. My name again is Keith
Harton from Admiral Beveridge
Corporation, um, Admiral itself
specifically employs 575 people
across the state.
Um, I'm representing all the
distributors in the states um
itself, and there are 5 of
those.
Of, of a fairly sizable size.
Um, thank you for allowing me to
speak on behalf of this bill and
the alcohol distributors around
the state, approximately 4 years
ago, this the 18 year olds were
being able to drive, um, a, a
semi truck, um, that was, that
was passed in, in the legis
legislature, uh, 4 years ago, it
dawned upon us that we have a
large number of people, and I'll
call them, um.
Um, merchandisers as well as uh
warehouse staff basically that
in effect handle um um alcoholic
beverages right now is a
merchandiser, you cannot do that
unless you're supervised and
it's kind of hard to be
supervised when you're one
person that are putting away
stock.
Um, the, the way that the
product itself works is that uh
The um
Warehouse people are the ones
that's that picked the the uh
the product itself, put it on a,
on a pallet. It's loading on the
truck with the 18 year old
driver to take it directly to
the retailer, um, and it's
dropped at the back room, a
merchandiser then comes in
specifically and pulls that,
that pallet of of paper of
alcohol directly into the uh the
shelves themselves to stack them
directly onto the shelves itself
you can just imagine going to a
smiths.
And an effect that you go down
the alcohol line.
Um, and when they're, when
they're actually touching the
alcohol itself, it's all
packaged. It is not singles, so
they don't have the
opportunities specifically to
have it and one bottle or one
can in their hand at any time,
as, as a representative uh Art
De la Cruz indicated, this
really is a job thing.
Specifically, um, it is very
difficult to find employees, and
for an 18 year old coming out of
high school who basically is
trying to find a job, um, our
particular business itself are
well paid.
Benefits and opportunities grow
with the company. Our average
number of years that people are
working for our company is 25
years old, 25 years. So in
effect it's a solid
organization.
I stand for any questions, Madam
Chair.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Um, let's go to the audience,
those wishing to speak in
opposition.
please approach the gentleman
with the microphone. Those on
line wishing to speak in
opposition, please raise your
hand.
I don't see anyone.
Those in the audience wishing to
speak in support, please um
approach the gentleman with the
microphone and limit your
remarks to about a minute.
Thank you, Madam Chair. John
Thompson again representing
Admiral Beveridge Corporation. I
think the sponsor and the expert
witness did a great job. I'd
like to thank the sponsor for
bringing the bill forward.
I would like to categorize this
as a career bill.
These, these are excellent jobs,
uh, as Representative De la Cruz
indicated, the pay is phenomenal
for young people. There's profit
sharing, benefits, health.
Wonderful things that a young
person can get into that quite
frankly are lacking uh for young
people in the state of New
Mexico, and we would ask that
you pass the legislation. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Uh, Madam Chair, Scott Scanlon,
registered lobbyist for premier
distributing.
And uh our former CEO began as a
merchandiser, then as a driver,
and he became the CEO of the
company 20 something years
later, so this is a careers
bill, uh, and I would just like
to uh tell the committee under
current law.
A 19 year old.
can serve a drink.
Glass of beer, cocktail in a
restaurant, something like that.
Uh, but what we're trying to do
is allow an 18 year old total.
Uh, merchandise that's wrapped
in plastic, so we would urge
your support. Thank you.
OK. Um, let's go online. Those
wishing to speak and support,
raise your hand and limit your
comments to about a minute and
I'm gonna take 3 hands if there
are 3. I see 1 hand, Ronald
Brown.
Yes, madam Chair, and
representatives on the
committee, my name is Ron Brown.
I'm a business owner in Rio
Rancho and a company called
Latitudes. This bill would also
help out the retailers by
allowing 18 and 1920 year olds
to check in product and also
stock product, uh, it's not just
a distributor, it's, it, it
would help out the retailers as
well, and so I would encourage
you to pass this bill.
OK, I don't see any other hands
raised, um.
go back to the sponsor or
anything else before we go to
committee. we're ready for
questions. OK, great.
Um, questions.
OK. Representative Reed, Madam
Chair Representative, have you
brought, you brought this bill
before, correct?
Maurer said no, this is the
first time, first time, although
I think it's been brought before
but not by myself.
I just remember seeing it
somewhere, that was my question.
Anyone else?
Can I ask a question?
Thank you. Uh, so I just want to
visualize this.
Um, deliveries that don't
require a CDL license.
This would apply to. So,
My memory serves me. We now
allow delivery of alcohol from
restaurants to homes, I think
foods involved, is that right?
Is that our current law?
I'm not familiar with the age
that is affected they can do
from a, from a restaurant
specifically to homes and such,
you know it's like Uber and some
other entities that do that. OK.
OK. So, uh uh if what, what kind
of deliveries happen without the
need for a CDL license. Thank
you, Madam Chair. So if you
have, say, a large panel truck,
even a double axle vehicle that
isn't a quote unquote CDL, you
can drive those, uh, without.
you have to be.
Older than 21 to do that, which
is kind of interesting to me
when I first heard about the
bill.
I'm like, how is it that you can
drive a semi truck that's a much
larger vehicle at 18 or 19, and
yet can't drive a smaller
vehicle.
That you could be 19 or 20, it
just didn't make sense, manager.
Yeah, yeah, although I kind of
get it, it's a question of
access, not.
the size of the vehicle, um, and
so and in terms of stocking,
where does this?
Docking happen and how do we
know it's limited to when it's
wrapped in plastic cause that's
how it's been represented.
Madam Chair, so once the product
is delivered to, say, a grocery
store or convenience store.
If you are underage, you cannot.
Deal with the product. You
cannot take it from its sealed
packages, put it in the
refrigerator, put it in the back
room, and I will let my expert
expand on that.
Yes, ma'am. Um, if you, if you
can identify a 12 pack as an
example, it's in a in a
cardboard type of uh coverage
itself.
Um, that in the fact that you
lift specifically so that in
fact you're taking it off a
pallet and putting it on a shelf
itself.
But in no, no ways as there when
the fact that you're actually
taking individual um.
A bottle or a can that you're
touching it that way.
And expand a little bit.
Imagine this as well, you're at
a restaurant.
You have a 19 year old that
brings you a tray of of
beverages, they can be alcoholic
beverages. So you can serve that
to tables, that's completely
open. In addition to that, Madam
Chair, here's another one. I
love this one. You're gonna be
1415 years old, I'm sure. I'm a
bus person. I can go pick up
these half-consumed beverages of
all types, and I can take him to
the back.
And they're completely open and
exposed. Well, well, I hear you,
but they're like human beings
around watching to seeing if
these young people are guzzling
either half drunk glasses or
full. I think someone would
notice if someone was delivering
an open glass of wine that may
be some is missing or, you know,
so I appreciate where you're
coming from. It's, it's fun to
talk about, but
Most, you know, there are human
beings around while this stuff
is being delivered. I'm, I'm
pretty sure those young people
aren't gonna start guzzling in
front of a bunch of people, so,
uh, it's interesting analogy,
but I'm not sure exactly fits
representative. But what is
packaged out, OK, so I, I get
the beer in contain, you know,
and uh some kind of enclosed box
and stuff, but what about
individual wine bottles that
you're stocking those some of
them unscrew on, you know, I'm
just thinking.
Yeah, I don't want young people
to get access to the alcohol.
They have some have screw on
tops, um, those little minis are
open and available to easily
pull up. Yeah, I'm just help me
understand why that's not an
issue. So, if you're working at
a convenience store and you're
underage.
You're exposed to all of it.
It's all there whether you
stocked it or you didn't, you
have access to that same uh
refrigerator to that same shelf
that anybody else in the store
has. The only difference is you
are not allowed to work to put
it on the shelf, but it's there
while you're working all the
time and it is exposed.
Fair enough, but when does
stocking happen? Does it stop,
its stocking happening when
The store is operating, you
know, and all, I hope we're not
having 18 year olds there in the
middle of at midnight. So when
is the stocking happen? Cause if
there's not a lot of supervision
around, I'm sure you got an
answer. I can see you do, Madam
Chair, we're the merchandiser,
they are only one that the uh
business is open. There, there's
not in the in the middle of the
night or anything along those
lines, so they start pretty much
around 6 o'clock.
Um, and work towards probably 3
to 4 o'clock in the afternoon.
OK. All right.
my questions have been answered.
Anyone else?
Go for it. I'm sure I'd like to
move house Bill 443.
No amendments.
No amendments.
Maybe we do pass on
and we have a do pass motion
made by Representative Romero,
seconded by Representative Hall,
which you call the role. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Representative
Abeta pass.
Representative Chavez, yes.
Representative Hall.
Representative Hockman B. Hill,
yes.
Representative Martinez, yes.
Speaker Martins, Representative
McQueen.
Representative Reed, yes.
Peter Sapansky, yes, Madam Vice
Chair.
Excuse me, yes, sorry, sorry, my
bad, representative of Beta.
Yes.
Yes.
Madam Vice Chair.
Oh yes, I was, yeah, sorry, that
was on me, Madam Chair. Uh, yes,
Madam Chair, you have a do pass
on He Bill 443.
OK. You're welcome. Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Thank you. Thank you.
All right.
Um, next we have House Bill 426
Mobile Home Park, Notices.
Good afternoon, uh, Madam Chair
and members of the committee.
Uh, we're here to present, um,
House Bill 426, um, as many know
manufactured housing is some of
the most affordable housing here
in New Mexico and um we have a
PowerPoint actually to show what
some of this manufactured
housing looks like. We really
want to ensure that as we're
having this discussion, we know
what we're talking about, which
is, um, these are not trailer
homes with wheels, the way that
it is defined in the statue is
we are talking about.
about homes that are attached
homes that people have invested
in, um, and therefore why we
bring this bill to continue to
invest in our communities and
give people the opportunity to
purchase the land beneath their
homes.
And I'll introduce my
co-sponsor.
Or she'll introduce herself.
Thank you, uh, co-sponsor and
thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, um, I
just add quickly to what uh um
represented power on indicated,
um, just a couple of stats, um,
we have 380 mobile home
communities in the state.
They represent 17% of our
housing stock.
And um
One of the most terrifying
things that they can hear is
that the park is going to be
sold.
Uh, because that often means
it's going to be transferred
into a different use.
And what HB
426 deals with is a method for
the tenants.
Uh, to match an offer and
Um, be able to purchase the park
so they can continue to live
there.
And with that, I'll turn it back
over to my co-counselor.
Uh,
I was, um, that's pretty good,
yeah, yeah, uh, Madam Chair, we
will, um, go to uh comment or
questions.
OK, thank you very much, um,
those in the audience wishing to
speak in
Opposition to the bill, please
approach the gentleman with the
microphone.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Brent
Moore. I'm a registered lobbyist
for New Mexico Association of
Realtors, and we stand in
opposition to the bill. We have
had many discussions with the
sponsors on this bill, and we
have a fundamental concern, and
the fundamental concern is that
the owners of these mobile home
parks, they have private
property and we understand the
sponsors concerns about the
interests of the the residents
of the mobile home park, but our
fundamental concern is that the
owner of the park should be able
to sell the property.
As they so choose and so the
restriction on their ability to
dispose of the property as they
choose is a fundamental concern.
I would also say that we've had
discussions with the sponsors
about what does it mean when the
when the residents of the mobile
home park come forward with an
offer, and you'll see, and I'll
give you an example on page 3 of
the committee sub on lines 4
through 5, it talks about an
offer to meet the price and
substantially equivalent terms
and conditions, but then again.
on line 16 through 17, it says
substantially equal
substantially equivalent in
price and in terms and
conditions, so we're not sure
what the inconsistent language
about what is that price that's
being brought forward? Is it
substantially equivalent, or is
it the price that the third
party has come forward with.
Thank you very much.
Anyone else in the audience
wishing to speak in opposition?
Don't see anyone, anyone online
wishing to speak in opposition.
OK. Anyone else online in
office.
I don't see anyone, um, those in
the audience wishing to speak in
support.
approached the gentleman with
the microphone and please limit
your remarks to about a minute.
Uh, good afternoon, Madam Chair
and members of the committee.
I'm Arturo Castillo and I'm the
director of equity and culture
at Conservation Voterss New
Mexico.
Um, as climate and weather
catastrophes continue to rage on
and the number of unhoused New
Mexicans continues to increase.
We must do everything we can to
prevent any more new Mexicans
from being evicted from their
homes and onto the streets where
they will suffer the harshest
impacts of the worsening climate
crisis.
Conservation border stands in
strong support of this
legislation because this is one
of the many steps we can take to
continue to provide affordable
and stable housing for all New
Mexicans.
And this would also allow them
to eventually own their home if
given the opportunity to
purchase.
Stable housing is not only a
human right, it is a necessary
Stable housing is not only a
human right, it is a necess
necessary is necessary for our
most vulnerable communities in
New Mexico, be engaged in this
already exclusionary political
process. Thank you.
Good afternoon Man chair members
of the committee. My name is
Craig Hay. I'm assistant general
counsel with Aging and Long-term
Services Department and we stand
in support of this bill,
uh, portalhousing is really
important for older adults here
in New Mexico and uh preserving
that option for older adults is
really important. Thousands of
older adults live in
manufactured homes here in New
Mexico. We urge your support to
protect uh that option for you.
Thank you. Good evening, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Maria
Grego, and I'm
attorney and the director of
Economic equity at the New
Mexico Center on Law and
Poverty, and this bill is one of
the New Mexico Center on Law and
Poverty's um greatest priorities
this legislative session.
Um, is is Representative
Matthews mentioned earlier,
nearly 17% of New Mexico's
affordable housing stock is
comprised manufactured homes.
They offer in affordable path to
home ownership for low-income
families and seniors on fixed
incomes. However, residents of
manufactured home communities
face increasing instability as
out of state investors, uh,
swoop in, buy up the properties,
hike rents, and neglect
maintenance, and in some cases
sell off the land displacing
families.
This bill provides a
commonsense, fair solution that
has been successful in many
other states.
When residents own their
communities.
Rents remained stable.
OK, thank you. We, we strongly
encourage the committee to
support this bill. Thank you.
Yeah.
All right, those online.
Wishing to speak in.
The port, please raise your
hand, and I'm gonna live it
limit it to 3 people, 1 minute
each.
Rochelle Smith.
Roche
There
OK.
Rochelle, I, I thought I heard
you.
Now, can you hear me? Now go,
OK, I'm sorry. That's OK.
OK, Madam Chair,
Representatives, thank you for
the opportunity to talk with you
today. My name is Rochelle
Smith. I live in a 55 plus
mobile home community of over
600 residents in Albuquerque.
Many residents have been forced
to move out of our community due
to increasing lot rents.
Their cash, the corporation that
bought us their cash cow is
drying up.
And they may be ready to sell
the property. If we don't have
the opportunity to purchase all
600 plus of us will be forced to
move out, often with no place to
go.
I support HB 426 to save our
community and others in the
state in a similar situation or
maybe in the future. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Kurt Baker.
Hm
Kurt
Yes, uh, good evening, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
This is Kurt Reagan, the
director of Lutheran Advocacy
Ministry of New Mexico. We also
speak the position of the New
Mexican Conference of Churches,
and I'm here to urge, uh, to
express our support for HP 426.
You've heard the challenges
faced by members of of mobile
home communities and of the
incredibly vulnerable positions
that they have been in or
potentially could be put in into
when their community is sold. We
support HB 426 simply based on
fairness, because of the
potential loss of their homes.
It is fair and reasonable for
residents to have the
opportunity to buy their
community that owners negotiate
a sell in good faith and that
residents have reasonable time
to secure financing and to keep
their rents affordable. For that
reason, and for the reasons
mentioned already by proponents,
I urge your support for HB 426,
and I also thank you for your
work on this long day and the
opportunity to speak. Thank you.
And one more.
Let's see, how about Joanne and
Michelle.
Joan
Yes, good evening, Madam Chair,
members of the committee.
Um, my name is JoanMichel, and
I'm a homeowner and a
manufactured home community. I
bought my home as a solo ager. I
use most of my savings to pay
cash for my home so that my land
rent and utilities could be paid
with my Social Security. I had
found affordable housing, a
supportive community, and what I
thought was security and
predictability. I thought I
could predict my future expenses
by buying new. I would never
have to replace a roof again in
my lifetime. When I
my home, the landowner lived 3
doors down from me, and we
talked regularly as neighbors,
but never once did she tell us
that the, or any of the other
homeowners that she was about to
sell the land under our home. It
came as a shock that we found
out that the uh the land under
our homes now belongs to an out
of town investor.
Our community is made up of land
and homes and landowners and
homeowners, a business, a
manager, and people who cherish
their homes and community. It's
not simple. We have overlapping
interests.
HB 426 recognizes the interests
of homeowners and landowners.
In these communities that
provide
For some security and
predictability that is not
currently available. I urge you
to pass this bill. Thank you.
Thank you.
OK, um, that concludes our
public comment.
back to the sponsors, anything
you wish to add before we go to
the committee? Uh, no, madam
Chair, we'll go to questions.
Um, Representative Martinez.
Go ahead.
thick man chair, um.
Thank you, sponsors.
So
Ah
How would this work with
Would the owner of the, of the
property have the subdivided
down to these individual lots.
How does the purchase?
I'm not understanding how that
mechanism is gonna happen. Um,
Madam Chair and Representative
Martinez, uh, no, it is not
subdivided. It is the sale of
the entire park.
So each
Each person, each resident.
It's gonna have to come up with,
I mean, if they're gonna sell
the property for
A couple of million dollars,
that's divided down.
He resident, what if that, what
if there's some residents that
can't afford that,
Madam Chair and Representative
Martinez, uh, so typically what,
how it works and how it's
outlined here is um 51% or more
of the residents have to, um,
say that they will want to
purchase the park, uh, and then
they usually will form a
cooperative in order to purchase
it with the help of a CDFI.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative, so.
What are the other 49% do?
Uh, Me and representative
generally, uh, and we may not
have said this in the beginning,
but uh 22 other states have an
opportunity to purchase, um,
types of laws and generally as
we've learned through um Rock
USA and uh we actually have two
experts with us here today on
Zoom, Carolyn Carter and Mary
O'Hara from Rock USA who can
provide expert opinion, um, but
generally what happens is that
the same way that if you've ever
bought an REI co op.
membership, um, and you, uh,
purchase part of it. It's
essentially a community
ownership agreement.
And generally what happens,
Madam Chair and and
representative is 90 to 100% of
individuals buy into that
cooperative.
Would you like the one of the
experts to weigh in who knows
how it operates in other states.
Yeah, sure, um, Carolyn or or
Mary can weigh into that as
well.
Mary or Carolyn, whichever one
of you wishes to.
Add anything
So this is Carolyn. Oh, Carolyn,
that's fine. OK, shoot.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, um, as Is the way it
usually works is the um
Once 51% of the residents agree
that they want to go um down
this route, then they'll form a
cooperative or a similar um
cooperative type corporation
under the um state law and the
cooperative then will buy the,
the whole tract of land, and it
will then rent out the lots to
everyone, um, all the
homeowners, and so it's really
works just like the high rise.
co-ops in New York City, where
the co op owns the building, but
then the members of the co op
and anyone else um in one of the
units rents the unit from the co
op, and the members of the co op
then um or the um co op like
corporation.
Um
They set the policies, they set
the rents, they set the budget,
they hire the property manager
and so on.
This is Mary O'Hara from Rock
USA. Can you hear me?
If briefly, if you wish to
supplement.
Yes. Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. I just
wanted to say that Rock USA is a
national nonprofit
organization that supports the,
these residents. How's that?
Yup. And so it is as Carolyn
described, a corporation each
homeowner is a member in the
corporation and owns a share in
the corporation, and so they're
both member owners and also
renters from the corporation for
their lot and their lot has a
proprietary lease that allows
them to maintain their home on
that lot in perpetuity or until
they sell their home.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So,
Once you reach a th threshold of
51%.
The owners
The what happens to the other
49, they're forced to rent from
the.
Cooperative or move or what
happens to them?
and um representative, those 40,
9% they can choose to join the
cooperative or um they can um
choose to rent from the
cooperative. So the cooperative
will have generally a board that
governs and how the processes
are, and it would be the same
process as if you had a
landlord, for instance, it, you
know, if there was a landlord
and you were paying to that
landlord, it would be the same
process, um, Madam Chair, and
representative of what we've
seen though in other communities
that have done this is that um
the 51% is only a threshold. Um,
other states have a lower
threshold, like 24%, for
instance, um, we feel it's more
fair that more than 50% of the
community says they want to do
this and um that then they would
be able to uh continue to manage
the property amongst themselves.
man
representative, but in this case
it's 51%.
So for the 49%.
It's still the same.
Issue that they're having if
Something happens.
They're still renting from.
I mean
From a, from a landlord,
basically.
Me,
oh sorry, go ahead
and um represent Martinez, yes,
in fact they are still um
renting. Uh, however, there is a
little bit more stability, the
teeth, the skin in the game for
a lot of these folks is their
home. Um, it is there, you know,
folks have purchased the home at
$200,000 sometimes for a
manufactured home and wanting to
preserve that, um, there's then,
uh, a more security knowing that
the folks within the within.
in the park who live in the park
are managing that.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'll,
I'll listen to the rest of the
debate. It just doesn't seem
like.
for the 49%, it's.
There's, they're still in the
same boat, it seems like.
I think some people will help
you with that. Um.
Oh, cause I have some thoughts,
but I'm not ready yet. I mean,
I'm not in a que yet
representative um Ree.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representatives. OK, I have
questions about the kind of the
process to starting on page 2,
line 5, section B before mobile
home park may be sold, the owner
shall notify each resident,
household of the mobile home
park and the executive director
of the New Mexico Mortgage
Finance, blah blah blah, of the
offer purchase.
So
Do they notify them of the
amount of the offer in addition
to
Me whatever I didn't know
somewhere in there it says you
have to do this the same, give
the same information that you
gave to the third party, so are
they telling the giving notice
to all the manufactured or
mobile home owners. This is what
the offer was, Madam Chairs
representative.
Man of chair, uh,
representative, uh, yes, and
The reason that the mortgage
finance Authority is in there is
that we have.
One of the obvious questions is
where are the people who live in
the mobile home park going to
come up with the money.
To make the purchase and so um
I've been meeting with the
mortgage Finance Authority. They
are very interested in
developing a program to support
this.
Uh, I've also talked with um the
New Mexico, um, finance
authority which currently has
some programs that could help
with the funding.
Um, so there would be a
And there and there may be other
sources of money, for example,
the, the rock organization
residency owned Communities, um,
also has in various states, uh,
been part of the source of
funding to buy this.
So
What simply happening is that
instead of having a private, a
private equity company or
someone owning it, uh, the
tenants create an organization
to own it, to hire professional
manager, um, the, there's a loan
and then from there, uh, it's
just uh now it's now it's run by
the, the tenants with a
professional manager.
And you don't have this
pressure.
To
Push everybody out because
somebody's gonna get a better
offer you because they're not in
it so much to make money,
they're in it to have a place a
solid place to live that isn't
going to be sold out from under
them.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair
Representatives. I, I guess I
thought it was gonna be more of
a little bit of a competitive.
Bid process just because of the
rest of the bill, but we just
keep kind of asking my
questions. So then there's this
period of um
Let's see, resident has 75 days
in which to make the offer.
Or make the owner an offer to
purchase the property for 90
days to secure the financing in
a commercially reasonable amount
of time to close the sale sale.
And then failure to meet any of
those deadlines. My
understanding terminates
opportunity of the residents.
purchase. So Madam Chair and
representative, that's what that
about 6 months or so.
Madam chair and represented 165
days is the maximum um amount of
time that uh a purchase like
this could happen, um, however,
you know, it can go a lot
faster, for instance, um, in the
75 days where you're uh making
that agreement, the corporation
could be formed within 2 weeks,
for instance, and then another
90 days to obtain um the
necessary financing and Madam
Chair and Representative Reeve
this uh 90 days portion.
I, um, is really an important
proportion in order for them to
assess um the parking is is
quite a natural part of the real
estate process, um, if even a
private equity firm or another
third.
Um, a third party organization
were to come in and purchase.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative. So it, it's
about it, it, it's basically.
reading it.
statutory right of first
refusal, kind of where none
existed before with the property
owner.
When they bought the.
OK
So you're having to wait about
165 days or possibly more before
whether knowing the purchase,
Madam Chair representatives is
gonna come through to you, it
wouldn't that discourage other
property owners who maybe even
wanted to be in the process of
this. I mean, it seems like I
understand what you're trying to
do, but the third party people,
I mean.
They're gonna make an offer then
what's gonna happen is that
offer is gonna go to um
everybody in the park, um, so it
just seems like, why would you
even want to make an offer if
you were a third party, um.
I, that's such a long process
and if you're in a situation
that I'm sure representatives
were, you need that money, you
need to get this property sold.
It seems like we're waiting
quite a long time.
Madam Chair and I'm
Representative Reeb, um.
Yes, there are definitely it's
certainly we're adding, for
instance, a 75 day period to
allow the the residents to
organize, um, however, we have
added some provisions, um, after
our discussions with um folks
owning mobile home parks and um
with the real estate
organization, which you'll see,
uh, there are a list of
exceptions that are provided
where you don't need to provide
notice, um, and these exceptions
are taken from the New Hampshire
statute, which is the longest,
um.
Statue of this type in in the
United States. It's been around
for 40 years, um, and has helped
the purchase of over 300
communities, so you'll see, for
instance, if there's a
foreclosure or you need to sell
to a family member, um, if you,
if it's a transfer in between a
partner of an LLC, um, and I
think most um.
Most specifically, um, in on
page 6, line 16M, we've added a
provision that um actually
allows an owner to accept the
third party offer, um, which,
um, then allows them to, so to
speak, lock in the price, Madam
Chair and representative.
OK. Uh, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. So,
This part, and I think it was
discussed in some of the
comments, um, in Section E of
the residents submit a proposed
purchase and the sale agreement
and sale agreement that the
owner does not consider to be
substantially equivalent in
price or in the terms and
conditions of the third party,
the owner shall negotiate with
the residents in good faith, um.
Anyway, on and on. So what, what
is substantially equivalent, and
I know I had that question,
what, what kind of that meant
also and it's
I think it's used somewhere else
in the bill. Um, yes, on page 5
at the top, so.
You just describe out chair and
representative what that would
actually.
chair and representative, uh,
the substantially equivalency
you'll note that in section E,
the owner has to define that
actually, so we have allowed
here the seller to determine
whether or not that is
equivalent, um, and so the
reason why we talk about
substantial equivalency is that
what we've heard in other
communities is sometimes an
offer may include something such
as, um, a third party is coming
in to purchase a mobile home
park, but in addition,
to the purchase of that land,
um, that third party seller will
also throw in another plot that
is somewhere else. Um, and so
what would happen in this case
is that the um the tenants would
have to show that they would be
offering something substantially
equivalent to that third party
offer. Our intention here is to
really ensure that the landlord
gets the best possible market
value price that they could get,
um, somebody, uh, in my
conversation.
mentioned, what if somebody came
in with a $10 million cash
offer,
um, manager and uh
representative very quickly, uh,
depending on the size of the
park, you know, the tenants
would say, well, we can't match
that. And in that case, that
would be that they would not be
able to offer a substantially
equivalent price, Madam Chair
and representative.
And so Madam Cha representative,
what is, let's say the property
is $2 million and someone comes
in like uh.
a resident comes in 10%.
That, let's say 5%, 10% below
that. So would that be
considered substantially
equivalent.
The lower price
Uh, sorry, Madam Chair and
represent him so the if they
came in with it was 10% less. So
right, so Madam Chan represented
what this statute, uh, would say
is that the owner would have to
define um that so if they
considered it to not be
substantially, um, for, you
know, 10% to not be
substantially equivalent, um,
then they would engage with the
negotiation.
OK, and representatives and then
it goes on to say the owner
shall negotiate in good faith,
um,
And
And I'm understanding what that
means, but
Why did they have to manage to
representative put in writing
within 3 days.
Why they don't believe that the
offer is, I guess, substantially
equivalent.
under your bill,
uh, Madam Chair Representative,
um, we, we edited this portion
as well in um in our talks and
essentially we wanted to have
something in writing that would
say to explain the process, um,
Madam Chan representative, this.
You know, would be part of it
that good faith negotiation to
provide the reason.
Right. And then when it goes to
the top of page 4, Madam Chair
Representative, and it says um
Starting from 3 last line, it
should be presumptive evidence
of bad faith if an owner
attempts to or does require the
residents to waive any of their
rights. What, what rights are
you talking about, Madam Chair?
Um,
Mandarian representative, um, it
would be this process, uh, so
if, uh, for instance, a, uh,
landlord came in and said, um,
you know, you, you all.
Need to, uh, you, you, you all
won't be able to purchase this.
Um, we want to make sure it's
very clear that uh that would
not be appropriate and um we
would want them to follow the
process, Madam Cha
representative.
OK, and then continue down into
G.
Um, on line 11 on a chair,
represented any new offer to
sell the mobile home park, or
any new offer to purchase a
mobile home park that the owner
intends to except she'll
initiate a new effective period
for the opportunity to purchase.
So does that mean, uh, Madam
sure that that whole time limit
starts all over again.
Madam Chan representative, yes.
So for instance, and this is
really here for um
In order to protect the landlord
if there is a better price. So
for instance, you'll see here
that it is any new offer to
purchase a mobile phone part
that the owner intends to
accept, um, it would be probably
strange if the owner intended to
accept a cheaper price, for
instance, it was first offered
at 3 million and now it's 2
million, um, but if the owner
intends to accept an offer that
is now coming in at 5 million,
for instance, um, then yes, the
process would start over again
and um the landlord would then
have the the residents would
then.
have to offer the same amount
that the that the owner is
getting on the market.
OK.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative for explaining. I
just, I'm having hard part with
the property rights of the
actual mobile homeowners in this
is a lot of steps and a lot of
Um
Uh no concerns I have about
that, but um I appreciate you
clarifying the bill for me and
um I will just listen to the
debate. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I think, uh, Representative
Hoffman be here. Thank you,
ma'am and, um, thank you,
representatives, um, for the
bill. Thanks also our
representative Reeve. You
answered, uh, you'd asked some
of the questions I had, but
Forgive me if it's, if it's not
more clear in the bill, but um
in terms of, let's say,
You have a mobile home park and
an owner gets an offer of
$3 million in total, and um the
51% of the uh residents get
together and decide that they
want to form the co op, but they
Can't
Me anywhere near the $3 million
offer. I mean, do they get like
a first round of refusal, or is
it just give that, does it stop
the process enough.
To allow them the ability to put
this together or is it an actual
legal right that they received
through this law to be able to
purchase first.
Madam Chair, Representative, uh,
there is no expectation that the
residents themselves and, you
know, passive, uh, a bucket and
put in the money to pay for
this.
Um, obviously they're going to
have to find financing. I mean,
assuming we're talking about
several million dollars. They're
going to, we assume that they
will have to find financing in
order to do that.
And they will be dealing with
some kind of a third party or
third parties in order to raise
that money.
And so, um, and, and that's why
we're talking to organizations
like the New Mexico Finance
Authority, and uh the MFF and
the MFA.
Um
The concept is that with some
sources of funding.
The seller will essentially get
the purchase price that they
have been offered by someone
else.
Um, and that the money and there
will be a reasonable time in
which you would fund the the
purchase and um and close the
deal.
So I, I hope that helps answer
your question.
Madam Chair representatives,
yeah, I think so. Good enough.
OK, I have.
Some comments and
thoughts on how this will work.
So, um, with respect to the
question about
How does this work for those
individuals who don't wanna
buy into the purchase their
tenants.
So, you know, if there are 100
people in the park.
51 of them want to be
purchasers.
They develop some legal entity.
And they purchase and they own
shares in that company or
whatever, there's some kind of
structure.
And the rest of the folks who
didn't want to be owners of the
park.
Our tenants
That's how it works. I mean, I,
I mean, I understand you think,
well, all of them should have to
own it. I mean, I bet that's
some of the thought process that
people are going, oh, well, what
if everybody doesn't want to
buy? That's OK.
They can still be tenants and
what, what the potential
advantages.
Right now, mobile home parks are
being bought up by private
equity firms.
They're jacking up the prices.
They're putting all kinds of
fees on people, and we had this
conversation in uh in another
mobile home park context is,
it's very hard, they're like
captives almost because they
can't move their home.
You know, it's very hard, and I
imagine um these ones are
especially hard, and it's a
really hard situation for
people. So what this bill does,
it's not regulating the mobile
home park people, although we
should be talking about that
some more. It.
Allows the owners to take
ownership and control their own
destiny.
And the belief is, since they
are also tenants.
They will have reasonable rents.
They will want to care for the
property.
You know, they won't wanna jack
up the prices too much.
They won't come up with fees
that are unreasonable, and
that's, that's the thought
process. And is it a little
inconvenient for the owners?
Yeah, it is, but is that what we
want to do to help people in New
Mexico to avoid some of the
horrible things that have been
happening in the state. That's
what I wanna do.
And it's not just in pockets in
Albuquerque. I've been hearing
about this in Los Alamos, um,
it's across the state there are.
Parts of state that have very
high percentages of mobile
hardware, and I think
representative um Hall has some
of that in his community. So,
cause I, I've been watching it
over the summer there was a
group working. I wasn't actively
involved, but I was kind of
watching what was going on cause
I'm interested in this topic and
pleased to see that other
representatives are stepping up
to actually do the actual
legislation. So that's what this
is about.
Um
And so I hope that helps kind of
clarify for people what, cause I
could see people are like, how
does this work?
And um well, so first rights of
first refusal. Well, those are
sometimes in contracts, right?
Well, OK, they have language
things like what's uh a
substantially uh equivalent
offer in those things, and
there're worked out.
You know, that's, that's what's
in those contracts when you have
a contract of a first refusal,
you know, it's not identical
necessarily. It's, it has to be
looked at in its totality, and
if there's a disagreement, yeah,
maybe it's gonna go to court to
sort out that disagreement, just
as it would in a private
contract where the right,
there's a right of first
refusal. So, I mean, it is, it's
a little tricky to get your head
around at first cause it's kind
of a novel thing and it is take
picking up steam.
across the country, but I think
this is um a great approach um
to try to support our residents
in the state who um are really
struggling with what's going on
with the buying up of these
mobile home parks and um really
imposing some unfortunate things
on people we all care a lot
about, and it's affordable
housing.
So, um,
If there is there anyone else
who wants to uh weigh in on this
bill before we go to a vote.
Yeah, sure.
A chair and I, it's not so much
a question right, so I guess it
is kind of a question.
of the
Not to beat the 5149 to death.
Understand what you're saying,
but what if the 51 decide to
stick it to the other 49.
Um, that's, I mean, you know
what I mean, if they, uh,
that's, that's all, that's what
I'm thinking. I, I don't know.
I'm just asking.
Obviously that in theory can
happen.
Just like it does happen when
private equity firms and
corporate entities own these
parks. We know what's happening.
But it really is not in the
interest of the community to
behave that way.
Really. And cause remember, you
live next to these people or
around them or close by, whereas
the corporate entity is in
Missouri or someplace. I bet
they have a place where they all
live, but it's not in New
Mexico. So, um,
That's, you know, of course,
that's a risk, and, and their
issues, but there are issues
now.
With the corporations that are
owning these things, and it's a
lot harder to to sort out.
Given what they're dealing with.
So, um,
Anyway, uh, is there motion on
the floor? I'm happy to
entertain it. I'm sure I'd like
to move a do not pass in
houseboats 426 in a do pass on
house commerce and economic
development substitute for House
Bill 426.
So we
We have
It is a do pass on house
commerce and economic
development
committee substitute for House
Bill 426.
Yes, so is there a second?
Oh.
So there was a motion and a
second, I think by
Representative Sapansy.
You know we're all so tired.
It's just.
It is a do pass motion on house
commerce and economic
development Committee substitute
for House Bill 426 made by
representative Romero and
seconded by um representative
Sapansky.
What you call the role.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Abeta.
Thank you, Representative
Chavez.
Uh, no.
Representative Hall.
Yes.
Representative Hochman B. Hill.
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
No.
Speaker Martines.
Representative McQueen.
Representative Reed, no.
Leader Sapansky, yes.
Madam Vice Chair, yes.
Madam Chair. Yes. And I'm sure
you have a do pass on
committeestitute for House Bill
426.
OK.
Thank you, Representatives.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. Thank you.
All right.
Next, on the agenda is
House Bill 369.
No, no, excuse me. Sorry, sorry.
The next bill is Senate bill,
um, 17.
Representative Chavez, I think,
is going to be presenting and
Apparently represented Romero.
OK.
You want us to take your
photograph? Oh, it's.
We were just so excited about
this is an effort here. Look at
this. It's gonna snow tonight.
It looks great. You both look
great. OK, the floor is yours.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senate Bill 17,
um, is a bipartisan effort to
help modernize and update our uh
New Mexico Adult Parole Board,
um, this essentially is just
looking at the various statutes
that help us understand the
evidence-based practices, um, in
the discretionary parole
process, um,
It allows for the removal
process for board members, um,
but the standard guardrails to
protect the independence of the
board, um, it expressly
authorizes board members to
receive per diem reimbursement.
Again, it's a, it's a volunteer
parole board and in and finally
it introduces considered
scheduling practices that ensure
that hearings will not be
scheduled on the birth or death
date of a homicide victim. Um,
so really just an update to the
entire process manager.
Yes, Madam Chair, this, uh,
these reforms are designed to
improve outcomes, not only for
the individuals that are seeking
parole, but also for the crime
victims and public safety
overall. It does truly aim to
foster criminal justice
environment that upholds
fairness and consistency in the
parole-related practices, um,
represents a critical step
towards aligning state
regulations with best practices
and so
Um, with that, I just like to
add as a victim introduction of
considerate scheduling practices
currently, um,
Currently in discretionary
parole cases, life sentences,
juvenile parole hearings. Um,
the hearings often align with
the anniversary of the offense,
particularly with parole
eligibility. And so with that,
it places unnecessary burden to
the families because the date of
the offense is the date of
death.
For the victim's family and so
um we call that an angel
versary, and I think the last
thing that a loved one wants to
go through during the loss and
anniversary of a death is this,
so.
It aligns everything together,
um, with us, Madam Chair experts
Donley Wilson with ACLU, um, to
just talk a little bit about the
process since it was a
3 year long through the interim.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, the only fell out at
this time is a reminder that
this is the bill that we had
before, um, grits Corrections
and Justice Committee in October
and
They all came down and
Uh, discussed then an improved
upon. We had a number of
conversations and are really
proud that this bill has gotten
here, um, unanimously through
the Senate unanimously in most
of its committees and and
grateful to have a conversation
about the specifics today.
And with that we also have
parole board chair Abrahmanya
with us expert in questions as
well. Wow, I didn't know you
were the parole board chair.
That's madam chair, honorable
members of the committee, thank
you for letting me be in front
of you. Usually it's a different
realm, but yes, I am the
chairman of the New Mexico Adult
Parole Board. I'm also one of
the longest members of the
parole body I've been there for
13 years now. So I'm just sure
if you have any technical
questions, and I know how you
like your committee, so I'll
keep it very short and succinct.
We stand for. Well, that was um
an enlightening thing we just
learned, yeah. All right. Those
in the audience wishing to speak
in opposition to the bill,
please approach the gentleman
with the microphone.
OK.
Um
Those on online wishing to speak
in opposition, the bill, please
raise your hand.
I don't see any hands raised.
Those in the audience wishing to
speak in support of Bill please
approached the gentleman with
the microphone, um, who's
standing there.
I will help you in one second.
All right.
About a minute, please.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Rickie Lee
Chavez on behalf of the Law
Office of the Public Defender,
we do stand in support of this
bill. We appreciate the work of
the sponsors to engage all
stakeholders, and we also
appreciate the balanced approach
between um all persons that are
participating in the criminal
legal process. Thank you for
your time and we appreciate your
support.
Thank you. Anyone else in the
audience wishing to speak in
support.
OK. Those online wishing to
speak and support, raise your
hand.
All right. Diane McCash.
Ian.
There you go.
OK, thank you. Good evening,
chair and committee. I'm in 7 or
8. Yes, can you hear me now?
Yes, go ahead. Hello. Yes,
Diane, I can hear you.
OK. And then the last 7 or 8
years, I've had the opportunity
to hear stories of people who
have served their 30 years,
shown themselves to have
changed, successfully engaged in
programming and education and it
evolves far from the
circumstances that brought them
into prison with 30 years to
serve.
Nonetheless, the parole request
could be denied and has been
denied in many cases based on
the terrible harm they inflicted
decades ago, something that is
impossible to change. One of the
important things SB 17 does is
to steer the parole board told a
balance uh to to a focus on risk
and readiness for release as
well as other changes that could
lead to a more fair and balanced
outcome for the victim's loved
ones, as well as for the person
who has served there several
decades of incarceration. There
are things we can control in our
lives and
we can, things the person can
control are their choices and
behaviors going forward.
Disregarding how a person may
have changed and matured and who
they've shown themselves to be
in the several decades prior to
their parole eligibility makes
no sense. Thank you. Please vote
yes.
Anyone else online would seem to
speak in support.
I don't see anyone.
OK.
back to the sponsors. Anything
else before we go to the
committee.
With that, we stand for
questions. OK, I'll
Representative Reeve.
Thank you chair. I, I like your
bill. I just, I'm coming. I
don't know if I've ever seen
They Seal You Representatives
representative Chavez, and the
public defender all on the same
page, so I like the build. I
think it's great. I'm gonna
support. Anyone else?
I'd like to make a motion for a
new pass. Go for it. I'd like to
make a motion for a new pass,
I'm sure. OK. Anyone else, uh,
do we have a second?
So we have a do pass motion on
Senate Bill 17 as amended made
by Representative Hall, seconded
by Representative of Beta.
Would you call the role? Yes,
thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Abeta. Yes.
Representative Chavis.
Representative Hall.
Yes, sir.
Representative Hoffman v. Hill?
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
Speaker Martinez.
Yes.
Representative McQueen.
Representative Reed.
Yes.
Leader Sapansky, yes.
Madam Vice Chair, yes.
Madam Chair, yes, madam Chair,
you have a due pass on Senate
Bill 17 as amended.
Thank you for Abraham. Yeah, but
now I know who to go to when I
have questions about the parole
board, which I sometimes do.
That's great
I'm here for you, I appreciate
that. That was
great information to have. Um
Right, um.
House Bill 369 Insurance
licensing times and fees.
Um, we
Oh, OK, we're gonna go look for
uh representative Hernandez.
I believe there is an amendment
that I get by consensus, we're
gonna hear even though it was a
little bit late coming in.
OK.
Oh, is that yours um I'm sorry.
Thank you.
Well, I know we made sure we
changed all the chairs because
it was ridiculous
There's there's you
and if you're tall, they're
really horrible, you know.
Um, OK.
So we are now on.
House Bill 369.
We have representative Hernandez
here.
The floor is yours, and we do
have the um amendment and by
consensus, we're willing to hear
it. OK. Yeah.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, House Bill 369, um,
is an OSI bill relates to
insurance, uh, modifying certain
time frames and fees for
licensing, um, I will let the
wonderful people from us. I
explain what those are because
it's way over my head.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Elizabeth Johnson Associate
general counsel for the Office
of Superintendent of Insurance,
and this is Victoria Baca.
Licensing director for OSI.
And as a representative
Hernandez mentioned, we do have
an amendment and the purpose of
the amendment was merely to
address the technical issues
raised in the FIR.
All right, um.
Those in the audience wishing to
speak in opposition, please
approach the gentleman with the
microphone.
I don't see anyone in the
audience, um, those online
wishing to speak in opposition,
please raise your hand.
Right.
Uh, those in the audience
wishing to speak in support,
please approach the gentleman
with the microphone.
Don't see anyone, those online
wishing to speak in support,
please raise your hand. All
right. Um, back to the sponsor,
anything else with that Madam
Cha for questions. OK, why don't
we dispose of the the um
Proposed amendment, um, I'm
happy to entertain emotion,
Madame Chero move discussion.
All right. So, is there other
questions about the amendment
that's before us in the 202 is
39.1 are the last three digits.
Madam, I just have a question on
the 4th.
Um, amendment, yeah, that's the
big one.
Um, yes, Representative Romero.
Um, I, I guess just with the
other ones seem like clean up,
can you just explain the intent?
item number 4 on the menu.
Madam Chair and Vice Chair
Romero, item number 4 is um
making intended to make the
language in the bill mirror the
same language elsewhere in the
insurance code, so I'm not sure.
How the initial draft went away
from that, but this is just to
make it consistent with statute.
OK.
Thank you.
So, um, the bills talks about,
well, it strikes double. Am I,
am I looking at the right thing?
Litan, page 15, um.
And turning that into 150%.
Essentially.
Do I have that right?
Yes, madam chair. OK. And you're
saying that's how
That exists in other parts of
the code. Is that what you're
telling us? Yes, OK.
Um, anyone else have questions
about the amendment.
Any opposition, well, I'm happy
to entertain emotion to adopt
the amendment, Madam Chair, I
move to adopt the amendment. The
2nd.
OK.
Is there opposition to adopting
the amendment.
I see no opposition. All right,
so you have
An amended bill.
Um, anything you'd like to add
about the bill before we go to
committee. No, ma'am, we stand
for. OK,
uh, questions about
The bill as amended.
Speaker Martinez
do pass on how to do 369 as
amended.
OK, um, I do pass motion on
house build 369 as amended made
by Speaker Martinez, seconded by
Representative Hall, um, which
you call?
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Abeta.
Representative Chavez.
Yes.
Representative Hall.
Representative Parkman v. Hill,
yes.
Representative Martinez.
Speaker Martins.
Yes.
Representative McQueen.
Representative Reeb, yes.
Leader Sapansky, yes.
Madam Vice Chair.
Yes, Madam Chair. Yes, Madam
Chair, you have a due pass on
House Bill 369 as amended. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
OK, thank you. Um,
Let's see.
House Bill.
5:21. OK, here he comes. He
always, he always wants to make
an entrance. He can't be like
everybody else.
Yeah, now, have any of you ever
been in committee with um
representative block
and what sort of experience was
that?
Yes
yes.
Yes, yeah, and he just loves to
have a lot of questions.
All right
All right, um, Representative
Block, you have house Bill 521
Agritourism Promotion Act.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
and members of this committee,
it's the first time I've joined
you in your committee
testifying, so I'm very excited
to actually be here in person
and not watching you on the
Zoom. So it's good to see you.
So, Madam Chair, I do have an
opening statement really
quickly and then I do have an
expert. His name is RV Nichols.
He is on the Zoom, I believe.
Um, Mr. Nichols, raise your hand
so we can find you. I do see you
on there. OK, you're from Otero
County, I got it. OK, shoot.
OK. All right, so Madam Chair
Representatives, uh, I'm honored
to present House Bill 521, the
Agritourism Promotion Act, this
bill will strengthen New
Mexico's agricultural economy,
while fostering education and
tourism opportunities in our
state. So New Mexico's farmers
and ranchers, they've had a long
critical role in our state's
history preserving our rural
heritage and agritourism
presents a unique opportunity to
generate additional income while
sharing our state's agriculture.
cultural legacy with visitors
and residents alike.
So,
HB 521 provides a reasonable
liability protections for
agritourists or agritourists.
ensuring that farmers and
ranchers can welcome guests
without fear of unfair
litigation, while maintaining
accountability for negligence
and reckless behavior, so we do
keep that in the bill. So,
Across across the country, this
is a growing sector nationwide
and states are adopting similar
legislation to this, and uh, so
according to the USDA, a census
of agriculture in New Mexico had
326 agritourism operations in
2022, which generated over $20
million in revenue. So it's a,
it's a very big sector in the
state, and I hope it continues
to grow, hence the legislation.
So, as New Mexico's rural
communities face economic
uncertainty, this bill provides
a critical tool to support local
farmers and to attract.
More visitors to these, these
awesome farmers. So Madam Chair
and Representatives, I will turn
over to rep to uh RB Nichols.
He's an attorney, so if you have
any super legal questions, he
can answer those, but he might
have an opening statement as
well. OK. So, um, RB, we like to
keep things kind of to the
point, so, um, opening statement
probably isn't helpful, maybe
you wanna touch on any uh aspect
of the liability very briefly,
that's fine.
Understood, madam Chair, um,
good evening, Madam Chair,
members of the committee,
uh,
um,
Hi, I want to quickly just uh
say that um
What agritourism does for our
small farms in New Mexico is,
um, it helps them not only
survive but thrive.
And, um, and that's something
they haven't done previously.
It's, it's been, they've been
declining over the generations,
and um agritourism is offering
them an opportunity that they
diversify and also support
tourism in the state, but while
it's saving the family farm, it
is also risking the family farm,
and that is what this bill seeks
to address.
As to um limit that liability,
um, established that there is
inherent risk in coming to a
working farm, but there is uh
educational value and um
entertainment value and um
Thank, thank you, um, appreciate
it. Let's now go to the
audience, those wishing to speak
in opposition to the bill, um,
please, uh, um, approach the
gentleman with
microphone.
Uh, Madam Chair and members of
the committee, my name is Tyler
at. I'm an attorney from
Albuquerque.
Um, we learned in the first year
of law school that property
owner.
You need to ordinary care to
keep it safe.
And um
That means homeowners, business
owners, everything.
What this bill does is it seeks
to give some businesses a much
lower standard.
And in a, in a, in a context
where dangerous things can
happen.
So
My point is all businesses
should be required to exercise
reasonable care and this bill
should be opposed.
Thank, thank you. Um.
anyone else in the audience
wishing to speak in opposition.
I don't see anyone.
Um, those online wishing to
speak in opposition, please
raise your hand.
I don't see anyone.
Um, those in the audience
wishing to speak in support.
Of the bill, please approach the
gentleman with the microphone.
Those online wishing to
Um, speak and support, please
raise your hand.
Uh, I see a hand raised David
Lucero, um, please keep your
comments to about a minute.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, this is actually Mary
Lucero. I took my husband's
phone, uh, we, we own JAL Farms
in Fort Sumner, New Mexico. We
purchased the farm in 2020 with
the intent of having a UPI
operation for our fruit sales.
And uh part of this was our
interest in serving the growing
interest for people to know more
about where their food is coming
from.
And we plan to give tours,
educational tours, and this kind
of thing and that people see
what life on the farm is like,
um, we have not been able to
find insurance that will cover
us.
If we are allowing you pick
operations. And so this has
become a concern for us. We are,
you know, our, our fruit trees
are young, we're going into
production this year, but
We, we cannot implement these
plans for agritourism under the
current conditions because
insurance won't have it.
Thank you. Thank you. Um,
Let's see, anyone else wishing
to speak and support. I don't
see anyone. All right, um, back
to our sponsor. Anything else
before?
go to the committee. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Just one thing I
was remiss to mention that
Representative Sarah Silva is my
co-sponsor, and she was here
earlier, but she's an
appropriation so very important
work in many committees and then
I also do want to know in uh the
first committee, which was Rural
Development, land grants and
Cultural Affairs. This bill did
pass unanimously.
Yes, and we'll see how we do.
We could follow them and into
off a cliff if we, if if you
know, potentially, so let's
regardless. OK, very good. All
right, those, uh, questions. Did
you have a question? Uh, I have
Romero.
Aha
Hoffman B. Hill.
You're fine, OK, uh,
representative Romero.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, um, Representative, as you
know, I was elected by my
constituents to read every bill
and really go through them.
Very thoroughly, so I have just
a few questions for you. Did I
get that right? I don't know.
I've sat on committee with you
so long, so OK, um, no, uh, not
a representative. I'm just
curious about section 3,
On the limited liability piece.
Are you, um,
um.
Familiar with the difference
between gross negligence and
simple neg negligence.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representatives. So I, I have a
general concept of it, but my,
my expert is an attorney, and
I'm sure that he would be happy
to help with any questions
regarding that. OK, Madam Chair,
representative, I do know the
difference, so I'm just
wondering, um, on page 2, page
3, when we're looking at the
limited liability. That's sort
of the biggest red flag in the
bill. Um, I think we all
want to promote agritourism. I
think that's a great
opportunity. I just want to
understand why we're sort of
taking away, um,
The ability for folks to have
the opportunity to really
waiving pretty much every um
Right to the folks that may be
visiting, um, for simple
negligence, um, versus, you
know, gross like negligence. Why
was that the choice to add that
to to this bill.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative. So the, the way
I, I, I think of the bill is
these are more inherent risks,
and I think that's, that is what
the words in the bill say
inherent risks of agritourism.
So we're talking about things
like when you're picking
cherries and you're hit with a
cherry on the head and maybe,
maybe you stumbled or something
and you may have scraped your
knee, for example, uh, but it's
not for something when it comes
to if they did get a big pothole
that they didn't have signage
because this does require
signage if there are inherent
risks.
Regardless. So if there's a big
pothole that shows that the
property owner did not take
proper care to fill that in, and
it is indeed a risk that would
not be covered in the bill, and
I would love uh Mr. uh Nichols,
if he has anything to add to
that.
Mr. Nichols, anything to add?
Uh, online. Uh, yes, madam
Chair, um, uh, Representative
Romero to I'd like to analogize
it with the alpine Skiing Act
and the equine Liability Act,
which is along the same lines of
this, if you choose to go
skiing, you're choosing to
partake in an event that where
you'll be sliding down the side
of a mountain, uh, in snowy cold
conditions that
have inherent risk in those,
and, and you're accepting to do
that, but if the ski operator
doesn't
Uh, if there's a, a giant hole
in the where it should be smooth
and manicured, uh, and they
don't rope that off, then they
could be sued for that, but uh
they wouldn't have liability if
you're just
Participating in in the routine
routine act of downhill skiing,
and it's the same for a farm,
there's gonna be uneven terrain,
there will be trees, there will
be bugs, um, and, and those
things.
are part of the experience and,
and cannot be removed.
Um
And if there was a, if we had a
hay ride and we didn't maintain
the brakes on the on the
whatever was pulling the uh the
hay ride, then, then we would
still be liable.
Madam Chair representative, um.
I understand that though,
getting on a pair of skis or
maybe on a horse where you're,
you know, on a separate.
Vehicle or animal, as it were,
um,
But the difference here is we're
talking about
You know,
Natural attractions, wine making
farm to table activities. Why
wouldn't it be the
responsibility of the landowner
or the
Um
The folks that are providing the
recreation to at least ensure
that those dangerous conditions
were confined to something a lot
less dangerous than alpine
skiing or.
Get on a horse. There, there are
some elements of visiting a farm
that that just cannot be
removed. Uh, we can't put
padded, um, pads all around the,
uh
It, it would take away the
entire experience.
So
It, it's inherent in it.
Um, Madam Chair representative,
I, I don't know if I agree. I
used to own an ostrich ranch and
um it was very dangerous. And I
was just, you just can't have
people over for certain
um they're very mean. like
depending on the season, um, and
they could be very docile as
well, um, but it wouldn't have
been.
Fair to anyone to subject them
to their anger when they're
angry at times, um, and I just
If I was to be subject to this
law. Essentially, it's like do
everything at your own risk and
Without that, I don't know if I
agree with the um
The comparison to Albi and.
Um
versus, but I'll, I'll listen
in. uh, Madam Chair
Representative, does this also
include cannabis tourism.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. So I, you know,
it could, and let me go to the
definition that we, we picked
because it was very
prescriptive, but it also could
potentially have that. I know we
we include things like
winemaking, family farms.
But Madam Chair Representative,
I will ask uh Mr. Nichols as
well to opine on that because
that could indeed be be
included.
So Madam Chair Representative,
um,
Definitively we're saying that
this also includes tourists of
cannabis farms. Is that correct,
Madam Chair Representative, I am
not sure. I don't believe so,
but I will defer to Mr. Nichols
because he, he was integral in
the drafting of this very
carefully drafted bill.
Mr. Nichols.
Madam Chair, uh, members of the
committee, um, Representative
Romero, I, I, I believe it
wouldn't, um, if it were set up,
um,
Similar to a wine tour, it
could, it could fall under this
definition, and it could be
educational and um
Uh
Unless there's something
specific in the Cannabis Act
that um would prohibit it, uh,
and off the top of my head, I
cannot think of um
Anything that would
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. Was that your
intent to be able to allow that
kind of
Tourism.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. My, my intent
was to include all agritourism,
so I didn't want to pick and
choose winners and losers, but
if they are indeed included
because they are absolutely
agriculture. I wouldn't want to.
Be exclusive to only certain
types of industry which I
wouldn't find to be fair, Mature
and representative. That's great
to hear, Madam Chair
Representative, cause usually
we're in opposing views on
everything cannabis related, so
with this, I, I appreciate that.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
I really do just have a, a huge
pause on the um limited
liability piece, um.
Just on the um how it is
addressed in the bill. I think
it needs uh quite a bit of work.
Um, as to be in line with some
of our other industry tours and
and tourism. I mean we can see
film industry having a variety
of different um opportunities to
visit. I know, um,
film, uh
sites when they're when they are
filming and they are doing that,
and there's a a huge amount of
waivers that needs to, that
needs to be signed and filled
out. NDAs, etc. um, I think the
in at your own risk sort of um
level for this bill is, is quite
um
Quite a bit too broad for me
that's what we're trying to
allow for, um, but with that I
er.
OK, would I be able to just uh,
no.
OK, sounds good. So, uh,
representative Hall.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Block, um, how
did the dairy farmers feel about
this, Bill?
Man.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
and representative. So we have
spoken to many different kinds
of agricultural outfits. I
believe I did actually speak to
someone who was a dairy farmer
who had a positive reaction to
it. I won't say that they would,
they endorsed the bill because I
didn't didn't, they weren't able
to read it, but Madam Chair
Representative, I do know that
Mr. Nichols, his family does own
a ranch and a farm, and they
actually might be able to help
me with this question, so I'm
just going to defer quickly to
Mr. Nichols, Madam Chair.
Mr. Nichols.
Uh
Madam Chair, members committee,
uh, represent all, um, I, I did,
I have not spoken to dairy
farmers specifically. I think
that would be great, um, uh,
and, and to be really
educational and, and, and a
great experience, but um.
Uh, I, I have not spoken any,
uh, directly on this matter.
Madam Chair Representative
Block, so when the public
attends.
Fair and the rodeos and
everything, and they walk around
with the live stalker, they
required to sign NDAs before
entering the fairground.
I.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative.
No fear that I have been to, but
I do know that there is there
are provisions in this for
anything that could involve such
things that there there are
waivers that can be signed on
page 3. It talks about waivers
and then there also are some
provisions talking about signage
that we need to have if it's
something that could inherently
be a risk.
That's all I've got, Madam
Chair. Thank you.
Thank you. uh, Representative
Homan v. Hill and then
representative of Beta. Thank
you very much, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative Block,
um, just picking up on the
concerns of my colleague from
Santa Fe, um, Madam Chair
Representative.
So just, I'm just trying to
understand the logic of
including the limited liability
section on this, I mean.
talking about agritourism, which
can be a bunch of different
things, but you know, let's talk
about, let's say a ski mountain.
Or an amusement park or um
skydiving. We don't pass laws in
the state of New Mexico that
specifically allow for
limitations and liability for
Those
Activities, um, and I would
also, I'd also submit to you,
Madam Chair, Representative that
in those
Types of activities and
situations, you just simply sign
a waiver.
If you want to, um, a waiver of
liability if you want to engage
um in those activities. So
Mountain Chair Representative,
why not just have people sign a
waiver here, why don't need to
codify a limited liability in
law.
Thank you so much, madam Chair
and Representative Madam Flo
leader or Madam Whip rather. So,
that's a, that's a really
interesting point. I believe,
Madam Chair, representative,
this is meant to be a little
more what I would like to say,
uh, friendly to the agriculture
industry because we don't want
to force people in every single
situation, like if you go to a
cherry farm to pick some
cherries.
I, I wouldn't want to force
every single family to sign,
sign their life away on a waiver
before they pick a basket of
cherries. So Madam Chair
Representative, I do know that
there, there are inherent risks
in in many of these activities,
but I will also, if you'd like,
I can ask Mr. Nichols to opine
on, on why we did that
specifically, if he has
something to say, Madam Chair,
and representative.
Um, Madam Chair, uh, members
Committee, um.
To respond to that, uh, alpine
skiing, there is the alpine, New
Mexico, New Mexico skier safety
act clip which um does just
that, uh, and, and there's the
equine liability Act and um
It is a waiver in of itself has
no teeth. This legislation, uh,
actually will, will give backing
to the waivers, uh, without
this, um, the waivers
essentially not worth the paper
it's written on, uh, and
insurance companies uh know that
too. Uh, at least uh over 31
states have passed legislation
with language exactly like this,
and in those states,
agritourism.
op er ator s have abundance of
options for insurance. Uh, we
have
Little options in New Mexico.
Uh, there's, there's two
companies that will serve the
state and uh and there are
options they provide are very
limited, uh, because there is no
type of protection like this.
Thank you. So Madam Chair
Representative, is it, are you
positing here?
That this section is included in
your proposed legislation simply
because it's the only thing that
will get
Agritourism providers insured in
the state?
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. It is one of the
reasons and also many of these
farms, since it is so expensive
when it comes to obtaining this
insurance, a lot of these small
farms and local communities
across our state and many of our
districts are leaving because
they just cannot find an
insurance policy that will
indeed protect them. And so
with, with all the costs of
living going up as we know
currently, everything is very
tight margins. So, Madam Chair
representative, that is
definitely one spoke on the
wheel of
Which we're trying to fix today.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you.
Thank you, uh, Representative
Beta. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. Um,
can you please tell me how this
will impact
Pumpkin patches were thousands
of children visit every season
and what the liability for them
means.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
and Representative and good
question. So that is included in
the bill, uh, pumpkin patches,
and we all like to go visit
them, we like to do the hay
rides and stuff, but Madam Chair
representative, when it comes to
just picking a pumpkin, right,
you're just picking pumpkins,
you could get bitten by a bee,
for example, and so this is just
trying to protect folks from
liability from things like that
that are just naturally
occurring things that we have no
control whatsoever over, but
it's not about anything
regarding, say, a pothole in the
road.
It comes to a bump on the, on
the hay ride and you fall out,
right? That, that would
definitely be something that we
would.
still be liable for these
agritourist agritourism
operators, they'd still be
liable for that, Madam Chair and
Representative Obeta.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. Can you
tell me what page that says that
on.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. So on page 3,
And you go to line 11 through
13. It says commit.
Pardon me.
commits an act or a mission that
constitutes willful, wanton, or
reckless disregard for the
safety of the participants and
the act or omission.
Uh
Approximately uh causes injury
or death to the parts of the
participant, pardon me.
Madam Chair Representative.
slightly disagree with that, and
that's the end of my question.
Thank you.
Thank you. I'm happy to
entertain emotion.
Madam Cha moves the table.
We have a motion to table, which
is not discussable.
I
You call the rope?
Representative Abeta, yes.
Representative Chavez. No.
Representative Hall.
Representative Hoffman B. Hill.
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
No.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen.
Representative Reed.
No.
Leer Sapansky. Yes.
Madam Vice Chair, yes.
Madam Chair, yes.
of Charlotte.
OK, we, um, the motion to table
66 to 4.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
Yeah, it's it's always a
pleasure to be in front of
different committees and it's
good to be in front of yours. I
will be back.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative.
All right
Next up is um prior
authorizations, process
exemptions.
House Bill 461.
Welcome, chairwoman, and
Miss Siegel
Good evening.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, prior authorization
is a process in which healthcare
providers must obtain approval
from healthcare insurance plans
before providing medical
services to patients. While
promised as a way to contain
cost.
In the health care system, prior
authorization has turned into a
bureaucratic nightmare for
providers and patients alike,
delaying necessary care for
patients and creating hundreds
of hours of red tape for
providers. House Bill 461
addresses this nightmare by
establishing a process through
which a provider can earn an
exemption from the requirements
of prior authorization.
House Bill 461 would establish a
six-month evaluation period. If
during that time a provider had
a 90% or higher approval rating
for all their prior
authorization request for
outpatient services, the
healthcare provider could then
apply for an exemption from all
prior authorizations for
outpatient services moving
forward. This insurance company,
the, excuse me, the insurance
company would retain the right
to
it the providers to ensure they
continue to meet the 90%
approval rating, and, of course,
the insurance company.
If the insurance company
suspected fraud, waste, or
abuse, they could revoke the
healthcare provider's exemption.
Madam Chair, the bill was
amended in house to clarify on
page 2, line 21. This bill would
not apply to pharmaceuticals.
This bill, we really want wanted
to focus on test surgeries,
imaging, and procedures. We are
talking about things like
amniocentesis for pregnant
mothers, echocardiograms for
heart patients, MRIs for torn
ACLs, feeding studies for
toddlers and lumpectomies for
suspected breast cancer. These
proceed procedures and
diagnostic tests are the very
lifeblood of what it.
Means to practice medicine, but
each of one of them required
prior prior authorization.
Um, I think it is time that we
trust our healthcare providers
to make appropriate medical
decisions for their patients
without waiting on insurance
companies to grant them
permission to treat patients
with medical interventions we
know these patients need. Um, I
have with me as my expert
witness, Linda Siegel, and with
that we stand for questions.
Um, thank you, um, chairwoman.
Let's go to the audience, those
wishing to speak in opposition.
approached the gentleman with
the microphone.
Don't see anyone. Those online
wishing to speak in opposition,
please raise your hand.
Those in the audience wishing to
speak in support, please
approach the gentleman with
microphone.
Those online wishing to speak in
support, please raise your hand.
I see Carrie printer.
Hello?
Hello, Madam Chair and members
of the committee, Carrie Robin
Bruder with the New Mexico
Medical Society. This was
identified for us by our members
over the interim is a very high
priority for them so that they
can spend more time actually
treating the patients that need
their services and less time
going through the bureaucratic
hoops. We very much appreciate
all the work that has been done
on this bill and we urge uh do
pass motion. Thank you so much,
Madam Chair.
Thank you.
responses or anything else
before we go to committee? No,
man, with that we stand for
questions. Great. OK.
Questions or comments, uh
members.
How can the man and do pass.
OK, we hold that cause I have a
question.
Why don't we just say no prior
approvals.
I think
you know, let's just say that.
Doctors know what their patients
need. Insurance companies don't
really necessarily. They have
these made up rules that are
cumbersome sometimes and maybe
not even related to reality, um,
let's say no.
I'm with you, um, Madam Chair,
I, you know, I think by us
saying at the 90% mark, that's
that's where we want to go, but.
We, we left a little room in
there, yeah.
Because it's still kind of goes
back to the the insurer because
they're saying.
If you, the approval rating is
what it matters, you know, like
what we would have approved is
what should be how you're
graded, not whether it's good
medical, you know, advice or
process and um maybe that's why
doctors are leaving the state.
Well, maybe if we can get this
bill passed, we can have a
little data and maybe we can and
then go to your, your way of
thinking, Madam Chair.
OK, um, you know, I'm, I admire
you for taking it on, yeah, it's
just unfortunate we have to do
these kind of
And contortions when really, you
know, we, I'd like to be able to
rely on medical advice and, you
know, um, that should be the
standard, not somebody sitting
next to a computer.
Deciding whether it's good
advice or not. Um.
OK, we have a do pass motion by
um Representative Hackman v.
Hild seconded by um and
Martinez, uh, what you call the
roll, please. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Representative Abeta,
yes.
Representative Chavez, yes.
Representative Hall.
Representative Kaufman V. Hill.
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
Yes.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen. Yes.
Represented Free.
Yes.
Peter Sapansky, yes.
Madam vice chair, yes.
Met chair
Yes, Madam Chair, you have a due
pass on House Bill 461 as
amended.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Committee. Thank you. Good
night.
We only have one more bill, so
it's getting better. Um.
So
Representative of Martinez has
kindly offered to present on
Representative Sareana's bill,
and so that is House Bill 159.
Um, representative.
Thank you, madam chair members
of the committee, I bring you
House Bill 159.
Um, this requires developers or
owners of renewable energy or
other projects to notify the
chair of the military base
planning commission of a notice
of proposed construction, uh,
they would do this, uh, what
would trigger this would be the
report that's submitted to the
Federal Aviation Administration,
um, and I have my expert
witness, Mr. Paul Cassidy, um,
to answer all the tough
questions.
OK, I see some members might
have questions, but let's go to
the
And I, I don't see an Audi. Oh,
I do see an audience, those
wishing to speak in opposition,
please approach the gentleman,
um, with the microphone.
OK, I don't see anyone. Those
wishing to speak in opposition
online, please raise your hand.
Don't see anyone.
Those in the audience wishing to
speak in support, please
approach the gentleman with the
microphone.
Good evening, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, Rickie
Lee Chavez, on behalf of Inner
West Energy Alliance, we do, um,
stand in support of House Bill
159. Um, I know some of you have
seen this before and know that
the expert and the sponsor have
worked, um, really well with us
to address all of our concerns
on behalf of the utility scale
uh renewable industry in the
last committee, there was an
agreement to extend the 10.
notice period to 30 days. Um, I
recognize that there are some
sponsor considerations as to why
that might not have um ended up
in this committee in written
format, but we have um spoken
with the expert and the current
sponsor, and we hope that that
can be um something that this
committee addresses and that
does allow us to stand in full
support of the bill. Thank you
for your consideration. We
appreciate you.
Thank you, um, those online
wishing to speak and support,
please raise your hand. OK, um,
Mr. Moody, um,
One minute, please.
Madam Chair and members of the
community, uh, committee. My
name is Richard Moody, and I'm a
member of the New Mexico
Veterans and Military Families
Caucus. Our caucus supports HP
159 and its efforts to help
safeguard our military. Any
energy project near one of uh
New Mexico's 4 military bases
has a potential impact on the
safety of military personnel and
aircraft. HP 159 would help
coordinate future construction
or expansion of existing
facilities with the military
bases planning commissions, and
we
that you give this bill a due
pass. Thank you for your time.
Thank you. Anyone else online?
I don't see anyone.
Back to the sponsoring anything.
Did you want to comment on the
30 day, 10 day thing.
sponsor or expert, I understand,
um, represent Martinez is
standing in.
Uh, Madam Chair and committee
members, pleasure to be here.
Thank you for scheduling us. We
really appreciate it and thanks
to our Representative Martinez
and Sarannana and Senator Pope
for putting this forward, uh, as
a member of the military-based
planning commission, we support
mission-related items that come
before us and the biggest issue
we've had over the last 16 years
is encroachment activities,
anti-encroachment is our goal to
preserve flight training
missions.
That were properly neat but and
so forth over uh decades, um, we
just want a bill that's simply
notification by the industry and
thanked them for working with us
so that the military-based
planning commission, once they
know there's a project we can
make sure the commanders and the
folks on base around New Mexico
can can communicate,
communication is our goal, madam
chair. I hear you, and that was
super helpful. But do you agree
that the
days should be 30 days. I
understood there was some
discussion maybe with the
sponsor and as you know, there's
some personal things,
yeah, yes, we, we agree to the
30 days, absolutely, OK, and I'm
wondering if someone who might
be willing to entertain us on
the fly motion to do that. Mad
like to make a motion to strike
each to line 8, the number 10.
And in lie thereof like the word
30. OK.
All right.
Um, I, I have Madam Chair, on
line 12. 0, good. Thanks. Good
catch. Good catch.
Uh, also on line 12, page 2,
line 12. There's a 10 days and
that's a now should be a 30
days, so we have um page 2 line
8.
Strike 10 and insert 30.
And um um same page, line 12,
strike 10 and add 30.
OK.
Got that. Uh.
Do we have a second for that
motion to amend. I'll say, OK,
made by representative um
Romero and seconded by
Representative Reeb, any
opposition to that amendment.
I don't see any, OK, so you now,
we now have an amended bill, um,
let's talk about the bill now.
Any questions or concerns? Um, I
would move for due pass bills
and bills 159 is amended I. OK.
I do pass motion, um, made by
Representative Reed, seconded by
Representative Hall, uh, would
you call the role?
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative of Beta, yeah.
Representative Chavez, yes.
Representative
Representative Homan B. Hill,
yes.
Representative Martinez.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen.
Representative Reed, yes.
Leader Sapansky, yes.
Madam Vice Chair.
Madam Chair.
Yeah
That's thank you, Madam Chair,
you have a due pass on 159 twice
amended.
All right. Madam Chair members
of the committee. Thank you very
much. Of course. All right. Um.
Another good complete agenda,
um, appreciate all your hard
work. We will meet at 8:30
tomorrow and
I know I've said this before. We
have food and there will be
enough. I have measures in
place.
I'm learning so with that we'll
adjourn.
