Here.
Representative Eli there.
Representative Lewis.
Representative McQueen here.
Representative night.
Your.
Representative Rehm.
Representative Townsend.
We don't.
There
were years.
There.
It
was and I need to be sure that
I'm a co host I I well read you
already are well I just I was
not able to meet somebody who
didn't realize his Mike was on
just now so I don't know why I'm
asking yes you're not.
Okay we have at.
We're beginning today with house
bill one thirty two and on and
on the floor of the house.
I am going to do it again at the
beginning of each bill I'm.
I want to limit public comment
so there's ample discussion time
for each of these bills and we
simply can't.
All of our bills take a lot of
discussion and we really don't
want to be here for twelve hours
is not fair to the staff so we
are going to have public comment
on this and the other bills
today of twenty minutes per side
and I have already spoken with
the opponents and they will have
twenty minutes and I think that
means they may get up to two
minutes apiece and then the
Propontis I ask the sponsor and
she has twenty people identified
and they will each speak for one
minute okay.
Then we will take the time
that's necessary in the
committee so with that I would
like to let R. Sanchez doesn't
have data
began.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee thank
you for the opportunity to
present house bill one thirty
two before this committee I'm
going to keep my remarks very
brief and that my expert witness
to speak at the public comments
and that the members of the
committee have ample time for
questions I would like to add
that is my intention to add
amendments on the house floor
eliminating section K. and
changing the reporting date to
January first two thousand
twenty three as recommended by
the F. I. R. if there are other
questions we can hear those in
this committee House practices
and time constraints that may
sometimes get the empire as late
in the day and in the interest
of time I did not want to delay
the data this hearing everyone
on this committee understands.
Everyone agrees that a hundred
and seventy five percent right
it is exorbitant the question is
what right do we Senator
legislature and the real
question is about credit access
in credit availability how do we
protect New Mexican families
from financial hardship that's
really the question of this
committee legislators before me
created NFI do study and I have
put a summary for you and the
results are sobering over four
hundred and twenty thousand long
for taking out twenty twenty the
total loan amount was a hundred
and seventy nine million just in
each of you a summary of the F.
I do report along with the cost
of credit report I including
different loan amounts in
different terms we all struggle
with this decision including me
this debate is been going on for
years I've always wanted to
thirty six percent cap on small
loans and you all know than
twenty twenty one I carried in
ninety nine percent after months
under eleven hundred and thirty
six percent cap for over eleven
hundred and I did that because
it was the best I could get.
I'm old enough to not let that
perfect standing with the
possible I'm going with the
thirty six percent right because
as a nation we have much more
data on the effects of lowering
that person entry thirty six
percent and I never thought this
is a Democrat or a Republican
bill I've always known that
thoughtful people on both sides
of the aisle I understand the
enormity of this problem I think
this committee should pass this
bill at that thirty six percent
cap the houses every and had the
chance to vote on a thirty six
percent cap for those reasons I
hope you will consider passing
this bill and recommending it to
the house floor for
consideration with that madam
chair I would like to introduce
my two expert witnesses and
Myers Mr Myers was the director
of the consumer protection
division at the attorney
general's office for eight years
and then went on to be the
deputy director in the office of
enforcement and federal consumer
financial protection bureau from
twenty nineteen to twenty one
one for non this is a president
New Mexico credit union
association with that madam
chair I would ask that miss
Myers to address many.
Sorry hello unmute madam chair
members of the committee good
afternoon I'd like to thank
Representative Herrera speaker
egolf Representative Garrett and
all the other Sanchez for moving
this bill forward.
In my work I have interviewed
numerous borrowers and heard
their stories about the impact
of high cost loans on their
lives I reviewed many loan files
to better understand the
practices of lenders because of
the borrowers with whom I've
talked then I'm here today to
strongly urge you to pass house
bill one thirty two.
The question is been asked over
the last years when this issue
was discussed is where will
people go when they need help to
address that concern New Mexico
including community groups
advocacy organ positions and
state and local governments have
been expanding options for
people who face a financial bind
or in need of financial help.
Some of these options are non
credit options that put money
into people's income stream
which are also important as part
of the solution for the
challenges we face some of the
initiatives that have been
adopted do that ledges the
legislature recently expanded
the working families tax credit.
Legislature passed the lowincome
comprehensive tax rebate.
Both of these programs put money
into working families up pockets
as well as low income non
working seniors and allows them
to have more income to meet
their needs and to address
there in the seventies without
borrowing.
Legislature raise the minimum
wage which also does that last
year the legislature passed
legislation to help families
facing medical debt which will
protect families from the
adverse impact of medical debt
collection which is often a
reason for taking out the high
cost loan.
Families who face financial
needs for rent or utilities
we've seen an unprecedented
financial assistance during the
pandemic over ninety three
million dollars have been
distributed to municipalities
throughout New Mexico to help
them pay rent utilities so that
they can preserve their housing
and preserve the utilities many
credit unions with locations
throughout New Mexico offer
small dollar loans at rates less
than thirty percent and one
Fernandez will be addressing
that in more depth.
When you compare credit used
high cost lenders.
I just that you remember that
the marketing budget in
advertising of high cost lenders
and round out the alternatives
to credit alternatives and make
folks think the loan at a
hundred and seventy five is
their only option we can all
play a part in changing that
message.
Authority works is certainly
changed yes Representative
participated in that by bringing
to connect to New Mexico which
is an employee lawyer based loan
program is now offered in twelve
counties five cities and towns
to community colleges one school
district and one private
employer all without a check a
credit check a for a one year
term at rates far below thirty
six percent.
Public kirke is working to bank
on Berkey to expand access to
safe affordable of bank and
credit union accounts
for unbanked up folks throughout
the state so there are many
solutions already in place which
provide credit and non credit
financial turnips for
individuals and families facing
financial stress and we can and
should compete for New is
opportunities what we should not
do is abandon our families
friends and neighbors to lenders
who charge a have hundred
seventy five interests hundred
seventy five percent.
Annual interest rate which makes
family financial situations
worse not better.
When we previously talked about
what's happened in other states
who have enacted thirty six
percent Nebraska Illinois
Montana South Dakota and most
recently in Illinois in the last
year
did that with a comprehensive
of change for thirty six percent
of for all their loans.
Much like we're trying to do
today
as of this month in Illinois
there are still over five
hundred lenders listed in their
license the list making these
loans and with them they report
that there are sixty seven new
lenders who opened business in
Illinois after the law went into
affect their community
development financial
institution.
All and one of them so I seventy
percent increase in loan
applications from new borrowers
and Dr Kota their lot change in
twenty sixteen there was a study
done in twenty twenty where they
ask focus group borrowers about
how they felt about the right
they found strong continuing
support and a very strong
feeling to keep the high cost
lenders out of the state they
also have found that credit
unions had an uptick in their
landing.
This demonstrates that borrows
will seek out alternative
lending options and that
alternative living options can
exist in the state at thirty six
percent.
No no I just recently reported a
very interesting data point
which they said that the right
thing up the calculated that the
rate of Lente from between
twenty nineteen and twenty
twenty had been reduced and they
for a late that that with the
fact that in twenty twenty many
families have gotten stimulus
legislation from the federal
government interestingly enough
the same phenomenon has occurred
in New Mexico the range of
borrowers in the range of ending
reduced when they got stimulus
checks money in their pocket.
So recapped the thirty six
percent has been shown to be the
essential component of
affordable lending president
labels borrowers to make
progress in paying down the
principal and makes the loan
costs reasonable thus allowing
them to build credit and avoid
default.
Representative Herrera.
Reference the data I need to be
very brief about that we can
answer questions if you have
more in depth questions but
there's two data points I want
to point out.
The data shows that borrowers
paid more than a hundred and
seventy six million dollars in
interest and fees for
installment loans and more than
two point six million dollars in
interest for for refund
anticipation loans according to
FID forty three percent of all
loans.
Are made in Kenley San Juan and
Dona Ana County when put
together that means that seventy
seven million dollars in
interest and fees is drained
from those three counties hello.
As I do data confirms that loans
are made to borrowers who are
unable to pay that without
refinancing only forty fourteen
percent fourteen percent of the
installment loans in twenty
twenty would be paid in full
without refinancing for re
borrowing and only twenty three
percent of all installment for
worse were actually able to pay
off the loan without refinancing
or borrowing in twenty twenty.
The data also shows the impact
on lowincome and fixed income
families I urge you to vote a to
pass on house bill one thirty
two.
Thank you madam chair economic I
just want I'm just.
Thank you very much madam chair
representative representatives
good afternoon.
I'll keep my my comments brief
and being respectful of your
time and of course I'll be here
to to answer any questions so my
name is once then this there are
those on the presidency of the
credit union association of New
Mexico and I stand before you
today representing forty New
Mexico based credit unions and
for credit unions from out of
state that half branch
operations in the state of New
Mexico.
Together we have branches north
south east and west all over the
state of New Mexico serving
working families we have credit
unions that that have a
particular emphasis on teachers
electric workers city and county
employees Montoya you workers
immigrants hospitality and
restaurant workers underserved
communities so in other words we
truly have the entire state of
New Mexico covered in fact many
small rural communities only
have a credit union as their
source for financial services
and of course we have branches
in and and metro areas and and
and in rural areas in the in
particular Karen Myers mention
Los crucis low first like credit
union and and out of el Paso has
three branches in Los crucis
right now they have over two
thousand outstanding small
dollar loans helping community
members with alternatives to
predatory loans.
We together in New Mexico have
over one million member owners
of these are working people that
are not just customers that
credit unions but own their
credit unions and together we
are coming up with solutions to
really step up to the plate and
serve people that right now may
not be able to make ends meet
and be able to pay their or
their up their payments for
their next slide up between
paychecks.
the last thing I'm going to
mention.
Is that at the end of the day I
want to remind everyone what the
origins of credit unions are
back in the nineteen thirties
when for profit financial
institutions were only taking
set up savings accounts or
savings from from working people
they were not Lente those
communities truly Representative
the true definition of redlining
that's one credit union stepped
up to the plate in the nineteen
thirties operations were part of
the new deal and we saw an
increase of over five thousand
credit unions that were created
after Frank after FDR signed the
federal credit union act into
law in nineteen thirty four
credit unions have been here
before we have come up with
solutions and innovations when
we were part of the new deal to
help consumers have access to
credit during of the Great
Depression and we're gonna be
here again when the legislature
passes this piece of legislation
to cap interest rates at thirty
six percent thank you very much.
You madam chair that.
Each.
So are you ready for us to go to
the public now.
Okay
I'm going to begin let's see
what will start with a poll.
So you've got public comment up
there but let's do the full
first real quickly.
So are you.
Here we go.
This will be open for twenty
minutes just indicate if you're
for or against the
house bill one thirty two.
Madam chair I hope you meant
twenty seconds which is the
twenty.
This not even Monday.
Yes to.
Twenty seconds we have seventy
four percent in favor and
outreach with seventy five
percent in favor and twenty five
percent in opposition
as I answered earlier we're
going to begin with the
In the public comment with the
those in opposition and I'd so
I'd like only those in
opposition to raise your hands
and
Let's see sit in the hands
raised here.
Okay.
Okay now what this is going to
be two minutes for the
opposition if you are in favor
of this bill please take your
hand down.
I know is the people who are in
favor this bill who have their
hands up so.
We're doing the opposition two
minutes apiece ten people.
Hi this is.
Can you hear me yes.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee on Paul guessing
president of the Rio Grande
foundation public policy
research institute based in
Albuquerque in dealing with
public policy issues across the
state of New Mexico I urge you
to oppose this legislation which
would place an arbitrary thirty
six percent rate cap on loans
and cut off consumer demand for
low income New Mexicans
supporters of the bill site the
military lending act as a reason
to pass it what the MLA has
failed and service members are
suffering because of it the
annual military financial
readiness survey conducted by
the national foundation for
credit counseling found that
since the MLA imposed a thirty
six percent cap service members
were twice as likely to be
unable to pay their medical
bills on time their bills on
time as they were five years
earlier there were more than
twice as likely to seek out less
safe from predatory forms of
credit because there are few
options available to them and
the problem has reached the
point where the consumer
financial protection bureau has
had to take action against
predatory on lenders for
providing service members with
loans in excess of the MLAs
thirty six percent right passing
this bill is a bill on the
assumption that hard working New
Mexicans who rely on installment
loans to meet emergency
financial needs will still have
access to credit after the bill
passes if there were other
lenders ready to step in and
make loans to the same people at
much lower cost they would and
could be doing so today without
any action for the legislature
to urge you to oppose this
harmful legislation thank you
for your time.
Thank you right and passionate.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I represent
consumers domino wonders
Association.
Who are not predatory payday
lender as some have described to
me we are not against reducing
the one hundred seventy five
percent we've been trying to
work with people all over to try
to figure out a way to get there
it's been pointed out that one
third of Hispanics are less than
twenty thousand per year have
less than one thousand savings
sealer helps them to there are
times of safe affordable loans
see I have four hundred eighty
six locations will pay.
Okay rant throughout the state
it employs thirteen hundred
ninety five New Mexicans at an
annual salary of forty six
thousand seven or nineteen
dollars annual total
compensation sixty five million
dollars per year they pay the
state about six million and the
company and taxes and licenses
per year the total economic
impact is over nine hundred
fifteen million dollars per year
and over five years has been
over four billion dollars the
reason I bring this up is
because several people seem to
think that all this money is
going out of state but nothing
is staying here but that is not
accurate because the one thirty
two passed many of the jobs you
back to the state
fair loans will be lost comment
is really cause some problem I
agree with that it's important
to note.
Thank you credit juniors
contrary to what you've heard.
Not lan money to low income at
that thirty six percent unless
they have money in the account
with their credit unions that is
a way that works the end up
going if we lose this they will
end up going to real predators
in online loans and there are so
many solutions for low incomes
we're willing to compete with
these people if that's accurate
you feel will compete but we
need this bill defeated and a
chance to work something out so
we can get something done thank
you very much madam chair.
Our.
Thank you madam chair this is
Dennis are representing access
I'm not sure my client opposes
this legislation but is not
supporting the status quo we had
the opportunity over the last
year to meet with the times with
sponsor with other legislators
we've met twice with the New
Mexico and other consumer groups
we've shared our financial model
and our overhead expenses to
show them how we operate how we
decide who gets a loan and what
kind of money we make and what
costs we conquer we found that
thirty six percent loan four
thousand dollars for twelve
months pays us seventeen dollars
and seventeen cents a month in
interest which doesn't cover one
hour of employee worked.
We didn't stop with having these
meetings we also attempted in
Illinois to operate under their
new law at thirty six percent
and contrary to information you
heard earlier our research
indicated that the today and
small loan industry.
But that there were eighteen
hundred companies licensed in
the twenty twenty today there
are fourteen companies licensed
Illinois Illinois in that area
seven those are my client we are
getting out of the business
because after year attempting to
order.
West of the lenders.
Your increased by eight hundred
percent and our losses were
still staggering we respectfully
request that you reject this
legislation and are happy to
stand for questions thank you.
I'm sure can we just okay seeing
to mute himself because we're
getting a lot of background one
sorry I commuted thank you.
I guess I can't Paul Gibson
would you please do it yourself.
And Ramon Sanchez please make
yourself standards are please
meet yourself.
This is Danielle are low.
Daniel R. low.
Are you going to speak in
against this bill.
Sorry there are a lot of
participants here today is
taking a long time to scroll
through the natives.
Jessica ward.
R. yes this is Jessica are able
to hear me okay your all right
I'm testifying in my capacity as
director of state affairs for
national taxpayers union the
oldest taxpayer advocacy
organization in the country I
hope you'll consider opposing H.
B. one thirty two while
proponents of the cap into and
predatory lending the
implementation of the proposed
change in law will actually
prevent consumers with poor
credit scores from accessing
credit products during a period
of financial need the unintended
consequences of this legislation
will be far worse than any year
honestly anticipated gains and
will disproportionately affect
minorities who suffer from low
credit scores.
Currently consumers of credit
woes cash shortages and under
banking are able to access
credit through the free market
development and lending markets
and should be viewed positively
not labeled as predaceous if the
goal of HB one thirty two is to
increase financial stability
among New Mexicans limiting the
ability for small banks to
partner with third party lenders
and effort to improve credit
scores defies logic contrary to
the belief of those who support
H. B. one thirty two traditional
installment loans offered by
smaller lending institutions are
safe and transparent method for
consumers attempting to create
positive credit histories while
larger lending institutions
require barber borrowers to have
establish credit foundation
partnerships among smaller
institutions offer those
institutions to provide
financial services to clients
who pose greater borrowing risk
the proposal before you will
harm New Mexico's most
on all population during a time
when they're already grappling
with the economic downturn
created by the COVID nineteen
pandemic and a predatory loans
is a lot of local however H. P.
one thirty two the misguided
legislative initiative that
ultimately hurts the population
is striving to protect if
enacted the thirty six percent
rate cap and restrictions placed
on personal loans will
effectively punish those less
fortunate prevent them from
establishing credit as such I
respectfully ask that you reject
this proposal thank you for your
time and thank you madam.
Rick you can use.
Yes.
Okay thank you madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Dr Ricky keys that I am
president of renewal finance
services I've spent all of my
career working with
organizations like N. B. C. S.
L. M. eight CSL Nobel women
African American passes local
branches of the N. double ACP
amongst others to ensure
equitable access to needed
resources.
Corona by the Corona virus
pandemic is taught the entire
world several important lessons
yes health challenge
disproportionately impacted
areas that lack readily
available and desperately needed
resources thanks pharmacies
grocery stores and hospitals
among other resources make a
communities vulnerability index
the vulnerability index what how
well community handles the
replications of health
challenges are are basically the
ways that they handle health
challenges New Mexico has a
substantial vulnerability index
my primary goal has been to
identify and address statutes
that affect vulnerable
communities financial services
or credit does is is substantial
in communities throughout this
country especially the state of
New Mexico.
Last you would miss the closing
up two thousand nine hundred and
twenty seven retail bank
branches the most ever in a
calendar year high desert State
Bank in Albuquerque was one of
the banks that closed in New
Mexico we are working to
identify the others I believe
that the passage of this bill
will exacerbate credit that sits
in the state of New Mexico I'm
available for questions.
Tom Miller.
Mr Miller you're on mute I'm
unmuted I believe okay go ahead
thank you madam chair hello
madam chair and committee
members my name is Tom Miller
I'm a finance professor at
Mississippi State University I
hold the Jack our lead Cherry
consumer finance I have a simple
message today right caps do not
make loans less expensive rate
caps make loans less available
especially for loans less than
say twenty five hundred dollars
perhaps the ninety nine percent
rate is appropriate for loans up
to that amount.
Right cap harm consumers need
access to credit for example I
am currently studying what
happened in Illinois after
thirty six percent interest rate
cap was imposed in twenty twenty
one according to data from the
credit bureau the number of
loans made to deep subprime
consumers fell by forty seven
percent in the following quarter
where would they go for credit.
After my home state of Montana
imposed to recap the number of
new small dollar installment
loans fell to zero researchers
from the Federal Reserve Bank in
New York examined the effects of
rate caps in Georgia and North
Carolina after these rate caps
were imposed over more bounced
checks more unpaid bills and
more bankruptcy filings all bad
things the right capital harm
your constituents especially
those with low credit scores I
urge you to oppose a blanket
thirty six percent interest rate
cap moreover I would like to
close in state any member who
would like to have a more in
depth conversation about my root
reserves I would welcome the
opportunity to do so thank you.
Thank you I'm going to go to.
You want to that last we have.
Our committee has a person who
wants to speak against that
would be the last comment that
that person's on our panel so
that's why I'm not seeing it in
the attendee list we have to
work people do that Emory.
Thank you madam chair my name is
Junie B. access Representative
one main financial the leader in
offering non prime customers
responsible credit well we
support the goal of addressing
predatory lending we reluctantly
have to oppose this bill this
bill would wipe out almost all
credit including responsible
loans for non prime and low
income customers who need access
to funds and credit building
options.
Aligning the rate cap to thirty
six percent calculated by the
federal reserve's Rexy and the
truth in lending act for large
loans would preserve many
responsible credit options in
New Mexico.
Fifty percent of Americans have
no life insurance.
And just one third of people
have disability insurance.
Applying the military lending
act calculation to everyone
would prevent thousands of
people from accessing the state.
From across the state from
having access to insurance
options and help help them
withstand the inevitable shock
that happen to everyday family
or credit the credit building
Jersey thank you.
Please go ahead David Emery.
Can you hear me I'm sorry yes we
can.
Are good at it good good
afternoon madam chair members of
the committee my name is David
Emory and I'm The New Mexico
regional manager for QC
financial.
Now if I could please share an
example with you a we have a
customer named Andrew he's a
single father who is recently
divorced Andrew shot himself in
a position where he needed to
purchase some specialized
medical equipment for his
daughter and replaces hot water
heater in this home.
And you thought he had an ace in
the hole he thought he'd be able
to borrow money easily but when
he was unsuccessful in his
attempts to borrow money from
his employer who by the way is a
major it was a major bank in the
metro area Andrew turned to us
and we were successful in
helping Andrew now yes Andrew
isn't able to borrow money from
the bank being an employee of
the bank just imagine how
difficult it must be for our
fellow New Mexicans in these
types of situations we
understand it's important that
New Mexico needs to clean up and
right get rain and the rogue
actors but it's important that
people like and you have a safe
efficient and practical way to
have their needs met we need to
see financial stand ready and
being part of the conversation
regarding future regulations
thank you for your time today.
Thank you can voice.
Can you hear me.
Yes.
Good afternoon I'm employed with
title cache in Artesia New
Mexico
if this bill is passed I will
not have a job anymore I want
him income or insurance and I
will probably lose my home I
also have had to borrow money
from another loan company and it
was not for them I would not
have been able to pay some bills
and get back on my feet.
I do I really am against this
bill and I hope that it does not
pass thank you.
Thank you I have one more Joseph
Rubin.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you members of the committee
thank you Representative Herrera
my name is Joe Ruben I'm here on
behalf of.
can you hear me yes okay sorry a
few quick points I'd like to
make so and they generally
relate to the federal consumer
financial protection bureau
which is been discussed a little
bit earlier today first of all
in two thousand seventeen the
CFPB issued a rule in to in the
words of director Cordray put a
stop to payday debt traps well
the rules been tied up in
litigation I did want to note
that the approach that the CFPB
took was to propose a
requirement that lenders
ascertain it consumers ability
to repay along with other
consumer protections but did not
seek to smoke band small dollar
loans and did not seek to impose
a rate cap in fact the approach
that the some of the consumer
protections that they have they
proposed are some of the
consumer protections that we
supported last year before this
committee Representative Herrera
has included in house bill.
Similarly new CFPB director
Chopra testified before the US
house of representatives in
October of twenty one and he
said quote many short term
liquidity products including
small dollar loans plan
important role included
providing credit ability
availability and he went on to
say quote it would be good to
see many more financial
institutions offering small
dollar loans so in other words
the the push from the CFPB is to
go after bad actors and enforce
against those companies that
really do abuse consumers and
enable those good actors to
continue to make loans to to
consumers and just one other
quick note on Illinois one
fundamental flaw of miss Myers
presentation is that even though
consumers were getting in
Illinois in particular we're
getting more money from COVID
and there was a drop in the
number of small dollar loans
there's still a significant
demand for those small dollar
loans even in the face of of
that additional money so even if
additional money is provided to
these consumers it's still going
to be not enough for many of
them thank you very much for the
time and I'm happy to answer any
questions appreciate it.
Okay we're now going to go to
comments in favor of this bill
one thirty two so I would like
to invite those who are in favor
to please raise their hands.
Do you.
Mr hunt meal.
And yourself.
Yes thank you madam chair the
you've just came up David
Hotmail I'm registered lobbyists
for the City of Albuquerque and
I want to thank Representative
at offer multi year effort in
this important legislation as
well as the experts and what's
important to note is that the
expert's testimony mirrors the
City of Albuquerque's experience
the City of Albuquerque has
participated with lenders and
has been able to find the
lending products that all of the
industry lobbyists who have
testified in opposition to this
bill say are impossible the
possible is probable finally
probable it actually has
happened in can happen in New
Mexico if we change our way of
thinking about lending in
profits in who really needs
access to this important credit
our citizens so for those of
those reasons save all perky
strongly urges passage of this
important legislation thank you.
Thank you.
Next Austin we on page.
And remember Mr how do I did it
but we're at one minute for
these because they are more of
them go ahead Mr reallocate.
Sorry I didn't see them yet but
thank you madam chair and
committee members my name is
Austin we pass them on behalf of
and the native below we sent
today in strong support of H. B.
one thirty two because we
understand this is an issue of
equity for native Americans we
know that these loans are
targeting and I know first hand
because I have family members
who taking out these loans I see
my dad this lunches trying to
pay these loans back thinking
that we had a way to pay back
our car I've seen my aunt and
uncle's missed their propane
because they took out a loan and
all of a sudden they didn't have
any additional money left over.
In and I know because as a high
school drop out and the person
with no credit history as
someone who is listen to people
talk about credit history over
and over again that I am exactly
who's targeted as deserving a
one hundred and seventy five
percent predatory loan which I
couldn't afford to pay back.
I because I'm I'm careful and I
don't take out loans on money
that I can afford to pay back
I'm a prime candidate.
we know what these are under
seventy five percent loan loans
are doing we know what they're
doing we've heard that it's not
an issue with access to credit
but there's more accessibility
to these than the most
recognizable brand on earth that
offers ninety nine cent
hamburgers what we have is an
issue of accessibility and an
issue of consumer rights thank
you much no asking for thank you
next I have the only.
Please go ahead.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I'm okay I'm
assuming associate state
director for advocacy for AARP
New Mexico we advocate for
instrument quality of life for
states fifty plus population and
the continued independence for
these New Mexicans and as such
we believe in strong consumer
protections that help prevent
borrows from being taken
advantage advantage of or they
may end up in a bid to billeting
cycles of that so we urge you to
support house bill one thirty
two to help protect New Mexicans
and their financial security
thank you.
This will go ahead.
So let me go to somebody else
I'm not sure we're having
technical difficulties I have
died in Santa Griego.
You madam chair and committee my
name is dance on the lawn of the
able and I am the chief of
financial empowerment and one of
the credit union our credit
union serves the counties of
Santa Fe I'm again Torrance tell
us what Rio Arriba and Colfax
County which serves about twenty
four thousand New Mexicans both
rural and urban areas one of the
credit union is a community
development financial
institution and low income
designated.
Payday loan alternatives credit
builder loans and emergency
loans unsecured up to twenty
five hundred dollars we went to
those that may have credit
challenges including bad credit
and no credit we we developed a
product called under predatory
debt relief loans specifically
created to help people out of
this type of that due to the
overwhelming need to borrowers
looking for help with the over
saturation of these letters in
the market.
Coaching and financial literacy
with our programs you are asking
for representatives to bring the
rate cap of a hundred and
seventy five percent to be
reduced to thirty six percent
thank you Mexicans from being
financially exploited.
Thank you very much and we ask
for do pass on house bill one
thirty two.
Democratic Party of Santa Fe.
Hi there my name is in the past
I'm also representing we take
our democracy
My we are in support of this
bill from the opposition I must
say we had a lot of research and
statistics in defense of
predatory lending the word
predatory services at all I'm
not going to use any research to
point to why this is a good bill
but I'd like to point out that
the all there was only one
person from the opposition who
had any real world examples of
real people who need loan help
all of the propose who's worked
in the lending business when I
moved to New York I got a lot of
high fives from when I moved
here from New York I got a lot
of high fives for moving here
just before I got on this call I
was talking to a friend about
this hearing on predatory
lending and they could not
believe the hundred and seventy
five percent cap so I said she
said to me what you must be
kidding me can you explain that
and I absolutely couldn't
explain the success please
support and passes bill thank
you.
Thank you Patty Williams.
Good.
We're not hearing you yeah.
You need yourself thank you at
chair I'm sorry with the
technical difficulty I'm Patty
Williams a registered lobbyist
for the Navajo Nation office of
the speaker
Council and the Navajo Nation
president and speaker sent a
letter which I I'm transmitted
to your committee members last
night in support of this bill
the majority of the Navajo
Nation consumers are targeted by
these loans and are negatively
impacted by the current a
hundred and seventy five percent
rate of interest the tribal
leader support this bill and no
justification has been offered
for why thirty six percent is
not rational loan rate of
interest and we to do pass for
house bill one thirty two is
amended thank you.
Thank you next Christmas Michael
us.
Hi Representative the Santa Fe
branch of the N. double ACP.
Thus far with there has been no
justification offered for
interest rates of up to a
hundred and seventy five percent
and with these users rates we
know that predatory lending can
and has left many New Mexicans
was ruined credit burden with
unmanageable debt and also in
the risk of homelessness
therefore the Santa Fe branch of
the N. double ACP is in full
support of this bill is it will
helpful New Mexicans out of the
cycle of poverty and will force
many to avoid predatory lenders
to advertise prolifically in
into more same landing
approaches we do urge this
committee and madam chair thank
you for our time my time.
Yes.
Shoot.
Effort to thank you madam chair
my name is Fred Nathan and I'm
the executive director thank you
Mexico we stand strong support
of house bill one thirty two and
thank the sponsors I want to
directly address the Republican
members of this committee and
request their support for Lente
is reverse economic development
real economic development brings
new dollars into New Mexico
predatory lending does the
opposite about eighty five
percent of predatory lenders
operate in New Mexico are based
out of state reducing the
interest rate cap from a hundred
seventy five to thirty six
percent will put hundreds of
millions of dollars back into
the pockets of low income New
Mexicans will spend that money
immediately on local businesses
like restaurants we could use
that boost right now both the
New Mexico chamber of commerce
and the Spanish chamber of
commerce and endorsed this bill
and senator grace committees as
introduced Senate bill one
twenty nine which is very
similar to this bill as the
sponsor noted this is not a red
or blue state issue Arkansas
Montana Nebraska North Carolina
South Dakota are all red states
which have successfully capped
the interest rates on small
loans at thirty six percent or
less thank you.
Thank you next I have rented out
from.
Thank you madam chairman members
of the committee this is running
a national minimum member of the
league of women voters of New
Mexico we strongly support this
legislation.
primarily for the reasons
expressed by earlier speakers
but in addition other defenders
don't mention how many of these
folks fail how many times they
pay these exorbitant interest
rates still did not succeed to
get out of their problems and I
certainly don't explain why
states such as Nebraska and
others on a petition to affect
have not I have not had the
experience of the disasters a
day project.
As we strongly urges support and
ashes of this legislation thank
you for your.
Thank you.
Next I have Patricia he.
Madam.
Go ahead.
Hi my name is bill Patricia I've
lived in Santa Fe my whole life
I worked almost forty years as a
housekeeper.
I became disabled a few years
ago I now depend on social
security.
A few years ago my husband had
to leave to Mexico.
Or immigration status I fell
behind on all my bills.
I have seen a small company in
Santa Fe so I went there to
apply for a loan over a few
months the loan company
convinced me to take up several
more loans.
Of all the.
A little over six thousand
altogether.
The last loan the interest rate
was a hundred and thirty
percent.
I was supposed to make payments
of seven hundred and ten dollars
that's more than.
What my income is I was supposed
to pay back thirty four thousand
dollars back on this chart on.
So if not they threatened to
take my car.
I thought that taking off his
loans all my problems but only
made them worse I am here to ask
you to help the people of New
Mexico and reduces Nicole
interest rate to thirty six
percent thank you.
You Karen Grifo.
Hi I think you are thank you for
your time and and here I wanted
to say on this the other credit
union it Rossell we're in
Roswell we serve.
Members who have been Chavis any
link in the pocket and rose what
counties just wanna let you know
for many years is pretty and
sixty five years old I can't
tell you how many years probably
fifteen or twenty or more we
have been doing low dollar loans
we do the songs from members
don't even need to have a credit
for each Senator deposit we
certainly will make a long as
for needing money in their
accounts as it was explained
that's a twenty five dollar
amount that goes into a savings
account must be involved that's
their money in the event they
didn't have the twenty five
dollars we've been known to add
that along so that they can get
the small ball alone they need
we charge far below thirty six
percent and we're fine I just
can't see that how hundred
seventy five percent can help
anyone are mostly our members we
have brought out of these
situations so I certainly ask
for your password in support of
HB one thirty two thank you.
Rebecca Johnson thank you are.
Go ahead Rebecca.
Thank you madam chairman members
of the committee my name is
Rebecca just on the line I am a
member of the alliance for local
economic prosperity where we
believe that there and just
access to capital for all New
Mexicans is a tool for economic
justice I speak to you today to
urge you to support to support
H. B. one thirty two of not just
a member of staff lead but as an
individual the staff parallels
between axles applets believes
the intention of this bill which
is to protect the most
vulnerable you Mexicans from
predatory lenders should be
helping those in need take
advantage of them and putting
them even deeper in debt No Way
storefront lenders do with
schools where most borrowers
wind up taking out multiple
loans I have the first one or
the avid story told by one of
the opponents of the bill there
are a hundred more stories where
borrowers have had to do exactly
this take out multiple loans to
pay the first one I would
imagine that I would indigenous
communities bear the brunt of
the spread of Tory practices
please I respect respectfully I
need to pass this bill thanks.
Thank you very much
I would like to call on rob
black.
Rob are you ready to speak.
Yes.
Madam chair and members of the
committee this is rob trying and
and I'm a consumer protection
attorney in New Mexico.
what I can offer the committee
is my experience in litigating
against predatory lenders for
twenty years here in New Mexico
what is coming to light is.
like we said earlier over eighty
percent of the lenders operating
in New Mexico are subsidiaries
of out of state corporations and
many have a business plan.
To look for states with the
highest interest rates and lax
regulation and so they target
New Mexico some of those lenders
may leave under thirty six
percent cap but that to space
created will be filled up
quickly by the credit unions of
weeds as we've seen in the
testimony today I urge.
Ready to pass this bill thank
you.
Next.
Just a second here is rob black
from the chamber of commerce on.
Let me have lawn Senator.
You're up go ahead now.
Are you ready.
Senator are you there.
Okay
We won't is will **** ready.
Thank you madam chair committee
members my name is will how to
cook and I'm student at UNM
School of low two years ago I
had the displeasure of working
briefly for a short term loan
company in Albuquerque I just
moved to Albuquerque and entry
level pay was very competitive a
complete the training left
shortly thereafter because I
felt I was actively ruining
people's lives through predatory
practices I was trying to look
through bank statements for
source of recurring income and
that is that most of these
recurring comes with payments
from the social security office
well is that I saw countless
customers come in seeking to pay
off the loans however customs
really paid off the loans
because it was company policy to
happily suggests the refinance
of course we never use the words
refinance but rather dangled
money in front of the customers
face masks and they wanted to do
it how about you give me twenty
dollars and I'll give you forty
dollars back well the classic I
see we can give you an extra
fifty dollars today how does
that sound many Christmas simply
did not understand this is
refinancing I support this bill
because I support helping the
vulnerable if public social
safety net some not going to
help underprivileged in the
least we can do is try to stop
private companies from
exploiting the vulnerabilities
lack of financial literacy at
least of the extortionate rates
we have seen.
Thank you.
Laura are you with us.
The bases here.
Go ahead current.
We've got you we're ready for
you on our end.
Just yourself.
Please send yourself current.
You.
If you
want to thanks to choose hosted
time.
Representative Chasey it's that
we've.
I'm having a problem.
Bill Jordan.
Madam chair members of the
committee on Bill Jordan with
New Mexico voices for children I
want to thank Representative
Herrera speaker Egolf and all
the other Sanchez who I know
have worked very hard on this
issue and because voices for
children championed both the
working families tax credit and
low income comprehensive tax
rebate we're especially glad to
see the tax refund loans are
included in the bill.
In twenty twenty New Mexicans
paid over two and a half million
dollars in fees and interest to
tax refund lenders most of those
at eight P. R.'s near a hundred
and seventy five percent that
means the lenders are taking
advantage of the absolute
highest rates they can legally
charge.
We appreciate your support thank
you.
Let me try one more time to see
if I can find Alan Sanchez.
Is madam chair.
Members of the committee my.
I'm sorry can you hear me yes.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name's Alan Sanchez
on the executive director of the
New Mexico conference of
Catholic bishops the bishops
have been working on this issue
for twenty years and we continue
to see
the sad stories of people that
are caught up to the stand in
this cycle of debt of we want to
urge you to pass this
legislation we need to find
other committees for people
their emergency a great number
of the people to take out these
loans are emergency or crisis
and we would hope that they
would turn to something that
would not put it into debt as
such as a different charities
for example Saint Vincent DePaul
if you need to fill a propane
tanker pale lectured bill I have
a car fixed there's other
remedies then then rather than
of preying on people in a crisis
or emergency so we urge you
please pass this legislation
after twenty years thank you.
Thank you.
Current record.
Going.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee right
of the director of Lutheran
advocates sinister New Mexico
Lutheran advocacy also expresses
today the position of the New
Mexico conference of churches I
do hope the committee members
had a chance to read the letter
I sent you last evening from the
nineteen faith leaders of the
denominations the comprise a
conference of churches
nominations that include
Presbyterian episcopal Catholic
Lutheran Methodist disciples of
Christ Mennonite African
Methodist Episcopal to name a
few as well as almost two
hundred Lujan advocacy
individual partners we're here
to offer strong support for H.
B. one thirty two we believe
that there's no morally
justifiable reason to condone
triple digit interest rates let
alone any on reserve rate above
thirty six percent nor the
business model that depends on
the continued refinancing such
loans we absolutely agree that
this predatory lending crisis
must be addressed from a racial
justice perspective as well in
light of where the vast majority
of the storefront mentorship
located again Lutheran advocacy
of the New Mexico conference of
churches perjure support for H.
B. one thirty two and the all
inclusive rate of thirty six
percent thank you.
Thank you very much copyright
the seventh.
Go ahead I'm here.
Yes hello.
Can you hear me yes.
Thank you for this service I'm
retired physician to want to
thank the madam chair members of
the committee.
The.
This bill addresses a monumental
problem with equity and up to
current lending does not address
the root cause.
Processes need to be in place to
create solutions and and stop
these are.
Opportunistic disaster
capitalism the price on on
people
Toward the bandage.
Businesses through a
high cost of operation need to
make adjustments to their.
for you about the rating and not
passing the year of the closing
to the consumers.
Again this is a problem with the
with equity in needs real
economic justice and racial
justice solutions thank you.
Thank you we're gonna go to the
committee room house number
three oh nine at night on.
Madam chair members of the
committee representative we're
I'm Alexis Johnson I'm an
attorney in New Mexico I stand
in support of the bills and I
appreciate all the efforts of
those who go into making it
happen I will tell you that it
seems long overdue is other.
Folks who have testified this
morning would observe I would
observe that it supported the
bill is supported defense of
people and their economic
security support of something
else like opposition to the bill
we're waiting or waiting to
discuss solutions in the future
in support of an industry that
is itself the problem and so I
think you stand in ready defense
of people economic security and
of bills and brings rates down
to thirty six percent which some
of us would observers still high
but it's a solution so solutions
that waiting silence delay are
not solutions I would also
observed that this legislature
passes built in support of early
childhood development CYFD deal
wage another supports the
families and this bill HB one
thirty two is consonant with
that concept anything else is
and it drips down everything
else you do for the benefit of
children and families and people
in New Mexico thank you I do
pass this bill please and so.
Thank you with that we are
concluded our twenty minutes and
we will now go back to the
committee.
I want to before I go to members
Representative.
Did you I have one question for
you and I wondered if you wanted
to press any of the COVID.
Before we go to members but let
let me have to do that first and
then I'll ask you my question.
Thank you madam chair I I I
think the the COVID speak for
themselves.
The majority of people in New
Mexico want to see these rates
lower I think I think there is a
point seventy nine percent April
this legislation on and you can
see these are people
representative of the
populations groups that are
really impacted by this
legislation and the the comments
were often the industry and and
I think that says it all thank
you madam chair.
Thank you so much question
before are you take comments or
questions from the committee
members.
Representative would you mind
telling me.
At the building here now what
sections are you contemplating
for House floor amendment if it
passes this committee yeah it
would be
section Kate.
Find it for you and then it was
also the
F. I do said that we should
really change the the the
reporting date report.
Joining date to January first
two thousand to three that would
make all the information
compatible are you know you
would be you would be having six
up to date in one year and
another set of data another year
so it would it would reflected
better Senate data so that
people could track what's
happening.
In real time.
And the sections are numbered so
it's probably a subsection K. I
do what section.
You madam chair.
Okay.
Adam chair that starts on state
section three.
Which starts on page five and
then sub paragraphs K. is on
page eight.
Thank you.
Instructions.
So.
Thanks.
Re subsection may cause one
sixteen page right through.
Twelve.
Yes okay thank you we want to
know.
Let me go to my members now for
questions.
First on my list.
Representative.
Thank you madam chair and
committee I just have a quick
procedural question as we as I
think she knows I adore and
respect my dear friend and
colleague Representative
Armstrong but I was surprised to
hear that she be joining us
again over this morning's floor
session just before we started
committee also it seems like
we've gone from a twelve person
committee to a thirteen person
committee and I just wanted to
understand if we still have the
right make up of committee
members given
the part of the numbers in the
body so I was just surprised and
unfamiliar with the process and
just wanted to if we had room
madam chair and potentially Mr
speaker to understand what
happened today and how we have
different voting numbers.
Thank you madam chair.
Vice chair that was the decision
of the speaker and I have not
discussed it with him further.
He may have a further debate as
we go along to the meeting and
potentially would just like to
hear more about that and make
sure that our ratios are are
accurate and so the all the
votes we take have the
the the full of real and proper
procedure of the committees
behind them thank you.
Representative Eli.
Madam chair you calling on the.
Your hand was.
Are you.
Thank.
Representative Ely I see your
hand up if you look frozen right
now so I'm not sure if you have
a question.
Hi are you talking to me madam
chair.
I'm pointing out your hand was
rates are.
Yes it was but I my internet's
terrible stall log off and come
back on all right I'll go I'll
go to someone else.
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair
I do have a few questions the
the.
Okay maybe repeats from from
prior.
Years of civil war legislation
right I to the issue that
represent the data brought up.
It's a little bit disconcerting
because our.
I believe prior practices
followed back the make up of
this committee should be eight
five if there are thirteen
members will with the eight
major members I minority members
and.
Exist right now it is nine with
Jordy members and continues to
be for minority members so if
we're going we're going to add
one I think
Custom of the house would
dictate the
based on the make up of the
entire body that there would be
a thank I committee not nine
four.
Well let me let me comment on
that Representative because we
actually had that those numbers
before Representative Hochman
Vigil what went to
appropriations so we had nine
four I'm sure may I may I
address this also you're only
thank you madam chair so under
house rules the decision on that
numbers on committees is
entrusted to the speaker.
I'm at the request of the
minority leader.
The last.
To legislature's we have
deviated from the council
service published ratios on
numerous occasions for the last
three years the house Education
Committee has been a nine to
four committee
as House Judiciary is now
there's been zero objection to
the Education Committee building
nine four.
At the request of the minority
leader I added Republican
members to the energy committee
so that the energy committee is
now a six to four committee hi
deviating substantially from
their Legislative Council
Service ratios agriculturist
Seiki estimate and water
resources committee is five to
three I also deviating from the
ratios the appropriations and
finance committee is eleven six
one and also deviates from the
ratio in favor of the minority
commerce and economic
development committee a six for
deviating from the council
service existed ratios in favor
of the minority consumer Public
Affairs Committee deviates
ratios a three to two Canadian
again in favor of the minority
this is been common practice for
my entire time as speaker of the
house we.
The guidelines that are
published by the Legislative
Council Service are just that
guidelines and we have deviated
from them with almost every
committee almost every year.
So there's nothing unusual with
this
And I I understand that the the
minority isn't happy.
But simply put they were
perfectly happy for me to
deviate from the ratios when it
benefited them on the Energy
committee on the agriculture
committee on the Appropriations
Committee on a commerce and
economic development committee.
So I'm not sure that they're
being consistent yeah we're
raising this objection now I
would not raise that objection
with these other committees.
So I'll just leave it there
Madam.
The floor representative Nibert
thank you madam chair.
The.
The bill Madam chair
representative I understand it
correctly.
Where we look at the.
Articulation of the maximum
amount of money that can be
charged by one of these lenders.
Yes chapter thirty six percent
interest but that also includes
other fees does not.
Yes Representative madam chair
here right.
So it's it's not eight thirty
six percent cap on the interest
rate so you have on.
The interest rate plus.
Any fees that are associated
with that particular loan is
that correct.
In chair representative you are
correct.
So you're making a fairly small
loans that would.
That would require.
That would require
Significant time the lending
institution to to process
particular request.
Basically you're left with a
very low interest rate if you
were to charge of.
For the cost of engaging them of
the application process credit
reports are the time that the
employees spend with the
individual filling out the forms
of and secretary Schardin so.
It when you capture all those
fees the the actual interest
rate could be quite low in light
of the fact that it may be front
loaded with with other fees
would that be accurate.
Madam chair Mr naiburg
Representative number yes that
is correct.
Madam chair representative are
you cited at least two states
Illinois and South Dakota and
I'm not familiar with the the
one but does either one of those
two states
allow the way the institution to
recoup the.
Fees without consideration of
the maximum interest rate that
can be charged.
Chairman representative I'm
gonna refer to care
announcements.
Representative Nibert Madam
chair of both of those states as
well as others includes is an
ancillary products in the
interest rate calculation.
Madam chair representative and
misfires
You side of the number of of
states that that have these
limitations would you say that
your view that you just
expressed of the majority do or
the minority view.
Of.
Representative Nibert and madam
chair I'm not sure what you mean
by minority and majority.
okay this way miss Myers of all
the states that cap these types
of loans with an interest rate
do more than fifty percent of
those states allow the
recruitment of application fees
and possibly other fees outside
of the calculation of the thirty
six percent interest rate Max
of.
Representative nine madam chair
my understanding is that there
are fourteen states to include
the origination fee in the
calculation of thirty six
percent there are five or six I
believe other states who include
also.
Edit life insurance those type
of ancillary products.
So I understand your your answer
correctly.
Was it most states allow the
recapture of those fees outside
of the calculation of the
interest rate.
It would be a probably I'd say a
total of.
Seventeen states who require
that the feed the origination
fee be included in the allowed
in interest rate
there are other states that also
the limit the amount of fees
that can be charged limit how
they can be calculated I will
Representative Nibert point out
that in New Mexico under the
small loan act additional fees
are not allowed under the bank
installment land act they are
allowed but limited.
How
over these topics loans.
Representative Nibert madam
chair those are the two laws at
this bill amends to change the
allowable interest for rates and
to add other provisions.
Maybe I lost something in the
translation
We're amending those laws at the
present time.
Institution in this case can
recapture some of those fees but
they may be limited is that is
that what you stated
Representative Nibert Madam
chair it depends on which law
they make local phone under
under the bank installment loan
they include the the fee is
already included is it has to be
calculated within the current
interest rate ready of one
seventy five
it's so the key is already
calculated under federal law is
being included in the right
under the small loan act which
is also amended you are not
allowed any additional fees it
is only through the in trest
right itself that you recruit
your Abbey to bang.
Madam chair and and other
Representative misfires you
would agree the the ability to
capture those fees when you're
looking at a hundred and seventy
five percent maximum interest
rate yep that's the apple rate
is a little bit different than
when you have a thirty six
percent maximum interest rate
and you're still trying to
capture those fees on a fairly
small loan would that be
accurate Representative Nibert
madam chair you yes obviously
those different based on the
calculations of the right.
So madam chair yes
Representative best buyers would
would you agree that the
economic
This for making a loan may be
compromised if the lender
cannot.
Recoup
The cost of processing that loan
and still recruit.
An interest rate that's going to
may be.
Reward them for the rest taken
imagine that long.
It.
Representative Nibert Madam
chair of there are many lenders
to make loans at thirty six
percent or less and have made a
calculation based on their
lending model obviously lenders
to make loans at a higher rate
may have different models so it
varies depending on the lender.
Once.
So you're wanting to two hundred
fifty Bucks and it cost.
The company maybe fifty to
seventy five Bucks to to do the
processing of that thirty six
percent interest rate when you
when you add.
In that because they have to
basically eat those costs up
front because thirty six percent
going to be a lot less than me
processing cost Representative
they would undertake in that
case and FY with the party
decided whether to win the money
I would not I would not make
that two hundred fifty dollar
loan because there's no way that
I can capture of the costs that
that yes Kerr that I am creating
to make that long let alone have
any profit over and above that
amount I think that the the the
real concern hearing you talk
about this is the credit access
bill.
You know I I think we all agree
that.
Rates of interest and.
The ability to
You know engage in predatory
lending is is something that
that we all need to look at but
I'm also concerned about the
credit access issue and I think
on small loans.
This type of limitation
particularly when you're exclude
the ability to recoup the
processing charge or the the the
cost of.
Process three not long.
Is going to be a a huge
deterrent now that you will find
that the smaller loans will be
made now may be the upper and
lower the US also five thousand
dollars ten thousand dollars
maybe those loans continue to be
made because you can have the
application period probably
doesn't cost any more to to a
ten thousand dollar loan that it
does a two hundred fifty dollar
loan what I would suspect.
So the the operate loans may be
made that the lower and loans
are going to probably disappear
by estimation and.
I would suspect without V. and a
basis for making this statement
but I would suspect that a lot
of these lenders focus on some
of the smaller dollar amount
loans you know five hundred
dollars a thousand dollars
and.
If we pass this legislation.
I'm concerned about what some of
our party stated that because we
and we deny the ability to
separately
Recruit.
Cost of.
processing that loan that.
Well we're going to two of.
Force people to make a business
decision not to make those lower
and loans and to either focus on
the higher end loans or
completely get out of that that
the business and and the so I
well I believe that this is a
credit access bill but it's
going to limit the credit access
well let me move on to another
is.
Madam chair representative could
I could I answer that a little
bit.
Representative it's not really a
question so I'd like you to and
Representative dress that near
closing if you would think so we
can move along.
Not undoubtedly has more
questions.
Please Representative mix of
this quickly as you can thank
you well I'll I'll try but you
know I'm not very good at
building where
Madam chair representative there
was testimony from the credit
union that they would make these
loans.
And my question is our credit
with our credit unions subject
to the same limitations as our
president your amendment this
legislation.
Thank you Madam chair
representative I'm gonna.
That question to Juan Fernandez.
Madam chair representative the
so credit unions are already
doing small dollar loans in fact
we have an increase of over six
percent last year in all in all
instances credit unions charge
less than the thirty six percent
in fact federal credit unions
cannot charge more than twenty
eight percent but to answer your
question now.
And so madam chair and and
Representative I didn't catch
the name of the speaker but
Do credit unions charge AC to.
To our.
Process that long is that passed
on to the consumer.
Madam chair representative it
depends but most credit unions
do charge a small application
fee to do small dollar loans
especially when they're not
pulling credit.
Madam chair representative how
much with those fees do you
sorry small
many dollars if you're making a
small loan for the equal quite a
few percentage points.
Madam chair representative
specifically under twenty
dollars.
Credit check cost more than
forty dollars for you madam
chair and representative.
Into of one for them to secure.
Madam chair representative Snell
typically credit unions by those
credit reports on ball but once
again for the small dollar loans
for most ratings that have these
programs they do not pull an
actual credit report.
Madam chair and representative.
If I'm checking out one of these
loans and you're willing to make
those loans at twenty eight
percent and.
This institution Dallas again
the loan of a hundred seventy
five percent or even thirty six
percent.
Why am I not going into the
credit union.
Madam chair representative I'll
defer to Juan Fernandez.
Madam chair representative
that's a that's a really great
question I think losses credit
unions need to do a better job
of letting people know the of
the products and services that
we have when this legislation
passes I look forward to working
with you and everyone in the
legislature to get make sure
your constituents know all of
that they can come to credit
unions not just for these loans
but all kinds of loans and they
can save you know tremendous
amount of money.
Also Representative night but
you can address your questions
to Mr Fernandes just.
Madam chair representative on
this in the Mr Fernandes and we
don't have to let the sponsor
allow him to speak.
I will be happy to do so with
your permission sure.
Madam chair Mister Fernandez
Your members have to pay an
annual fee to be a member.
Madam chair representative now
typically there is a one time
amount of money as little as a
dollar typically about five
dollars that that it gets placed
like miss Grifo mentioned
earlier it gets placed into
their account and it's it
represents their par share their
membership chair but there's no
any to there is no feet are
annually to be a member.
Madam chairman Mr Fernandez hi I
am really confused because you
know years ago we didn't see
these are.
Type of lending institutions.
In our community service maybe I
was oblivious to it but I don't
recall growing up that there
were a lot of these places you
have pawn shop and you have
banks and your credit union and
then you have savings and loans
we don't have savings and loans
anymore we've got banks we've
got credit unions and we now
have these.
Payday loans we have the use
title loan companies out of
state have sprung up and you
our it just seems to me that
that so that's a result of the
market and action and that means
that the credit unions nor the
banks filled that space and
maybe it's because of government
regulation maybe it's because of
other reasons but the space was
blocked bill and there's a
demand out there and now you're
saying your your bill that
demand.
But.
I.
I would think that when you look
at these types of loans and
looking at the credit worthiness
of individuals and what have you
that.
The.
Traditional institutions of have
Not going down that path because
I suspect the risk the risk of
Lente yes much greater than the
in many of the loans are
traditional banking institutions
as well as credit unions
traditionally may.
So again the credit access to it
is a great concern to many of
madam chair
If this were were limited in up
to a rate of interest but
allowing the collection of of
those species
I could maybe be more supportive
of it but when you read when you
include the
application fees and maybe the
other costs associated with
thank you have a loan into the
rate of interest I can be
charged
I really think that that's going
to cut off many of the smaller
loans.
People for many reasons need to
take out on occasion
particularly on emergency basis
and we're gonna be left with
them having to go to pawn shops
or elsewhere that the.
You know you are not going to be
subject to this the fact that
maybe even the credit union that
will be subject to it either so
madam chair I I have some real
reservations about the about
this legislation thank you madam
chair and.
Representative you can now
comment on the whatever I said
that may have been incorrect.
I'll also Representative when
she closes on the bill okay
thank you madam chair
Representative Eli.
thank you madam chair
City your vision which are my
internet's better now
so are you.
What I I just really have one.
Suggested amendment which is
I've talked to I've I know the
Sanchez been talked to about
four
You know it's strange to me that
we're all coming at this with
you know a measure of good faith
in terms of which is funny
because that's gonna be the
technical amendment but we we're
all trying I think to do the
right thing.
And.
CERN is recall is if we reduce
the interest rate the thirty six
percent this is what
Representative Knightsbridge
questions really went to.
We all for the small loans.
People still have access to
credit under the same criteria
that they would have access to
credit for say a hundred seventy
five percent.
Is that is that going to change
another words are they still
going to be able to get these
funds because yeah we we are I
think I'm concerned I know I've
got colleagues that are
concerned that if we do this
that suddenly the ability to
access these micro loans will
dry up so I really want to just
put it to Mr Fernandes as as
straight as possible are people
going to have access to these
small microloans these under
thousand loans if they're thirty
six percent under the same
criteria that they wanted a
higher number like one seventy
five.
Madam chair representative it is
my belief that yes they will
have access to credit.
Okay and can you give us madam
chair Mister Hernandez anymore
details on that in other words
what is that based on just so I
know.
So Madam chair representative I
mean I know the industry now
says they can't do loans at
thirty six percent but they said
the same thing when the rate was
with stylish a hundred and
seventy five percent I still you
know I still think we obviously
currently make those loans and
are able to.
Offset the costs so I think
either industry will as well I
don't think that this is going
to extinguish them from
existence I still there mind you
their profits might be lower but
I still think that they're gonna
be able to to remain in New
Mexico their loans are going to
be fair and it's going to be a
fair deal deal for for consumers
all that said credit unions are
finding ways to get the word out
more effectively about the types
of loans that we do offer and
we're also leaning on technology
and finding ways so that we can
do the small dollar loans
through the internet to our
members so that I'm if a member
is I'm gonna find is finds
themselves in a bind us Saturday
night when the branches are
closed they can access that
those dollars and then go to the
ATM and withdraw those of those
funds so once again to reduce
the costs and the over had I
believe that that can be done by
other industries as well and
then in terms of criteria I mean
is there going to be a different
criteria used for thirty six
percent and there would be for
one seventy five.
Another words are you going to
be doing some extra R. why I
realize not everybody that
applies for a loan even a one
seventy five is going to get it
so is there are going to be an
extra criteria that doesn't
exist with one seventy five for
thirty six percent or would be
sent Madam chair representative
it be the same because gradings
are not charging one seventy
five I mean they're charging far
far less than one seventy five
in fact less than thirty six
percent okay that that's that's
all I needed but madam chair I I
I know the Sanchez been talked
to I I would like to proposes
amendment I can explain it is a
simple one on page four line
thirteen.
there is the phrase in good
faith.
I'd like to strike that.
and I'm happy to explain that it
does not change the substance in
fact that's the whole point is
it is a needless and could be
very confusing our current in
the US we're trying to spot
these in different legislations
they keep cropping up and I'd
like to be able to take that out
and I would propose that
amendment and asked that it be
adopted at this time thank you
madam chair.
your proposed amendment.
And
Would you like to move that for
discussion purposes yes I would
madam chair if I could move that
for discussion purposes so we're
striking words in good faith on
page four line thirteen.
Members on that point.
Discussion of in good faith.
Go to.
And check.
Who
you representative
Representative and that I should
have asked you first anyway is
that a friendly amendment yes
how except that amendment Madam
chair.
Okay is there any discussion of
that amendment.
I'm afraid because of the
virtual nature we're going to
have to have a roll call vote of
move adoption of the amendment
and Representative Ely do second
I will second that thank you
madam chair all right so we'll
call the roll under.
Adopting that amendment.
Representative Alcon yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Chandler.
Representative Chandler.
Representative Cook yes.
Mr speaker.
Yes.
Representative you line yes.
Representative Lewis yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative night we're.
Yes yes I'm not sure.
Representative Rehm.
No ma'am.
Representative Townsend.
Ma'am.
Thank.
Yes.
Madam chair you need to go back
to Representative Cook.
Representative Cook.
And madam chair I'm back as well
I stepped out for a second thank
you yes.
Representative Armstrong.
You know what I mean
Representative Chandler is our
ended yes.
Madam chair yes.
Tended to.
The past on that from the
amendment so that amended has
been adopted.
Thank our motion I am.
I'm sorry so I just I am I can
resist the temptation to tease
our representative Nibert about
his vote
but I
I do think of with that answer
that if people have access to
credit under the same criteria
that they would for a higher
number that's strange means the
real issue and if I'm I I'm
supportive of this because I I
do view this as I think we all
do is a tax on the poor and the
lower the rate we can get the
better so I appreciate very much
this bill and I appreciate the
Sanchez bring it thank you madam
chair and thank you Sanchez.
Thanks to have Representative
Oakland.
Thank you madam chair I'm having
trouble finding the button.
What I'm Madam chair
representative your I have just
a few questions where we
basically.
That would first of all the
process of the bill.
Just curious because you know
this is my fourteenth year here.
This is a thirty day session.
He did not see the governor but.
The subject on the call.
So can you explain to me how
this legislation.
Did not go to rules and how it's
I would what I would how did you
manage to do this that's I guess
that's the best way to ask.
How did you manage to get this
legislation going I'm without it
being on the call and with that
it.
Going to rules.
Thank you madam chair and
representative that question I I
I really thought about this a
long time you know the you know
what that it was last year we
passed and and I the governor
didn't put it on the call we had
some meetings that we can reach
agreement and then I thought
well if I put this up and it's
at thirty six and nine
the past and I don't think the
governor would turn it down I I
mean that was my thinking and
and so I put in appropriation
and none of fully to make it
germane and it was accepted and
that's that's what I didn't.
you madam chair so explain to
me.
You put in appropriation.
Right.
how that process works.
Representative Oakland I really
want to is you madam.
This privately but because the
let's stay on the bill we've got
to put that in jeopardy.
Please list is about the bill
madam chair I I think I have a
right to ask questions.
Ask questions that I feel are
pertinent to my job as a
legislator of the state of New
Mexico.
And I feel that maybe you don't
feel that I should ask these
questions but I feel that the I
would like you to ask those
questions whenever you want you
do have the right to do it but I
can.
We try to ask the members to
focus on the legislation I am.
I am madam chair I am focusing
on the of the legislation on
focusing on how eight how it got
here number one that is my big
question how did you get here
that's all I'm trying to find
out because publicly I think the
whole world should know how it
got here.
I don't think there should be
any reason why we could not
answer that.
The representative told you what
the chair madam chair you can
just.
We.
I
have no intention of doing that
I'm just saying the
representative gave an answer so
what.
Can you move on or do you need
further explanation I had an yes
I need an explanation yes I
asked what the appropriation of
us.
Madam chair representative
appropriations I put in a
hundred ninety thousand up for
financial literacy
And.
I was prepared to actually put
junior money if I needed to and
I was able to.
I'm in the State Bank and I did
so.
Will.
For the appropriation with no
longer in the title.
madam chair yes it is it it was
the we I came to this bill with
that one thirty two as amended
and as amended it would strike
out the last section of this
bill which is the.
section fourteen.
Would you.
What will be appropriation you
did not I got the word in
requests making appropriation in
the title.
I didn't hear your Madam chair
representative I didn't I didn't
hear the question can be
reworded when you made the
motion to strike out of the
appropriation in the other the
previous committee.
Despite that the wording make in
an appropriation in the bill.
Mmhm.
Yes I did Mr chair I mean
Representative where they may
have done that committee I'm not
quite sure thank you.
Read.
Okay so and madam chair
representative you I'm putting
the bill up the way I see it
from the.
the way it was presented
legislation that's what my to my
curiosity part okay so we got a
bill before us that wasn't on
the call.
And with the procreation and we
took it out.
Representative green side but
that you Representative you
remain and madam chair.
Just like forty bills that are
in the rules if you were to put
it appropriation but nine
hundred thousand dollars to do
the people in person what that
emanated legal.
Okay good get away from that.
Representative Akan XP back
Representative I'll call.
I just checked the committee
report from C. pack making
appropriation was stricken from
the subject and the section was
stricken in the committee report
okay thank you madam chair.
So now I want to ask one
question madam chair and the
Representative a little last
year
The newspaper here in Santa Fe
energy did we like the.
Like the the orphan step child
because of my actions on this
type legislation last year.
But anyway.
Actor a lot of discussion with
the reporter and details I
wanted some the.
Well.
All the credit unions.
How the great in my area and I
called difficult what you take
this with you my phone and just
pulled the credit unions and to
start making phone calls.
And I.
The most vote most of the credit
union.
Do not just let the general
public go in there and apply for
a low.
The fact is I will even go to my
credit union hearing requests
that you grant well except you
if you are a member if you are
an employee of the grant Cibola
County schools or if you are an
employee of the Homestake mining
company.
Which is no longer really in
existence.
But my cell additional regular
person off the street yes.
And not go in to the credit
union and apply for a loan
because I am not an employee of
any of those.
Our.
Companies that.
That they consider.
Alright and they're great you
light I should say.
So I'm having problem with that
that's where I'm at with the big
problem.
One is.
Number one is how long yes this
question it may be a.
one which in the end.
Yeah and then to this for me.
It is.
This thank you thank you madam
chair I'm.
If.
And I somehow know that you can
get into the credit union and
apply for a okay at my car broke
down okay I need to get my car
fixed I can get to work.
Thank you and I applied for a.
Six hundred Bucks fix my car
thank you.
And ask for that six hundred
dollar low.
And if someone the other day
hello we do with all by.
How long is it gonna take to
process that.
How long is it going to take for
me to have six hundred dollars
my.
Madam chair representative it
depends you know first financial
credit union which is probably
the closest Act credit union
that's near to you can do that
loan if you're within two hours
actually you could actually have
the funds that are for for that
car repair.
So okay so and then not okay so
how would I get in there to
apply for a loan at that great
you.
What process what I had to date.
Madam chair representative so
more than likely could even do
it online you don't even have to
go into the branch you could go
to the to the to the website and
join online and then apply for
the loan rate on the internet as
well
some to what's your to your
greater point about whether or
not some credit unions allow you
to join or not the vast majority
of our credit unions have
community charters or and you
know the I think the credit
union you quoted is probably one
of our smallest credit unions
and yes they have a pretty close
knit field of membership but as
the years have gone by credit
unions have expanded their field
of membership just to the point
that now if you live in a
community house of credit you
more than likely you'll be able
to qualify for membership
specially if you live in an
underserved community.
Thank you thank you want thank
you madam chair.
I understand that but then again
like I said I mean and I did
they're standing around I found
that really.
That.
Really not that accessible to
the general public.
To the board.
That has a five ninety but it's
going.
The convenience store.
And these are a fixed.
Is item look.
You just you go to grandma
grandpa mom and dad.
But I mean it's it's it's
written the reality of life in
today's world.
And really and honestly mom and
dad who are struggling to do so
where they got to come up with
six hundred dollars to lead that
it needs to get back to work.
So.
I think here is the problem that
I'm having okay I totally don't
agree that a hundred seventy
five percent is.
Senator interest rate I totally
a hundred ninety nine percent
agree that it is not a decent
rate.
But I also agree I also say that
what's going to happen to that
point here.
This guy's broke down you Mr
again seeks to get it to work.
Where did you go to go
is in today's world like I say
it's not as easy as us when I
was a kid.
And I struggled a lot with the
kids and sometimes you today's
world likes from.
So if you think about it where
does that person go are we going
to close these doors to these
people.
I don't have any way to say
that.
Shutting down these businesses.
Is going to help the poor people
that really need to help and yes
and I agree with the people that
say it's the poor that they
don't know what that guided it's
the poor that need loans Hey I'm
trying to say that's the way the
world works if you had the money
in the bank thank you what
legal.
So with that in mind madam chair
I I would turn it over but I'm
sorry I'm not happy with the way
the legislation was introduced
and brought forward I just don't
think it was right.
And the I just think that we're
taking action the wrong way and
leading the.
At and and just not doing things
the way we should be doing that
thank you madam chair.
Representative McQueen.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative Herrera by
My questions have been touched
on by urgent diverted and also
Representative Ely any concerns
the.
The ability of small loans and
so if I mail it with Justin's Mr
Fernandez.
If you still with us there is
Madam chair representative Mr
Fernandez.
You do.
The question bill bill the can
could you so this market niche
in your suggesting yes they can
Representative divert listed
from you that you do chart small
application fee it did Sampras
small business he's correct if
it's a very small swabs cation
G. R..
If it's factored into the
interest rate could be quite a
bit.
Mr Fernandes is your application
be factored into the interest
rate.
Madam chair representative we
have run models modeling to make
to make to ensure that our loans
are under thirty six percent and
they are and one other factor
that what like to point out to
you Representative is that the
vast majority of credit unions
also offer lines of credits that
don't have an application for
the they don't have any sort of
a fee to use that you just pay
an interest rate usually
eighteen percent APR or last and
you can access that transfer the
money right into the checking
account you said you only pay
interest for the days that
you're utilizing those funds and
try you know pay it back without
paying and sort of see.
Thank you for that
so so my question is you said
you're under thirty six or less
does that include the
application.
Madam chair representative yes.
Okay so Madam chair
representative for a different
and is it I mean my concern last
year when the small loans were
raised was.
Whether or not they would be
available through credit unions
and the answer I'm hearing is
yes they are in that doesn't
mean you know the current ends
are gonna be putting out.
Advertisement and you're on a
bus benches and flyers and phone
books or where we advertise
these days
And so there there may be a.
You.
Component a learning curve you
know people people need to know
that they can go to a credit
union get a quick small.
Reasonable interest loan in
cover an unexpected expense and
I don't know how we get that
message out I suppose that's on.
my job per se
but as long as that alternative
is available.
More than happy to support the
store so thank you madam chair
thank you Representative for.
Thank you Representative next I
have Representative Lewis.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative so one of the
issues I had with the bill last
year was that we didn't have the
report from F. ID and
representative will you tell me
when the report was issued to
whom it was issued and how it
was issued or are Representative
if if someone else on your panel
of experts has the information.
Sure
Madam chair representative
Lewis.
I have the report but I actually
don't know Karen can you answer
that question yes
Representative Lewis madam chair
the initial report was issued in
September of twenty twenty one
then they issue the second
reversion of division I believe
sometime after that because they
have identified errors the final
third edition was issued in
December of I believe it was on
the twenty first nineteen twenty
one it was updated and there
have poured some calculations
that were corrected that have
been an error that is their
final report I really could not
tell you F. I. D. deficiency
that or sent that to it was
posted on their website which is
where I found it.
Great thank you madam chair and
thank you Representative
I really appreciate that
information because I was the
sponsor of the bill
I can't remember because like
everyone I think our years mixed
up but and I really commend you
know everyone that work together
I think Senator online poverty
was really helpful in a meeting
with lobbyists from the industry
to talk about a compromise and
that bill was a compromise that
we came up with after I want to
say at least a dozen meetings so
a lot of hard work was put into
that and I don't know if one was
sent to me or one was sent to
legislators because I think many
of you know that our email boxes
get flooded with emails so it
was hard to tell but I do want
to say that you know I did
finally get a chance to see the
report I hope it was sent to me
but it might have been one of
the ones that was in and
finalized for you and I do think
that that information was
helpful I think it does is say a
lot and I think it now I'd like
to ask
Madam chair representative some
questions that Mr Fernandez
now that we have that
information because another one
of my concerns was related to
access especially for rural
communities people with low or
no credit.
That.
That might otherwise not any
have any means to accessing
funds and times of emergencies
so madam chair and
representative Hernandez excuse
me Herrera and Mr Hernandez
earlier you referenced small
dollar loans is there an amount
that you can point out like is
not less than five hundred
dollars is that less than two
fifty how is that categorized by
the credit unions.
Madam chair representative we
typically consider small dollar
loan anything that's on secured
under five thousand dollars.
Thank you madam chair and
representative Mister Hernandez
and I'm glad to hear that no
credit report is required I
think that's extremely important
because sometimes folks don't
have the opportunity
to establish credit and that's
not necessarily a bad thing
because you know we don't want
folks swimming and credit card
debt or or other means of of
being in debt so I don't think
that's necessarily a bad thing
so I'm glad to hear that
and madam chairman
Representative Herrera and Mr
Fernandes you also talked about
rural communities underserved
communities and I'm wondering if
you keep statistics
on on those types of customers I
am particularly interested in
Statistics on native Americans
and and how
how much of your customer base
is serving native American
populations.
Madam chair representative I
don't I know we're gathering
that data as we speak and I can
share that data after this
committee meeting that said I
know in the I can tell you that
in the western part of the state
first financial credit union is
a community development
financial institution there one
other credit unions that we've
been referring to and this
committee hearing in one of
their main focus is is native
American Community certain
factor expanding their branch
off press and in the western
part of the state to do partly
to do a lot of these very loans
that were discussing.
Thank you madam chair and
representative and Mr Fernandez
And and I know now it's not a
good time it because of the
pandemic still occurring but
normally or in the future is the
credit union available to join
community fairs especially in
rural communities so that they
can find information if but
folks don't have that perhaps
even laptops with internet
access in the event that people
need to apply for membership
especially if it's you know at
no fee or for small dollar
amount I think that something
that my district in southwest
Albuquerque as well as areas
rural communities including
native American and American
communities throughout the state
would be interested has that
occurred or do you think that
could occur in the future once
we're at a level of safety and
our.
Infection rates are
going down.
Madam chair representative yes
we would love to partnering with
you to do that many credit
unions are already doing a lot
of those things and Furthermore
one complaint is that I don't
think we've mentioned yet S.
financial coaching and financial
education I think that's going
to be a really key component to
this so that people have the
knowledge and the tools to
really make ends meet.
And and the technical knowledge
so they can make more money and
they can avoid these these
issues but yeah we would love to
partner with you when we commit
to doing that all over the
state.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative thank you Mr
Fernandez I'm really happy to
hear that I think that's really
important I did sign on to
Representative Maestas bill
about financial literacy and
school I think financial
literacy is key
I think I'm fortunately
especially now in the pandemic
where people are glued to their
phones and maybe perhaps even
before the pandemic and we see a
lot of things happening on
tectonic and Instagram where you
know materialism is really
glamorized but I think that you
know once folks get an idea of
of cost in words and time and
effort that it takes to by
things and they will be better
situated and and hopefully that
will be and and much better
financial situation situations
and circumstances
so.
I think that's everything again
madam chair and representative
Mr Fernandes I I do look forward
to seeing the credit unions out
in the community once that state
and providing that financial
literacy to them providing those
opportunities for memberships
especially if they're able to
obtain loans in times of
emergencies at little interest
rates and
no or low membership fees thank
you madam chair.
Thank you Representative.
Representative Townsend.
Thank you madam chair.
What questions I was.
I thought the report.
I I don't know
madam chair he delivered it to
the office this morning but I
thought it was was full of a lot
of good information.
and I I appreciate that.
One think that I believe this
striking to me is.
There seems to be quite a demand
for.
She
That people either don't know.
There are alternatives to.
Are they believe it's their only
option.
Okay is Mr Fernandes
R. all of these people.
Do you believe all of these
people that have used these.
One institutions that we're
discussing today with they
qualify for loans in your
institution.
Madam chair representative most
of them would not I can't
guarantee that all of them would
depend the vast majority of them
what yes.
So.
Sure so very probably your
business's gonna blow up.
When these go if they go away.
Madam chair representative I'll
repeat what I said earlier I I
don't think this legislation
would actually just make all of
the the small dollar lenders go
away I mean I just think that
would adapt their business
practices and would continue to
land in New Mexico so what our
business what out what we have
more loan Beilein potentially
but I still think they're here
they're not going to be going
away.
And I I get that there there may
be some of them that survive but
It will cause someone to fill
the void whether it's you or
someone else somebody's got to
build void because a lot of
these are in rural New Mexico
and they don't have the capacity
to go to town.
You know
To do to
two suffice this need.
Of.
I thought something that was
kind of interesting to me that
the small small the small
installment loans.
Appear to be about eighteen
percent of them come from
seniors.
And.
I think it's ironic it's not
it's the same number but on a
different scale that about
eighteen percent of the seniors
live in poverty.
And.
That kind of caught my eye.
I.
I believe that that.
We have to be very careful.
That we don't hurt.
A lot of people.
That we think we're trying to
help because most of these
loans.
R. twenty seven percent of
R. around five hundred dollars.
And thirty four percent of more
between five hundred thousand so
you got sixty one percent of
them are less than a thousand
Bucks and if you go all the way
up to three thousand dollars
you're at ninety four percent of
all the loans.
So these loans are.
Our.
Relatively small numbers
especially on the inflation that
we're and that their small
numbers and and
I really I really think I'm I'm
concerned that we're going to
do.
More damage but.
Yes yes yes are the rules that
better withstand yes House Bill.
One thirty two are they a
collectible figure institutions.
Madam chair representative I
think the question was directed
to me and if so give us our
it now but that said we we are
already modeling our our
interest rates to make sure that
we comply with us so let me get
this straight you're proposing a
you sound almost like what
people think about Congress
today you're proposing rules
that are applicable to somebody
else but did not your and your
institutions.
Madam chair representative we we
actually did not sponsor promote
with where we're supporting this
legislation because we believe
it makes common sense for New
Mexico but it was not a brain
child.
Common sense grows business
Representative to read the
Representative had it for ten
Representative.
Yes ma'am please do not to
motives to the experts that are
speculation on your part please.
Well I it wasn't speculation he
tell me he thought his business
was going to go up.
But you're saying that he
initiated it and he said he did
not now I I pass that that was
applicable to his business.
In your comments Representative
please be respectful I am I am
respectful madam chair and I
don't need to the not respectful
but I think this is a tough a
tough bill that we have to be
careful up let me ask you this
Madam chair out last well I
wanted that.
After listening to
Representative outcomes.
Concern and I'm sorry I was out
of the room for.
Part of the rest of it so it's
may be repetitive but I
understand I understand that the
The bill was germane because
they appropriation it was struck
on the first committee I get it.
Yes and I appreciate the
Sanchez.
Telling us that story
But it makes me think that the
committee should consider.
That there are a number of bills
that languish in rules.
That so Sanchez promised to put
an appropriation on in the first
committee with a B. D. Major
germane.
And I think we all know the
answer to that.
But it shows me.
And it should show the
committee.
The problem with the process as
utilized.
Representative I.
I do appreciate you.
Bringing this bill back.
I know it is of great concern of
yours I have talked to you about
it I I believe you're trying to
do what you feel is best and not
I appreciate people that stand
on principles rents.
It's becoming more and more
evident today but I.
I am concerned that we're going
to have the same thing happened.
To the same people.
We have not prevented that we
have just prevented a certain
business.
From.
Utilizing what they believe is
their their practices.
And if we were concerned about
it happening we would make get.
Cover all lending institutions
every where and not pick and
choose who we were I mean this
game of pick and choose some
winners.
Is not something the legislature
has a good track record in and
I.
I appreciate appreciate the
opportunity madam chair.
Thank you Representative Rehm.
Thank you madam chair.
What I'm gonna do is follow up
on our some of the conversation
that we had earlier in I think
that predatory lending
absolutely needs to be addressed
but I think that perhaps
some of this needs to be worked
out.
In a larger universe and I wanna
I wanna start off of madam chair
if I can ask Representative
Herrera she's aware what the
pawn shops here are loud as an
interest rate.
Madam chair representative ring
thanks for your question I I I
must tell you I'm not I I think
it's pretty on the exorbitant
side too but we're just amended
its lower your evening commute
at all.
She's not muted I could hear
her.
Can you hear me now.
Okay.
Representative no I'm not aware
at the at the rate set up on tax
charge.
We're amending just the small
loan act and the and they thanks
Tom no act here.
Okay thank you Representative
Madam chair representative the
interest rate at a pawn shop is
a hundred and twenty percent.
R. Madam chair representative
one of the things that really
bothers me is your credit card
companies when we look at it if
we looked at my just pulled up
the southwest credit card
support your base rate on
interest this fifteen point nine
nine to twenty two point nine
nine based on your credit score
if you get cash advances twenty
four point nine nine and this is
really where I think the
predatory lending comes and.
If you're late on a payment or
you're behind on payments they
can raise your interest to
twenty nine point nine nine all
what makes you think.
That a person who is having
difficulty paying could pay a
higher interest rate you know
that just doesn't make sense
And madam chair in our
Representative I'm all.
Amended dressed some of these
questions to.
My friend Mr Fernando.
He knows that I member of the
credit you.
And I've looked at some of that
you know one of the things I got
a new application a couple years
ago or you know what piece.
On
a line of credit.
In the line of credit of.
Required a two hundred fifty
dollar application fee.
A discovery well.
I don't need the money right now
but you know I'm trying to get a
a line of credit and so I was
like no I'm not going to do that
but.
I just was looking at the
website.
And
And then we ought to pick up a
dollar amount madam chair with
kind of sounds like a five
thousand dollars was a something
that would trigger some of these
of fees and look at that and try
to figure out what is the
interest right now so according
to the.
website right Sir subject to
change okay the forty five
dollar initial credit report she
applies to all wants.
Third party fees may apply in
certain circumstances
additional fees may apply
outside New Mexico and then if
you're using property that a
survey fee may apply as well.
What I was trying to figure out
some of these to perhaps you
could help me R. madam chair Mr
Fernandes so we've got a forty
five dollar credit the what
would be the application fee.
Hold on just one moment
Representative Rehm how does
this relate to the bill.
Madam chair of what I believe
this we need to look at this
holistically if we're if we're
going to go ahead and address
predatory lending.
In four.
We try to reduce your point to a
few questions if you would.
Okay madam chair I just trying
to get all the fees that would
be associated with it so that we
can figure out what the true
interest is what state on five
thousand dollars.
Can you address that sure madam
chair representative so I'm not
I can't see what you're looking
at but what I'm assuming is
based on the costs that you're
enumerating that's probably a
real state law so usually there
are minimum loan amounts for
that kind of loan and and
there's all kinds of and this
answer by the way goes to what
Representative Townsend said
earlier to Representative credit
unions and banks have all kinds
of regulations of payday lenders
don't have to abide by and when
we comes to real estate lending
all of those fees going to the
truth in lending act and it does
get it factored into the A. P.
R. what you're looking at a
multi year loan so and and all
of those fees are clearly
disclosed when you are taking
out that kind of loan the small
dollar loans whether it's a
personal loan a
small building on what we call
in pay Lente alternative loans
any of those loans don't usually
have the types of fees that
you're a new marketing.
Thank you and madam chair and Mr
Fernandes can I come to the bank
and get a state six month loan
on five thousand dollars.
Madam chair representative
absolutely.
And madam chair and and Mr
Fernandes I think that's exactly
on the point that we're talking
about on the small small loans
and I was just trying to figure
out what would be the true
interest rate.
Well Madam chair representative
but once again you wouldn't have
those two hundred dollars season
forty dollar fees because those
those real estate loans you do
we usually have some sort of
minimum term that's far exceed
six months.
Okay.
Madam chair representative I'm
gonna go ahead and move on and
I think that that part of the
discussion and I I found a
solution.
And I think if madam chair if we
in Representative we go to page
two winds eight and nine and we
don't lead at that section then
we're going to make sure that no
banking in New Mexico would do
predatory lending it would all
have to fall underneath this
thirty six percent cap.
And I would propose that is an
amendment.
Representative read that would
violate the Interstate Commerce
Clause.
Okay Madam chair in
Representative I think what we
ought to look at them is some
language that make sure that all
banks in New Mexico who do small
loans don't violate the intent
of this legislation.
So all I do work on it with
Legislative Council but that
will be something I'll be
looking at if this legislation
moves forward.
With that madam chair thank you.
Representative Eli.
Thank you madam chair moved do
passive house bill one thirty
two is amended.
Second that motion.
Click to call the roll
Madam chair and like to make
comments but if appropriate I
can use up to the vote.
I'm sorry I didn't see your hand
up did you just put it up it
wasn't it wasn't showing.
Well you can see.
What.
If you.
Okay Representative Akan.
What is on the bill.
We are yes Representative com
no.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Chandler yes.
Representative Cook.
I.
Representative Cook.
Mr speaker yes.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Lewis yes.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative.
I'm sorry Representative number.
M..
Representative Rehm.
No ma'am.
Representative.
Representative Townsend.
Representative Townsend.
Only
then.
Madam chair.
Madam chair this is that it is
representative traveled.
Yes go ahead Representative Cook
no thank you Madam.
Was.
Representative.
Instead thank you.
Okay.
Our
illustrious.
I sure could.
Mr katana.
Madam chair.
Yes.
I colder
Madam chair.
Seven against.
I.
Four and five opposed we have a
due pass.
Representative could.
C. Representative and more I
don't either.
Mr Representative madam chair I
have I will tell you I dropped
off a bunch and it's possible
that you just dropped off.
Okay so you know.
I'm checking to see if I can
find Representative.
I think we yes go ahead we've
been on this now for almost
three hours and I said we'll go
ahead and Representative
thank you very much and your
experts thank everyone for
through deliberation.
And madam chair I'd like to
thank the members of this
committee I know some of these
issues are very difficult and I
appreciate your attention I did
stand out Representative
Townsend that Maria the F. I do
study and the cost credit for
for long so I wanted this
committee to have as much
information as you although
appreciated so madam chair I
will close and and thank you
very much thank you we're going
to move on to house bill one
fifty one.
And we'll give these folks a
moment to exit.
Representative Hochman Vigil are
you on our panel.
Or.
I am now madam chair okay very
good.
And madam chair can we also are
promote Chief Justice of the
United the New Mexico Supreme
Court Michael E. Vigil.
I think we can arrange that
thank you.
Good afternoon Mister Chief
Justice good to have you with
us.
Do you need anyone else
Representative.
I do not believe so madam chair
thank you we'll go ahead with
house bill one fifty one.
Thank you so much madam chair
members of the committee on
house bill one fifty one aims to
do three things and I'm gonna
talk about a very minor
amendment that I believe your
secretary has madam chair and
and and has been prepared for.
a motion to move it whenever
you're ready but we'll talk
about the substantive bill first
the first thing it does is it
amended section thirty four dash
one dash nine eight of the New
Mexico of the New Mexico
statutes by mandating that
justices the of the New Mexico
Supreme Court be compensated an
additional salary level equal to
the annual salary received by
New Mexico federal magistrate
court judges the second thing is
it delete subsection C. of that
same statute which would be
Google magistrate judge salaries
from the same of funding formula
that determines state court
judicial salaries and the third
thing it does is it amends that
same section
subsection do so that annual
salaries for state justices
judges and magistrates for
fiscal years nineteen ninety
five and for all subsequent
fiscal years shall be provided
by the legislature in the
general appropriations act
rather than established by the
legislature and with that madam
chair do you want me to move my
amendment it's pretty small.
It simply adds an implementation
date of July one.
Two hundred is going to to to
number on that.
You know I'm madam chair I never
actually saw it from the okay
I'll give it to you I got it.
Do you have it Representative
Chasey I was going to read it
okay.
It's four one one point one.
And it just changed the
effective date to July first
twenty twenty two there it are
not change that in as an
effective date there was none
and it would have started before
that this new fiscal year so
this makes it much cleaner.
Correct thank you madam chair
and thanks also to the LCS
drafters you caught that error
and it does make it much cleaner
so what that madam chair well I
guess we'll address the
amendment first of what would
you what's your what's the cause
of the committee.
The amendment for adoption it is
are there any is there second on
that motion.
A second.
Thank you very much
representative Armstrong
seconded that motion and is
there discussion of that
effective date.
All right I'm sorry we're gonna
have to call the roll on this
because we can't tell who's
here.
Take a roll call on adopting
that amendment.
Representative Alcon is.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Chandler.
Representative Chandler.
Representative Cook yes.
It
the seventy four dollars.
Mr speaker.
Yes it.
Representative Ely.
Representative the line.
Representative Lewis.
Yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Nightmare yes.
Representative Rehm yes ma'am
Representative Townsend yes
ma'am.
Vice chair.
Price check.
In one eighty.
but two million.
Chandler.
Representative Chandler did you
want to vote.
Just give Representative
Chandler she's having a blast.
Madam chair yes.
Okay we have about a ten to zero
right that was adopted in go
head with.
Thank you madam chair and so
this is the third time in peer
to fund before your wonderful
committee and I've been talking
a lot about judicial
compensation and so madam chair
this really wonderful young lady
and.
Not.
The third part of this
conversation and the reason for
madam chair is to echo the same
arguments that have been made
before and not specifically for
state court judges about it's
been hard for recruitment of
qualified applicants to serve on
the bench and I can pontificates
on this issue madam chair until
the end of time but who better
to actually give you the reason
for this legislation then of the
Chief Justice of the New Mexico
Supreme Court himself justice
Michael E. Vigil who I would
like to turn it over to you to
say a few words.
Chair members of the committee
it's it's up always an honor to
appear before this committee
many of you know the story how
this came about but all in no
repeated briefly just to so that
those have not heard we'll have
the full picture I would first
like to thank the Representative
Hochman Vigil for doing this and
introducing this legislation it
is endorsed by the courts
corrections and justice
committee and it is also
endorsed by your own judicial
compensation commission that
meets up regarding judicial
compensation last year was my
first year as Chief Justice of
New Mexico and it preparing to
give various presentations to
the legislature I ready years of
our judicial compensation
commission reports and it was
repeatedly are we are after year
after year New Mexico judges
were among the lowest paid
judges in the nation
judicial comp judicial selection
commissions were having very
difficult times a recruiting
people to apply for judgeships
and the the the consistent
reason given for that was that
hello compensation
what we also found was a
systemically lawyers with.
Basically criminal law
background young course and an
attorney John in the district
attorney's offices and public
defenders options whether
primary applicants it is not to
put them down or anything but
they just didn't have the same
type of experience that that.
We needed in the judiciary we
are.
And I saw the last competition
commission report recommendation
to raise judicial salaries over
a period of five years and it
occurred to me that this is our.
Issue of of of craziness because
which that's what we've done all
along we again check judges
small raises are over forty
years sometimes more bigger
raises but it could relations of
the the rest of the judiciary
throughout the nation we're also
very races we remained at the
bottom so this bottom of the
barrel so to speak so my mind at
that point that we were going to
try and fix this problem of
getting qualified people in the
middle of but in their mid level
attorneys who apply for
judgeships in New Mexico and
that the fix for that was once
and for all sixteen judicial
compensation.
So I'm what I'd like for you to
understand that the Mexico
judges are behind if work the
competition areas first of all
we're below the paper judges in
other states.
Mexico Supreme Court Mexico just
to salary compared to eight
mountain west states of Arizona
Colorado Kansas Nevada Oklahoma
Texas Utah and Wyoming.
Since the comparisons what was
started in two thousand and
seven New Mexico has been either
seven or eight consistently
every year after year after year
are district judges are trial
judges are forty eight hundred
fifty one of judges throughout
the the country.
We're also below the paper
lawyers in private practice how
the last Jedi we have is from
two thousand seventeen and that
showed that the average salary
for a law firm partner in New
Mexico was two hundred and ten
thousand five hundred two
dollars and that a lawyer in
solo practice their average
salary two thousand seventeen
was a hundred eighty four
thousand dollars.
Currently the rate of the New
Mexico Supreme Court judges it's
just a little over a hundred
fifty three thousand dollars so
when we look at two thousand
seventeen salaries we know the
gap is bigger today than it was
then.
Thirdly.
We went to go look at New Mexico
will be slowed the paper senior
level state and local government
employees for example the
Bernalillo county attorney makes
two hundred sixty three thousand
dollars.
The UNM lost will be two hundred
and fifty three thousand dollars
Santa Fe County manager hundred
ninety eight thousand seven the
the Dona ana county manager
hundred eighty five thousand
dollars.
So we're we're behind on that
scale as well we're also below
the pay a federal judge.
The federal District Court judge
in New Mexico thanks two hundred
eighteen thousand six hundred
dollars so I do trying to
determine.
What would be an appropriate
salary target for our New Mexico
I judges I I looked at
Compensation paid and other
judges and what I found was that
with New Mexico advertises for a
vacancy in the United States
magistrate judge position which
is the lowest your judicial
position in the federal court
they were getting applications
I'm in my experience thirty to
forty but what we found out from
Mr work think or who chairs the
merit selection commission
committee for the federal
magistrates they had as many as
eighty four positions.
For applications for one
position in Albuquerque.
And it's much and that's what
compare that.
Just last week in Los crucis a
judicial selection commission
Matt they had three applications
none of those three applications
one were sent to the governor we
have many cases where we've only
had one application we and in
fact famously object governor
bill Richardson got one eight
one then we send it back and
that commission chair that's all
we can come up with so he
refused to make that appointment
because you want to order some
more diversity and you couldn't
get it and the jobs bill to the
Supreme Court Chief Justice to
make that appointment so I I
look at.
Looking at these.
Comparisons I determined that we
would try to see the pen for the
highest judges of the state to
receive the period of the lost
judges in the federal system as
a comparison and that is one
hundred
So that's that's that's how the
figure came to be in this bill
We were hoping with that we can
select mid level career
attorneys to apply projections
in New Mexico Mexico why is this
important.
It's important because many of
you don't don't know this but
over ninety percent of the cases
in the entire country our urban
state point seventy percent of
those cases are civil case.
So.
State trial judges are dealing
with social issues that affect
everyone of the state.
It's more mental issues family
law issues consumer issues
voting rights issues tax
righteous use healthcare human
rights issues domestic violence
unemployment age.
And and in order to adequately
address those issues.
All people all over the state of
New Mexico we need to have
lawyers who have experience in
areas like negligence law
landlord tenant law consumer
leases oil and gas law consumer
protection product liability
medical malpractice tax
contracts business litigation
family law commercial law these
these are the earns a lot of
work we have to attract judges
of the state to apply to to
enhance and better serve the
people of the state of New
Mexico.
We also know that this is good
for business the the chamber of
commerce reports that Mrs look
to the litigation environment
that they're going to be working
in in deciding whether to move
or expand their business in the
in a locality we don't have to
be a fact we also know that this
is important for New Mexico not
only the northwest quadrant of
the state the southeast quadrant
of the state what are rural New
Mexico
Some of you may not know this
but in rural parts of New Mexico
were we have just a couple of
judges each district they hear
all the case there is no
division do not occur P. we have
people the judges that student
out family log District sections
we have judges from across
sections we have judges sitting
in several sections in the rural
areas where one judge has to be
an expert in all of these areas
in your case is there a file
what's critically important to
adequately serve the people of
the state of New Mexico the we
have judges with this background
and with this experience.
So I urge you to consider these
factors I know most of you on
the committee are attorneys I'm
and I know most of US attorneys
would know first hand this is a
problem of trying to get to that
level attorneys with experience
in their fifties to leave their
private practice you can see why
meant that have to give up their
private practice run for
election and and then and then
be sitting judges so I I think
of the members of the committee
I think.
Representative Hochman DO and I
and I I stand ready for
questions.
From the members of the
committee thank you I hope I
wasn't too long.
Thank you Mr Chief Justice.
Will recall.
With those in attendance and if
you will please indicate if
you're in favor of house bill
one fifty one or in opposition
coal would be out for about
twenty seconds.
Not minutes.
It's up.
Go ahead.
Sentenced no the new this summer
okay we have eighty nine percent
in favor and eleven percent in
opposition let's go to is there
a need for public comment by any
of these folks
I I will I'll just thank you
keep your comment to no not more
than a minute and I'm looking
for hands no news.
What answer raised.
Representative Maestas.
Would you like to speak.
No I don't see his hand in the
longer.
Carter Bundy.
Carter go ahead.
Thanks thank you madam chair
members of the committee Carter
Bundy with asked me we want to
think Representative Garrett and
Representative Lundstrom is well
she's work on this with this for
a long time chart we're on the
wrong bill.
It said fifty five sorry about
that we're on house bill one
fifty one I'm sorry fifty five
sorry okay
Jessica Wilson.
Are you one one fifty one your
we're ready to talk.
Hi thank you for letting me
speak my name is Jessica mall
then thank you madam chair
members of the committee I am
the campaign manager for the
fair courts initiative for
common cause New Mexico we think
Representative Hochman Vigil for
sponsoring this bill
we feel it's essential to
compensate judges in New Mexico
adequate leave this will allow
us to not only retain our
current justices but also to
encourage new and qualified
individuals to seek a judicial
position within our state thank
you for allowing me to speak.
Thank you and I think that's it
for public comment let me go to
the Committee and first
let me begin with we can take
the public comment down and we
already got the committed
Representative read this first.
Go ahead Representative right.
Thank you madam chair
I was looking at this and I had
a couple questions so madam
chair in.
Representative Hochman Vigil one
of the things I'm worried about
is in this legislation we did
couple the magistrates from the
if you will the form or schedule
that we've set up and what I'm
worried about is is that we're
going to leave them far behind
and we're going to see the same.
you know legislation in the
future.
Every year trying to bring their
salary back up I would feel a
lot more comfortable if we
didn't do Google the magistrates
but we left them in this
legislation
so that so that we do have a
scheme and madam chair and
representative do you have any
comment or strong feeling on
that.
Thank you madam chair
representative regime I know
upon first reading of it is
alarming to look that we're
we're going to be changing this
compass salary this
compensation language and and
schedule that we put the
magistrates on but really the
reason for that Madam chair
representative is because we are
not seeing recruitment problems
in any way with magistrate Drug
judges with the the thought
pattern the the thinking here
would be we keep magistrates on
a similar schedule as to where
they are now because it is
working and we see no shortage
of of applicants for the
magistrate pool and we do Google
that the judges because that
final actually has been
artificially keeping the state
court judges and above salaries
low to a point where we cannot
recruit the type of applicant in
the number of applicants we need
to to prop up our judicial
system so that's the thinking
behind that and then magistrates
would still continue to keep a
someone's salary schedule they
have now it would be
appropriated by the legislature
and the same process that we use
for other state employees and
and to that all I'll defer to
the chief justice we help to see
if he has any additional.
Thank you Representative
Representative right madam chair
what P. when we first part of
this we had a meeting with the
magistrates from all across the
state where they were able to
appear personally were by zoom
according to their preference in
their comfort and what we
learned in that meeting was that
they're very very happy with
their salaries that they
currently get their
qualifications are completely
different from from other judges
in the state they are happy with
their your Hey there there are
getting slated to get a up to a
raise in the current house bill
two as I understand it and and
they're they're you're happy
with that
they are they are there
consternation to the X. to the
extent expressed any
reservations it was because of
unforeseen possible consequences
we did that by them that there
is a complementary bill
that we were seeking as well
which is a cop and a commission
to set the salaries of all state
officers in the state which
includes judges and that that if
that it should pass and be
adopted by the people's state of
New Mexico they would be
included in that for sure as
well as all the other judges
across the state so what are
with their blessing we we went
ahead and proceed with this
ammendment.
Madam chair and chief justice
thank you for the answer but
madam chair and
Representative Hochman Vigil I
really think that
If we did Google then we could
end up seeing the problem that
you're speaking about for
district judges in that thirty
applicant pools of.
Become smaller and we would be
right back.
At the same problem for that
reason I I really think that we
need to place them back and we
have a formula in the.
In the in the law currently to
go ahead and compensate them and
I think that's the way they
should move all along.
madam chair and Representative
Hochman Vigil I I'm worried over
here we just change the
effective date of July one the.
FY are.
Does give of what the actual
cost would be.
for this of.
In speaking with some of the
people on the finance committee
they're estimating the cost
could be around about four point
two five million.
And I. R. my question is is
there and is this money in the
budget.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Rehm is a great
question so the answer.
It is that yes some of it is
currently in the budget we don't
have full funding for the bill
at this time in the current
house bill two to that we're
gonna be hearing on the floor
tomorrow however there happens
go she Asians are still being
held we still need to move for
with this legislation as it
relates to the substantive
changes to statute but yes there
there is some money in the
budget and there is there might
be more as it crosses over to
the Senate side.
Representative Chasey.
If I could also add to
Representative Hochman Vigil
statement read Representative
Chasey and Representative green
if you look at the AOC'S
analysis is one of the concerns
without having the effective
date is that the cost between
it coming becoming effective
ninety days after the session to
the beginning of the fiscal year
would be one point one million
dollars so the reason of having
an effective date of July one
was to save the taxpayers one
point one million dollars the.
House appropriation bill does
have the money's.
For the increase in salaries.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr Kelly that that is
our committee analyst.
Madam chair and
Representative Hochman Vigil so
what is the current amount
that's in the budget so the we
have an idea of what to
shortfall as.
Madam chair representative
regime I think we're about.
Thank around three million
dollars short at this time to
fully fund the request which has
been requests on the Senate
finance side.
Okay thank you madam chair and
thank you that's all my
questions Representative
Representative Ely yes madam
chair I'm the designated hitter
today I will move it to pass of
house bill one fifty one as
amended as amended.
Okay.
I'll second that motion.
Is there further discussion.
I
see none the clerk to call the
roll.
Representative Alcon.
Representative Armstrong.
Yes.
Representative Chandler.
Representative Cook.
Yes.
Mr speaker.
Yes.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Lewis.
Yes.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative night where yes.
Representative green yes ma'am.
Representative Townsend.
No ma'am.
Thank.
Madam chair.
Yes.
Ten to one we have a due process
on house bill one fifty one is
amended.
Congratulations thank you all
very much thank you madam chair
members of the committee good
luck moving forward thanks so
much.
J..
I think that should be how it
goes.
This bill is about fifty five.
Representative Garrett and
Lundstrom.
Representative are you in the.
See if I can get you here.
Thank you very Herrera and this
must mean you're an expert.
Madam chairman my need to review
the criteria but you would be
correct.
And I see we have Representative
Garrett that's good who will
soon be Representative Garrett.
You're you're muted so do you
need anyone else with you I see
you have Carter Bundy you have
Larry Herrera who else to market
where it says here for technical
reasons she's the drafters.
For Legislative Council Service
are you there all right great
we'll go right ahead
Representative Garrett.
Okay thank you
House Bill all fifty five is
creates the public private
partnership act.
And I'm going to just review a
couple of things in its history
on the public private
partnership package it allows
public partners to enter into
public private partnership
agreements to facilitate public
projects it creates the public
private partnership board the
partnership project fund
provides for an exception to the
procurement court code that
authorizes grants loans and
bonds.
And this may not be on the furry
port but what we amended it
since house transportation was
it provides the delayed repeal
and requires reports.
This bill in twenty nineteen
House Bill five thirty four
passed the house passed its
Senate committees.
For.
That is the bulk of the bill but
we've made revisions based on
feedback since then from the
transportation committee and
that the NMAA eight
It is it is prudent use of
public money is it fair to
private partner so this bill
really looks to that balance
making sure that there's
accountability and it benefits
the public need.
Want to go over just a couple of
points and then Mr around will.
At some point this applies to
two kinds of public projects
public transportation facilities
or public transportation our
public construction or
improvement of broadband.
Medications that work facilities
and that's what really attracted
me to sign on
a couple of other things
Before entering any
negotiations.
What partner has to under Kate
undertake a cost benefit
analysis public public private
partnership to see how it
measures up in comparison to the
more traditional public partner
manage project.
To determine whether the
application of the procurement
cord
but excuse me or other
procurement rules applicable
they have to conduct a public
hearing all after they've
publicized.
in local newspapers and on the
internet they have to
demonstrate that it really
serves a public purpose I'm not
going to go over everything it
does but it outlines those.
There's the bill outlines what
the agreement has to have
The public private partnership.
The board we have amended to
include the director of the
office of broadband access and
expansion for the directors of
designate.
we have listed the power of the
boards.
Create a private.
Private partnership project.
it reminds workers agreements
have to be involved just like
the minimum wage.
Subcontractor will send other
such labor related issues.
There's accountability and that
it has to be reviewed by the
board or but to make sure that
everything is honored in terms
of public dollars.
Those are
all things what we added based
on transportation.
The deal lately she also that if
the bill needed to be reviewed
repealed based on what happened
that could be done so that's
just so brief point I'll turn it
over to Larry correct add a few
additional.
Right.
And let
me just jump in for a moment
here it's been called to my
attention to I've heard this
before and I'd
it there is a committee zoom and
so you are
excluding Committee stop and we
will substitute that the
approach.
That is correct I'm sorry madam
chair I forgot all about it I
got so excited about this.
Mr grant I thank you madam chair
members the committee Larry
heard and I hear you but before
you today is that the general
counsel for the mid region
council of governments and real
metro regional transit district
I'm in discussions with
Representative Garrett.
The reason I'm here discussed
the bill is part of what the
real metro regional transit
district is responsible for is
operating The New Mexico rail
runner express and we actually
just went through our second
procurement for operations and
maintenance of the rail runner
and in the public private
partnership is something we've
been following for a significant
time because that project for
operation and maintenance and
also the broadband aspect would
have been a great tool for us to
use because what we found is
were limited by procurement code
for just an eight year contract
with our with our contractor if
we have the ability to into it
into a.
Public private partnership the
things that we that we typically
various problems are complaint
related to the rail runner like
it takes too long to get Santa
Fe we want to see more trains
can't you run double track so
you can run more trains really
are severe limitation is just
that we don't have the funding
we don't have the public monies
available to make those costly
improvements if you can attract
operators that can operated
under public private partnership
and have.
Predictability and also a longer
term contract then they can
commit to and we can negotiate
some of those capital
improvements we otherwise would
not be able to avail ourselves
of that we would have to come to
the legislature or look for
alternative methods of funding
and in fact the way the the our
contracts are written we are
actually prohibited no political
subdivision or government entity
in the state New Mexican operate
the train and so we have to go
out we have to have a private
operator so it would help to
solve a lot of those problems
and would be beneficial in this
last procurement and and just
very quickly will touch on his
we recently just had to to
complete will positive train
control which is a federal
mandate for safety
I'm gonna put some safety.
Related to avoidance of head on
collisions with the train and
that mandate costs about fifty
five million dollars in capital
and we have an ongoing five
million dollar cost that we're
going to have to have to
to pay for the foreseeable
future laws were operating the
rail runner that's another piece
where we could have utilized the
private contractor to help us
defray some of those costs or
maybe minimize those costs and
I'll just the last piece all
state is yes part of that PTC or
positive train control we had to
we have to have broadband with
have wifi throughout the route
so as we're looking at broadband
and we're looking at potential
public private partnership the
rail right away which is owned
by the state of New Mexico is a
great place that we can lay
broadband fibre right down the
middle of the state
and it's another place for P.
three and you you have that in
this piece of legislation so I I
speak as having experience with
a project which would be really
which would really benefit from
use to public private
partnerships and I'm happy to
answer any questions that the
committee has thank you.
Madam chair said one point the
advantage of a a P. three I'm
just going to initiate
initialize that and say P. three
each participant leverages the
strength of the other The New
Mexico finance authority stated
in the analysis that potential
public partners are attracted to
states that have clear P. three
laws and rules and affect thirty
nine states have a public
private partnership laws as well
as the district of Columbia and
Puerto Rico and with that we
stand open for questions.
Okay.
But will will do that the right
hand let's go to the audience
here and see you do a quick poll
twenty seconds
to measure those in favor of.
House bill fifty five in those
in opposition.
So we'll get back up on the
screen here.
Your with us a moment technical
difficulties.
Pulls up now no this is actually
got the wrong house bill on it
but it's supposed to be house
bill fifty five.
But if you would pretend that
says fifty five at the top in.
Appropriately this is house bill
fifty five.
Okay.
Okay that with eighty two
percent in favor eighteen
percent in opposition twenty
three to five so let me go down
for public comment.
And see if there's anyone first
of all who wishes to speak in
opposition to the bill.
Will you know Carter's got his
handout but you're on the panel
Carter so I'm.
We.
I'm sure does that mean you can
hear me right now I can hear you
but your honor pedal to so go
ahead it was the.
Right so thank you madam chair
members of the committee Carter
money with asked me and that
whole earlier is exactly what
through me so I apologize for
interrupting Representative
Hochman Vigil still before we
are usually very skeptical about
P. threes are skeptical about P.
threes they often are sort of a
tool for privatization of core
public services we have nothing
but respect and gratitude to
Representative Lundstrom and
Representative Garrett for
reaching out to us about this
this is been a three year
process and the odd they have
taken some very narrow areas
where there is private sector
involvement already our
broadband and some public
transportation facilities and
also ensure that operations and
maintenance works already done
are are going to continue to be
down by the Public partner so we
can't thank them enough for
reaching out getting our input
taking it seriously we think
that's good for workers and we
stand in support of this bill
thank you.
Thank you.
Derek Scott.
Go ahead Derrick.
The way for the.
Madam chair members of the
committee
my only issue with this bill is
that I'm just concerned with
just lock in the.
Governments with one company and
further more what I'm asking is
is that are we.
There's been a lot of problems
is getting higher speed internet
to people like myself who are
as.
Well funded is shall we say to
get money for this issue
I'm paying absorbency as it is
is there any way that you guys.
If this bill passes to find a
better way for with this
partnership to lower prices
perhaps or at least ask for a re
evaluation of their prices and
their fees because I do see that
there's some fees paid in here
so that's kind of my concern and
I appreciate you taking the time
to listen to me thank you and
have a great day.
One.
JD Bullington.
Thank you madam chair speaking
in support of my in the right
group here.
That's fine.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee this is JD
Bullington speaking on behalf of
the greater Albuquerque chamber
of commerce which supports house
bill fifty five public private
partnerships offer taxpayers the
best of both worlds.
Readily available resources
state government and the
efficiencies of the private
sector we know our broadband
infrastructure is lacking at a
time we do that enhance more
than ever and we know our roads
and highways Needham immediate
attention also so this is the
perfect opportunity and the
perfect vehicle to make
significant investments in our
infrastructure using public
private partnerships thank you.
Thank you.
Should I confront.
My apologies again this is for
number one with the
communication workers of America
we actually sharing so much
count so okay the name change
again this is for non to remind
thank you madam chair what are
women and members of the
committee again my name is for
non to remind them with the
Representative the communication
workers of America and working
in New Mexico and we are
strongly in support of
legislation which improves and
expands the availability of
broadband to New Mexicans and
appreciate that you just
legislators are making hundreds
of millions of public dollars
available for those purposes HB
fifty five would provide
additional opportunity and we
support the general intent.
However we strongly advocate the
addition of measures to be added
to the bill which would protect
the workforce installing other
broadband expansion and the
public investment just to ensure
there be clear and adequate
oversight and accountability for
the maintenance of the projects
completed the the use of
people's investment using public
funds to that end we sent
suggested language for goals are
for such goals to the eight
conservation fifty five we want
to extend those amendments
request to you as well for
deliberation on the merits of
this legislation please consider
CBA to be a partner in the in
this expansion our workers know
their jobs and all the proper
broadband installation
requirements we are very very
willing to work with you and all
and your staff to great the best
bill possible if you have
questions were available again
we're in support of this bill
with merit of the amendments
thank you so much thank you
Catherine Nicholaw.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee this is
captain Nicolau I'm a registered
lobbyist and external affairs
chair for sacred wind
communications which is a
sixteen year old New Mexico
owned and operated broadband
provider serving Navajo Nation
parts New Mexico state could win
stand in support of house bill
fifty five we've had the
opportunity to strike broadband
partnerships with several towns
and counties some of the
frustrations that we've run into
include hesitation from
governments and a lack of
support for P. three projects in
our state.
Passage of this bill would open
a great opportunity for local
and rural broadband providers so
we urge the committee to please
give this bill if you pass.
Thank you.
Thank you Karen Graham.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Cameron
Graham I'm a volunteer advocate
with a a RP New Mexico and a a
RP New Mexico is in support of
this bill improving broadband
access is a very high priority
for a a RP New Mexico and a a RP
nationwide.
Are we believe that the concept
of the private public
partnership
that is contemplated in this
bill is one more means of
achieving this goal and we want
to thank the sponsors for bring
it forward and thank you members
of the committee.
Thank you Danielle to run.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name's Danielle
Duran I'm the inter governmental
affairs chair for Los Alamos
County we support this bill and
we support the greater access to
broadband across New Mexico
especially in northern New
Mexico so we urge the committee
to please provided to pass for
this bill.
Thank you I thought we were
finished I think there's one
we're hand yes Katrina how
tribal office.
I thank you madam chair my name
is Katrina hotel Lopez in the
cabinet secretary for aging and
long term services we urge you
to support this bill in the body
to support this bill this our
our seniors really need not only
access to transportation but you
know broadband helps our service
delivery to to all of the the
senior sites that we have it
just says us and and addressing
some of the challenges of
signing folks up for things like
the pandemic that we've had and
also assist long term care
facilities in getting to where
we want to be which is not only
reporting on pandemic but
streamlining process sees that
can be reported to the
department of health and aging
and long term services so this
would benefit us our seniors and
adults with disabilities we
strongly support this bill and
urged the body to do the same
thank you.
For.
Thank you so much nice to see
you are have you with us madam
secretary.
We are now going to
Go back to the committee.
And.
Everybody on the screen here and
Representative Garrett.
I will let me move that the
committee substitute for
discussion purposes will you
tell us I know aren't committing
analysis is based on the
substitute so you could all feel
confident in that and so.
Is there anything you want to
say about the substitute
Representative.
Yes thank you madam chairwoman
and the number is two two two
two seven seven point three.
The committee the committee so
to see.
I think one of the analyses
actually went through it.
That is the the house committee
analysis report.
When we first heard this and
house transportation and at that
time the analysis pointed out
you and.
Parking some of the needs and
publicizing
so we added the fact that
notices this is the first step
what is a public entity is
considering that they have to
advertise.
Where the public entity is and
where the project is in local
newspapers in both locations and
on their website so that it's
public so that was clarified
more clearly
We.
Section five it includes
entering into joint powers
agreements with any other public
partner for Indian nations
tribes or pueblos to make it
clear that although the Indian
nation of.
Try.
But as a public partners for
joint powers agreements they can
participate we added the repeal
clause which I think is in
section sixteen.
The guidance of a week added to
the public project revolving
fund that some project that's an
excuse me section fifteen
we added some other mechanisms.
but
She wants.
So we really value that input.
From.
Members of the house
transportation.
Some of the analysts that bound
thanks.
Are there questions from members
on the order itself before we go
to general discussion.
I do want to point out
Representative Garratt our
committee analysis from not sure
if you have a copy of that yet
but there might be some other
suggestions for you.
Just.
For.
Worthwhile.
Consideration by your group.
Thank you madam chair I mean
that's why we're here because
many people in your committee
have
Is that you know have sponsored
have looked at it and we want to
get a bill that does that right
and really balances are public
taxpayers funds.
Our governmental rights as well
as the balance with those
private parties that enter these
agreements.
Thank you.
So first on my list is
Representative McQueen.
One question on the committee
said.
Madam chair of resent your
in just ring the changes on the
committee said.
In the multiple publication in
newspapers.
It was curious to me that it was
just one county doing a project
in another county.
We
care why would one party do it
project in another county and I
could see like the real runner
which runs through multiple
counties.
It is their circumstance we're.
You can find the the public
partner into you shopped around
found one in the so do a project
that wasn't in your
jurisdiction.
Share.
We also going to ask Larry
hearing to correct to answer
that because he's worked with
the New Mexico press association
but broadband projects often
spanned two counties so in
making so in the interest of
transparency
the originating let's say that
it was San Juan County that was
working on it but it went
through it neighboring counties
we would want to private
partners in both counties and
the public in both counties to
be aware of the project it's
just in the interest of
transparency
local newspapers public notices
are one of the most highly read
things that our state so it is
important to make sure that it's
totally the public's totally
aware of what's going on and
whether or not they have issues
if there companies that are
interested whatever Mister right
you want to add anything to
that.
Thank thank you Representative
madam chair Representative
McQueen the issue that had to be
changed regarding the
publications on page four
starting on line seven where it
says the notice shall be
published in the count for three
successive weeks in a newspaper
of general circulation published
in the county where the public
partner situated without having
the general circulation language
not every county has a newspaper
of general circulation and so
you it has to be available so
for it you know the.
If you had that published in the
journal in a in a county where
they didn't otherwise have a
newspaper that's why we had to
have that language phonetically
because not every county has a
newspaper particularly the
county so that was the notice
piece that we needed to address
so that you make sure that it
was generally available to
anybody in the county to see
what was contemplated.
Madam chair representative here
Mister and so I think there's a
sort of two different questions
two different answers the same
question
You with the ability of the
newspaper is a growing issue.
It certainly concerns me.
You know I I've I've heard from
from local newspapers.
The you know publishing a
newspaper might not be the best
means of providing of this but
I've also heard from local
papers that they rely on that
income but like I do I don't
read the legals in the newspaper
you could pretty easily set up
an internet search to catch.
Publication if it was online so
that there are issues around
publication but my specific
question was.
I could see some of like the
real runner I think touches
multiple counts.
and if you have a project that
all the rail runner there would
be something to be said for
publishing it not in.
For publishing it you need to
tell me that affects the way you
chosen the committee so that is
a little curious.
because it's implies that one
county to do a project and other
county or one of the partners
that wasn't located in a county.
Could you project and other
county that says.
Well we're the public partner is
situated in in the county
decanting singular where the
proposed public project will
occur in different so it doesn't
reference the multi
jurisdictional part of project
explicitly is it does use the
county instead of the counties
it could be more than one and I
am I question was if it wasn't a
multi jurisdictional project the
public partner
State of the.
C. Bernalillo county once a new
public private prisons and I I'm
not sure that's within the scope
of this but it popped in my head
could could Bernalillo county
building a public private prison
in Torrance County.
Madam chair representative it's
very unlikely however let's say
let's say that do it as a state
agency was involved with the
private.
Company.
Working in some type of network
situation and a school district
it's conceivable so we just
allowed for the possibility.
Okay madam chair.
There's no leverage I I do think
she counties clear I mean I
think we should be wherever that
the project has an impact thank
you madam chair.
Representative Chandler.
Thank you madam chair.
So.
Just behind this bill I believe
at least one of the premise east
madam chair and sponsor and
thank you for bringing it I'm
sorry I'm losing like purchasing
this evening is get a little
late in the day
the premise behind this bill is
that it will add efficiency.
Advance more projects support
you know the more readily
available infrastructure and
broadband madam chair and
sponsor do I have that correct.
Yeah.
Hold on my my bar just didn't
work
yes I madam chair and
representative.
That that is one part of it and
and I want to remind people this
is on page four number two
before entering into a private
of public private partnership a
public partner shall revert to
determine whether the app excuse
me undertake a cost benefit
analysis of the project in
comparison with traditional
public partner manage projects.
We as another option it's it's
not okay now we're all good but
I do public private partnerships
it.
It allows us to consider this as
another option.
In my I I spoke with of the
broadband experts from Senator
Lujan office who talked about
how Brianna Bivens insurance
were that with the money coming
down for infrastructure the
federal government is has
identified public private
partnerships as one of the
mechanisms to carry them out.
Okay.
Madam chair and
Representative
thank you for that.
I'm I'm intrigued that you
pointed to this bill a cost
benefit analysis and and so on.
I remember reading and the bill
madam chair and sponsor when
when this was filed and I
remember thinking well how often
do you think they're not gonna
have a cost benefit that favors
a private
I'm a public private partnership
you know.
So help me understand why this
won't always be the option that
is used.
Great question madam chair and
representative there's a board
of.
People that has to go through
it's not just boom this is what
I what I do I'm gonna do it has
to be approved by the people of
approve our the department
secretaries and members of the
public with expertise.
Financing broadband development
and many failed so it's not a
done deal you have to go through
and tire process.
Madam chair and sponsor and
Representative Garrett my
recollection was there is the
dollar threshold so that was
about ten million dollars it
goes through the board if it's
below ten million dollars it
doesn't go through the board so
you know I understand they're a
lot of projects that are built
above ten million but I also
understand that there are
probably many that are alone ten
million did I get that right.
Yes Madam chair representative
you did.
Okay do we have madam chair and
representative any sort of
reporting requirement to the
legislature as to how many
projects have utilize this
mechanism what the board let's
assume there about ten million
dollars madam chair what the
board decided how many they
determined to be not appropriate
how many they should term and to
be appropriate at setter is
there anything in the bill that
requires that.
Yes Madam chair representative
it is required to report on
exactly those things.
The I know that the date is by
December first if you go to
section.
Well.
Nineteen.
Reminds thirteen by December
first of this year and by
December first of each year
there after the board shop
provide reports the government
and the New Mexico binance
Authority oversight committee
for the grant and loan
application is approved for the
public private partnership
agreements approved by or
reported to the board the status
of the public private
partnership Fund
Bond reporting and recommended
changes to the act they feel
that those are called for.
Madam chair and and
Representative Garrett are there
other any sunset kind of
provisions or any sort of
trigger that would require us to
reevaluate as to whether or not
this is law that we just passed
is that we may be passing is
effective.
Well yes.
One thing by the September first
the board has to specifically
state if they recommend changes
and then in section sixteen the
late repeal section one through
thirteen of those that are
repealed.
Act July first twenty thirty two
or it can be done earlier but we
were concerned that because of
the bonding capacity
I'm drafter Edwards I didn't
want to you know push too short
of a term so that someone didn't
want to invest in bonds because
it could be repealed next year
something great question thank
you.
Thank you very much
Representative Garrett and madam
chair and I have of I'm through
with my questions that point
thank you.
Thank you very much
Representative Chandler.
I don't have anywhere hands
raised is there for the
discussion.
We we do need a motion of a for
a do not pass on house bill
fifty five and Madam chair of
rules.
I I will moving do not bring the
form with the signature.
Chris you're still on somebody
is still here somebody we got
all right I move a do not pass
house bill fifty five and a do
pass of the committees Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill fifty five.
We have a second from
Representative night birds the
motion from Representative Ely
is there further discussion.
The clerk to call the roll.
Representative of corn.
Yes Representative.
What was your vote yes.
Representative Armstrong.
Yes.
Representative Chandler yes.
Representative Cook yes.
Mr speaker and.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Lewis.
Yes.
Representative McQueen.
No.
Representative Nibert yes.
Representative green yes ma'am.
Representative Townsend yes.
Representative.
Mr speaker.
I.
Madam chair.
Yes.
By a vote of ten to one we have
a do not pass on house bill
fifty five in a do pass on
committee substitute for house
bill fifty five.
Thank you madam chair and
committee.
Thank you all very much.
We'll see you later.
Next we have house bill seventy
nine.
We.
as Representative Eli and
Maestas and review.
Madam chair representative my
masters is in the attendees if
we could probably nurse panels
look at it right now okay.
Is here.
President of.
Okay I understand Representative
says that you're going to be
presenting this bill and
We'll we'll hear about the bill
that will will do a poll in the
go to public comment in the back
to the committee.
So go read.
Thank you madam chair members
this is house bill seventy nine
house bill seventy nine it
received and executive message
it's a bill that has been
presented and passed this
committee in an in order to get
a iterations.
One is increasing and making the
penalty appropriate for the
intentional killing of another
for murder.
as you all well know murder in
the first degree is thirty years
with no good time.
Up and up potential lifetime
parole second degree murder
drops significantly down to
fifteen years.
Because of because you have our
homicide statute or frankly are
murder one murder two statute
over here and are the rest of
our criminal code over here.
The attempt of secondary murder
drops a degree and becomes a
third degree crime.
and it's only three years.
So you have fifteen years for
secondary murder and only three
years for attempted second we
murdered so dust rarely and died
on that.
I'll try to get an aggravated
battery or things like that
You can receive eighteen years
mandatory for a subsequent drug
charge.
You can receive eighteen years
mandatory from a subsequent
armed robbery
in it resulting in no injuries
you can receive eighteen years
mandatory from a kidnapping.
Involving no injuries
murder.
Should be the highest penalty.
In our criminal code this bill
does that it brings up Secretary
murder from fifteen years to
eighteen.
and then I and then of course if
we do a special penalty for
attempted murder from three to
nine that bill has passed this
committee couple times I believe
it's passed the house a couple
of times also madam chair of in
the executive message a combined
it with another.
policy choices which is dealing
with the statute of limitations.
As I mentioned before because
secondary murder is second
degree it attach is to second
degree crimes in our criminal
code and equals a six year
statute of limitations so we
have to correct that error in
our criminal code because a
murder should have no statute of
limitations we're the only state
in the country that has a such a
a six year limitation and let me
just talk about this from a
chair members.
The
You have an eye witness the
trial occurs.
You know soon thereafter.
The cold case is derived from
three primary reasons one is you
the body is discovered that
verifies the murder idea there's
a DNA match.
With someone in the criminal
justice system that puts them
at the scene of the murder or or
do any on a murder weapon or
whatnot and then maybe although
rare it does happen that you
know what a jailhouse
confession.
or knowledge of that of that
homicide so
so yeah it does it does diminish
the prosecutor's ability and
maybe even the defense's ability
to.
To tell a story with regard to
that day.
But but it's not unusual
nationwide and and out.
And alleged murder should should
live to their dying breath
knowing that they could face the
consequences of that murder now
the prosecutor has to indict
them on first degree murder
which they may be able to do and
then you have to convict them
beyond a reasonable doubt of
first degree murder the jury
doesn't have a choice the statue
has run with reguards to the
crime of secondary murder so we
have to remedy that in our
criminal code I think that this
is consistent with what we've
been talking about the past ten
fifteen years that the penalty
should fit the crime.
Violent crimes should should.
For us to propel to the non
crimes and that
And that the and that you should
be on the hook so to speak
For life if you in fact commit
you know if you purposely
intentionally killed someone so
so that's the bill those of the
three provisions
And and I don't I don't there
may be some folks in the
attendee list.
They can speak I had a.
I had a experts at the last
hearing but in this situation
what that time short will just
have that they are in the other
in the agenda will just have
them speak during public comment
maybe give an extra moment or so
thank you madam chair and I I'd
like to thank my co chair or co
sponsors rather Representative
Eli Rosen as Rehm.
and then set up the Senate
sponsors a Senator Duhigg thank
you.
Thank you.
Do a quick call with the
attendees to see if the folks
want to weigh in in favor or
against the seventy nine.
I think we've got that ready to
go out.
Yes we do will take twenty
seconds please mark what your
opinion is.
Okay.
We're finish their seventy seven
percent in favor and twenty
three percent opposition.
So let's go down to public
comment first let me take the
opposition if you want to speak
in opposition to this bill
please raise your hand.
And we'll take one minute Diane
with cash go ahead.
Good evening I'm.
Just wondering about this bill
to is kind of related to first
degree murder and that my
understanding is that if there
were no statue limitations on
second degree murder using a
charge of second degree murder
could be a way to see
convictions on old first three
murder cases given the
difference in the burden of
proof required but as years
passed I think it will be
increasingly more difficult to
mount a robust distance
especially for someone charged
with the crime that was actually
a possible second degree murder
and Justice that could be done
to innocent people caught up in
a charge for something that
happened ten fifteen twenty
years ago seems to me to
outweigh the justice that might
be gained in a very small number
of cases I'd also like to add
that the change from fifteen
years to eighteen year sentence
and then costs that would be
like.
He more than a hundred fifty
thousand dollars for conviction
is highly unlikely to be a
deterrent for anyone who's
either contemplating murder or
wanting us to themselves may one
day be triggered and in rage to
murder.
Thank you.
Thank you our regional Griego.
Yes I suppose I do not support
this bill I support H. B. one
forty and that age piece one
forty.
Okay.
And I don't have any other hands
up.
So at this point.
In a minute.
And came up no okay at this
point we will go back to the
committee.
And.
Representative a lie is going to
take over to the chair for a few
minutes.
Thank you Representative.
Yes madam chair all right I am I
census of my last opportunity
probably to be a chair I miss my
opportunity to prevent Mr Karan
Mister Bundy from ever talking
again I was going to be abusive
as chair so with that I won't be
I won't have that opportunity so
instead I will go to the
panelists and see if anyone has
anything they want to discuss.
Palace.
I do not see any hands up.
Is there anyone that would like
to make a motion.
Representative Rehm.
Mr chair I go ahead and move the
do patch on one of my pieces of
legislation I will second that
and the clerk to call the roll.
Representative Alcon yes.
Representative Armstrong.
Yes.
Representative Chandler yes.
Representative Cook yes.
Mr speaker.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative McQueen.
Representative Lewis.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative night bird yes.
Representative Rehm yes ma'am.
Representative Townsend yes
ma'am.
Mr speaker.
Representative Lewis yes.
By check of Anna.
Madam chair.
By a vote of nine two zero we
have a due pass on house bill
seventy nine all right we have a
due pass congratulations sponsor
and temporary chair now we'll
move to our house bill nine R.
Representative Lujan didn't for
Senator Ivy Soto they may be on
the attendees list she we can
pull them up.
That we're
training people right now.
The other one.
Representative hundred.
We have to progress.
Are you finding them.
This chair I'm here
Representative Herndon we're
looking for Representative we're
looking for senator Daniel Ivey
Soto and Mister chair I also
have three witnesses expert
witnesses I would ask that you
please bring them up.
All right Representative would
you tell us their name and.
Thank you it's Daymon Martinez
is one.
We have.
We will have Josh brown.
And then we also have a and I
need to ask your assistant eight
if she was able to send the link
to our third witness who is
Nathaniel to Barnes I sent it to
him but he's not in.
let me state.
And I don't see Mr brown in
there either.
Mr Martinez David Martinez do we
have a special link for cardio
card stock.
Yes so how hard so I he's in
there now I'm into promoting.
Thank you Mr chair.
Representative.
Because.
I am bringing up I'm texting Mr
Nathaniel.
Two bars he is coming in the.
To do this.
He said school today so he was a
we were trying to work between
his studies.
Yes Representative Senator Soto
is not there and neither is Mr
Jabbar is.
Representative here's what I'm
gonna have you do okay we've
been going about four hours I'm
gonna have to get started all
have the agenda and I Deputy
Assistant I continue to look for
these are experts and if they
pop up will put an end but the
hours late and would like to I
know everybody would like to get
started to get going.
So Representative you're on if
you would explain your bill
thank you very much and Mister
chair I would just like to let
you know that submitted that
Daniel A. Ivey Soto has joined
me personally here well then
we're going to be here for a
long time at some point if he
was able to join us so.
The look out in New Mexico.
We'll look at the best in the
bank of the bars that's great if
you guys would get started let's
get going thank you very much so
good evening.
Mr chair and members of the
committee my name is
Representative Pamela Herndon
and I'm here with senator Daniel
Ivey Soto we are two of the
sponsors for House Bill night
which we are now asking for a do
not pass on house bill nine and
four do pass on house of
substitute for house bill nine
and they explain what this this
legislation is all about.
I want you to know that New
Mexico had the seventh highest
rate for fire our deaths in
children under eighteen years of
age between the years twenty
eighteen to twenty twenty and
during this time frame The New
Mexico right a fire arm related
deaths which was four point
seven deaths per one hundred
thousand residents was eighty
one percent higher than the
national average which was two
point six yes or one hundred
thousand residents so according
to the twenty twenty New Mexico
behavioral risk factor
surveillance systems thirty
eight percent of all households
in New Mexico have a firearm in
the home at thirty nine point
eight percent of households with
at least one child at a fire arm
in the home and among those
households with at least one
child in a fire alarm in the
home forty point three percent
have fire arms that was stored
I'm locked and loaded so what we
are asking Mr chair members of
the committee is that we want
individuals who decide that they
want to have a fire arm if they
do so and remember that a sure
fire arms and your
responsibility and to keep it
out of the hands away from the
access of children mines and so
with that Mr Mr chair members of
the committee we are asking for
your support and I do passed on
this piece of legislation I do
have at least two of my to all
of our expert witnesses and I
would like to introduce them now
Mr chair before we do that what
I'd like to do is just so we're
on the same page and you
mentioned a committee substitute
let's make sure that everybody
has that all all interchange a
motion for the purposes of
discussing the committee
substitute is there a motion.
So.
All right so so let's let's go
ahead will not need to staff on
that what I'd like to do is is
let's go ahead and make sure
from the assistance that the
committee substance is been made
available to all members the
committee and is on the web is
that right.
I
think we should check with the
analyst
this was done by.
So we'll make sure we're all on
the.
And here and is it in the Here
file.
Yes this is your final all right
great all right I'm sorry
Representative that introduction
of that any interruption Mr yes
May Day erector eruptions or a
course to suggestions first
available on the web means
available in the Here file not
available to the public so if we
have the public to speak on the
bill they probably have not seen
the committee server to tire the
possible second I would I would
ask that the the sponsor of the
bill read the to the two number
just to make sure we have the
right.
Yeah that's and that's the most
fair points all right I'm a
little rusty at this chair so
bear with me all right
Representative Herndon if you
would read the two oh two number
so we know we're looking at the
right thing in the Here file and
then I'll check to see if it's
available on the web thank you
Mr Mr chair the two oh two
number is two two two three five
one point six.
The current.
Inform you that that then you'll
to bars is in the audience that
we can bring him on to the path
okay one thing at a time let's
make sure that the committee
substitute is that on the web
and available for the public as
we begin discussion.
Is anybody now.
Yes it at least some more of
your that Jerry Lai this is Anna
calling the analyst on this bill
and our I think your question is
whether the substitute is in the
Here file it's also the question
is is whether it is available to
the public the public can see it
being your file the member is
not available to the public all
right is there a way that we can
do that so that we as we have
discussion the public can see
what it is we're talking about.
How would I do that.
I don't I think the only thing
on the website Representative
Eli.
Is what what is the committee so
it has to be adopted.
I believe what that what's going
to be important is for
Representative current and or
just senator Ivey Soto to
briefly explain it it's a very
brief.
Well I don't know I I can I have
the point three so I'm gonna
have to look for in my share
file so I think perhaps it would
be good and I like your idea of
having them explain the bill
before we go for public comment
so let's do this just before we
go to your experts
Representative why I want you
just briefly explain how the
committee sub is different from
what the public would be seeing
if they went online and looked
at the bill so how is it
different so that we know that
thank you Mr chair Mister chair
I would like to ask and a pilot
if she would actually do that
for us okay.
As for comp are you there.
I am here I wasn't prepared to
do that so.
I'm.
But I can do it I.
If you'll give me a.
So the the the review of the of
the amendment is that what you
were looking at what the
difference between the committee
sub is from the that's now up
for discussion of verses the
bill itself you will the import
so there's a couple of things
the it's important to note that
the Canadian side of it is is a
complete substitution of the
initial bill the original bill
I think the after speaking after
maybe one another hearing
speaking with other analysts
the.
There were several issues
identified and
Another bill was substituted
that rearranges read to find
some things and addresses the
issues raised by those analyst
so the original purpose of both
bills remain are the same
and that is and actually
Representative heard and you may
later want to discuss the
purpose I don't want to put
words in your mouth about what
your attention is in proposing a
bill but
But some of the issues role in
number one in the first Original
Bill were related to the men's
rada or intent the possibility
of a parent to authorize a
minor's access to a firearm
which was seen as potentially
sort of negating the bill after
the fact it's like well I gave
him permission
at the definition of securely
store proposal the proposal of
special penalties
for example it was proposed that
a peace officer could write a
citation but a parent could also
claim in magistrate court a
civil fine against for example a
parent a neighbor
so those kinds of things were
identified that the renewable
Reorganize it in such a way that
and I may get.
At least allow our who's gonna
be mad at me for calling route
but
Lisa Lauer to maybe.
Address that but this is the
substitution.
Re organizes a law in such a way
that it doesn't focus on
it's cleaner
so the first section addresses a
person who
The intent of the bill is to.
Is to address adults who are
storing guns in such a way or
keeping guns in such a way that
a child can access them so the
goal is to put the
responsibility on the parents
to or the adult to keep a gun in
such a way that a a a child
doesn't on into doesn't.
Doesn't access it so it takes
out the concept of authorizing a
child
And there's two sections one is
a child or minor gains access to
the gun or firearm in general
and the second version the
second section is gains access
to a minor sorry a minor gains
access to a firearm resulting in
great bodily harm
so escalating
offenses in their
We leases that do you feel like
you can yeah I can so I'm the
title of those bills remains the
same it's just that there's two
integrations that hopefully
verify the language better
it does create the crime of
unlawful access to a firearm by
minor the committee substitute
provides a men's rate of
reckless reckless disregard that
was a concern raised in a prior
hearing where some thought it
might be either a strict
liability or negligence crime
and there's questions as to
whether New Mexico law
Spain court recognized a
negligence standard in a
criminal for culpability Bill
the substitute
brings the fences that within
that current criminal code so it
defines of the integration where
a child unlawfully accessed well
access is a fire arm and
should somebody either kill them
or create a causes great bodily
injury for that as a fourth
degree.
which is your is it
basics of eighteen months
incarceration when trials
brandishes the gun or you know
you takes it to school and
friends people then it's a
misdemeanor.
the man's right again as
reckless disregard as opposed to
the original which was it is
unlawful for a person who keeps
our stores firearm to do so in
such a manner that the firearm
is accessed by a minor without
authorization of the minor's
parent or guardian or when used
in the commission of a crime I
think and described that pretty
well we removed our.
Without authorization because
that would always be a defense
where somebody couldn't you know
ex post facto statewide gave
information to use.
I'm the
ones that that really quickly
it's just been texting with our
analyst and then also with
Representative Herndon the
version we have additional file
is point six and that is
actually the latest version so
it's not point seven so the
total number was wrong so just
so you know members of the house
Judiciary it is accessible the
latest version is point six.
Just wanted you to be sure that.
The new bill in I didn't set of
instructions see specifically as
exceptions that will
address are intended to address
the practicality and Justice
issues
previously it was a concern that
whether a child be able to
access to a gun and use in self
defense things like that so this
creates specific explicit
exceptions where the criminal
aspects don't apply and those
are where the child obtains the
firearm as a result of illegal
entry to the premises so if a
child breaks into
home and still the fire on the
owner is not I'm criminally
liable for that wouldn't fly
another one is a firearms kept
in a locked container and is
securely stored we're in a
location that a reasonable
person would believe to be
secure when obtained by a minor
that kind of access the
incentive for people to
keep their their guns of the
firearms securely
it securely stored and it
doesn't to provide a means of
storing them to a certain kind
of technology or certain kind of
gun safe or anything like that
so it addresses whether people
can afford a certain kind of
storage or
whether the there's new
technology that might not be
covered if we define the types
of storage I'm next one is the
fireman's carry on person or
within close proximity of the
person so that the person can
readily retrieve and use the
firearm as if carried on the
person.
So if a person of parent is
caring
gonna have concealed carry
permit or somehow is added on
their person they're not liable
if the child grabs the gun.
or has access to it.
Another one is a firearm is
locked with the firearms safety
device that has rendered the
firearm an operable and obtained
by a minor that's another
incentive.
Where the exclusion would
incentivize.
But in firearms locks on guns.
the person as a peace officer.
of the armed forces of the
United States for the National
Guard and minor changes firearm
during or incidental to the
performance of the person's
duties that recognizes public
responsibilities and doesn't
make those people a criminally
liable as a child with access
there done and save trying to
get away from
the end of the state with the
officer.
It's a minor obtains or
discharges a firearm in a lawful
act self defense or defense of
another so that recognizes we
don't want to take that option
away from a child if they need a
gun in self defense.
The new bill also provides a
General X. the exclusion under
to say that it's sections not to
be construed to preclude any
claim or claims pursuant to any
other section of law for any
civil action for damages so it
doesn't it's not to be read to
preclude other charges that
might applaud the criminal realm
or to preclude a person is
injured as the result of
a violation the slot to be sued.
The new bill removes some of the
definitions that were in the
original because the other
language takes care of them
the section F. adds a definition
for
it's for firearm safety device
because that term is added to
the exceptions.
And then there's also additional
incentive for education and that
is evidence that a person
attended a firearm safety
training course prior to and it
leads to approve a violation of
this section so be it admissible
in any action preceding trial or
sentencing Mr etcetera the
section and.
That intent is I believe to
incentivize a safety training
courses and hopefully people
think more careful with the
storage of their guns and
limiting access.
Okay thank you I think that was
pretty thorough going back to
Representative Herndon I you
wanted to identify your experts
and I if you'd like to have them
talk please have at it I do Mr
chair members of the committee
I'd like to first introduce you
to Nathaniel to bars and I want
you to know that in on January
fourteenth in Roswell New Mexico
a middle school student opened
fire in his GM with a hot with a
side done and critically wounded
two students in Roswell today we
have that then go to bars with
those one of those students who
was who was injured to tell the
stories that you can understand
the importance of why this piece
of legislation needs to be
passed Mr to virus please tell
your story.
Thank you all so much for having
me within the Judiciary
Committee so.
Yes I was and thankfully Avid
survivor of the January
fourteenth twenty fourteen
school shooting.
So you know As You can
potentially see I as a result of
that shooting I am fully blind
in my left eye and slowly
regaining full vision in my
right eye
there are several different
injuries that continue to
proceed as time passes again as
a result of that school shooting
and so this is why once again
thank you all for having me to
speak on this house bill
I find a huge passion for making
positive change like this within
not only the state of New Mexico
but across the United States.
One of the things that I have
recently been working on in
conjunction with some of New
Mexico state representatives and
senators as well as the state of
Texas is actually a program
similar to what this bill
proposes regarding education
which helps to educate everybody
any gun owners and future gun
owners within easy reach of the
counties of the state on how to
properly lock their fire arms
which again was proposed in this
bill and store them properly in
regards to storing a firearm in
one portion and ammunition
separately
Again like this bill proposes
you know different ways that
describe could be punishable to
both the gun owner and the
person committing the crime such
as the minor.
so yes proceed with my story.
That's exactly what's to come in
the near future is sharing my
story in order to help the
potential of these bills passing
within the state legislatures.
Thank you Mr.
Mr chair of Mr to bars thank you
very much for sharing his story
today.
I do know that he has Mr chair I
do know that Mr to bars is in
school he's in college now and
he does need to return to
studies but he was generous
enough to come and join us to
make sure that this committee
understood why this bill needs
to pass thank you Sir for coming
and now Representative are there
other experts that you want to
call I do I have been that I the
second expert.
I would like to call is to lay
the foundation for his presence
on August thirteenth twenty
twenty one that was a school
shooting in Albuquerque New
Mexico where thirteen year old
boy was shot six times on the
school grounds of a middle
school and the deputy commander
who was on the scene at the time
after that murder occurred was
deputy commander Heil card order
and I had and he is here today
to also explain it to share.
Why this bill should be passed
the court order.
Please tell your story I check
you can you hear me OK you can.
Thank you for having me on on
this for the important topics
not only in August of last year
was I on scene and incident
commander for the Washington
middle school shooting and
murder of our brave Benny in
twenty thirteen I was also one
of the principal investigators
when the Mike to Rico or treat
unsecured firearms inside his
parents bedrooms and went
through and stocked killed five
members of his family including
small children all three of them
in elementary school as mother
why she slept in his dad when he
got home from work those are
just two of the more recent ones
I've been to I've been to
several other shootings where
it's accidental access to guns
but someone is shot and killed
it is almost always involving
children getting hurt in
children pulling the trigger on
these guns it's rarely
accidental it's usually on
purpose we just recently
investigated a murder from a few
years ago where a fictional was
also got access to a gun to go
and try to commit an armed
robbery drug dealer during the
robbery the drug dealer shot and
killed a fifteen year old time
and time again these guns are
hurting the exact kids who put
their hands on whether they're
getting hurt themselves or
they're using it to hurt others
it is a very common sense bill I
think it does need to pair up
with education is Mr to virus
that I think that's very
important that we educate gun
owners I do know personally as a
police officer and a father of
the kids that live in my house
and put a very small children
the second I get home from work
even as a police officer the
first thing I do is go to my
safe my lock up my gun my kids
look at it and I talk to about
it but it's locked up it's also
in my holster that has an added
level of protection that even by
the freak nature that my gun
might be left out which I don't
think I ever have it's still in
a secure holes for that requires
really an adult presence and
someone who knows what they're
doing to retrieve the gun from
the holster so I could support
this bill more the scenes where
kids are getting guns and use it
on other kids at whether it's on
purpose or an accident or
absolute.
The traumatic and horrific to
everyone involved from the
teachers at the schools to this
to the victims like Mr to far as
and some of the victims they can
be heard today because they've
lost their lives to it so I
couldn't supported more I'm
happy to answer any questions
you guys have but I the I'm
really excited The New Mexico
might finally be getting on
board with a bill like this to
to make gun owners more
responsible.
Thank you thank you Sir
Representative any other
experts.
Yes Mister chair Mister chair I
would now like to introduce you
to Daymon Martinez who is the
senior policy adviser but the
Albuquerque police department.
All right Mr Martinez.
C. R..
Panelists Mr Martinez you are
muted.
I don't see him can you hear me
now yes we can area all right
Mister chair members of the
committee thank you for allowing
me to speak before you tonight.
on behalf of the City of
Albuquerque Merrick Heller and
the Albuquerque police
department we strongly support
this bill.
This summer more telecommuting
the measure crime initiative and
this was.
Sessions a two course over five
different sessions.
And it involves a number of the
community partners who are
involved in a public safety for
example the attorney general's
office was that the DA's office
was there serenity mesa
highlands university C. N. M.
it it was a really broad brush
of everybody who's involved in
working with public safety and
as a result of this initiative
what came out of it was forty
task Taskers that we should be
working on things that can make
a difference in our system.
And one of those forty was to
require gun owners to secure
weapons and so what this bill
does is it complications that
goal now the important thing and
this is the reason I'm bringing
up MCI the metro crime
initiatives is that it was the
the community coming together
saying these are issues this is
the community's voice and so by
conveying that this is one of
the priorities this is important
not only to Bernalillo county
but as you just heard from the
representatives first expert
tonight to this is an issue that
is occurring across the state so
thank you for allowing me to do
an introduction and we stand
ready to answer questions I
understand that that completes
the presentation will do a poll
are your Chasey does polls on
this so I would like to know
from the attendees who is in
favor of this
bill and these committee
substitute it has been adopted
yet but it's up for discussion
and who is opposed to what the
call up now.
I hope will put the public now.
There we are I think we have
twenty seconds to answer the
poll.
If you could please respond if
you're for our house bill nine
or against.
I am not seeing the poll is the
assistant there.
Sixty eight percent for and
thirty two percent against all
right I'm trying to get a sense
of the numbers.
Okay I'll give them to Lisa it's
thirty eight in favor and
fourteen in opposition R. what
we like to do as I'd like not to
limit each side I will if I have
to
by the hour is late sort.
Twenty minutes Mr chair all
right we'll do twenty minutes
per side down but I what I would
like to do is encourage people
to please keep your comments as
short as possible and please try
not to be repetitive issue for
COVID somebody's already set it
you don't have to say it again I
promise you we're we're
listening all right let's go to
those in opposition first of
please put your hands up if you
would like to speak in
opposition to the bill and we
will call on you first now wait
to see a show of hands.
Rio.
All right.
I'm seeing a.
At Garrick just.
if you'd like to go first sure.
Thank you chair of sorry thank
you and members of the committee
my name's Derek Scott I'm a long
time law enforcement officer
who.
Medical issue that brought me
out of it getting back into it
I'm running for sheriff
Bernalillo county
I want to talk specifically
about a couple of comments made
about this bill first off I'm
concerned that we couldn't I
appreciate that you are you had
it read out thank you so much
but it's still not having in
front of me it makes it kind of
difficult to comment on the the
amended bill.
But one of the things is is
first off the city said they
contacted the community but we
know a lot about the contact
including the ABQ disability
commission of Albuquerque were
never contacted about this issue
Furthermore I would like to
comment on the fact that they
they believe that walking up the
gun will fix this problem well I
would like to say that that
won't.
Requiring people to do something
with their property within their
property is kind of I would say.
Start starting the line of what
the government is allowed to do
with your property.
Like for instance if you had
your keys to have to be locked
up because your kids might get
access to the car and then might
run over people with that
vehicle it's the same equation
here we start locking up
everything and worried about
everything but not as parents
instead being responsible I've
been a very responsible person
and that's another thing he
mentions it's about responsible
gun owners while we are response
we've been very responsible gun
owners in the state of New
Mexico probably some of the best
and as a firearms instructor I
have been instructing people and
instructing children on how to
properly use of firearms storage
and then when they were younger
if they see it they run that's
the Eddie eagle program
so I I don't understand what
they mean by education when
there's a vast education system
out there already actually some
the education's been pulled out
of the schools for our state the
fact hi what I'm gonna do is
because I don't see clock
usually we have two minutes and
again sorry I'm usually used to
collect myself for getting out
and I apologize but we've got a
number of people and I'd like to
give everybody a chance to talk
if they can and I'm gonna ask
the assistant if you could put a
clock so I have some idea there
we go thank you everybody a
minute Sir I'm gonna move on to
we need not Griego is Griego.
Okay speaking in opposition I
don't know why my my hand is up
all right then I'll go to Tom is
it so important so it works.
Okay so what they did is they
got it he's got are you.
Yes Sir I'm I'm sorry somebody
to meet me I'm sorry that's
right all right Tom is it so
there.
Are you there.
All right I guess he's not there
John so soon.
I hope people can hear me.
All right
I'm gonna go to the next one
make May eski hello can you.
Yes who is this this is Thomas
author okay yes Sir please go
ahead and add me on to the panel
before our kids anyways hello
Mister chair and committee
members my name is Thomas Selter
I'm a fifty five year resident
in New Mexico retiree from
Sandia national labs a husband a
father of three daughters and I
am legislative affairs officer
for New Mexico shooting sports
association which is been
representing gun owners in New
Mexico since nineteen thirty far
in the supreme court's Heller
decision the requirement that
the firearm be bound by a
trigger lock or similar device
makes it impossible for citizens
to use them for the court lawful
purpose of self defense it is
hands unconstitutional section
one see her gross to for and
also F. paragraph two violates
is finding from Heller and this
is from the substitute bill we
believe that many tragic
accidents could be avoided if
children are educated on what to
do they come across an unsecured
firearm rather than waiting for
an incident to happen and then
punishing the person responsible
for not safely securing storing
the farm but there is no good
this bill what I because our
members to vote no all right
Jamie Frasier page.
Jamie Fraser page.
Okay.
Mr chair this is then just call
your men to go ****.
All right mistrust you since I'm
not hearing from Mr are from
Jamie so yes your one minute go
ahead Sir thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee my
apologies for any errors the
latest version of the bill I
have access to this point four
not point six house bill nine is
on to punish not prevent the
committee substitute has the
same critical deficiencies the
earlier presented version namely
that that a public outreach
component this bill will not
have a preventive effect is
already believe and practice
your firearm responsibility will
continue to do so those who do
not will continue in their
responsibility.
I believe house bill nine will
go the way of red flag law if
passed much use made up need for
that law would prevent crime
make New Mexico safer in reality
is barely used in affected best
in a complete waste of
legislative time at worst in the
near of real and significant
challenges to New Mexicans
legislating for legislation sake
is not something the public can
for we've heard a lot about not
creating new crimes in the
session charges brought under
house bill nine will certainly
be supplemental charges use only
to leverage defended a plea
bargain a pretrial negotiations
a question what creating these
new crimes we'll do to benefit
New Mexicans those posted data
inform public health approach on
safe storage.
Thank you Sir I'm McGrath Scott.
Are requests.
Yes.
Yes on the.
But there part is there's a
provision and cancel the
provisions of kids cannot
protect themselves and defend
themselves in case that there is
a person that is break into
their home there's gonna be hard
to track prosecutor this willing
to go after these kids and also
the responsible gun owner
another part of this bill that I
cannot agree with is that I am
basically one of social
emotional supports educator with
children that have been abused
neglected and have other issues
they do say things and I wish
that everybody would understand
that some kids say things out of
anger we have all done that
please take into consideration
the roof and there it takes a
village to raise a child we all
have to see how everybody is and
how to how to help them better
off rather than punish them and
put them in handcuffs is really
heartbreaking to see that
possibly that my students that
I'm saving will be going to jail
because he said something
foolish.
thank you J. B. thank you.
I have a J. B..
All right we'll go to Zach for a
this is all part that JB hi I'm
new but just came on I'm sorry
J..
So one at the end of somebody
could please confirm for me what
the definition of minor is for
one
because if it's eighteen we
allow sixteen year old to get a
driver's license in the state
and drive a vehicle on a company
so we we need to reconcile that
balance previously mentioned
about minors being at home alone
this is a large mostly a rural
state
and miners with proper training
can defend themselves and should
be able to defend themselves.
And if you're an adult at one
o'clock in the morning you hear
noise in your house R. is not
the time be open your safer
scramble to get your trigger
lock unlock sure it should be
ready to rock.
R. and if that is the case that
this does pass a like to know
what the state's tactics
techniques and procedure is to
come around that we just office
locked up what we disposed to
do.
Yep that's all I guess and you
said this point all right I
appreciate it azek fort.
Members of the committee my name
is Zach for to the president of
the New Mexico shooting sports
association we represent on on.
I would like to first thank this
bill sponsors here dialogue with
gun owners on this issue we do
appreciate it I want to take the
time and again hi guys
somebody's somebody's not muted
please okay sure I start over
sorry I don't know how much you
just keep going here I'll give
you a little extra time I
appreciated Mr Mr chair to take
the time today to point out the
H. B. line only applies to
charges after something has
occurred there is no funding for
education or giving up gun locks
which studies have shown to be
the two key components of safe
firearm storage in the home in
fact H. P. line is a firearm
specific expansion of New Mexico
child endangerment statutes from
CDC statistics vehicles and
swimming pools pose a greater
risk for children but H. B. line
only targets constitutionally
protected property if New
Mexico's child endangerment
statutes need to be revised then
we should do so but with a
broader consideration
accomplices all dangers and not
just singling out one danger
thank you for your time.
Elizabeth Holmes I hope I
pronounced that right.
This homes.
Got H. O. N. C. E..
Yes it just it just unmuted me
can you hear me I'll go ahead
ma'am okay thank you
I'm a criminal defense lawyer
I've been a criminal defense
lawyer for eighteen years in New
Mexico and I would state that.
You're giving.
People don't owe a duty to a
minor a duty to minor and it
just seems incompatible and
unconstitutional the NMAA
basically I think that parents
to do you should be on parents
parents have the duty to control
their minor children to teach
their minor children and I think
the duties should be on parents
it seems like you're trying to
make a broad sweep with this law
I don't think that it's going to
be effective if you look at your
statistics I will guarantee you
that all of the children who had
access to firearms in your
statistics got them from their
parents not other people if you
want to make it to parents make
it to parents that's my and I
don't need a vote now all right
John Sossion.
Can you hear me yes Sir we can
go ahead thank you very much I'm
a certified firearms instructor
from Roswell New Mexico this
bill is unconstitutional it's
unenforceable I don't see how
you're gonna be able to prove in
a court lobby are dealt with
farmers stored properly you
might have the getting your
parents against the minor I'm
also a four eight shock and
additional coach properly
trained youth should have access
to farms that's our parents
decision not the government's
decision if you'll check you'll
see that this has not proved to
be effective in any other state.
And we need to be educating our
kids in our schools about
proper.
Firearms handling.
Not trying to do this but by
having the government do it and
also.
There's a contradiction when you
say you can have access for
protection self protection which
you have access for any other
capability from a child's
standpoint I urge you to please
not passes bill.
All right thank you now will go
to those in favor of the bill
stand caution please please
don't repeat
we're going to keep its twenty
minutes so we're gonna give
everybody one minute on and
Regina I I do I don't have your
total estimates creams are just
I I know I called on you once I
understand you're talking in
favor of this bill.
Thank you Representative Eli.
And thank you for this
opportunity to speak in support
of HB nine.
My name is Regina Greg I'm from
Albuquerque New Mexico I'm a
retired engineer and author.
now I speak out for them common
sense gun laws this story is
about a perfect storm that took
place.
In my family and I lost five
family members of victims of gun
violence committed by my
troubled nephew this happened
nine years ago and it changed my
life and the lives of many
brothers I wish I had been more
vigilant about what was
happening in my brother's
household including the fact
that he kept a gun and ample
ammunition.
All I'm procured and therefore
accessible to any of his four
children firearms are the
leading cause of death for
children in our state we must be
prioritised keeping them safe at
home and at school why take a
chance on having a child
unintentionally shoot themselves
or others specially when we know
that it can be prevented it's
time for lawmakers to act and to
save New Mexico live and that
starts with passing your storage
legislation immediately I am
convinced that my family members
then I'll be alive today we have
a lot of speakers so I I hate to
cut you off but I'm going to I'm
really gonna rigorously keep
everybody to a minute Ali says
C..
Yes thank you my name Mr chair
my name is Lisa Kristofferson I
speak as a community member and
former public school teacher in
New Mexico I speak today urging
committee members to vote a do
pass for H. B. nine seven six
when I first began teaching in
the early nineties in Texas
rifles in their truck drugs in
the school parking lot the
district actually took a day off
a rattle snake roundup but I'm
not opposed to guns we did
tornado drills regularly but
nineteen ninety eight
Jonesborough Arkansas school
mass shooting happened and to
our and brought on the error of
lockdown drills both in Texas it
might be fifteen years in New
Mexico have the privilege of
teaching students with emotional
disturbance lockdown drills are
very traumatizing all kiddos
especially to kids who have
anger issues due to abuse way
that New Mexico which just got
right forty nine again as of the
twenty twenty one kids count
report anyway New Mexico can
keep guns out of the hands of
children it will save lives it's
our shooting kids in schools and
they're getting their requests
from their homes please do
passed H. B. line thank you
Catherine only about.
Can you hear me Sir I can go
ahead thank you Representative
Eli and members of the committee
my name is Katherine I'm a moms
demand action volunteer and I
have two boys who currently
attend public school in
Albuquerque from a very young
age my boys and their teachers
were subject to active shooter
drills causing recurring anxiety
and trauma for all parties
involved I was surprised to
learn from several studies
including one from the U. S.
secret service that between
seventy three to eighty percent
of school shooters obtained
their guns from their own home
relative's home or friends
during COVID many of our
children were at home all day
giving them a reprieve from
these drills unfortunately it
did not keep our children safe
fire arms are the leading cause
of death for children in our
state and in twenty twenty and
according to Albuquerque police
there was a seventeen percent
rise in unintentional shootings
in Albuquerque this common sense
legislation can help put a stop
to help those deaths and
injuries and keep our children
safe I ask for your full support
of it thank you so much miss
Spencer.
I think it's I I could be wrong
it's Khalil Spencer.
I'm here to our installer yes we
can hear you I called it
misspent Sir sorry about that
that's okay I've been called
worse.
Yes I'm a long time gun owner of
concealed carry holder and
member of my gun club in Los
Alamos.
What I saw was the version of
this bill that was sent to me
and a wee hours he was at two
twenty one through eight point
seven it cleared up some of the
problems I had with the first
version and that it gave gun
owners the protection of not
being prosecuted or sued if
their guns are stored safely.
By a conversation with
Representative her to further
stated that this bill would not
interfere with the lawful use of
firearms by miners such as
hunting for H. junior trap high
school sports or other
activities for a student or a
minor is using it on a lawfully
and therefore have session of
the gun finally this bill
doesn't go far enough and that
it doesn't provide the kind of
public outreach that we know is
required for these bills to work
properly which is been
documented and very good
research also we we need to go
farther in terms of cooperation
with gun owners thank you very
much Maggie her rant.
Hello.
Yes yes we can go ahead okay
thank you Mr chairman and
committee members for the
hearing us on this
and let's just be straight guns
are designed to kill that that
is what they're designed for I
understand people that need them
for protection nobody is saying
you can't store got in such a
way that you can get to a
quickly as long as you have it
locked up so that this the
children can I get to it we have
that people have just gone
through all the statistics that
I was going to mention it ever
happening in the state into this
country children need to be safe
and parents need to be
responsible about what they're
doing so please I I don't think
was holding everybody else
responsible was saying if if
it's in your home if it's a
parent or guardian they need to
keep it safe and I don't think
that's a lot to ask of people
thank you.
Thank you for all Senator
mission Senator.
yes I'm doctor Harper Jason and
I live in Los crucis today I'm
speaking as a member of the
executive board of the Dona Ana
branch of NAACP we recognized
and voted to support a house
bill nine we see the need for
all full line to be a law which
will support school personnel in
their constant battle with guns
being brought the school because
the improper storage of the guns
at home.
I was of four I am a former
school principal remove guns
from students and I had no
longer refers to when addressing
parents on the on secured good.
This law can be used to promote
gun safety I am also a member of
moms demand action and we also
support house bill nine please
give a do passed to this bill
thank you.
Cheryl Haas.
Ms costs you there.
All right we're gonna go to the
next level hello costs go ahead
okay I'm sure I'll do a moms
demand action volunteer from
Albuquerque early in my thirty
year career as a teacher a
student was sent to the
principal's office for
discipline while waiting for a
car drove home grabbed one of
his father's unsecured guns and
killed himself those guns been
stored properly he may well be
alive today teaching at grant
middle school in Albuquerque
change dramatically six years
ago after student brought a
loaded gun to our school to show
off to his classmates thankfully
no other student a student
reported this to an adult and no
one was hurt but it was a call
close call and to this day our
students are not allowed to
carry backpacks fire arms
naturally cools are the leading
cause of death for children in
our state we must prioritize
keeping the children safe.
It's time for lawmakers to act
and that starts with passing
secure storage legislation today
thank you.
Thank you Merck learn.
I've got the reading not.
I do I cannot pronounce the last
name you'll have to help me with
that hi I'm Laurie New Mexico
strand and the physician living
in Albuquerque and I also am a
moms demand action volunteer.
Passed the secure storage staff
going on just a second somebody
is doing is they're
responsibility of all adults to
keep our children safe mode do
pass and H. B. line thank you
thank you okay Charles good
marker.
Charles go ahead.
Okay they are among meet it okay
thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee and Representative
turned in and Senator Ivey Soto
and I must tip my hat virtually
to the family Benny Hargrove and
the other victims of gun
violence.
My name is Charles good marker
and I'm speaking on behalf and
public health association's five
hundred plus members M. P. H. A.
stands in support of the
substitute bill for H. B. line
we stand and support becomes gun
violence is a huge public health
failure in the US New Mexico
department of health statistics
show that from twenty sixteen to
twenty twenty a hundred and
forty New Mexico children are
lost their lives to gun
violence.
This bill addresses
accountability for parents to
store guns.
So that there's no doubt the
bodily injury or even the threat
there of the toll of gun
violence is worse in minority
populations making it even more
port in New Mexico the toll of
gun violence is enormous is
horrific and we need leaders
like Representative herbal
Herndon to fight with courage.
Two and the combine once please
do about past due path.
Maranda this goalie.
Can you hear me we can go ahead
I'm chair members of the
committee my name is Randy was
fully in New Mexico president of
New Mexicans to prevent gun
violence we stand in full
support of the committee so for
H. B. line and we think
Representative turned in for her
courage and hard work as these
changes hold now hold gun owners
accountable as we all know many
homes in our state have firearms
of many these firearms are
stored and safely the victims of
these unsafely stored firearms
are all too often our children
New Mexico loses on average
close to three children every
month too gotten violence
trials already made the point of
a hundred forty children I want
to add to that the half of those
are suicide we also know the
child access prevention laws can
prevent school shootings one
study found that over two thirds
of school shooters acquired
their firearms from their home
or the home of a relative it's
time for gun owners to secure
their firearms or pay the
consequences and that is exactly
what H. B. line does thank you.
Elaine Miller.
Yes Miller I'm eight your work
once spent action and I'm asking
you to support cross the line
thank you thank you Becky ****.
Hello my name is Becky **** I
live in Albuquerque New Mexico
and I'm a moms demand action
volunteer please support house
bill nine thank you thank you
and then our final is I guess we
are one more so we got Emmelie
de Angelis.
Hello thank you can you hear me
OK yes we can go ahead
Representative Ely abruptly
DeAngelis I'm a gun violence
prevention advocate living in
Albuquerque and a mom this
version of H. B. line gives gun
owners and non gun owners alike
in New Mexico a much clearer
picture of what responsible gun
storage actually it looks like
that opens the door for
organizations like the one that
I work with to conduct really
meaningful education seminars
about safe storage which is
something we're doing already
but the demand will grow once we
pass this law it also gives of
course our dust up of clear path
to prosecute and hold parents
accountable when they don't
restore responsibly please a
past this bill thank you and our
last US speaker of the attendees
is a drink called.
This call.
Okay I guess not we'll go back
to the
presenters Representative
Herndon or Senator Ivey Soto is
there anything you want to say
before we go to the committee.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and I would just like to say
that I for everything
Representative and instead will
be happy to staff.
All right well then go to the
members of the committee
Representative ring you have the
floor.
Thank you Mr chairman.
And
We begin by first saying that
please don't take care of any of
this as not supporting
responsible gun ownership.
Of the as many of you know I'm a
retired police officer well I
would get home with my gun belt
and I had my gun belt put up in
the closet and I taught my kids
that they did not go to that gun
belt or access to any firearms
in the house and so responsible
gun should gun ownership begins
with that and
Mr chairman and Representative
heard the let me ask you do you
have any data from the other
states that show that by having
US straight storage has reduced
any shootings.
Mr chair of Representative ring
it's important to note that this
bill is about leaving keeping
guns are out of the hands of
minors and making sure that they
don't have access to those guns
and so whatever that whatever
that means is this bill talks
about specific ways in which it
can be done and it also talks
about reasonable ways in which
it can be done so I want to make
sure that we are focusing on the
purpose of the bill is to
keeping guns out of the access.
Out of the hands of mine is is
not necessarily just focusing on
secure storage.
It is it has the.
But I can tell you that when
guns are kept away from minors
and out of the excess of their
hands that the a number of
children students have decreased
significantly percent.
Yes.
Madam chairman Representative
heard and do you have any data
to show that yes we do have the
data to show that it would if
you would like to meet just
shared with you at some point in
time I can.
Madam chair and representative
heard and can you tell the
committee about that that are
right now sure yeah and and just
let me point out that I the last
time I checked madam madam chair
so just so.
Thank you sorry I don't take
that personally all right I'm
sorry Representative did you
have the floor thank you thank
you Mr Mr chair and
representative being so when I
began my my Committee at the
beginning of this up at the
beginning of my presentation I
cited to you the statistics that
were from the CDC and if you
would like to me to read those
again I will make those
available to you I said New
Mexico has the seventh highest
rate of firearm deaths in
children under eighteen years of
age between the years twenty
eighteen and twenty twenty
according to the CDC wonder the
site for that is wonder dot CDC
dot gov forward slash UCD yes
ICD ten that H. T. M. L. and
during this time frame The New
Mexico rate of fire arms related
deaths were about four point
seven per one hundred thousand
residents which was eighty seven
percent higher than the national
average which was two point six
deaths per one hundred thousand
residents I also shared with you
that a national study conducted
by the pew research center found
that nationally one in three
American households owned a gun
I said to you W. W. W. dot a few
Research dot org forward slash
social dash trans forward slash
WP content uploads sites three
twenty seventeen guns report
according to the twenty twenty
New Mexico behavioral risk
factor surveillance thirty eight
percent thirty eight point eight
percent of all households in New
Mexico have a firearm in the
home thirty nine point eight
percent of those households with
at least one child had a firearm
in the home and among those
households with at least one
child in the fire on in the home
forty point three percent.
Have fire arms that was stored
and I'm locked and loaded
leaving children at risk I also
point out to you Mr chair
Representative Rehm a report
that was just released by the by
the department of health and
Human Services but the state of
New Mexico talking about the
issue and respect of guns in the
home and I still cite those
statistics for you twenty one
percent of the homes the fire
arms are loaded and unlocked in
sixty four percent of those
homes their barns are the
firearms loaded and fifteen
percent the not loaded at all is
there anything else I can find
Mr chair representative to
bring.
Mr chair.
Representative heard thank you
for that data on firearm
ownership I was really
interested if you had data
showing sensei passed a similar
law in this similar state that
there was a reduction in
shooting in but let's go ahead
we can move on R. all right the
next one and if you want to
follow long would you need to do
is go to our.
Cornell law.
The I pulled up the district of
Columbia versus Heller decision
this is a discussion about the
U. S. Supreme Court and its
decision.
In the district of Columbia and
in this decision there are
several components I want to
read one of them so on the first
page and it says requires
residents to keep waffling on
firearms unloaded and
disassembled or bound by a
trigger lock or similar device.
When you get to page two hundred
number one.
It's that the second amendment
protects that individual right
those that's a firearm.
For traditional waffle purse
purposes such as self defense
within the home.
And when you go to page three
under number three this is the
court ruling.
Done bam and the trigger walk
requirements as applied to self
defense violate the second
amendment.
The district total ban on
handgun possession in the home
amounts to approach prohibition
on an entire class of arms in
quote that Americans
overwhelmingly choose for lawful
purposes of self defense so how
is this.
Law not unconstitutional.
This Mr chair Representative
rain thank you for that question
one of the things that I asked
you to I asked everyone to look
at is that this legislation
focuses on when you are not
you're done and you are not
around here done when you are
near your done you can do
whatever you want to you can
have it on your holster you can
have it with you you don't have
to have a lot you have the
choice but when you are not
around your our our this piece
of legislation is said please
keep it out of the hands and not
assessable by minors so those
are two different areas than
what you describe of Mr chair
Representative Rehm and I point
that out to you it talks about
when you are not near your fire
on when you are near your farm
there is no required under this
bill or anything else the state
lock it up and put a secure lock
or do anything else.
Okay Mr chairman and
Representative heard and no
where in this decision do they
say that and when you leave the
home you shall walk it up that
is not in that court decision.
Mr chair Representative Rehm is
that specifically in there but
it's implied so if you said if
you read it again that's exactly
what you will see.
Mr chairman and Representative
heard and that's not the way I
read it and I it's not way I
think the court's going to
interpret it clearly an
individual would leave his home
and he did not comment on that
here Representative the only I'd
like to do is if you have a
question ask a question I'll let
you do that once what I like you
not to do is ask a question you
get an answer the question thank
you give an editorial comment
that the sponsor can't respond
to when you go on so if you
could just please ask the
questions we're trying to get to
everybody's answers and have a
real discussion but it's not
helpful to have kind of
editorial comments of the
sponsor then isn't expected to
respond to so if you want her to
respond ask a question thank you
Mr.
The dance that I you're not
asking your opinion about the
opinion and she's doing the same
so if you could move on with
your next question that be great
the hour is late we still have
two more speakers I'd like to
give everybody an opportunity
I'd like to avoid the editorial
comments all right.
Thank you Representative go on
to your next question the.
Mr chair I think the real
problem is ducation and I think
that.
Education is the component that
we should be looking at for safe
storage and a half home that the
parents are educated about those
one of the things that we should
be working out is when you
purchase a new gun.
There is a gun lock that comes
with that.
If you don't have a gun locked
the NRA is giving free gun locks
out the national shooting sports
association is giving free gun
locks law enforcement is issuing
free gun locks so we have a lot
of of gun watch if you if you
wanted to utilize a gun law.
But let me move on to of.
Page two or nine one.
And it says is that the gun is
swept in a reckless this Richard
regard of the minors ability to
access to firearms well to me
that is trial with the age
then it's already covered by
law.
Mr chairman and Representative
heard the is that not child
endangerment.
Mr Mr chair Representative Rehm.
What this bill does it focuses
specifically on accessing a
having a child a minor to have
the ability to access the done
when you look at the of the
statue that you're looking at
and within aspect is right now
it does not specifically deal
with that particular item but
this piece of legislation will
specifically deal with keeping a
fire arm that will not be
assessable I might.
Okay Mr chairman and
Representative heard and I would
earn you to page three line
twenty nothing in this section
shall be construed to preclude
any claim or claims pursuant to
any other sections of law.
And that's child endangerment
but when we go on.
Mr Chairman representative.
If we go to page two winds
sixteen unlawfully brandishes we
have a definition of Renishaw's.
I guess I do Mr Mr chair
Representative rain it means to
let me pull the definition that
year.
It means to move our state in a
in a manner that causes of.
Right in scare and of could
cause harm.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Representative Herndon I just
noted that Senator Wirth had a
different definition earlier
this year.
So
He felt that.
If a gun was in a poll for on
the yep of an individual it was
brandished.
You see that as a brandishing or
not.
Mr chair Representative Rehm I
do not and he's not a child it
sounds like you were talking
about an adult.
Mr chairman and Representative
Herndon so let's go to page two
and page one twenty two.
The minor obtained so far aren't
as a result of an illegal entry
to the Paramus.
So if.
The homeowner or parent tells a
child you are not to go in my
bedroom.
Is that an unlawful entry into
that premise.
Mr chair representative bring.
The concept which this was
bitten was an exception to the
rule and the premise is defined
as the edifice and so we're this
specifically is referring to a
burglary or breaking on an
authorized entry into the home
that are to the end of this
itself.
Mr chairman and the
Representative heard in which go
to page three line sixteen
evidence that a person that is
important safety training course
prior to when allegations hello
owl labs were proven violation
of this section so be admissible
in any action so are you saying
that if the child had attended a
farm safety course that that is
a defense against the statute
that you're proposing.
Mr chair representative to bring
I would just point out to you
that you're reading from section
C. of the of the of the
substitute and it talks about
the provisions of this bill do
not apply yes and so they did
not applaud when we are
specifically looking at those
times when a parent has gone
through the process of going
through that training that to
talk about the gun safety aspect
that you talked about and we are
making sure that a parent is not
the end held liable because they
have some their their
responsibility so I just want to
make sure Mr chair
representative to bring that
you're reading the concept that
is written in the matter in
which it was intended those are
the exceptions to the
application.
Sure Mr Fuhrman act
Representative heard sure that
would be a defense to a charge.
From this lofted pass.
So a parent would not be of
would not be subject to the law
pursuant to the exceptions that
are under item C. and you just
read two of those exceptions.
Thank you Mr chairman that's all
the questions I have.
All right let's go to when I go
to Representative night word.
Representative are you ready.
All.
Thank you Mr.
Your
the
few questions and.
To
duplicate what's already been
so.
It looks to me like.
I understand the testimony Mr
chair.
What this bill is trying to do
is present access to a farm land
mine.
With the representative my
concerns because much of the
district that I represent.
Required.
Miners to.
Utilize.
These firearms.
Every day.
A regular basis for the
protection of their livestock.
Particularly those that are.
being on ranches in and outside
of the.
I keep hearing something on a
hope is not on my end but I I do
too
everybody make sure they're
mute.
and I think I thought I heard
Representative Townsend
at some point I heard his voice
so maybe that but.
Use my car driving his wife home
in the snow right now so I don't
know that.
number but in any event the
maybe that'll urged the
management.
Mr chair back to five point
in many of the communities that
I represent.
Fire arms or a tool.
A tool that are utilized by not
only adults find monitors for
the protection of their
livestock.
Also would protection for
themselves certainly for their
livestock.
I am concerned that we are
creating a felony.
For a misdemeanor crime for some
some of them said but but could
occur and.
we are.
Really thank you Mr step beyond
that which I think is normal in
our criminal jurisprudence so.
I do have some concerns about
that
it's really weird from that
perspective Representative the
well I raise these concerns
on on page one line twenty five
the work processes years ten and
I heard
Mr chair representative that
very you do I have as of the
for us
I understand that word sorry
building a large building so I'm
with respect to my concerns
there is a gun in the bar.
Is that are are you a premises.
Mr chair representative Nibert
first of all in the state thank
you for the time that you spent
talking with me it was really
quite an honor to have that
conversation we don't have
enough of those and so Mister
chair and representative Nibert
if there is a fire on that's
left in a barn and it's not it
is not kept in a manner that is
not accessible by a a a a a
minor then that's a problem if
particularly if you are not near
your firearm the pharmacist
there.
Dr money my concern
based on the district I
represent that firearm is not
accessible to.
Marketers.
To the children.
Great can be in danger because I
don't have access to that tool.
That could prevent the danger or
correct may be.
Deal with any predation that's
occurring all there former ranch
so I I I see.
Being commonplace within my
district.
For.
Firearms to be located at places
where.
People will generally be and
where those tools are necessary
not unlike a shovel or hoe for
or some other.
And so
I'm.
I have a hard time
getting my head around a lot I
was really hoping that you
defined premises serve as the
residents of the it would take
it away but Representative
elephas which is a large
building that would include some
of the things that
Representative the.
Are of grave concern to me
If a person stores I are are in
there picked up truck.
Mr chair and representative that
would not be covered by this
bill what it.
Mr chair representative but not
for the way the bill as
currently written you are
correct.
So the access is not the real
issue because the rancher in my
instance could could have easy
access to firearms of the pickup
truck in the.
Outside the.
Professors were the first but if
it were in the barn.
They would be subject to to this
law
and so.
You're on.
Again I I think.
On a ranch.
Goes far arms need to be at
locations where they are likely
to need them.
Pickup trucks certainly one of
those locations but a barn would
be another place and possibly
even within the house
The other concern I have.
It really says the.
Percent cheaper stores any bar
are within the premises in a
manner that is in reckless
disregard disregard of a miner's
ability to access the bar are.
If we.
How does.
Train their children.
Most read to Bramley served some
of those kids can barely walk.
As to the respect that one has
to give to well firearms their
purpose was we discussed with
children on the branches no that
when that trigger squeeze
something does affect die on the
other end
Yes but what that.
Frightening.
Keep that person.
Out of this category of being
and reckless disregard.
Mr chair representative Nibert I
would just
twenty two and and to the to the
overall focus of the bill and it
talks about having access to a
gun at the end causes bodily
injury our great bodily injury.
And so if we look at that if
they if they are child is
accessing a gun and we look at
the application of the rule Mr
chair Representative night it
says that if you are accessing
it in defense of yourself or in
defense of another I want to
point out to you that that was
an exception and that if you are
looking at a child who is
accessing the done four four
eight GB and for a shooting
event going out with their
parents that is not covered
under this we're talking about
those instances where great
bodily harm or death our current
so those are two very specific
items so that things that you
describe Mr Browde
Representative driver of of Mr
chair representative Nibert are
not things that would be covered
by this because those are not
items that are looking to calls
great bodily harm or death in
that in that in another person.
Mr chairman and representative
maybe I'm misreading line
sixteen.
On page two.
If the.
In my example.
Parents have.
Their children up to respect
weapons I know how to use them
and all that.
But the minor.
Takes a gun and.
Lawfully brandishes according to
your definition would be
basically showing that
It doesn't require any bodily
injury because as I read it it
says war.
So I'm all for Willie
brandishing.
And I would.
Madam that probably means
brandishing
That in and of itself.
Would bring the parents.
Into the subject of this
statute.
Why else the first question if
they had raised their children
and have trained them.
It goes down.
House sixteen year olds do and
and
showing that our bodies there
there there the economic.
Brandishing according to the
definition that was Stewart held
earlier.
That's going to cause the
parents to be subject to the
store with law I read it
correctly would you disagree
with that the Mr Chairman
representative.
Mr chair representative magnet
yes I would disagree with that
because I let's just take the
basic premise that you presented
Representative Mr chair
representative Nibert he said
that the parents should train
their child in the proper use in
and of a firearm and if you
change your child in the prior
use train your child whether in
the in the proper use of a
firearm your child is not going
to go out into the public and
wave their done around because
that's not part of state a use
of a firearm no I would training
that's going to be taught in the
class so Representative Mr chair
representative Nibert I'm saying
to you the answer is no because
if you have properly trained.
It isn't going to happen.
Thank you for staying some
instances where where there.
It is.
One of that weapon with them.
Result in a charge of they are
brandishing that economic and
that would have been in June.
The the parents under this type
of statute.
Let's look at the the exceptions
under paragraphs three one
twenty of for page two and then
it goes goes on
We went over
winds twenty two and twenty
three with Representative
arrangement once look at the
lines twenty four twenty five
and over to the next page
The farmers kept in a locked
container and securely stored
them.
It's not going to be subject to
this crime is that is that the
correct reading.
I'm Mr chair representative
Nibert that is correct but it's
also important that you read the
entire part of section two and I
just ordered it.
So so.
Or.
It's in a location that a
reasonable person would believe
to be secure.
When obtained by the miners so
my questions Mr chair
representative.
Let's talk about some of those
things that may or may not be
reasonable and your money.
Would stand next to a bed be a
reasonable.
location that would be secure.
Mr chair representative Nibert.
We would be looking at is the
evidence that would be presented
for you to pull out things in to
segregate them it's hard to say
what would or would not apply
what is the really important
about this bill is the takes
into consideration those things
are based on the financial
status for example of a person
or even whether they're in the
rural or urban area so maybe in
a if I were in a if I were in
the low income neighborhood
perhaps the secured storage
could could would mean something
different is it then that would
be and that they was that where
there are more affluent parents
they might have to stop so
what's most important is you
can't just take a one item in
state is this that of
Representative turned it will
need to look at the totality of
the circumstances that is
exactly what the courts would be
doing if that was if that was
brought before them.
Well.
Mr chair and representative
You use the words of a
reasonable person would believe.
And.
But reasonable person standard.
I remember no and to take the.
Different levels based upon
economics four major hoods or
anything else that reasonable
person standard is essentially
what the what the jury believes
it is the condition but I think
it's important for us as.
The people who are making public
policy.
To have some idea as to what you
are intending by these words and
so you know what the best stand
next to the the best I I didn't
get a firm answer there what
about between the mattresses.
So Mr chair representative
Nibert I go back again to
looking at the totality of the
circumstances and how something
may be capped at a moment in
time if the court we're looking
at so I am involved in nonprofit
work and I'm highly engaged in
areas where there low income.
Individuals and I would say to
you that something that may be
considered reasonable under the
circumstances could be locked up
in grandma's
cosmetic case with the key that
grandma kids around her neck the
nobody else has access to but I
it is very difficult for someone
who may not have the same broad
perspective that I have to see
exactly how this reasonable
under the circumstances might
apply and that's what we have a
court and the jury if that is
indeed the mat the matter in
which the determination must be
made.
So basically the the legislative
history of the costs are we're
we're just gonna leave it up to
people to try to figure out
we're not going to try to give
some clarity as to what we as a
policy makers believe should be
reasonable
and I agree that they're not
gonna know that stuff but I
think the public right now
should have some idea as we
believe it is reasonably
believed to be secure
and.
I would.
We can see that the the there
may be differences in certain
homes
but the reason why I'm really
asking.
Is that we have.
The New Mexico constitution.
That does some things that the
second amendment doesn't do.
Article two section six is not a
law sure bridge the right of the
service and the keep and bear
arms for security and defense.
For lawful hunting and
recreation use them for other
law for corporate purposes.
And so the reason why state
budget stand for macros.
Because.
I think a lot of people.
Yes.
Many parts of New Mexico.
Bill like they need a firearm in
their budget.
And they are exercising their
New Mexico constitutional rights
of protection.
Is afforded by the firearm.
And so.
I'm concerned that.
Exercise of their constitutional
rights for protection is being
compromised.
If
believe.
That one cannot secure a firearm
in a budget stand.
Or under their mattress.
In a manner that can be easily.
The access and utilize that a
moment's notice which means it
can't have a trigger guard on it
which means it can't be locked
up which means our variety of
other issues that arise from
that so I'm really concerned the
the the the.
What we're trying to do.
Is is.
A law.
That bridges the right of the
citizens to keep and bear arms
for specifically security and
defense in their homes.
Sir Mr chair representative
Nibert I'd like to respond.
So with respect to this piece of
legislation it talks about the
times with the you are not
you're far off if you are in bed
and that's our office next to
you in the budget stand
anticipate this piece of
legislation will not apply if
you were in bed and you like to
sleep on top of your firearm
because between the mattress
this piece of legislation will
not apply this talks about when
you are not your your firearm
and then you leave it in the
matter and which is can be
assessable by a minute there's
nothing in this far that
prohibits not instances of on
the constitution Mr chair
representative not I just
present that to you in terms of
the totality of looking at the
bill as a whole.
Okay.
I heard you say that before
that's really I think where
you're headed in paragraph
three.
Is it not.
Mr chair and representative.
So Mr chair representative
Nibert I'm not sure I understand
your question would you please
be able.
You just stated that the if
you're close proximity that
this.
Does not intended to to deal
with that and.
I think you're that's basically
where paragraph three is raising
that issue the pharmacy carried
on the person or within close
proximity of the person so the
person you're really retrieve
and use of our our reserve
carried on the person it is was
up a program that.
Gave rise to your statement
Mr chair representative.
The Mr chair representative of
that is one of the exceptions to
the application of the statute
that is.
I still have concerns that
applies Stewart my firearm on my
bedside.
My budget stand.
And I go to the kitchen.
Program three doesn't apply.
But balance that's where I
stored that's why I think it's
reasonable for the public to be
able to
trying to figure out.
What a reasonable person would
believe to be secure when it's
obtained by the minor but the
I'm not gonna be that one did
not
And then for firearm is locked
with the firearm safety device
which I've already expressed my
concerns there
again that goes against the idea
of having something students
secure
Now number five center St
because.
Representative Rehm stated
already he brought he came home
he he put his holster
Representative for have a fire
or minute in the closet is gives
more not to go in the closet but
under this bills are completely
exempt even if the child takes
so the police officer's gun and
commits the crimes of the better
talked about and paragraph may
of this of this provision so
there there's a complete
exemption for
police officers are armed forces
National Guard
but but not for any other law
abiding Senator I read that
correctly.
The course of the minor
takes it and.
Users and self defense there
there the parents of exonerated
from from that we use
Madam chair
Mr chair I'm sorry that's the I
just have a Mr chair and
representative
It is really
Difficult to.
Think of some things that apply
to rural New Mexico that oh.
Would.
While this type of legislation
to
Be an active and still not
Have some very harmful effects
or some some
Affects so.
Cool the ability of people rural
New Mexico to to do that because
I think they'll see this bill
and parents will
you know be a little bit
concerned because.
Very
You will now have a duty.
To take those weapons out of the
Barnes take those weapons maybe
out of places in the house that
the children should have easy
access to the.
Hi I.
I really.
We are or trying to cast a doubt
I I think I understand what
you're trying to do but I think
we're trying to cast about and
may.
Cool not only.
Responsible for their children's
actions but the make them
criminally liable for those
actions which seems to be a much
greater staff from what we
normally take and our criminal.
sprint so without the slide all
all shut up and.
Appreciate the your efforts to
answer more questions I hope
you'll give program thought that
what may be reasonable with
those about one instance because
I do think the public the
dancers are thank you Mr chair
thank you Representative I thank
you.
Course whichever committee
report called on Mr I am sure
and Representative McQueen
I I have as Representative
Nibert was discussing these I
understand that Representative
McQueen is going to have some
amendments because we're dealing
with a committee substitute in
judiciary we don't amend the
committee substitute we will do
a point seven.
I know you're you're not you
don't know what the amendments
are you're going to be agreeing
to them but what I would like to
do I think for benefit of the
committee members on the I would
like to have Representative
McQueen describing what it is
his concerns are and I his
proposals and then if it's
acceptable will do a point seven
and bring it back to the
committee will just roll over
subject what sure Chasey would
like to do terms when it gets
scheduled I would hope to be the
next meeting but I don't speak
for the chair I do want to
quickly point out that the hour
is late and that surprisingly
and one of the sponsors want to
point this out it is not Senator
Ivey Soto is fault that we're
here late and so I think as a
courtesy to the senator I I need
to point that out it's kind of a
unique position we find
ourselves in so with that I will
turn it over to Representative
McQueen to explain his concerns
and has proposed amendments for
you to consider when we come
back for a point seven version
of the bill if that is
appropriate Sanchez okay with
that.
That Mr chair yes all right
Representative McQueen you have
the floor.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative Herndon Senator
Ivey Soto.
three the things I would like to
look at more closely in terms of
revising language before I touch
on those I I I briefly just need
to touch on a couple of points
raised previously
I think it is Representative
divert wants to provide
reasonable or reckless
I think that's a red herring but
that's the nature of the law
respond reckless or situation
based.
And I would present green was
concerned that we were creating
a new law when child
endangerment might apply in.
Yeah we just recently passed the
chop shop Act.
Which creates a new crime with
any number of crimes are going
on in the top job so that that's
not unusual.
The first the first area and you
know actually Representative
Nibert in his usual thoroughness
flag all my issues.
I just have a different point of
view.
The first area is he's right
there are a bunch of guns in
cars.
And my feeling is it sure can
you're responsible for and you
need to store it in a safe
manner.
So I was I would like to see if
we can expand this to.
Include
We have the the reckless
disregard standard I I don't see
any reason why that should be
limited to a building whether
it's a form or a house if you're
gonna in you're responsible.
Second issue of the especially
in light of some of the comments
from the public I'm really
surprised that.
The.
For to be a crime for contact
for.
It has to do harm to another.
Because there are multiple
examples of self harm.
Whether intentional or not.
you know toddlers feel more
people than terrorists in the
United States and sometimes it's
some so sometimes it's their
brother.
but and then there's also the
simple side of a.
The young man who upon being
sent to the principal's office
went home and committed suicide.
That the harm as a result from
that is just as great as
actually shooting your support
and so I think the language
should be changed to great
bodily harm or death to
themselves or another.
Not just to another.
My final comment on the page
three number five dealing with
law enforcement and military.
Representative Nibert described
this as a blanket exception and
he's not far off.
I think the word incidental to.
Is problematic so under this
language if you have a weapon.
Pursuant to your employment
that's going to be incidental
to.
I think law enforcement members
of the military and National
Guard should be securing those
weapons just like anyone else.
So if there if there are indeed
enacted to the okay that might
be one thing but simply
incidental to the unemployment.
It is a complete exemption.
You know I think we just
recently.
How the two year old kids.
You know there's no there's no
reason why law enforcement
should also secure their
weapons.
So
Mr chair Sanchez I thank you for
this bill I'd be happy to work
with you on on language I hope
we can look at those three
issues and make it a better
bill.
Thank you Mr chair.
All right so with that we are
going to adjourn for the
sickening it this chart of
course you have the work sure.
Mr chair I just want to see if
the the Sanchez find those
amendments palatable.
Mr chair this chair yes.
Okay okay.
Then that makes sense we'll get
that we'll do it first on
Friday.
Thank you madam chair Mr chair.
And with that I guess I will
announce its I see the chairs
muted that we stand adjourned we
have concluded our agenda for
this evening thank you both very
much Representative Herndon
before you go.
Excellent presentation
regardless of where people were
out on the bill you were
thoughtful and kind and
responded to questions and I for
one appreciate you did an
excellent job thank you so much
thank you Mr chair.
