All right, good afternoon,
everyone. Um, this is a special
House Judiciary Committee
meeting, uh, the topic is.
Assisted outpatient treatment.
Civil commitment and we're going
to be getting a briefing at
about 2:30 today from Justice
Thompson about the status of um
the ALT pilot projects that we
funded during the special
Senate. So that, that's the
general outline. I am going to
take public comment at the end
and we'll, we'll follow our
usual rules of no more than 2
minutes and and that sort of
thing. And we'll have to see how
many people um there are, but I
may limit it to a certain number
of people, just so you're aware.
Um, um.
With that, I'm asking the
assistant to, um, call the roll.
Thank you Madam Chair taking
role.
Representative Abeta.
Representative Chavez.
Representative Hall.
Representative Hochman B. Hill.
Representative Martinez.
Speaker Martinez.
Oh yeah Representative McQueen.
Representative Reeb
Leader Sapansky.
Madam Vice Chair Romero.
Madam Chair.
Here
Madam Chair, you have a quorum.
So what we're gonna do is we're
gonna get a briefing on AOT from
Megan Dorsey, one of our, um,
staff attorneys for the, for the
speaker.
I'd like to allocate about a
half an hour to that, and then
we'll hear from the Chief
Justice as to the status of AOT
and, and he has to leave at
about 3:40.
And he may be done before them,
but just to alert everyone in
terms of time management, then
if there are additional
questions for Megan Dorsey, we
can hear those questions and
then we can ask Cameron, um,
Cummings to brief us on, uh,
civil commitment and so that's,
that's the kind of order of
business. We had to accommodate
certain people's schedules, so
that's why it's a little bit
broken up, but that's, that's
where we're at. And so with
that, um, Miss Dorsey, we're
Looking forward to your
presentation.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
um, I'm gonna be discussing as
the chair indicated the current
status of the law on assisted
outpatient treatment, which is
known as AOT in New Mexico.
And uh I'm gonna be having some
assistance from staff in terms
of moving the slides along, so
please, our next slide.
That's OK. Uh, for members of
the committee there has been
printed and it should be in
front of you. Hopefully it's
also available online for those
of you who are watching from
home, um, and you're welcome to
ask me afterwards if there's
anything you missed during while
listening to the oral
presentation.
So first, what I'd like to do
for you all is to describe
exactly what assisted outpatient
treatment means, uh, assisted
outpatient treatment is defined
in statute as categories of
outpatient services ordered by a
district court prescribed to
treat a patient's mental
disorder and to assist that
patient in living and
functioning in the community or
to attempt to prevent a relapse
or deterioration that may
reasonably be predicted to
result in harm to the patient or
another or the need for.
hospitalization and what does
that mean? What that means is
that um it is possible to seek
involuntary, uh, a, a court
order from the district court to
order a patient to participate
in involuntary mental health
treatment, um, when the district
court determined that it's
appropriate.
The statute that we have on the
books right now currently has an
enumerated list that outlines
the types of uh services that
may be included in an AOT order.
It's important to recognize that
it is a May list, which means
it's discretionary.
Oh, excuse me, next slide please
thank you. One back please.
Uh, this is the list that you
can see in the statute because
it is listed as a May, it
doesn't mean that every single
AOT order would include all or
any of these things necessarily.
It means that these are the ones
that the judges are most likely
to consider, but they certainly
have the discretion to order
things outside the scope of this
list, uh, for your purposes, the
ones that I, I have seen the
most common are medication.
And uh drug testing, and that
drug testing hits into two
different spaces. It can be used
to determine whether a patient
is complying with prescribed
medications and whether they are
utilizing um inappropriate drugs
or alcohol in a way that can
negatively impact their mental
health diagnosis.
AOT orders also usually include
both individual or and or group
therapy treatments, other types
of programming supervision of
living arrangements and any
other services that are directly
related to the symptoms that the
patient is experiencing with a
hope to mitigate harmful
responses.
Next slide please.
Uh, we're gonna move on now to
discuss the criteria for AOT.
One slide back please.
And what I mean by that is what
is the standard that the court
is considering when a person
petitions for assisted
outpatient treatment for a
patient.
A person may be ordered to
participate in AOT if the court
finds that the petitioner
established 5 elements by clear
and convincing evidence.
Clear and convincing evidence is
a burden of proof in our legal
system that is relatively high
but it is not the highest burden
of proof.
The highest burden of proof,
which you are most likely
familiar with is beyond a
reasonable doubt that applies in
criminal cases, clear and
convincing evidence is the
standard immediately below that
and in case law, um,
specifically State v. Rotherham.
The court has defined the
standard of clear and convincing
evidence, uh, or have supported
this as included in the standard
because it strikes a fair
balance between the defendant's
interests in avoiding an
erroneous deprivation of liberty
and the state's interest in
treating.
defendant, protecting the
defendant from themselves and
protecting society in general.
Now clearing convincing
evidence, like I said, is a
lesser standard than beyond a
reasonable doubt, but it is a
higher standard than it's
usually seen in most civil
cases, most civil cases carry a
preponderance of the evidence
standard which has been
attributed or akin to more
likely than not. So in these
proceedings, this is the first
place where you can see a due
process protection for patients
or respondents who may be
subject to AOT.
orders, and that's the burden of
proof.
Next slide please.
Now those 5 elements that have
to be established by clear and
convincing evidence are as
follows, uh, first, the patient
needs to be at least 18 years of
age or older and be a resident
of a participating municipality
or county.
The patient has to have a
primary diagnosis of a mental
disorder and have demonstrated a
history of lack of compliance
with treatment for a mental
disorder. Now this prong prong C
has um additional clarification
on the next slide, please.
A history of lack of compliance
with treatment can include at
least twice within the last 48
months, um, failing to well, I
won't belabor this because it is
on the slide and it's very
lengthy. What I will say is that
both the statute and case law
has very carefully, uh,
determined what it means to fail
to comply with a court ordered
treatment and in considering
whether a person is eligible for
AOT, the judge has to look very
carefully about um how the
person has been behave.
in recent past, what attempts
have been made to seek treatment
and what ways they have
allegedly failed to comply with
those orders.
Next slide, please.
Back to those main 5 elements
that must be established to get
an AOT order.
The Petitioner also must
establish that the patient is
unwilling or unlikely as a
result of their mental disorder
to participate voluntarily in
outpatient treatment.
They must also establish that
the patient is in need of
assisted outpatient treatment as
the least restrictive
appropriate alternative to
prevent relapse or deterioration
likely to result in harm to
themselves or others.
And, they must establish that
the patient will likely benefit
from and the person's best
interests will be served by
receiving assisted outpatient
treatment.
Next slide please. Next, I'd
like to talk with you about
jurisdiction and standing.
And uh those are legal terms
which essentially mean where can
we pursue an AOT order and who
has the authority to do so?
First, a petition for assisted
outpatient treatment must be
filed in the district court in
the county where the respondent
is present or reasonably
believed to be present if that
district court has entered an
MOU with the participating
municipality or county.
What does that mean? What that
means is that first, a
petitioner needs to know where
the defendant, um, or the
patient is living or have a good
idea about where the person is
living and is required to file
their petition in that
jurisdiction.
And once they've established
that point, the petition can
only really be accepted or
considered if that community is
has an AOT program in place.
Obviously there's not an AOT
program in that community. It
is, um, or there's not an MOU
with that municipality or
county, it can't happen.
In terms of the people that are
current under current statute
allowed to seek an AOT petition
for a person, um, there is an
enumerated list in statute that
includes an 18 year old who
lives with the respondent or the
patient.
A parent or spouse of the
patient.
An 18 year old sibling or child
of the patient.
A director of a hospital where
the patient is hospitalized, a
director of a public charitable
organization, agency, or home
where the respondent resides,
that provides mental health
services to the respondent, a
qualified professional who
either supervises or treats the
respondent for a mental disorder
or has supervised or treated the
person within the last 48
months.
Or a surrogate decision maker.
So these are the people under
the law that are currently able
to seek uh to file a petition
seeking AOT for someone they
care about.
Next slide please.
Now once the petition is filed,
uh, we proceed through the legal
process whereby the petitioner,
the person seeking assisted
outpatient treatment for their
loved one has to establish that
it is appropriate for the court
to order it and that is based
upon an evaluation by a
qualified professional in AOT
petition is required to include
an affidavit from a qualified
professional that states that
the professional personally
examined the respondent within
10 days.
the filing the petition.
That that qualified professional
recommends AOT as the
appropriate course of action for
this person and that that
qualified professional will be
available to testify at the
hearing on the petition.
more, no more than 10 days prior
to filing the petition, the
qualified professional or
designee has successfully
attempted to persuade the
respondent to submit to an
examination.
That the qualified professional
has reason to believe that the
respondent meets the criteria
for AOT and that the qualified
professional is able and willing
to examine the respondent and
testify at the hearing on the
petition.
So essentially this prong of our
statute permits
The petitioner, the person
seeking treatment, two different
routes. When they are addressing
an individual that has indeed
submitted to an evaluation, um,
that is what the affidavit
addresses when you're dealing
with a patient who is either
unwilling or unable to
participate in an examination,
the court allows for a qualified
professional to make their best
estimation based upon the
available information to them
and to still continue to try to
meet the elements and the
burden.
of proof for an AOT order.
Next slide please.
Once the petition has been
filed.
Uh, the respondent or the
patient is entitled to
additional due process
protections including a hearing
on the petition, uh, and
although it doesn't say it on
this, oh, it does say it on this
slide, um, the hearing shall be
held within 3 to 7 days of
serving the petition. It can't
be held sooner than 3 days or
later than 7 days. Uh, however,
it can, the hearing can be
continued for up to 30 days
based upon good cause, and
that's up to the judge's
discretion.
If the respondent or the patient
is hospitalized. The hearing
should still be held to allow
for continuous care and the
respondent or the patient is
entitled to an attorney to
represent them at every stage of
the proceeding, so there is an
additional due process
protection built into the
statute at that point.
If the respondent or the the
patient fails to appear for the
hearing under the current
statute, the court is allowed to
proceed with the hearing as long
as the respondent's attorney is
there. So in circumstances for
um where the patient is either
unwilling or unable to be there
the hearing can proceed with the
attorney standing in for the
respondent.
The court may order the
respondent to comply with an
evaluation if they have not done
so already and in that
circumstance, the court may also
order that the respondent be
detained to conduct the
evaluation, um, and that
includes detention and transport
to the appropriate facility, um,
to conduct that evaluation,
however, that detention cannot
exceed more than 24 hours.
Next slide, please.
At the hearing on the petition,
the qualified professional who
conducted the evaluation will be
called to testify as a witness
in the hearing.
And they are required to explain
their rationale and the
recommendation for assisted
outpatient treatment.
To, uh, outline any facts that
establish that AOT is the least
restrictive appropriate
alternative they have to be able
to testify to the access and
availability of an AOT program
in that community or somewhere
else, and if the recommended AOT
uh order or or the order that
they are seeking includes
medication. The expert must also
testify to the types of
medication that should be
authorized and the benefits and
drawbacks of using such
medication.
Um, and all of these opinions
will be included in a report
that's required to be provided
to the court and the parties.
Next slide please.
Uh, you've heard me say several
times the term least
restrictive, appropriate
alternative that's an important
definition for you to be aware
of and what it means is that the
conditions of the treatment, the
conditions of the AOT order are
are no more harsh, hazardous, or
intrusive than necessary to
achieve treatment objectives and
that they do not restrict
physical movement or require
residential care except as
reasonably necessary.
Next slide please.
Uh, the other definition that or
the other phrase you've heard me
say so far is likely to result
in serious harm to others what
that means is that it is more
likely than not that in the near
future, a person will inflict
serious, unjustified bodily harm
on another person or commit a
criminal sexual offense as
evidenced by behavior, causing,
attempting, or threatening such
harm.
Which behavior gives rise to a
reasonable fear of harm to from
the person.
next slide, please.
Finally, the last definition,
there are many definitions
outlined in this act, however,
the one that is most relevant to
our discussion here today is
likely to result in serious harm
to self, and that is statutorily
defined as more likely than not
that in the near future the
person will attempt to commit
suicide or will cause serious
bodily harm to the person's self
by violent or other
self-destructive means,
including grave passive neglect.
Next slide please.
So after the petition is filed,
the evaluation report has been
read. The judge has listened to
testimony from the expert, the
attorneys have had a chance to
ask questions, and the judge has
considered any other evidence
that the respondents attorney
may submit. The judge must
decide if the petitioner has met
the burden of proof by clear and
convincing evidence to establish
those 5 elements that I outlined
for you earlier.
Next slide please.
If the judge finds that the
elements have been met and
chooses to issue an AOT order,
um, there are, they have some
discretion about what that order
will include.
First, uh, but there are some
guardrails. First, the AOT order
could not be for more than a
year, and it must include
specified services by identified
providers. That means that the
judge has to usually adopt the
recommendations from the
evaluator and outline exactly
what the patient is required to
do, where they're supposed to
get the treatment and um be
aware of the availability of
that treatment.
The order can require self or
professional administration of
medication, but it cannot
require authorized restraints or
physical force to ensure
compliance.
In addition, all AOT orders must
be based upon recommendations
from the qualified professional
expert, which means the judge
cannot order something that the
expert did not recommend.
Um, the court cannot require
private or Medicaid providers to
cover treatment that's ordered.
And the order cannot conflict
with an advanced directive or a
surrogate decision maker's
testimony.
Next slide please.
Uh, there are additional due
process rights that the
respondent is entitled to after
an AOT order is issued,
including an expeditious appeal.
Uh, but an AOT and and also it's
important to be very clear about
this, and AOT order of finding
that a person is um eligible for
AOT and should be ordered to
participate in involuntary
treatment is not the same thing
as a finding that a person is
not competent in a criminal case
and it is not the same thing as
a finding that a person should
be subject to civil commitment.
Next slide, please.
Um, the law, the current law
does allow for petitioners to
seek an extension of that year
of treatment, I said was the
limit before, um, and there is a
process to allow them to extend
for an additional year and
maximum of additional year and
essentially it goes through a
similar process as was already
outlined to seek the initial
order.
Next slide, please.
There are other modifications
that the court can seek to
change the terms of an order
throughout the person's period
of treatment. They also require
a hearing and um arguments from
the parties next slide please
and I know that many of you are
curious when somebody has been
ordered to participate in AOT
and when they failed to comply
with the court orders, what
happens if the qualified
professional determines that a
respondent has materially failed
to comply with AOT such as the
qualified.
believes that the respondent's
condition is likely to result in
serious harm to self or likely
to result in serious harm to
others and that immediate
detention is necessary to
prevent such harm, the qualified
professionals shall certify the
need for detention and transport
of the respondent for emergency
mental health evaluation and
care.
And a respondent's failure to
comply with an but a
respondent's failure to comply
with an order of AOT is not
grounds for involuntary civil
commitment for a finding of
contempt of court or for the use
of physical force or restraint
to administer medication to the
respondent.
the next slide, please.
Um, everything associated with
these types of proceedings is
confidential and sealed.
Next slide, please.
And that is a basic summary of
the status of the law in AOT and
after we've heard from the judge
and and with the chair's
permission I'm happy to stand
for questions. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Ms Dorsey.
Um, I believe the justice is
here. I wanted, um, this
briefing to lay some
foundational information before
we hear about the status of
what's going on in AOT.
Um, as I mentioned earlier,
based on scheduling issues we're
breaking it up a little bit. So
I I saw the justice's staff, so
I'm assuming the justice is
around, Justice Thompson, Chief
Justice Thompson.
Hey
Welcome, Chief Justice. Uh, come
on down.
That's right.
Yeah. Um
You're perfect.
Miss
Uh, welcome, Chief Justice. I'll
ask you to, um, introduce your
staff. I just wanted to let you
know, uh, one of our staff
attorneys for our caucus
presented an overview of what
ALT is, you know, all the legal
requirements and the like. So
certainly feel free to touch on
those again as well, but yeah, I
just wanted you to know they
have the, we have the
foundational information and
we're looking forward to your
presentation on the status of
the, the pilot projects. So with
that you have a floor, Chief
Justice.
Thank you, Chair.
Karl Rasack, our head of AOC and
Say Boone, who is heading up
many of our, um,
Behavioral health programs and
it's been.
Particularly instrumental, um.
In AOT.
Uh, I appreciate the opportunity
to present today, um.
And give you a little update.
On AOT and as I discussed this
morning.
Sort of in the larger context,
we're really here to answer
questions, but it's in larger
context of
Um, some of the behavioral
health policy initiatives you
all are interested in.
I outlined for today, um.
In this morning's conversation.
About um
Sort of in the narrative about
what we did so you provided the
funding in our initial.
Uh, conversations, I think
dating back now to August, which
really is not that long ago. I'm
gonna summarize those for you,
um,
And then give you sort of a
flavor of of.
What it is like to execute a
policy like this from the
judiciary which is.
Unique for us.
Um, and then Stacy and Carl will
address any particular questions
you have, talk to you about
specific districts.
And talk to you about next
steps.
And then, of course, answer
questions.
Um
I don't know if we were able to
provide these uh there are hard
hard copies being distributed,
so the, the first thing I'm
gonna talk about basically is
this timeline which I described
already.
Um
In my comments today, $3 million
appropriations, September
developed the components, um,
securing national experts and
technical assistants and
stakeholder meetings, um.
Those uh going into November,
December, developing policies
and procedures when we go
through the budget and CC and
Carl talk about the budget. Much
of that money is occupied in
that area, right? It's a
national experts that are
assisting us in the stakeholder
meetings.
And when you have these
stakeholder meetings, you
literally come out with
basically an action plan and
depending on the program.
Um, the regions could include
from the county level.
Maybe out to a district level,
meaning, um, uh, district court
level.
Um,
we granted the pilot in 3
judicial districts including the
1st, 4th, and 12th.
The first is I described as
Uh, up and running um as of
today.
So do I have numbers for you on
participants? I don't. They
literally turned on the switch.
Um
But in a manner and way in which
all the preliminary steps were
taken, and I think in a lot of
ways, the first is the design by
which we
Envision this going across the
state we'll continue to look at
the in the second has done some
good work on this in a different
way in the 3rd also in a
different way, but what we're
seeing out of the first is if we
could design it from the ground
floor. That's really what we're
looking at.
But the AOT, what we're doing
with regard to AOT not only
supports that particular
process, but it also supports
other behavioral health
processes, um, including
competency diversion.
And those are running at the
same time or we're trying to
make them run at the same time
in those same districts.
That in turn.
Impacts competency evaluation.
So when you look at the criminal
purely criminal justice.
Portion of this in which the
question is, are people being
evaluated.
To determine whether or not
they're competent. The diversion
programs allow us to off-ramp
some of those so that we can
have a more expedient,
competency evaluation. Let me
make this clear, even with all
of these, we do not run
competency evaluation.
Courts do not do that. That is
100% in executive function.
So
If you have related questions
with regard to that, just
understand that evaluation
process.
Is an executive function.
Some of those same providers to
do those two things are the same
providers, so us being able to
evaluate the districts to see
what behavior health providers
are in there, help us understand
whether it can go towards a
diversion.
And whether we can get
competency evaluations.
So
Um
I think
I think I hope I made um the
point this morning that.
Uh, we have onboarded very
quickly in my experience in
state government, which is
extensive, I was at the attorney
general's office. I am familiar
with the operation of state
government. This is.
To be generous, efficient, I
think, and quick, um, what this
team has done, uh, with regard
to these programs.
Um
I continue to um I'll turn it
over to Carl or Sarah.
Uh, for talk, I think.
In particular about.
What we see.
With AOT, um.
Either in the first and, and
what is coming next and then
we'll stand for questions. Carl,
you want to take it? Sarah.
Wrap around here
Thank you, Chief Justice, Madam
Chair, Representatives,
senators, thank you for allowing
us to speak with you all today
as the Chief Justice mentioned,
um, in the state this morning,
the state of the judiciary, we
are happy that AOT has
officially launched in the first
as of today. So, um, a very
large lift since you all
appropriated the funding in
August of last year, 2024, and,
um, up to today we were able to
implement that program, bring
community-wide stakeholders
throughout Los Alamos County,
Ria Riba County, Santa Fe
County, all comprising the first
judicial district court.
Um, this implementation was
really.
Supported and encouraged and
continues to be supported and
encouraged by the community
members and the local leaders in
the first judicial district
court, and we've been happy to
be involved with that. So, um,
to stand up AOT is, is kind of
multi-purpose and multisteps to
do so, so as the Chief Justice
already explained, um, kind of
what those overarching steps
were that we were able to
complete, um, I do want to share
a little bit more about the
specifics so that when we talk
about future implementation we
all kind of have the same
baseline of all of these
components that are necessary to
stand up a quality program.
And to sustain it going forward.
So, um, as we have both, you
know, spoke about the, the
stakeholder engagement in the
first has really been
substantial. We've had a lot of
support. We've had a lot of
engagement. We have a lot of
folks that want to do this work
with us, um, to continue it long
term for the community members
that are most in need of these
services around behavioral
health treatment and ongoing
support.
Um, so the stakeholders again
have been really instrumental.
We're able to secure a national
provider to assist us at a
statewide level for technical
assistance and training and
really helping develop best
practices, letting us know what
other states have been doing
around AOT Allstate AOT laws
look a little bit different, so
of course we are following New
Mexico's statute, which you all
heard about just before, um,
coming to hear from us. Um, so
we've really been working at a
national level to make sure that
we're doing best practice, but
also really working within what
is unique to New Mexico, so
treatment.
Advocacy Center is our national
um partner in this. Um, they're
also known as TA, so you may see
that acronym, you know, for
future conversations around AOT,
um, but we've really been been
grateful to have them on board
and and working hand in hand
with us on this implementation.
In the first specifically one of
our largest lifts, and this will
be the case in our future
implementations as well is
really bringing on behavioral
health providers, so as we have
talked about in different, you
know, capacities and you all
this body has explored these
conversations and these issues
in the past, especially during
the interim, um, behavioral
health providers in New Mexico
are um not always as available
as we'd like them to be, um,
they're not always as present as
we'd like them to be. They're
very much engaged in what we're
trying to do, but there just
aren't enough of them. Um, so we
were able to
contract with um the Life Link
in Santa Fe County to provide
behavioral health services for
AOT those services for AOT per
statute in New Mexico are pretty
wide ranging but include things
like medication management, um,
outpatient treatments
specifically around, um,
behavioral health issues, of
course, mental illness,
substance use is possible, um,
for treatment as well. Other
things like case management
services also really important
when we're talking about AOT
treatment services, and it can
also include things like
supported housing.
Um, and other mechanisms that
help support those with high
mental health needs.
We're also working with Los
Alamos County and Riariba County
to ensure that those counties
also have specific behavior
health providers that can take
this work on, as I mentioned, a
lot of them are eager to work
with us, um, but there is some
hesitancy with those providers,
um, to kind of know what the
future holds for AOT so they're
contracted with us through the
end of this fiscal year when
this appropriation expires on
June 30th, 2025. Give me one
second, um, Chairman, you're
welcome to join us up here if
you wish.
OK.
OK. Well, you can wander if you
choose also.
Um
Sorry, Chief. That's fine. If
Stacey.
can emphasize.
At this point
So the issue when I mentioned in
the state judiciary is, is this
funding the manner and way this
is being funded, it is difficult
to.
And correct me if I'm wrong, to
to get contracts for these
providers and
They don't have a.
Horizon of 9 months.
So, I just want to make that a,
a focal point of, of, uh, of her
presentation then one other
thing maybe we can touch on is.
Are we familiar, chair, we won't
go into it with SIMs mapping.
We understand that
OK.
Um, fair enough. All right,
well, uh, Carl, want to talk a
little bit about the budget and
then we'll have Madam Chair,
Chief, thank you, um.
So if that $3 million you all
appropriated to us, uh, this
summer we've spent about
$230,000 of that, and we've
obligated another 1.5 million
million through the end of the
fiscal year.
And that 1.5 million is going to
um the providers as well as uh
the respondents attorneys in the
pilot sites in in our different
judicial districts.
We've also contracted with uh
University of New Mexico's
Institute for Social Research to
do the data analysis portion of
this so that we have a third
party data analysis, and then
it's the same throughout the
state for all the pilot sites.
Um
That also paid for our uh help
through the treatment advocacy
Center as well as through
National Center for State
Courts, they're helping with uh
some of that SIMs mapping that
uh that you mentioned.
Um, I also need to hire staff. I
don't have behavioral health
staff. The only um behavioral
health funding we get from the
legislature that's recurring is
about $325,000 a year.
Um
And uh so I'm, I'm using some of
that, one of the, our, our new
staff members Abby Chavez is
here uh today as well, um.
But as the chief was saying,
With one time funding, it's
great we can get things stood
up. But there's a challenge for
our providers. They can't go
hire new people and increase
their capacity. It's hard for us
to go out and hire new people
and increase our capacity, and
so, um, that's part of our
message there and, and as um.
Stacy mentioned the funding does
expire on June 30th, and so
we're, we're working hard to use
it as effectively as possible
through then and, you know, are
looking to this legislature as
to your direction for next year
and ongoing into the future.
Um, with that, I think we'll
stand for questions, Madam
Chair. Great, um.
Before we go to questions, I
just want to acknowledge that we
have leader worth here.
Madam Pro Tem Stewart and
Chairman Cervantes and they're
certainly welcome to ask
questions as well, so, um.
Questions for the chief. OK, we
have.
Um
Representative Martinez.
You have a mic or
Chair
Um, my question is on the
The first
presentation
Yeah, I, what I'd like to do is
hold those if you could. I
understand that there's a
little.
Scheduling issues. So we're
gonna come back to, um, Megan
Dorsey, um, once this
presentation is done.
Thank you, ma'am.
Anyone else?
Um, leader Worth.
Uh, perfect.
Like
Uh, thank you, Chief, and to
your staff, uh, huge
appreciation, um, this is a very
positive.
Report to us. One of the things
that we on the legislative side.
knew had to happen was putting
in place the infrastructure so
that when we make changes during
this session.
We're not waiting
The 8 months, the 6 months,
whatever this has been to just
get out of the gate.
And you're absolutely right
about
Things typically don't move like
this, and I couldn't be.
Happier about the first judicial
district today.
Actually starting an AOT
program. This law has been on
our books since 2016, and we
just weren't using it. And so
huge appreciation for the court
being willing to be a partner
with the other two branches and
it's both branches. I appreciate
the governor signed this piece
and I think we're in a good
place, um, I do.
want to just give you a
commitment that we are going to
work hard to
turn these dollars into
recurring.
Dollars so that as you build
this out, you're able to.
Hire the folks that can do this
on a longer term basis. This was
one time money and the fact that
you've actually done this with
one time money is something
again, we very much appreciate,
but you can't do any programming
with non-recurring money, uh,
and, and we certainly, I, I
certainly will speak for myself,
don't think it's fair to ask the
courts to
Lift something up like this and
then come back every year for a
one-time appropriation needs to
be recurring, and I think we all
need to work on that. So I just
wanted to make those comments
and, and.
Uh, we've been criticized, uh,
lots of discussion about the
special session. I'm glad we're
no longer focused going
backwards but focus moving
forwards, but I do think it's
important for the public to know
that this is something we did in
the special session that is
going to have huge results as,
as I know Chair Chandler is
working on the criminal
competency and there may also be
tweaks to assisted outpatient
treatment and the fact that the
court system is there to
implement that. It's just we.
don't have time to wait to build
this. And so I think we're a
step ahead so I don't really
have a question other than
wanted you to hear that
certainly I'll speak for myself,
but a Senate side in the house
I'm sure as well. We're gonna
work hard to get these dollars
recurring and something that I
committed to you, Chief. Uh, I
think we realize this is above
and beyond the rest of your
budgets and in no way should
impact all the other things you
talked to us about this morning
that you need, which are, are
certainly critical and and.
to happen. We need to do this
separately and so just a couple
of comments. Thank you, Madam
Chair, for doing this.
Thank you, Mr. Leader. Anyone
else? Question, we have, um,
representative Hall.
I don't want to choke anyone
out, you mentioned a minute ago
they don't contract out for like
9 months.
Can I
I'm just would like to know what
is it like 2 years, 3 years,
these contracts?
Thank you.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative
Paul.
The issue is for the providers.
If we're asking them to take on
more folks and treat more folks.
Oftentimes they're coming back
and saying, well, I need to go
hire my own staff to do it. But
if you can only give me a
contract for 9 months. I can't
go hire new people cause I just
got to go lay them off right
away. And so that's the concern
we're trying to voice. Madam
Chair Representative, yes, to
echo what Mr. Rei said, um, the
way that we're currently
contracting with with those
providers is through January
30th, 2025 when this
appropriation is set to close
currently and so we've had
really great.
conversations they're interested
in partnering with us long term.
We just don't have that
guaranteed funding to be able to
extend those contracts, ideally
we would love to set contracts
for multiple years. We're just
not in a position to do that the
way that the current
appropriation is set.
Stacy, what is, if you could
tell the body sort of the, the
lifespan of a, if you were to do
a sin map, like you just was
completed in the first. What's
the lifespan of that?
Thank you, Chief Justice. The
lifespan of a SIM map that we're
seeing is about 3 years, um, for
us to do the work, it's about an
8 week process to map those
communities to gather those
stakeholders, those SIM maps and
action plans we expect to kind
of be 3-year plans, um, so we're
looking at ways to impact those
action plans and to bring on
those providers and keep that
engagement for about 3 years.
We're going to then revisit
those action plans to see what
progress has been made, what new
gaps have been developed and
what new opportunities we have.
So that's kind of what we're
anticipating in terms of a cycle
is about 3 years.
Um, that's typically what we're
seeing at a national level as
well, sort of this 3-year
refresh on those community maps
and those community action
plans, and that, of course,
informs AOT and competency
diversion and the provider
landscape in those areas as
well.
And representative vice chair
Ramiro and then leader Sapansky.
Thank you, Madam Chair. um,
thank you, Chief, uh, great
presentation earlier. I think
for so many of us, um,
Really looks at how we connect,
um, and, and I appreciate so
much of what you had said for
where the funding goes and
what's needed, and I think just
following up with that and and
echoing, um, I think some of our
colleagues' concerns first on
the appropriation that is set to
end at the end of Jan or
contract. So if we could clarify
appropriation versus contract at
January 30th this month.
Um
Which is it a contract or is it
the appropriation that ends at
the end of the month.
Madam Chair, Representative,
thank you for the opportunity to
clarify, um, if I misspoke, I
apologize, the appropriation
that we received in the special
the special session ends June
30th, 2025. Um, so that
appropriation is what's driving
all of our contracts, so we're
not extending contracts with
providers or respondent
attorneys past June 30th, 2025,
so apologies for any
miscommunication there.
Thank you for the clarification.
I was so concerned that programs
would just end this month and we
could not. I was like, we need
an emergency clause right now.
OK, so super appreciate the
clarification, um, second to
that is in order for us to
continue to pursue the
three-year programming and look
at what we're doing. We'd love
to build in data in some of your
recommendations and, and I know
that what we were dealing with
this during the special and
preparing legislation then that
that was always a challenge as
to what are we trying to
achieve.
um, are part of your
recommendations or frameworks
for how we can adapt to what we
need to do moving forward. Is
there a data sort of section
for, for what you're
recommending that we can, uh,
appropriate for.
Madam Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
um, thank you for the question.
The data piece on this as well
as the data requests we get from
you all in the executive play
into everything we're trying to
do today, the chief this morning
talked about, um, our staff,
right? It's our court clerks who
enter the raw data that we're
relying on. So that plays right
into that staff salary request.
We regularly for the last
several years, asked for data
analyst positions that don't get
funded, um, and so
It's all of judiciary sort of
funding approach that helps
answer that data question. It's
not just
On the behavioral health piece
as a standalone, uh, because we
have to extract that from.
Court pleadings, we have to
extract that from different
sources and then have a
statewide consistent approach as
well.
Thank you Madam.
So the data comes up in a lot of
different policy areas. I talked
about a little bit today. So,
and I, I just want to continue
to emphasize this for everybody.
The data that is contained in
the court system is data that is
a filing system. Our database is
not of a behavioral health
database.
It's not a Department of
Transportation road funding
database. It is a filing system
in which we code different types
of activity.
So
It would require
Some staff time to create the
right codes.
And then jid staff.
Our IT staff to be able to
extract that from there it goes
to the experts to analyze or
what has worked, I think, Kelly.
In pretrial detention is we have
external experts also that are
able to evaluate and that's kind
of what we were recommending in
some parts of the behavioral
health bill so everybody
understands we are, we don't
just collect data.
Directly on, on, on any type of
policy.
It is a
Data extracted from a case
filing system. I'm sure, um,
Chief, uh, and I'm sorry, your
name again? Carl. Thank you. um,
thank you for clarifying and
just for further clarification,
does the, is the request for
appropriation that you mentioned
earlier today, does that include
any of these data structures or
systems that would be in place
for
for this session that we may be
able to look at.
Uh, Madam Chairman and vice
chairs, yes, in our unified
budget we have the request for
the staff salaries. Again, it's
our court clerks who are
entering the primary data on a
lot of this. And then secondly,
we did ask for 4 data analyst
positions in our budget neither
none of those are in either the
executive or legislative
frameworks at the moment.
Uh, thank you for clarifying.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Chief. Um,
And Carl, what I would behoove
this body to continue to, um,
look at that budget opportunity,
um, especially as we continue to
evaluate our progress made, um,
and thank you for what you've
done in, in 6 months. I mean, I,
I'm
Standing in ovation continuously
with what we've seen achieved.
So super appreciate, um, what
you've, what you've already done
and hope that we can continue to
evaluate based on data that
we're requesting. So, thank you.
Thank you, Vice Chair, um,
leader Sapansky.
Thank, thank you, Madam Chair.
Great to have you all here. Uh,
if this is a great progress
report. I am very impressed with
the speed at which you have, uh,
stepped up to the plate, um, I
think we all, um, see a lot of
folks in our communities that
need help, and it is wonderful
to see the court stepping up to
do their piece of this. It's one
piece in a, in a big system and,
um, Chief, I think you said it
very well that it's, it's not
the answer. It is one piece of
the puzzle here. Uh, I just
I had a few questions, um.
Along the lines of and and you
may not be ready to answer them
because the program's still
being implemented, but I'm, I'm
very
curious, um, 11 thing I noticed
is, uh, Ms. Dorsey was
presenting is that, um,
respondents that go through this
process may not be required to
Uh, use Medicaid or private
insurance to pay for. And, um,
as we look at the appropriation,
I'm just curious if you have
initial thoughts on whether that
should be changed in the law,
um, whether that is an
appropriate limitation. Um, one
of the reasons I'm asking about
that is, is often in public
health, we're talking about
getting people into a medical
home, having them have a primary
care provider, having them
really access local services.
consistently from the same
place.
And it seems as though if
individuals are
participating in this process.
They are in AOT that we should
be encouraging them.
To
Utilize their Medicaid if
they're covered through
Medicaid. And also leveraging
those dollars because those are
partly federal dollars as well.
And so it just seems like a
little bit of an arbitrary
divide to have an organization
like LifeLink that, for example,
that does bill Medicaid on one
hand,
Also now creating a new billing
process to build.
the judiciary for for similar
kinds of services that may be
covered. And I just wonder if
you are ready to speak to that,
um,
In this initial implementation.
Great question. Let me
to my expert, but as a, has a
direct answer to that, and we
have
Um, we, we wrestled this
actually when we were looking to
try and provide you some
estimate with regard.
To the, uh
The appropriation that came
through.
In August
Um, a lot of that money was with
the assumption that some
Medicaid dollars wouldn't be
available, but, but they are, I
have, um, Stacey answer there.
Thank you, Chief Justice, Madam
Chair.
We are structuring our, our
provider contracts, um, with
the, the various providers
including Lifelink, we're
requesting in those contracts
that they do utilize Medicaid
funding or Medicare funding if
it's available for the
participant. We also have
structure in those contracts
that they assist the individual
in obtaining those, um, benefits
if they're eligible for them and
so we've asked them to build a
court secondarily if those other
mechanisms aren't in place or if
they're underinsured or some
services that are not covered,
the appropriation has allowed us
to give those providers, um,
some additional funding for.
that aren't typically billable
to Medicaid, such as searching
for someone, you know, those
aren't Medicaid hours that can
be billed, um, attending court
staffings are typically not
something that can be billed to
Medicaid, so we do want to make
sure that the providers have
what they need at the
administrative and so that
they're not sort of having to
spend more money on these
programs than they would
otherwise, but we have requested
in our contracts with them, and
they have agreed so far um to
bill Medicaid first and to
assist the participants in AOT
in um.
Accessing those services and
those benefits if they're out.
thing to add with regard to the
construct of this is this is a
very good example about the
judiciary's ability to exact, so
we can exert pressure through
these contracts.
They answer to the executive
like the folks that really have
leverage are you all in the
executive with regard to getting
them.
To the table with regard to
letting us know what providers
are available and, and, and
making them available. So.
I just highlight that.
For your understanding that
again as far as you did, they,
them coming to us, there's a
contract obligations, but we
don't have any other real
authority.
To have them act in a way that,
that helps us.
Thank, thank you for that. Um,
that's, that's great to hear.
And that seems like a very
efficient way to use resources.
It also
Would allow the respondent to be
looked at on, they are going to
have access to more
comprehensive services. Um, just
a couple more questions, um.
What safeguards are you putting
into place for individuals with
disabilities, developmental
disabilities, other
disabilities, um, particularly
individuals with autism, um, you
know, are there going to be
sensitivities or protections for
those folks as they go through
this.
Madam Chair Representative,
thank you for that question. Um,
we are really working with our
national providers on, on
structuring something that works
with our AOT policies and the
AFT statute here in New Mexico
to ensure that the AOT treatment
is truly um whole person based,
so if that person is coming to
us, of course, with the primary
mental health, um, diagnosis for
the statute, but if they have
substance use or if they have
other intellectual developmental
disabilities or autism or other
neurodivergence that the
treatment provider is really the
clinical expert there and making
sure that that treatment plan
that's presented to the court.
as part of the AOT order really
encompasses all of those needs
and services. I think we
recognize an AOT specifically
and as well as comp diversion
that.
We're not just treating the
mental illness, we're treating
things like their housing status
we're working with them on, you
know, basic needs like food
security, um, access to
transportation, all of those
things that really make that
person whole and thriving in the
community, um, it's not just
limited to mental health
treatment, it really is looking
at that whole person and
whenever is possible throughout
the process of an AOT order, we
are really consulting with the
participants themselves, and
they are the expert on their
life and we want to be able to
ensure that their needs and
wants and desires are included
in that treatment as well.
And Madam Chair, Madam Wieder, I
just wanted to briefly augment
that saying, as much as we look
at the whole person.
The people we're looking at and
they come into contact with the
courts are only a small slice of
the folks with behavioral health
needs in our state. And so,
You know, this, you know,
whether it's companies the
diversion or AOT or other core
connected programs. That's not.
The only answer in behavioral
health, right? It has to be a
very broad, um, look at folks
and folks' needs, and I, I don't
want that to be lost that we're,
we're here saying we have all
the answers because we don't, we
have a small slice of folks that
we can address.
Thank you for that.
Um
I, I do think just as you go
through the process, you know,
really noting what kinds of
process protections are needed
for individuals who may have
different abilities, um, I think
it's gonna be really important.
Um, my final question is that,
you know, this is.
We're finally implementing
something that has been on the
books, um, and we're getting,
uh,
This pilot projects in these 3
new judicial districts, how will
the individuals who have
standing to file an AOT
position.
Know that this is a new program.
Do you have outreach?
In place? Is that something that
we need to account for in the
appropriation so that
Uh, say a parent or a, um, you
know, director of a charitable
organization.
knows that this is an option
that they have this ability to
come forward, um, and see if
this program might be right for
someone that they encounter.
I'll leave this to Stacy and
then I have a, a general
follow-up.
Madam Chair, Madam Leader, thank
you for the question. Um, we are
absolutely um after today's
announcement that we're
officially open, we are
absolutely going to be kind of
pushing that green light and and
sort of mass distributing um the
invitation for folks that are
eligible per the AOT statute to
petition. We've been
specifically working um with the
inpatient state hospital in
Mexico Behavioral Health and
Krista Saint Vincent's in the
first, um, to ensure that they
have all of the petitioning
documents and they're ready to
go, so there's been a lot of
conversation with them directly.
Um, we've also been working with
our newly onboarded.
AOT respondent attorneys to
ensure that they have what they
need to assist with those
petitions, um, kind of on the
other end with the respondents
in terms of family members or
other folks that are are listed
in the statute as potential
participants or excuse me,
potential petitioners, um, such
as a spouse or a roommate or,
you know, a child over the age
of 18, um, petitioning for their
parent, for instance.
We're, um, our team at AOC is
really looking at a better way
to sort of stand up self-help
around that so we have our
self-help systems within the
judiciary where folks can come
into those civil matters, um, so
our team is really looking at a
comprehensive way to build that
out so that it's ease of use,
um, for folks coming in and also
just kind of generally
spreading, um, spreading the
word that AOT is up and running
as of today.
Um,
Madam Chair, uh, floor leader,
this is not uncommon.
In the court system.
two things. First, in the 3rd,
At least with the example I
provided today.
The hospitals are certainly
gotten the word, right?
Um, we're seeing those from
I think with, with regard to the
individual today, it was to, um,
petitions from, from the
hospital.
But it's not uncommon when they
come and see a judge trying to
get a problem solved.
The judges in the situation of
saying, I can't fill out this
will for you. I can't fill out
this for you. I am the judge,
but here's self-help.
And these resources for you.
Um, if this is what you're
trying to do, and I would
envision as Stacey is
describing, it would not be
dissimilar to that.
It would be something in the
toolbox in which the judge would
not advocate.
But would have the information
at the courthouse for them.
Uh, Madam Chair, uh, and Chi and
staff leaders. That, that is,
uh, amazing, uh, that you all
are incorporating that at this
point, and that you've already
received two petitions on, on
your first day. Um.
I, I know the background of the
passage of this legislation was
really driven by a lot of family
that wanted tools in the toolbox
to assist people that they loved
who needed assistance beyond
what they were able to give them
at home.
Um, so I think that, that
self-help, the education is
going to be really, really
important. So thank you very
much that that is all of my
questions and really appreciate
you all being here today.
Representative Beta.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Chief Justice. My question
is also building off of
leaderscapanzi's question what
jurisdiction and standing. I see
that you have a list of
individuals who have standing to
file. My question, first
question is, will you have a
template with self-help for
individuals or
Is self help more of a guide
that these are the elements you
have to meet and then they
essentially burdened with
finding legal assistance to help
draft that petition.
Thank you.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative.
So yes, we do have a sort of
form petition.
But there is no um right to an
attorney, a petitioner's
attorney, that burden does fall
on the families. Um, it is
something that we try to support
our civil legal services and try
to partner with them, um, but
they are, of course, also
looking to you all for funding
and that, that sort of thing as
well. So, um, that's a direction
that we, we end up steering
people.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair,
Chief Justice, my next question
then is our petitioners eligible
to apply with legal aid programs
for assistance for this.
Madam Chair Representative
Abeta, I do not know every, uh,
one of the legal service
providers, um.
Criteria and whether they're in
operating in this area, um, but
I'd certainly be happy if you
all funded them to do that.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
representative of anyone else.
OK, um, Chief Justice, the um
AOT statute.
References the need for the
courts to have some sort of MOU
in place with, um, I guess it
would be the county, um, where
the program is being located.
How is that going and I'm
looking for suggestions on how
we could approve AOT if that's
necessary, just to make it
somewhat easier, you know, some
of them we could try to adjust.
This is what makes Carl nervous.
He's trying to take the mic from
me because he thinks of.
I'll, I'll tell you, strike the
language.
Carl put a more defined.
It's been in.
I think given our experience, it
would be more efficient.
To allow us to
Uh
Develop these relationships
directly.
We have had
Um, systems in which they've
employed that process and it, it
bogs it down quite a bit.
The main reason and I'll let
Carl address it directly similar
to my response to the floor.
Local governments do not answer
to me.
I
The court can control courts and
court users.
Local governments answered you
all in the executive.
And, uh, Madam Chair, I, of
course, wholeheartedly agree
with my boss here, um, great
relationships with our local
governments and local partners
are critical to the success of
these programs. Formal
agreements are not.
Um, and so having something go
through a county commission with
the vote is not as meaningful as
just building that relationship
with our county public health
folks, which is wonderful, and
we've had great response here in
Santa Fe County, Los Alamos
County, Ria Riva County, and we
really appreciate their
partnerships on this.
That's helpful. Is there
anything else in the statute
that we should look at it in
terms of implementation and if
you're, um, not prepared to talk
about that right now, I'm happy
to get with one of your staffers
to talk about that because we're
that issue, we are looking at
AOT as part of the criminal
competency bill. So there is,
um, some avenue to maybe try to
adjust a little.
I don't think currently, chair,
I think it is also important
that the context in which it, if
it's in the criminal competency
bill may change our view
differently from a standalone.
So, um, we can put you in touch
with staff for the OC with with
regards to particular language.
Appreciate that Justice, and
just to be clear, and I don't
expect you to, um, change your
answer, but in terms of what
we're changing in the crim
through the bill that we've put
together on criminal competency
is allowing district attorneys
to be a party through AOT, you
know, to petition. And so, of
course, that means we have to
amend the AOT statute. So that's
the only thing that we're doing
at the moment, but we're
certainly open to suggestions,
you know, reasonable suggestions
along the way. Yeah, Carl.
Madame Terry did want to add, I
know.
Part of the discussion in the
past has been whether uh an AOT
order would require us to report
a firearms prohibitor to NCIC,
and I just offer that for the
commit committees, uh, thoughts
and discussion.
I'll, I'll probably follow up
with you, Carl to get opened up
the whole thing, the filing fee
also we had discussed.
Um
There's a filing fee with regard
to these petitions, so that may
be an impediment. OK. Um, very
good, that's helpful, um, you
know, I just wanna echo the
remarks of some of my colleagues
and
Um, the leader, uh, you all have
been very responsive throughout
our summer proceedings in terms
of talking about behavioral
health as it sort of engages in
the criminal justice system and
other aspects of our system and
I just want to express our
appreciation for that and
certainly our appreciation for
your willing to work with us
going down the road to, to
implement AOT in a meaningful
manner for the state, um, you
know, I agree with later Worth
that I think
It's, um, an unfortunate thing
that we have underutilized that
tool. I think it's a tool that
could really benefit families
and the individuals, of course,
involved and, and I'm I'm
looking forward to, to, to
develop a system that is more
helpful to those who are in need
of assistance, both through
changes in law and also our
funding of the behavioral health
system, which is, of course,
very important to make all of
these things work. So, um, thank
you very much, Justice Carl and
Stacy you've all been super
helpful.
Um, any concluding words
justice? No, thank you and I
stand committed to my words this
morning. We'll make folks
available to you.
During the 60 day session if
you'd like to continue the
conversation. Thank you.
Well, thank you for making time
for us, really appreciate it.
So now, um, we will allocate
time for questions, um, by Miss
Dorsey.
And then, um, Brandon Cummings
will um present on uh civil
commitment and then we'll have
questions available for him.
Oh, you have a question? Oh
yeah, OK, very good. We had
Representative Martinez said he
wished to have a question for
Ms. Dorsey, and then, uh,
Representative Reeb.
Thank you, Madam Chair, I
appreciate the uh
The time
Um, on the presentation. I have
2 questions, uh, just
Out of curiosity on page 15.
What, what exactly is grave
passive neglect.
That's an easy question, Miss
Dorsey.
Uh
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative.
Um
I can tell you essentially what
it is, but if you give me just a
moment, my uh cohort here is
looking at the exact legal
definition, so we're not
misleading you.
Uh, grave passive neglect is
statutorily defined as a failure
to provide basic personal or
medical needs or for one's own
safety to such an extent that it
is more likely than not that
serious bodily harm will result
in the near future.
Essentially, if I can expand
upon that in layman's terms,
what I interpret that to mean,
and again, I'm not a judge, so
it's up to a judge to determine
whether the facts of any
particular situation meet that
legal definition or not.
But I think that what this
definition is seeking to
encapsulate is a situation in
which a person is unable to meet
their basic needs unable to feed
themselves unable to find
themselves safe housing, unable
to care for medical needs in a
way that puts them in that
threatens their life or their
bodily integrity.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
That, um
And my next question on page 21.
Uh, failure to comply with AOT.
the last
Paragraph on that page of
respondents failure to comply
with an order of AOT is not
grounds for involuntary civil
commitment or a finding of
contempt of court.
Or for the use of physical force
and restraints to administer
medication to the respondent, so
are there any consequences at
all for not complying with this?
Madam Chair, Representative.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
yes, uh, the, the consequence
that is available is in the
paragraph immediately preceding
what's not available, uh,
essentially if the qualified
professional, if the doctor in
the situation believes that the
person has materially failed to
comply, and that's an important
phrase, materially failed to
comply means a serious
violation, not some accident,
not some mistake, um, but they
have really violated the terms
of the court order.
And that violation is likely to
result in serious harm to the
person or someone else.
Then they can seek detention to
prevent such harm, um, but in
that circumstance, the qualified
professional must certify the
need for detention and transport
for the respondent for an
emergency mental health
evaluation and what that is
referencing, I believe, is the
first step in the civil
commitment process, so what this
is saying is that failure to
comply with AOT doesn't mean
you're automatically eligible
for civil commitment, but it can
under these very narrow
circumstances.
Um,
allow somebody to be detained,
usually by law enforcement in
transported for uh an evaluation
to see whether they would
qualify for a civil commitment.
Thank you, Madam Chair, that
makes sense. I appreciate the,
the explanation.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative, I
have Representative Reed next.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
I had a, this may be a stupid
question, but um.
What is considered a surrogate
decision maker, you mentioned it
a couple times in there if, if
you could just tell me who that
would be, please, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair Representative, that
is another great question, and
if you'd give me one moment to
double check if it's defined in
the section. If not, I'll tell
you what I think it means.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
it is defined under 43-1B2R, a
surrogate decision maker means
an agent designated by the
respondent, a guardian, or a
treatment guardian.
You, that's all I had.
Appreciate it.
Anyone else questions um for
Miss Dorsey. Yes, Representative
Ubeda.
Thank you, Madam Chair. My
question is looking and forgive
me, this is uh my first
presentation seeing this and
it's very interesting and
helpful.
From my understanding, looking
at this, there are two ways for
this AOT to happen. The first is
the individuals who file the
petition on their own family
members or anyone 18 and over.
And then the second way is when
they're brought in through the
through a criminal complaint.
Is that correct?
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
no the this process the assisted
outpatient treatment process is
only civil in nature. It is
completely separate from the
criminal proceeding and a person
is not under current statute
referred to AOT because of a
criminal complaint.
Um,
That being said, if there was a
criminal case filed and if
because competency was raised or
even if it wasn't, if there was
serious mental health issues
involved, it might trigger
somebody pursuing the civil
process, but they're completely
separate.
OK
I'm sure, thank you. And my next
question then is, um, are
looking at slide.
Page 11.
The respondent is always
represented by council, or does
it need to be requested?
The statute requires that the
respondent be represented by
council, um, so I
don't know the exact process of
how a council is appointed, but
they proceeding could not go
forward unless the respondent
had an attorney.
Thank you, Madam Chair. That's
it.
Other members?
Oh yeah, um, represent, uh, vice
chair Ramiro.
Just as a follow up to that
question, Madam Chair, um.
When we're thinking about
self-help.
In the mechanisms that would be
in place for those who would be
seeking the support of AOT.
And the idea of when we get
representation and we just
discussed or Chief Justice just
discussed that that's not uh
necessarily available.
Is
through the statute through
self-help, is there a way in
which we can mandate counsel
because it, uh, you know, in the
sense that once the petition is
filed,
Can we mandate representation if
the court accepts it. Madam
Chair Representative or Madam
Vice Chair, uh, I'm not sure I
fully understand your question,
but let me take a crack at it.
Um, I think there's two
different, uh, attorneys that
we're talking about here, um,
this is for the respondent to
the patient, the statute
currently requires them to be
represented by council and, um,
the chairwoman can correct me if
I misremembering from our summer
presentations, but I believe
that that is facilitated through
an AO.
contract where those who are
subject to an AOT petition, the
person that is potentially going
to be subject to involuntary
treatment, AOC appoints an
attorney on a contract basis to
represent them.
However, what I believe the
chief was referencing earlier
was attorneys for the
petitioner, so the family member
or other community member who's
seeking to have someone else
subject to an AOT order in the
current statute, there's no
requirement that that person be
given counsel, um, in any way,
shape or form. So right now the
only way that they could get an
attorney, as far as I know, is
to hire one or to find somebody
who's willing to do it on a pro
bono basis.
Um, I don't know if legal aid
provides civil attorneys for
that process or not. I'd be
curious to know. I kind of doubt
it honestly because it is a very
technical type of proceeding,
um, but I would be curious and
then finally I believe to hope I
captured all of your questions,
um, could you change that as a
legislature I imagine just as it
says in the statute that the
respondent shall be represented
by council. You could say the
same thing for the petitioner
though.
that would likely have a
financial cost.
Thank you, Madam Chair. And just
to clarify, so if you are
involuntarily looking at
treatment through the court
system, then definitely we're
hearing that you shall be
represented by council. However,
if it's through the petition
process, um, whether it be
self-help or otherwise, um.
Only then would that be private
council that would be needed.
OK.
Yes, Madam Chair and
Representative, and if I could
explain why I imagine that it
was enacted that way. It is to
protect the respondents due
process rights that we want to
make sure that somebody who's
having a liberty restriction
imposed upon them, which AOT is
in some ways, even though it's
not a physical liberty
restriction, you're controlling
what this person can and cannot
do with their daily life. They
are entitled to due process
protection, and that includes an
attorney to represent them and
to argue that this is not
appropriate if it's not.
appropriate for that particular
person, um, meanwhile, the
petitioner, the person who's
saying, hey, my loved one, my,
my daughter, my mom, my son
needs this treatment. They are
not necessarily entitled to the
same due process protections
because they're not the one
whose liberty is going to be in.
before we move on to Brandon.
OK
Um, all right, so this piece is
civil commitment, um, just
another mechanism to address
mental health, um, serious
mental health when there's
danger to sell for others, but
I'm sure Bran Brandon can
expound on that.
Thank you Madam Chair. Actually
that's a great segue because
we're gonna talk about the um
heightened liberty restriction,
which is involuntary civil
commitment, so there'll be some
differences in standards and
some differences in um due
process protections because
we're gonna discuss.
The step sort of sometimes
after, beyond AOT or sometimes
independently.
We could go to the 2nd slide.
So there are 3 statutes we're
going to be discussing that are
involved in involuntary civil
commitment, 43 1 10, which is.
The emergency commitment statute
or something frequently called
the 72 hour hold.
43 1 11, which is the 30 day
civil commitment.
Specifically limited to 30 days
and then 43 1 12 which allows an
extension of the 30 day civil
commitment. We'll also discuss
the constitutional precedent
that.
Hm
These statutes have to operate
within.
Um, specifically addressing due
process burden of proof and
limits on the use of status.
Next slide please.
So 43 110, the emergency mental
health evaluation and care
statute or the 72 hour hold.
Is, um, the statute that is
relied on sort of at the moment
of intervention in most cases.
It provides that a peace officer
may detain and transport a
person for emergency mental
health evaluation and care in
the absence of a court order.
Only if and then gives us 4
categories. The first one is if
the person is subject to lawful
arrest, the officer has the
authority to make the decision
to transport them instead.
Um, for emergency mental health
evaluation.
2 is also
Self-explanatory. It's if the
the police officer or peace
officer has reasonable grounds
to believe the person is just
attempted suicide.
3 is where we see the statue get
and these these tattoos are
gonna be dense and that's sort
of why we're gonna walk through
them.
Um
So 3, a police officer based on
that officer's own observation
and investigation.
Has reasonable grounds to
believe that a person as a
result of a mental disorder.
Presents the likelihood of
serious harm to himself or
herself or others, and that
immediate detention to prevent
such harm is necessary.
So
Um
First, if I could, this would
be.
To the question earlier about
what's the enforcement on AOT.
This is the spot at which the
AOT statute dovetails into this
statue.
So the AOT statute provides that
if you're not complying and if
it's a material noncompliance
and there's reason to believe
that you're a danger to yourself
or others, so this is.
Effectively
tying in right here at this
point.
Um
It is a subjective standard, it
has to be reasonable grounds,
um.
And
That it provides that.
There will be a lot of the use
of the word immediately.
In the statute
Uh, immediately upon the arrival
at the evaluation facility, the
peace officers shall be
interviewed by the admitting
physician or the admitting
physician's designee.
Or number 4 is a physician or
psychologist or qualified mental
health professional licensed for
independent practice.
Who is affiliated with the
community mental health center
or a core service agency.
And it brought the definition of
core service agency.
Has certified that the person as
a result of a mental disorder
presents a likelihood of serious
harm to himself or herself or to
others and that immediate
detention is necessary to
prevent that harm.
What we're gonna hear throughout
the throughout the each of these
statutes is the repeated
referral to.
Um
Serious
harm to sell for or other.
And that that serious harm is
likely to be near or me.
Subsection B provides that um an
emergency evaluation under the
section shall be accomplished
upon the request of the of the
peace officer or a jail or
detention facility
administrator.
Or that person's designee upon
the certification of the
physician or psychologist or
qualified mental health
professional licensed for and
here we get that long definition
again. Independent practice who
is affiliated with the community
mental health center or core
service agency.
Court order is not required
under this section. So this is
the 72 hour hold and it's
dealing with interventions, um.
Rapid interventions, so.
The, it allows you to, it allows
a police officers, peace
officers to detain someone for
the purpose of seeking emergency
treatment and emergency
evaluation.
Uh, does not require court
intervention and that's why the
the time frames are so limited.
If an application is made to the
court, the court's power.
It doesn't prohibit you from
applying to a court if an
application is made to the
court, the court's power to act
in furtherance of an emergency
admission shall be limited to
ordering that one.
The the client be seen.
By a certified psychologist or
psychiatrist and to that a peace
officer transport the person to
an emergency facility, so the
court order, if one was sought
in an emergency situation is not
a determination that they, um,
meet the civil commitment
standard and it's not a 30 day
commitment. It's limited to
saying that you have the
authority to transport the
person.
And that you, and, and that the
person must be evaluated.
Um
Subsection C tells us that in
evaluation facility may accept
for an emergency-based
admission. Any person when a
position physician or certified
psychologist, certifies that
person as a result of a mental
disorder presents a likelihood
of serious harm to himself or
herself or to others and that
immediate detention is necessary
to prevent that harm.
Uh, there's some case law
surrounding an issues
surrounding the, the use of the
term as a result of a mental
disorder, and whether that
includes substance abuse
disorder or not.
And that's an issue with New
Mexico's the, the New Mexico
statue.
Anytime that order is made, that
also constitutes authority to
transport the person for
evaluation.
Any person detained under the 72
hour hold.
Show whenever possible be taken
immediately to an evaluation
facility. It's worth mentioning
that evaluation facility is not
defined in the statute.
Uh, detention facilities shall
be used as temporary shelter for
such persons only in cases of
extreme emergency for protective
custody and no person taken into
custody under the provisions of
the code shall remain in a
detention facility longer than
necessary, and in no case longer
than 24 hours.
So this is addressing um the
sometimes necessary use of a
jail or
Center
In this process and effect so
it's limiting that to a maximum
of 24 hours and then it places a
few additional restrictions,
which are
One, the person, uh, being
transported or detained for
emergency mental health
evaluation shall not be held in
a cell with prisoners.
Shall not be identified on
records used to record custody
of prisoners.
Shall be provided with adequate
protection from possible suicide
attempts.
And shall be treated with the
respect and dignity to do every
citizen who is neither accused
nor convicted of a crime.
Subsection E tells us that the
admitting physician under a 72
hour hold statute or certified
psychologist shall evaluate
whether reasonable grounds exist
to detain the proposed client
for evaluation.
So it's another step in.
Um, determining whether or not
this person meets the emergency
criteria.
And if reasonable grounds are
found, the proposed claim shall
be detained.
If the admitting physician or
certified psychologist
determines that reasonable
grounds do not exist to detain
the proposed client for
evaluation and treatment, the
proposed client shall not be
detained. So the first
determination was made by the
peace officer.
Who brings the the proposed
client to the admitting
physician and then they may have
to make the same determination.
Upon arrival at an evaluation
facility, the proposed client
shall be informed orally and in
writing by the evaluation
facility of the purpose and
possible consequences of the
proceedings, the right to a
hearing within 7 days, the right
to counsel, the right to
communicate with an attorney and
a mental health professional of
the proposed client's own
choosing.
And shall have the right to
receive necessary and
appropriate treatment.
So in addition to providing
those rights, the statute also
requires that the proposed
client be informed.
Of those rights.
Um
Peace officer who transports a
proposed client to an evaluation
facility under the provisions of
this section shall not require a
court order to be reimbursed by
the referring county.
Uh, that is our um.
Emergency 72 hour hold statute.
So it's basically reasonable
grounds to believe that this
person.
Is a
Danger to themselves or others,
and that reasonable grounds have
to be found both by the peace
officer.
Who encountered the person and
then by the admitting physician
or certified assuming that the
standard for the 72 hour hold is
met.
The next step and assuming that
that patient is not.
Uh, able to be stabilized within
that 72 hours. The next step is
431 11, and that's the 30 day
commitment statute. Under 43111,
every adult involuntarily
committed to an evaluation
facility under the prior 72 hour
hold statute.
Has the right to a hearing
within 7 days of admission
unless waived after consultation
with counsel.
So it does allow the person to
wave their uh initial hearing.
And, and agree to a 30 day
commitment.
But but only if they they have
had the opportunity to consult
with legal counsel.
If a physician or evaluation
facility decides to seek
commitment of the client for
evaluation and treatment.
Petition shall be filed with the
court within 5 days of
admission.
So
Within um.
Our timelines start stacking and
they and they're relatively
short effectively the important
part of that.
The petition shall include a
description of the behavior and
symptoms of clients of the
client that evidence the
likelihood of serious harm to
themselves or others.
And shall include an an initial
screening report by the
evaluating physician
individually.
with the assistance of mental
health professionals or if a
physician is not available by a
mental health professional
acceptable to the court.
The petition shall list all
prospective witnesses and a
summary of the matters of which
they will testify, copies of the
posi of the petition have to be
served on the client, the
client's guardian, if any,
treatment guardian if one has
then been appointed and the
client's attorney.
The structure of the hearing is
such that at the hearing, the
client shall be represented by
council, and that's again we're
we're dealing with the the
highest level of restriction of
liberty because we're physically
confining people.
Um, they do have the right to
present evidence on the uh their
attorney has the right to
present evidence on the client's
behalf, including testimony
specifically providing that they
have the right to have testimony
by an independent mental health
professional.
Of their choosing and they have
the ability to cross examine
witnesses.
The presence of the client may
be waived upon a showing to the
court that the client knowingly
and voluntarily waives the right
to be present.
A complete record of the
proceedings, so it's an on the
record proceeding.
Uh, to allow for appeal.
A court appointed guardian for
an adult involved in involuntary
commitment proceedings shall
have automatic standing to
appear at all stages of the
proceeding and shall be allowed
to.
testify by telephone or through
affidavit if the circumstances
make live testimony too
burdensome.
Um
One of the issues that we had
that one of the issues that many
states have addressed is.
The
Inability of someone who's going
through this process to make
their own decisions or to assist
their counsel.
And we're requiring them to have
an attorney this also allows the
court to appoint a guardian ad
litem.
Uh, to help make decisions when
the when the individual, the
court shall include in its
findings the Guardian's opinion
regarding the need for
involuntary treatment or a
statement detailing the efforts
made to ascertain the guardian's
opinion.
He tells us that at the end of
the hearing.
Court may order a commitment for
evaluation and treatment, not to
exceed 30 days if it finds.
And the standard in this case is
also clear and convincing
evidence.
So if it finds by clear and
convincing evidence that one, as
a result of a mental disorder,
the client presents a likelihood
of serious harm to the client's
own self or others.
2, the client needs and is
likely to benefit from the
proposed treatment and
3, the proposed commitment is
consistent with the treatment
needs of the client and with the
least drastic means principle,
which you also saw the AOT
statute.
Finally, uh, F.
Provides not finally, but F
provides that once the court has
has made the findings set forth
in that prior section, the court
shall hear further evidence as
to whether the client is capable
of informed consent, and that
has to do deal with the issue of
medication.
Uh, primarily if the court
determines that the client is
incapable of informed consent,
the court shall appoint for the
client a treatment guardian.
Who shall have those powers in
in in
er ated in section 43115, which
is treatment garden statute, a
guardian enlightenment or a
treatment guardian are slightly
different.
The guardian had lied to mix
helps make decisions for
incapacitated or or incapable
person, the treatment guardian
is another sort of player in
this cast of characters whose
involvement is only required if
this, if, if this.
test is meant for the treatment
guardian is someone who has the
knowledge to make decisions
about whether a medication
recommendation is appropriate.
Section G deals with the
involuntary commitment, 30 day
involuntary commitment if there
was not a prior 72 hour hold or
an AOT intervention that failed.
So under section G, an
interested person, and that's
not a defined.
The statute doesn't define
interested persons, so it's up
to the court to decide who, who
would meet that test.
Who reasonably believes that an
adult is suffering from a mental
disorder and presents a
likelihood of serious harm to
the adult's own self or others.
But does not require emergency
care, and that's because there's
this court process was slower
than the emergency hold. So the
statute is directing you back to
the 72 hour hold if that's if
it's an emergent situation.
So in the absence of an emergent
situation.
An interested person may request
that the district attorney
investigate and determine
whether reasonable grounds exist
to commit the adult for a 30 day
period of evaluation and
treatment.
The applicant may present to the
district attorney any medical
reports or other evidence
immediately available but shall
not be required to obtain a
medical report or other
particular evidence in order to
make a petition.
The district attorney shall act
on the position petition within
72 hours.
If the district attorney
determines that the reason that
reasonable grounds exist to
commit the, the district
attorney may petition the court
for a hearing.
So the statute requires that the
district attorney must act
within 72 hours, but that action
might be that the district
attorney determines that it will
not proceed.
So it doesn't compel the filing
of a petition if the
District attorney's office does
not believe that there's good
grounds therefore.
If the proposed client is
summoned and fails to appear at
the proposed time and upon
finding of the court that the
proposed client has failed to
appear or appears without having
been evaluated, the court may
order the proposed client to be
detained for evaluation as
provided in subsection C of the
72 hour hold.
So if the court orders the if if
this proceeded on a petition
because it was not an emergent
situation.
Um, but the individual either
didn't, would refuse to appear
in court or refuse to appear for
a medical evaluation.
Then the court has the power to
order.
Um, that's 72 hour hold.
Any hearing subsection H tells
us that any hearing provided.
Pursuant to subsection G shall
be conducted in exactly the same
way that it would have been
conducted if it was under the
prior section, so there's no
difference between the way the
hearings held if the if the
potential.
Uh, patient comes in from a 72
hour hold or if it comes in from
a.
Uh, petition under G.
The 3rd and final statute that
we're gonna be talking about are
going through is what happens if
30 days is not sufficient.
And so under New Mexico's law,
the initial commitment can only
be for 30 days or less.
Um, if the treatment providers,
uh, and petitioners.
Do not believe that 30 days is
sufficient that they can
petition to extend it.
Um, section A or subsection A of
the statute tells us that that
has to be filed within 21 days
of the, uh, beginning of the 30
day.
So again, very, very short
deadline, um.
If that's not met.
You actually have to just go
back to 0. So if you don't meet
that 21 day deadline, then you
would have to start a new
petition under that prior
subsection G.
The petition shall explain the
necessity for extended
commitment specify the treatment
that has been provided during
the evaluation and include an
individual treatment plan for
the proposed commitment period.
The petition shall this
prospective witnesses for
commitment and a summary of the
matters on which they'll
testify.
A copy of the petition shall be
served on the client, the
client's guardian, the treatment
guardian, if one has been
appointed and the client's
attorney.
A hearing shall be held prior to
the expiration of the 30 day
commitment period, at which the
client shall have the all the
rights granted under the.
Original petition standard.
And in addition shall have the
right to a trial by six-person
jury if requested. So in the, in
the event that we're petitioning
for an additional extension.
Uh, the statute creates the
right to a jury.
A court appointed guardian for
an adult involved in an
involuntary commitment
proceedings shall have automatic
standing to appear at all stages
of the proceeding.
And we also and also be allowed
to testify by telephone or
through affidavit if
circumstances make live
testimony too burdensome.
The court shall include in its
findings the guardian's opinions
regarding the need for
involuntary treatment or a
statement detailing the efforts
made to ascertain the guardian's
opinions.
Uh, those are so the court's
directed to uh consider the
Guardian's position or or
explain why it was unable to get
the Guardian's opinion, those
opinions aren't binding.
Mr. Cummings
Yes, ma'am. It's helpful, but I
think it would be useful if we
could if that's OK.
Absolutely, Madam Chair.
Uh
We wrap up those, we wrap up
those, uh, the extension statute
by saying that the standard is
the standard remains, um.
And I'm sorry I haven't said to
switch the slide the whole time
we've been going.
Um,
The standard remains clear and
convincing evidence.
And uh the petition the.
The commitment may be extended
by 6 months, the first time, 6
months the second time in 1
year, the final time.
Finally, in considering um.
And considering this statue and
AOT.
The, uh, there are some
constitutional limits that we
operate within.
And if I could get the slide
switched to constitutional
limitations there we go.
So
While it's well established that
the government may detain
mentally unstable individuals
who present a danger to the
public.
In the absence of a criminal
prosecution.
The um.
United States Supreme Court and
the New Mexico courts have both
been clear that that requires uh
ample due process, although the
courts have also told us that
due process.
Isn't a bright line proposition.
It's a malleable thing that's
dependent on the facts of each
case.
Next slide please.
The Supreme Court US Supreme
Court standard is.
Voluntary hospitalization has to
be for the purposes of treatment
rather than mere custodial care
or punishment.
And that the state cannot
constitutionally confine a
non-dangerous individual who is
capable of surviving safely and
freedom by himself or with the
help of willing and responsible
family members.
Next slide please.
O'Connor v. Donaldson
specifically held that a finding
of mental illness alone cannot
justify a state's decision to
lock a person up against his
will and keeping him
indefinitely in simple custodial
confinement.
Assuming that the term referring
to mental illness can be given a
reasonably precise.
content and that and that the
mentally ill can be identified
with reasonable accuracy, there
is still no constitutional basis
for confining such persons
involuntary if they are
dangerous to no one and can live
safely in freedom. So that's
gonna be our standard.
According to the court, the
confinement of a non-dangerous
person based upon mental illness
alone is not constitutionally
permitted. Next slide, please.
Um, this just tells us that
there are several Supreme Court
cases that have limited us to
um.
That you can't make these
decisions based on preponderance
of the evidence that any
decisions on restricting
somebody's liberty for
involuntary commitment must be
made by.
Um
clear and convincing evidence
there we go.
And with that, I think I can
stand for questions.
Thank you, appreciate it.
Um, we have Representative
Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you and thank you for the
presentation.
There's that one question.
On
Page,
I guess there's no page numbers.
Um, on the slide of 43-1-11.
Um
It says the client shall be
represented by council.
Um, what
What's the process of that plant
can't afford.
council.
If the and that's actually the
usual case. So there are
contract attorneys that provide
that service.
Thank you, Madam Chair, so it
would be kind of like a public
defender or
Is, does it go through the
public defenders officers, is
this a whole separate thing?
It's similar to the public
defender or, or it would be
similar to public the public
defenders who work on contract,
but it is not through the public
defender's office.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for that.
representative
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair, and thank you very much,
um, to both of our presenters
and um for you, Madam Chair, for
having this informative meeting
for us. I think it's really good
going into this session, uh,
where we're going to be
discussing a lot of these
matters, so full disclosure, um,
I am on contract as uh one of
the attorneys representing, uh,
mental health.
Defendants, clients,
respondents, um, and the second
judicial District court, and so
I have a lot of questions as it
relates to process or proposed
process and the differentiations
between AOT and civil
commitment. So, um, the first
question I have is, like, for
instance, in the 2nd judicial,
we have a mental health docket,
which is, um, in front of a
specific special hearing officer
is the proposal that AOT will
have something similar.
Madam Chair Representative, we
are not, uh, presenting any
particular proposal here today.
I think that earlier chair
Chandler represented that in HB
4, which addresses criminal
competency. There is a, I
believe it's a 1 or 2 line
amendment to the AOT statute
that simply adds a qualified
petitioner, um, beyond that
we're not aware of or here today
discussing any particular
proposals.
Thank you very much, Madam Chair
and thank you, Ms. Dorsey. So, I
mean, will these petitions just
be heard in a regular district
court?
Madam Chair Representative under
current statute, there is no
particular rule about how and
when they'll be heard. I believe
that would be up to the
different district courts to
decide whether they have
sufficient resources for mental
health docket or not, uh, I
certainly agree that that is a
more efficient way to do it and
to make sure that people with
expertise are handling these
types of cases, but I am sure
that that is not necessarily
available in every jurisdiction
across the state.
If I could just step in briefly,
um, having talked to some of the
judges, I think it will vary by
district, but I do know that
Donana, whatever, you know, the
district down there is, there is
a judge who appears to be
dedicated to AOT cases and it's
familiar. I don't know if they
call it specifically like the
AOT docket, but definitely he
has presented to CCJ and so but
I think it will be handled on
probably on a case by case
basis.
Maybe depending on volume, I
mean, you know, they have to
manage their dockets and some of
the smaller districts may not
have a sufficient docket to
justify anyway. That's my 3
cents on that, um,
representatives not to take over
the conversation, but just to
share that bit of information.
Thank you, Madam Chair, that's
very helpful, um, so pivoting
then to the discussion, um, Mr.
Cummings about status and um
constitutional protections
related to status, so with the
proposal of AOT, I mean, status
tells us that we can't
involuntarily commit someone
simply because of their status,
because they're, they have a
substance abuse disorder or um a
mental health disorder, but is
what we're proposing, you know,
AOT is going to be depended upon
or decided on someone's
Status and who makes that
decision? Is it a healthcare
provider who is deciding to file
the petition for AOT because
they feel that that respondent
is better suited for AOT or um
who the DA who is, who's making
these decisions as to what
program would best fit whom.
Well I mean I as to involuntary
commitment and then I'll ask uh
Megan if it's the same answer on
AOT. So with regard to
involuntary commitment, the
person asking can be very nearly
anyone.
Any interested person who is who
has information that
Uh, that
And is willing to testify to it.
That this is that the proposed
claim or proposed patient is a
danger to themselves.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative,
and in the AOT context, um, as,
as I think you're familiar, the
statue in 431B4 enumerates a
list of qualified petitioners,
um, which again is essentially
people that have close
familiarity with the respondent
and or have treated that person
in a medical context.
But in terms of making the
decision about whether the
program is appropriate for that
defense or that respondent or
not, that's up to the judge.
Thank you very much, Madam Chair
and Ms Dorsey. So, I mean, if
you have a petition for
respondent, that is for AOT and
a special hearing officer or a
judge, uh, decides that that
person is better suited for
involuntary commitment can a
judge.
do that?
I mean,
It would require a separate
petition.
Um, the same parties can be
involved.
Because that's, that's that
subsection G that says
As effectively any person who's
aware.
Um, so the same people making
the AOT referral if
The hearing officer or the court
thought that involuntary
commitment was the better
answer.
Could proceed by a petition
under that, under 43111G.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Mr. Cummings. And my last
question, um, it seems, and this
is just hopefully to clear up my
own confusion. We have reliance
on the clear and convincing
standard, um, that the person
would be, you know, presents a
likelihood of serious harm to
themselves or others. We see
that reference in both of these
statutes, so, so what, what is
the distinguishing factors since
you have to meet
The same standard in both
statutes, uh, Madam Chair
Representative, that's a great
question and a good one to
clarify for the members in
general.
Um, what you're referencing when
you say the clear and convincing
standard, that's the burden of
proof that the amount of
evidence that the petitioner has
to provide the judge in order
for the judge to determine that
either process is appropriate
for them in a.
Proceedings specific to that
process, um, but the criteria
for AOT and the criteria for
civil commitment, the elements
that they have to establish are
vastly different.
Um, the criteria for AOT is that
the respondent, the patient that
we're concerned about is 18
years or older, um, is a
resident of a participating
municipality or county has a
primary diagnosis of a mental
disorder has demonstrated a lack
of compliance with treatment,
um, is unwilling or unlikely to
participate in voluntary
treatment needs AOT to prevent
harm and will likely benefit
from AOT to prevent harm. That
is a very brief.
summary, the real language is
much longer than that, but so in
the AOT contexts, the petitioner
has to establish each one of
those elements with clear and
convincing evidence versus in
the civil commitment process
they have to establish different
elements which Brandon can
outline for you by clear and
convincing evidence.
So in the in the involuntary
commitment or civil commitment.
Um, paradigm, they have to
establish by clear and
convincing evidence that the
person is in immediate danger to
themselves or others.
Um, so effectively AOT can be
utilized when someone is simply
a danger of harm.
Or it's noncompliant and it's
and it's affecting people around
them, whereas for involuntary
commitment, you have to show
clear by clear and convincing
evidence that they are a
Um
Serious danger of physical harm.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, um, both. So I mean, I
would just still close with
this, uh, from my experience.
In these cases, um, a lot of
people are being civilly
committed because not only are
they, you know, establish a
clear and convincing, um,
standard of, of, of being a a
threat of harm to themselves or
others, but because of
noncompliance, you know, or
because of serious mental
illness or because of substance
abuse.
You know, leading to all these
factors, so, um, I just a word
of caution, I think that there
might be some confusion as we
implement these two programs
and, um, you know, the language
is clear, but in terms of
actually standing everything up,
I think that's just something we
want to pay attention to. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative.
Anyone else with questions or
comments?
OK, um, really appreciate your
support and we may be drawing on
you again, um, obviously this
isn't the last conversation
we're gonna be having about this
particular topic area, um,
criminal competency is obviously
next in our queue or very soon
in our queue and, um, that's
also a very kind of complicated
and um difficult issue to get
your head around sometimes. So
really appreciate both of you.
Thank you. Um, I'd like to
conclude
by offering public comment.
To, um, members in the audience
and online, um, we will limit
the amount of time to the total
time to no more than 15 minutes
and individuals will be asked to
keep their comments to no more
than 2 minutes, so if there's
anyone in the audience, I
believe there is a, there's
supposed to be a mic somewhere
up there to, um,
assist.
OK, yeah, that's our assistant.
So, OK, I don't see.
anyone interested in the
audience, so online, um, raise
your hand if you're.
If you're, um, wishing to make
public comment.
Right, I don't see any hands
raised. OK, we must have
answered everyone's concerns and
questions, I'm sure of that. Um.
That's a joke.
Um, so I think unless there's
anything else that people want
to raise, I, I will say, um, and
don't bank on this, but I don't
see a need for a meeting on
Monday for our committee.
I don't know of any bills that
have made their way yet because
I don't think there are any
committees really that I've met
yet that, you know, because
usually we're the 2nd. Um, we
are gonna have an informational
briefing on Wednesday on, um,
AI, um, some of you have heard a
little bit about AI during CCJ,
but, um, it continues to be
something that I think we as a
society need to be aware of and
so I've asked a couple of people
who've been following trends and
what other states are doing.
In terms of regulating AI.
Algorithms and the like. Um, I
hope it's interesting, uh, an
interesting thing where I'm
thinking that might be about an
hour and a half or so of our
time, and that is also the night
of our, uh, dinner.
So our our committee dinner. So
that's kind of what the playbook
is for next week, at least for
this committee, as far as I know
at this point. So with that, I
am gonna adjourn this meeting.
Thank you.
