Inskeep here.
Madam vice chair.
Madam chair here madam chair you
have a quorum thank you so as I
said we're going to hear house
bill seven first and I'd like to
talk a little bit about
How we're going to proceed.
We have asked each side of the
issue to identify ten people and
if they have done that and this
is in coordination with my
ranking member in the minority
whip so this is agreed upon
process that we we arrived at so
I have a list of names of
individuals who are either
presents for online and we will
call on the accordingly
and each of you will be given up
to two minutes and I think you
all have been told that and I
have a little timer so I'll be
keeping track of your time and
that's how how will plan on
proceeding after the
presentation of the sponsor
I hope I don't have to remind
you but I'm going to this is a
it can be an emotional issue
people have strong views and I
understand that and I respect
that but we have to respect each
other and that means no clapping
no cheering no heckling no bu ng
no so loud stage whispers the
aware that are critical of each
other
we all want to be kind to each
other and respect the fact that
we have different opinions we
understand that and we're here
to listen to that and then the
body will reconvene and have a
conversation about how we're
going to proceed so with that I
the floor is yours
Representative Serrato.
Thank you madam chairman thank
you committee for hearing our
bill today I'm Representative
Linda Serrato and I have with me
my witnesses in our rush forth
who is the managing reproductive
rights and gender equity
attorney at the ACLU of New
Mexico and I also have doctor
Molly McLean who is a gender
affirming care provider also in
New Mexico
so today we're bringing forward
HB seven the reproductive and
gender affirming health care
freedom Act and as many of you
know I have two young kids and
recently my first I had just a
tional diabetes and so that
required less sixty weeks I'd go
to the doctor for twenty minute
sessions twice a week and in
those sessions are very brief
very easy to get to living in
Santa Fe I was running into
people from northern New Mexico
that we're traveling an hour
plus street health care and
really limited as many of us
know here that health care
especially reproductive and
gender affirming health care are
very difficult to reach and so
what H. B. seven does it ensures
that we are not adding fear of
prosecution or persecution or
discrimination against these
individuals from seeking the
health care that they need as we
know it attend maternal deaths
are preventable and prenatal
care can make a significant
difference in those numbers and
we also know that eight out of
ten trends a transgender
Division rules
consider suicide with four of
ten attempting suicide with
higher numbers when you so these
are life saving care that we're
insuring that New Mexicans have
access to madam chair what we
also dropped off an amendment as
well
If we can discuss that.
The amendment madam chair.
Would you like to thousand.
The technical.
Just a minute thank you madam
chairman thank you committee yes
that's correct we have a little
bit of cleanup ensuring that the
terminologies across the board
and we also wanted to be as
transparent with you know what
the work is we're trying to do
so it really does three things
one it ensures that the agents
are acting on behalf of the
public body in we should this
come up to it's ensuring that
all civil suits are directed
through the the public body not
to the individual and agree that
it clarifies completely for
transparency that any moral
concerns of a provider are not
violate and they can still you
know how the protections they
have in place currently that's
the summer though if I may hand
it over to
LA Eleanor I'll do that.
Sure I think you covered at the.
Okay I think we're good then all
right so we let's have a
conversation about her on the
amendment are there any
questions or on.
Not in the audience this is
amongst the members of the of
the of the committee Sir.
Sure low give you a few minutes
to take a look at.
And measures just to clarify
your asking for questions on the
movie we're talking about the
amendment.
Investors.
In the two oh two number as I
see it is two two four nine
three four point two is that
correct Representative I believe
I actually haven't seen the one
in front of me but I believe
that's correct sorry we get
sponsor copy of the you just
discuss it thank you.
Given the amount of options.
Okay.
Yes this is amendment two two
four nine three four dot two.
Are people ready to discuss the
amendment.
Representative Lane thank you
madam chair of.
So madam chair some questions
and to clarify so.
When we strike agent.
We're specifying that it is
somebody I guess within the
scope of their authority is that
right thank you madam chair
thank Representative yes.
And they can can I get some
clarification paragraph I we're
restricting the were right and
our inserting their of the
workability.
For.
Thank you madam chair on the you
committee member of it refer to
my experts.
Madam chair representative this
is another technical fix that
doesn't change the intent of the
bill it doesn't change the
content of the bill but it
clarifies rather than a court
you don't I think we many of us
know there's a significant
difference between the legal
definition of right versus
ability and so that was the
technical change we decided to
make.
Madam chair so right is.
A concept embedded in the law.
I'm not sure that ability is.
So it seems like this is greatly
expanded what this would apply
to in my wrong.
Thank Madam chair representative
we there's a different
interpretation to that so
ability absolutely so right is a
legal concept and the ability to
access does not expand upon that
it clarifies what the
expectations are with the scope
of this bill does and so you
know ability to access can mean
a lot of different things to
your to your point and when
we're talking in the specific
section about an individual's
ability to access health care
and abilities and an
individual's ability to make
their own medical decisions
that's what we're talking about.
Madam chair and.
Ability can mean a lot of
different things I I agree and I
think that highlights the the
problem with the change so a
right traditionally in in civil
law what it means is to the
rooted in a constitutional
provision or a statutory
provision.
And there's case law that
a judge may.
In for within certain statutory
provisions like a due process
clause for example.
Certain
Rights that are embedded within
that but I don't know what.
A person's ability to act means.
And so it's it's not it's one
thing if we're trying to codify
into law madam chair.
What some of the rights are
access but this bill.
Is also punitive.
And so for example there's
there's provisions in the
underlying bill that you I'm
subject to civil liability.
if I violate the statute.
And so madam chair.
When we talk about the communal
all the different things that
that concerns me frankly because
again we're not disqualifying
into statute.
Rights and obligations we're
also attaching with that.
Unitive measures.
And so I guess I'd.
I don't maybe I'm missing the
point how does changing out
right with the word ability
clarify this the sentence.
Madam chair representative
liking noted right is a legal
concept and this is a bill about
an individual's practical access
to reproductive health care and
gender affirming health care and
when we talk about ability to
access ability to decide we
within the scope of this bill is
access to this kind of health
care and so what we're talking
about is the person who is
attempting to access health care
and we are not talking about
that individuals right to access
health care now I agree there is
a right for folks to access
reproductive health care and
gender from health care here
we're talking about practical
access.
Madam chair so the way that I
read this bill.
And B. create the rights
essentially
And then C. as a mechanism to
make sure that those rights are
violated and then but I think
this ammendment now.
Goes away from that that
intellectual framework in our
inserting.
This concept of ability and I I
again I just so very very broad
terms.
I don't know what that means if
I'm trying to comply with the
statute.
I don't know what that means if
I were are you in this case
constitutionally at thank you
maybe what what I think is
already a big statute even more
fake.
is there.
Madam chair is there another
statute you could point me to
that hasn't trying this concept
of a person's ability.
Madam chair representative there
are numerous statutes that
actually ensuring that ability
including that you know from
health care decisions act The
New Mexico Human Rights Act the
medical practice act at the
ethics of that that and trained
in there and so so yes those are
just issue a few to name a few
of the various statutes and laws
for access and ability are
contemplated.
Madam chair so you're saying
that those statutes actually use
the word.
Madam chair representative.
I'm going I would have to go
back and double check exactly
the citation and exactly the
words but in the in health care
regulations and health care
decisions in statute they do
contemplate the ability of an
individual to access health care
and the duties of a health care
provider in those circumstances
madam chair and again I
understand what they are
intended to do I'm asking.
Do they use the word ability the
statute.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative I think we can
will definitely look at this and
go further back to ensure that
the language is correct that
went report referring to.
Thank you madam chair.
Of the second page so I
appreciate what I understand
sort of the thought process
there is here madam chair which
is.
Trying to preserve what I would
consider consciousness
conscientious objector type
concepts is that what we're
trying to accomplish here.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative yes okay so.
Madam chair I'm not sure that
this accomplishes that so.
The first.
paragraph on the for this new
paragraph he.
That the health care provider
inches not otherwise provider
have a duty to provide under
state or federal law.
madam chair can you point me to
a state statute that has.
Codified conscientious objector
standards.
Madam chair representative
Before I do that there are all
sorts of reasons I think we all
know why a health care provider
would be unable to provide care
which include their own personal
ethical preferences and beliefs
within our New Mexico state
statutes there are more numerous
references to the right to
refuse to provide care all all
refer you again to that uniform
health care decision act and I
have those citations right here
in front.
so you can take a look at New
Mexico state statutes twenty
four seven seven E..
Additionally the New Mexico
medical practice act
enshrines the code of medical
ethics which includes the
ability for health care
providers to be accommodated for
their own personal beliefs I can
also point you to the.
At let me pull back The New
Mexico practice act the
determination of medical ethics
sixteen point one point eight
nine and those enshrined the
AMA's medical ethics.
I can also point to federal law.
And we have
Numerous accommodations for
health care providers both state
and federal who decides what
care to find anyone at the
federal level the are
collectively referred to as the
church amendments they include
the coats snow amendment the
Hyde Weldon amendment and
additionally the patient
protection and affordable Care
Act and we also contemplate at
the duties of health care
providers in emergency
situations in in tala which is
at forty two USC a section one
three nine five DD.
Madam can you repeat the first
citation I wrote down twenty
four dash seven of seventy but I
think those of an overview.
Yes and madam chair
Representative The New Mexico
uniform health care decision act
is twenty four dash seven dash
seven he.
And the New Mexico medical
practice act is NMAC sixteen
point ten point eight point
nine.
Which is trying to the AMA code
of ethics which has numerous
opinions guidance and
Regulations around the provision
of health care and health care
that a provider might object to.
What's what's notably missing
from many of these statutes are
the rights of patients.
Madam chair so I think you're
you're siding to twenty four
dash seven eight of seventy
because again twenty four that
someone's been filled see my
want to update your notes on the
madam chair so if you look at
this statutory framework.
It does have language it says
health care practitioner made a
claim to comply with an
individual's instruction or
healthcare decisions for reasons
of conscience.
But unfortunately not the the
story if you read the pair of
subparagraph above paragraph D.
C..
There are.
There are ongoing obligations.
Even if I as a health care
practitioner don't want to
perform whatever is that we're
talking about this this bill
covers I think a lot of medical
access.
I have a.
Duty to provide that that person
receives whatever medical care
that it is.
And madam chair.
I think that.
And again I appreciate the
chair's comments early on that
this is a this is a highly
charged issue and I think it is
for a lot of New Mexicans.
And frankly I think there are
physicians in the state that.
The the idea that even having to
give a referral I think is a
violation of conscience.
and if you look at our statutory
framework it does protect me
from having to do the actual act
but it there's nothing there to
prevent or cover me for the
referral so.
I think my opinion based on what
I've heard expressed the in the
Sanchez intent.
With this paragraph the and I
don't mean to be combative on
this so I'm just trying to.
To to drill in that I think
paragraph one doesn't really
accomplish what you're trying to
accomplish.
If we really want.
Paragraph this new paragraph the
within this amendments to to
carve out a true.
Exception for conscientious
objectors.
Then I think we need to enshrine
that language within here.
Instead of saying madam chair
that as long as it's provided in
in any other state or federal
law well we're making state law
right now Madam might my opinion
is now would be the time to in
trying it.
instead of making it subject to
these other statutes that are
subject to change so.
Madam chair for for what it's
worth at the Sanchez one to to
consider that I think that would
actually find a lot of.
You know comfort for for medical
providers.
That that yeah these are these
are important things that we
need to be discussing and I
think I think we're gonna have a
good discussion they on on those
things.
But we also need to make sure
that in a state where we are
already struggling to attract
healthcare providers that we
make sure that they're conscious
objections are also equally
acknowledged and so madam
chairman of that something the
sponsors want to look at our own
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative and I I always
appreciate our conversations but
I believe that because of the
many sources that as my expected
site in many different ways are
protecting we would like to
keep.
Thank you.
Madam chair.
I understand will sponsor.
Again I don't think paragraph
one house the same.
Impetus that is being suggested
here today.
Paragraph three.
So
Can I get some explanation for
the thought process here in
paragraph three.
Madam chair representative again
this is the a clarification of
this bill that nothing in this
act requires an affirmative duty
to provide health care and we
felt it was important in in this
specific section
in consultation with other
experts in the healthcare field
that this provides important
clarification and.
With respect to the idea that
somehow this bill is requiring
an affirmative duty to provide
care regardless of the ability
to pay regardless of the
expertise to play regardless of
the standard of care and so
that's what this provision
contemplates as well as ensuring
that as you noted representative
madam chair in a state like ours
in a in a rural state where
access to healthcare is already
limited
that it under state and federal
law.
Folks who cannot pay for
emergency services are insured
access emergency health care.
You madam chair
I do yeah I think I'll leave my
my questions on them in the loan
I think as as I mentioned I I'm
not sure that these tickets in a
better direction I think these
actually complicate things so
thank you madam chair.
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair and
representative.
I'm I'm assuming that this whole
bill deals with like you NM and
its contractors UNM hospital and
its contractors and things and
and people that would have
admitting privileges to the
hospital the way I read the one
was that.
As opposed to a conscientious
objector it's really if it's a
boutique hospital not UNM
hospital but a boutique
hospital.
That only deals with broken
bones for instance.
They're not going to have to
provide these services because
that's not what they do is that
it I am I am I reading that
correctly thank you madam chair
thank you Representative yes we
and this is something that you
know we want to make very clear
no one is expected or
anticipated to change their
scope of work and he wouldn't be
safe for the patients either to
do so either so on that I
believe it can be applied in
both scenarios.
Because Madam chair
representative.
I to share my colleagues concern
that if the intent was to
provide for.
People who have a conscientious
objection to providing whatever
services I don't think you get
there with one I I think I think
that deals with.
For lack of a better word so go
practice
I don't I don't see the
another aspect of that and I I
do agree that if that's the
intent.
We need some other language here
to to accomplish that intent
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative.
I didn't hear question if you
but if you would like us to
respond we can I I I I guess all
as a question if it was your
intent do you agree that we need
to put some additional language
and here to accomplish that
because I I don't think it's
clear I'm a thank you madam
chair thank representative for
the question and I appreciate
that I will head over to my
experts on however when we're
when we were drafting this
legislation it is truly with you
know the intent of statute to to
offer that set a statutory
framework right so as opposed to
being very explicit and some of
these so I I will have to my
experts you can count in twenty
two.
Madam chair representative thank
you for your question because
this is a nuanced aspect of law
and the amendment like I said
earlier there are all sorts of
reasons why a health care
provider may not be able to
provide health care whether it's
outside of their scope of
practice like thank you
mentioned or they have some sort
of objection and this
contemplates.
all of those circumstances.
And to to your to one of your
points you know the the medical
standard of care at the scope of
practice all of that is
incorporated and in trying to
along with medical ethics which
include the ability to be
accommodated for your religious
beliefs.
I think this goes this provides
even more accommodation than a
specific clause.
You madam chair and
representative you Effendi that
your intent.
I believe people should be able
look at the language that's
going to be placed in statute
and clearly come away with that
notion and.
If you have to.
Go to all this other stuff.
To arrive at that conclusion
we're not doing the public as a
service we're doing them a
disservice.
And I would implore upon you if
that your intent.
That we either do it now for.
At some point clarify your
intent to accomplish those exact
purposes because.
I I I I usually figure things
out and I'm not impact on the on
the pages so I would just ask
that do you really consider
that.
You know if if it's not clear I
can't support the amendment so
thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative thank you
Representative Representative
ring.
Thank you madam chair and madam
chair an expert did I understand
the second
the site was of chapter sixteen
dash tomb.
Of the more practice Madam chair
representative of the medical
practices act all of the medical
I'm sorry of the medical
practices act okay.
I do I was looking in a
different area okay thank you
madam chair an expert what I was
here when we when abortion was
yield or of repeal I'm sorry and
when you go to thirty dash five
chapter thirty dash five
the abortion statute we pointed
out when you took that
completely off the books you
took out the conscientious
objection clause so I think some
way is the pointed out you've
got to put it back in.
So I think there's a problem in
our in our amendment thank you
madam chair.
Anyone else on the amendment
we're discussing the amendment.
I don't see any further
conversation and then.
Thank you madam chair calling
role.
Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane.
Mr speaker.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert no.
Representative read though.
Representative green no ma'am.
Representative Japan ski yes.
Madam vice chair yes.
Madam chair yes.
Madam chair you have six yeses
and for nose.
Thank you you have an amended
bill do you wish to described
the amended bill any further no
thank you madam chairman.
All right so we have a plan in
terms of how we're going to have
public participation I'd like to
start with those in opposition
and I have names that I'm going
to read and
who are who have volunteered to
speak in opposition the first
name is Joan.
Hendrick Jody Hendrick.
This.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Jerry
Hendrix I am a licensed mental
health counselor and the
executive director for New
Mexico Family action movie.
Parents across New Mexico and
across our nation agree matter
what party affiliation that they
have the right and the
responsibility to raise their
children.
And to make decisions for the
best interests of their child.
History and the common law
degree but parents have that
right and that solemn
responsibility.
Plus it has been recognized for
time and memorial.
Science tells us but a child's
brain is not fully formed until
twenty one years old.
So we have consensus we have
history we have wall and we have
science but all agree that
parents have the right to make
decisions with and for their
children.
We ask you to oppose this bill
not because you don't believe in
providing the services but
because it will directly impinge
the rights of a parent in
raising and caring for their
children for example a school
nurse might be concerned about a
child at school it is a free to
call the parents for fear of
being considered to be
interfering and causing a
lawsuit I'm a mother I have four
children and I would hate for
anybody at my child's school to
feel that they can't call me.
I need to know what's going on
with my children it is my right
and my responsibility this bill
also opens up with its broad
language the ability for someone
at my child's school to send
them in a direction of care but
they know they agree with but
maybe is contrary to my family
values again I is the parent
have been left out of the
picture my right my
responsibility is threatened so
again we urge you to oppose this
bill to protect parents rights
to show New Mexico families
matter thank you.
Thank you
elisa Martinez.
Madam chair it's Lisa Martinez
madam chair members of the
committee on the very time for
hearing us today I
Representative New Mexico
Alliance for life is the
executive director we submitted
over forty six hundred petitions
against HB seven is written from
you know concerned parents
families and public employees
across the state and really we
do know is that gender from
healthcare and abortion are
already legal we also know that
there are already books on the
law that prevent discrimination
however ideologically different
legislation like this will have
the opposite effect that you
know the well intentioned
Sanchez do claim as written it's
amended on paper that seeks to
redefine the meaning it meaning
of discrimination and will
construe discrimination as
anyone who interferes restricts
organize another right to access
reproductive agenda funding
health care they would in fact
be in violation of the act by
doing so I and right but for
penalty what is the estimation
of the cost for the state to
defend anyone who'd be construed
as directly or indirectly
interfering with another
person's access to settle act
health care as so poorly written
in section three B. well
intentioned and ideologically to
rebels like this lead to a host
of unintended or perhaps
intended consequences like
further driving our medical
professionals out of state will
simply choose to not comply or
put up with further harassment
we've been told before that
abortion is an issue between a
woman and her doctor now this is
an issue between a woman her
doctor and every public employee
a public body across the state
of New Mexico Sanchez kind we're
trying to prevent discrimination
but in doing so they're
perpetuating it and the
codifying it in the law this
sends a chilling effect affect
across every public employee and
body across the state we also
know that this won't are being
told that this changes standards
of care current clinical
guidelines then what exactly
does it do because there are
already anti discrimination laws
on the books.
lastly we're being told that
this bill does not create an
from the duty to provide health
care that there are as we said
it asked for explicitly in the
amendment but that you just
finish that there's no area that
would codify conscience
protections and for this reason
we ask that you vote now.
Mike Morris.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Mike Morris I love New
Mexican and currently more of
Clovis and I wanted to speak in
opposition to house bill seven
today on and and make just two
points in doing so house bill
seven takes away the home rule
local governments that that
Clovis has enjoyed for over
fifty years house bill seven
also in my opinion will will
damage our workforce first a
point I'd like to make is that
while I recognize that we are
interdependent for our
collective success as New
Mexicans the needs of one
community.
And these are priorities of one
community can differ from that
of another and since nineteen
seventy one the citizens of
Clovis have enjoyed home rule
form of government where they
have a sense that there
policymakers are local policy
makers have the ability to make
decisions in keeping with their
values and priorities house bill
seven does go in the face of
those values and priorities but
also strips our ability to
govern locally if you cannot
vote no on the bill please
consider amending the bill to
recognize the value of local
decision making across our vast
and diverse state and please
preserve the local governments
authority to reflect the
priorities and values of its
citizens secondly I'm concerned
that the private cause of action
provision in the bill will
compound the difficulty
recruiting and retaining highly
qualified employees across our
state certainly within the
public bodies outlined in the
bill but also in health care I
increase legal exposure
increased exposure to legal risk
serves as a disincentive for
those that may be interested in
joining these already tough
fields of work and if in fact
the door is left open on private
cause of action for health care
workers that make conscience
conscientiously objected
Services outlined in the bill
this would be devastating to
rural health care and health
care across the state if we're
to move next New Mexicans
forward expanding educational
and and employment opportunities
and increasing the amount of
services available within our
state we cannot afford to dis
incentivize talented and qual
qualified workforce if it's not
vote no on this bill please
consider amendments thank you
for your consideration.
Thank you Rebecca Lou Cerro.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Rebecca Lee said and IT
Representative The New Mexico
conference of Catholic bishops
and we continue to argue for the
sanctity of life.
We believe that the baby in the
womb is a person and that the
mother and the baby well they
both have rights that the rights
collide and that the child when
those rights collide it is our
duty as a society to represent
the most vulnerable and that is
the child and so we ask you to
oppose house bill seven.
Thank you.
From now we're going to go
online to those in opposition I
have some names so these are the
names I have an opposition
please raise your hand Deborah
Coles Andrea straddling Jamie
Jeffries Kelly Lester Dr Kerr
Reis tram dinner trams earned
Mary had passed and and I
apologize if I get your name
wrong but it will be helpful for
you put your hands up please put
your hands down if I did not
read your name.
Thank you so let's start with
Andrea straddling.
Hello.
Can you hear me yes we can hear
you.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and committee for this
opportunity my name is Andrea
straddling from Farmington
school board in Farmington New
Mexico please oppose H. B. seven
during prior legislative
committee discussions it became
clear that this bill opens up
the door for any agent of any
public body or organization that
receives public funding
including Medicaid to include
hospitals doctors teachers
firefighters police excited
about to be sued privately or by
the Attorney General for quote
indirectly interfering on quote
with anyone seeking abortion or
transient or procedures what
this means is that if a child
asks a teacher or a doctor for
help obtaining an abortion or
transient procedure and they do
not refer to them to such a
provider or if they suggest
alternative care the teacher
doctor could potentially be sued
for quote indirectly interfering
on quote with access to these
procedures for up to five
thousand dollars or damages
including tens of thousands in a
at attorney fees with such to
just Clemente already in place
we cannot afford the liability
nor the loss of staff and
education or health care one of
our Farmington OBGYN practices
is forced to sell to the
hospital.
Due to exorbitant medical
malpractice insurance and should
they decide to close San Juan
County where women will no
longer be served a teacher last
week confided to me that I was
accused earlier this year of
being homophobic for Connor
child agency the board the child
was born a girl was wearing a
dress make up and jewellery the
students around her said if in
need you Mr under this child and
quote the child started crying
and it's a longer story than
this but it was traumatic for me
as a caring teacher are quote
educators are under tremendous
pressure to close the
achievement gap due to comment
engage parents and students due
to apathy lack of discipline and
social skills.
We should not.
Transition thank you Mr.
Dr.
Thank you madam chair speaker
and representatives this is Dr
curry strand um I am a board
certified obstetrician and
gynecologic surgeon and have a
thriving private practice.
The scope of this bill not only
addresses change transgender
medications and surgeries but
also directly addresses access
to abortion.
We know that based on hundreds
of well conducted at national
and international scientific
research studies that elective
abortion and transgender
medications and surgeries
physically and psychologically
harm girls and women men and
boys.
Public school teachers guidance
counselors nurses at schools and
state sponsored health care
workers must have the freedom to
share these proven risks of
abortion and transgender
procedures and they're honest
recommendation which may include
not providing an abortion or
referring for an abortion or
aiding in trans gender
procedures did you know that
ninety three percent of OBGYN is
do not perform elective
abortions this bill finances the
medical standard of care in New
Mexico in the name of activism.
As OBGYN physicians we are
legally bound to Care for both
the mother and the fetus with
excellence this bill prevents
that care from being performed
and I agree the amendment does
not to provide conscientious
objection in regards especially
to religious freedom for
Christians Muslims and other
religious public employees and
health care what workers that
disagree with abortion and
gender reassignment.
I disagree with this bill hand I
thank you for.
Considering a different way of
the law.
Thank you Kelly Lester.
Can you hear me yes I can.
Okay great thank you good
afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Kelly Lester I work for
prologue ministries I am a woman
who has had for abortions I'm I
also am a former abortion worker
I had my first abortion at the
age of fifteen I was pressured
by my boyfriend have this
portion and I did so without the
knowledge of my parents that
abortion led me to the life of
drug addiction of domestic
violence eating disorders
homosexuality self harm suicide
attempts and all the while my
parents wondered why that
happens they didn't know how to
help me because they didn't know
what had initially happens there
was a pasta.
Study that was recently
published that sixty the one
percent of women who have
abortions are pressured.
Now one of those women are
teenage women what if those
women are young girls who are
being tracked thanks for being
abuse and they are not able to
talk to their parents or talk to
people in leadership positions
that can help them and they are
going to get this health care
with no knowledge.
As of the governing body it is
your duty to protect these young
people to protect these women
who are feeling pressured like I
did who are too young to make
good choices and they're making
choices that will affect the
rest of their life like it did
me and so I begged you to please
look at this bill and to vote no
on it thank you very much thank
you miss Lester the other names
on my list Jamie Jeffries who I
thought had her her hand up for
his handout okay and Mary Hance
hacen Dr Mary Hasson are you
online.
Well as I was told if merry
Hassen is not online there's
others there's a mark Cavaliers
mark are you online.
Well let's start with Jamie
Jeffries.
Madam chair representative many
Japanese and the executive
director for abortion on trial
there's a well established
national standard of care that
is supported by both a cog in
expert providers mark Nichols
and robin Wallace's testimony in
the District Court case Paxton
versus whole women's health that
standard states induction
abortion must be performed in a
hospital or hospital like
setting not is just one of the
establish standards of abortion
Care being blatantly ignored by
the state of New Mexico New
Mexico abortion providers have
failed to meet standards of care
in regards to late stage
abortion particularly which has
been documented and the number
of cases including the I.
converses UNM and southwestern
women's options wrongful death
case in the state of Arkansas
versus actor only state in which
abortion providers Sallee Salle
Act admitted that Macy's twelve
year old rape victim received a
late stage induction abortion in
Albuquerque resulting in the
young girl delivering the
deceased twenty three week old
fetus breach and her hotel room
Dr sella back to the body and
drove to the clinic according to
her own testimony.
Again the lack of meeting
standards of care was documented
in recent peer reviewed research
studies mifepristone misoprostol
verses we suppress all non
regimen for medication abortion
at twenty four weeks gestation
be a contraception journal the
study documented over five
hundred cases of late stage
induction abortions performed in
Albuquerque one out of sixty
five women involved in the study
experience spontaneous explosion
outside of the clinic there were
thirty seven abortion injuries
and the deaths documented in
that study the state of New
Mexico has not adopted a
regulatory process to ensure
abortion providers meet the
standard of care that's New
Mexico communities are well
within their right to establish
standards of care for themselves
in order to protect the safety
and well being of their citizens
according to New Mexico statutes
thirteen dash seven dash one
section be unless you can find
regulatory structure to ensure
standards of care within the
abortion industry at a state
level you must vote no on H. B.
seven thank you for your time
thank you Marc cavaliere.
Mark.
Marc cavaliere yes I'm here
madam chair and is the members
of the committee thank you my
name is mark cavalier with the
southwest coalition for life and
on behalf of dozens of other pro
women and pro life organizations
in our state we us not to pass
house bill seven in nineteen
seventy three rather than asking
society to conform to better
support women instead it was
nine men on the Supreme Court to
place the burden upon women to
be the ones to conform by
altering suppressing and
destroying the normal healthy
functions of her natural body in
order to meet the mail based
definitions of success for fifty
years of this expectation for
roe versus Wade has only
furthered a culture of then
using abusing and objectifying
women and it's created at
women's health care industry
that far too often defaults to
dramatic intervention as the
norm to treat these normal
healthy functions of a woman's
natural body as a liability or a
disease to be cured or discarded
rather than celebrated and
embraced and I seems trauma that
has inflicted on my wife and
countless clients that we serve
there are wholistic health
centers and I know that probably
everyone in this room carry some
kind of health care trauma in
her heart that men can never
understand it as a man I just
want to publicly apologize for
that justice if New Mexico
intends to support women's
health care I implore you to
focus on removing rather than
furthering the expectation that
burdens women to conform her
body to mail based norms let's
shift that expectation to
employers and universities are
provided to be the ones to
conform to policies like paid
maternity in minstrel the free
birth and child care lactation
fertility and menstrual
awareness and trauma informed
healthcare that tells women that
your body's created good your
body's not broken your body's
not the problem I know you mean
well but H. B. seven is going to
do the opposite please do not
pass it thank you for your time
thank you and lastly speaking in
behalf of those an op.
As Ishant merry Hassen I see
here your online here merry.
Thank you very much I'm Mary
Hasson an attorney at the ethics
and public policy center in
Washington DC I urge you to
oppose H. B. seven by securing
access to quote gender affirming
health care for persons of any
age including children with no
parental consent HB seven
jeopardizes children's health
and creates legal and financial
risk for the state recklessly
disregard to evidence from
Sweden Finland and the UK that
it found serious harm from
gender affirming interventions
harm that outweighed any
benefits those countries ended
or restricted minors access to
gender affirming care gender
affirming care rests on low and
very low quality evidence
according to the endocrine
society even gender clinicians
admit that it causes
irreversible lifelong
consequences including
infertility and impaired sexual
function Diane Erin staffed of
UC San Francisco States quote a
child who begins puberty
blockers at Tanner stage two and
proceeds directly to cross sex
hormones will be rendered
infertile and quote gender
surgeon Marci Bowers admits that
quote about zero and quote
adolescents who take puberty
blockers and cross sex hormones
will achieve orgasm although
gender affirming care is fun is
life saving that's not what the
evidence shows long term
research from Europe shows
gender transition does not
reduce suicide rates a twenty
twenty Dutch study found suicide
occurs at all stages of
transition the median time to
suicide debt was six point seven
years after beginning transition
a twenty twenty three New
England journal journal of
medicine study showed minimal
mental health benefits for
adolescents on cross sex
hormones but to suicide deaths
after four months were begun
gender affirming care does not
prevent suicide we know how to
keep suicidal kid safe.
And it's not by chemical
castration or amputated body
parts no minor can give informed
consent gender from.
This bill thank you doctor.
Thank you.
All right I we are have
concluded the public comment in
opposition we are now
we'll be hearing from people in
support and I have a list of
those present Erica Davis Crump.
Erica.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Erica
Davis Cup and I am the director
of advocacy for girls Inc of
Santa Fe.
As it is black history month I
want to incur this moment to
name that the founding fathers
that are often referenced around
reverberation and Human Rights
directly appealed and establish
laws that have stood for
centuries in direct opposition
to humanity and liberation I
would like to also name the
mothers of reproductive justice
the black fans that again this
praxis says in nineteen ninety
four.
Dr twenty by Maynard economic of
Crawford Evelyn S. field Terry
James the silymarin may consent
to McConnell said the new bio Dr
Loretta Ross Elizabeth Terry
able Mabel Thomas when that P.
Willis and Kim young blood for
my entire career has been in
direct support of the most
marginalized New Mexicans along
with personal lived experience
as a black New Mexican woman and
a person of faith I see
regularly the vital need for
this here health care to ensure
that all can be provided without
discrimination and without
judgment seventy seven percent
of New Mexicans agree with a
statement that says I can hold
my own moral values what about
abortion additional trustworthy
people and their families to
make this decision for
themselves seventy nine percent
of rural New Mexicans agree
whether loss of pregnancy
abortion care pre or postnatal
care all burning bodies their
proper care and respect when
seeking health care as a
community leader and a person of
faith I'm so clear that free
will also known as bodily
sovereignty must be upheld not
must be upheld not just because
selectively but consistently.
That the justice is rooted in
inclusion in our sexuality and
in fact in full support of
operating bodies in the full
spectrum of health care that
they required to thrive it goes
into Santa Fe stand in full and
complete support of this
legislation to continue to
protect and affirm Health Care
for all burning bodies we thank
you in advance for giving us a
do pass.
Thank you Marshall Martinez.
Madam chair members of the
committee Marshall Martinez I'm
the executive director of
equality New Mexico where the
statewide LGBTQ civil rights
organization.
The battle for LGBTQ liberation
is a battle for autonomy for
generations we have known all
too well the oppressions of
being told what we can and
cannot do with our bodies with
our identities and with our
lives in fact we were into been
granted permission as adults to
engage in romantic relationships
of our choice in all states
until two thousand three that
was only twenty years ago.
House bill seven is about
autonomy it is about being
entrusted no matter where we
live in New Mexico to make the
best decisions for ourselves and
our families it's about saving
lives because let's be clear
abortion care is a life saving
health care is a critical piece
of ensuring that we get to
decide our own destinies as the
queer Chicano son of a single
mom for most of my life I grew
up with the value of trusting
people and their families to
know what is best is because of
the fears women in my family
raised me that I am here today.
And gender affirming care is
suicide prevention is about
ensuring that we are able to
walk to the world as a whole
authentic selves without
restrictions placed upon us from
government I am honored and so
fortunate to have a lifelong
friends chosen family who are
alive today because they were
supported affirmed and left
because they were given access
to critical gender affirming
health care.
And every day I still more in
far too many of them who were
denied this care and are not
able to be here with me today
house bill seven is not full
liberation for LGBTQ people but
it is an urgent critical step on
what has been and will continue
to be a very long path toward
it.
Thank you Christine Armstrong.
Good afternoon chairperson and
members of the committee I'm
Christine Armstrong part black
non binary person and the
director of advocacy at the
transgender resource center of
New Mexico one of the nation's
only organizations seven
transgender gender non
conforming non binary and gender
expensive people.
I'm here in support of HB seven.
From first hand experience I can
attest under Fuhrman Care is
eight seven health care and
suicide prevention as a black
non binary person friend and
community organizer of witness
gender affirming care save the
lives of many.
As a non binary assigned female
at birth person with the ability
to reproduce gender affirming
care has saved my life and prior
to that my concerns were
systematically dismissed
question my spare and for the
prolong health concerns them
come twenty twenty one House
seen as a whole person was able
to access served cold
intervention save my life.
Expanding out to a data
perspective the twenty nineteen
youth risk and resiliency survey
here in New Mexico has already
shown trans youth attempt
suicide at four times the rate
of their sis appears awesome as
reported by the Trevor project
change gender non binary youth
attempt suicide last about half
the rate with our pronouns are
respected.
Everyone deserves access to
equitable health care including
those of all genders.
When gender from health care is
a priority we all went as such
urge you all to support this
bill thank you much happy black
history month.
Thank you
we are now at
When I purchased.
Monday March fifth.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Monique archer back and I am
here on behalf of the New Mexico
Black central organizing
committee we stand in strong
support of H. B. seven because
it prohibits public bodies from
denying restricting
discriminating against
individuals right to use our
refuse reproductive of gender
affirming care and the New
Mexico Black central organizing
committee we define reproductive
justice as a human right to
maintain personal bodily
autonomy have children not have
children and parent the children
we have in safe and sustainable
communities reproductive justice
is about access even when
abortion is legal many black
better than bodies cannot afford
it I cannot travel hundreds of
miles to the nearest clinic
there is no choice where there's
no access gender affirming care
is a life saving care the most
influential factor in health
safety and life expectancy for
transpennine bit binary
individuals access they have to
lifesaving gender affirming
health care our society will not
be free until the most
vulnerable people are able to
access the resources and view
full human rights to live self
determined lives without fear
discrimination or retaliation I
close with a quote from Audrey
Lorde in our work in in our
living we must recognize that
difference is a reason for
celebration and growth rather
than a reason for destruction
thank you for your time happy
black history month.
Thank you Rebecca guy a ghosts.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Rebecca K.
goes I'm an attorney and the
current board chair of Planned
Parenthood of the Rocky
Mountains action fund I was born
and raised in New Mexico my
family has been here in our
beautiful state for many many
generations we come from Los
crucis house tier C. Santa Fe
want to see to Silvercity Las
Vegas in Albuquerque.
I am who I am today in large
part because I was lucky enough
to have access to reproductive
health care my ability to make
my own decisions surrounding
pregnancy when and if to start a
family allowed me to take charge
of my life my education and my
career and that's why Planned
Parenthood of the Rocky
Mountains standard strong
support for H. B. seven all of
my family all of our families
deserve the same right to access
the full spectrum of
reproductive health care
including abortion and gender
affirming care no matter where
we are in New Mexico thank you
thank you will now go online so
with the following individuals
please raise your hand and if
you were not named please take
your hand down so the names are
Crystal curly.
Dr Dave key ashi.
Krista Jones heavenly Kim and
Elena Butler so could I please
have those individuals raise
your hands and if you were not
named please take your hand
down.
Thank you so crystal curly would
you please do you have two
minutes.
Crystal.
Thank you madam chair woman and
members of the committee for
your time my name is crystal
curly I'm and my clients are
keen on initially Kinley Jeannie
by fifteen twelve this is Jay
auto hunting I think that's an
island and I'm originally from a
community cultural tides about
twenty miles south of Gallup and
I'm the executive director of a
nonprofit called indigenous
lifeways.
We are an indigenous women led
organization that highly values
the decision making power of the
matrix in our family and our
communities we have creation
stories that values and respects
the insight and perspectives of
our to spare relatives the way
in individual chooses to live
should not be penalized in the
health care we seek should match
should be readily available for
all New Mexicans the statistics
shows that having reproductive
and gender for me health care
available save the lives of our
trans and non very binary
individuals New Mexico has an
opportunity to be proactive in
suicide and protect access to
reproductive and gender
affirming health care that all
individuals deserve.
Thank you he had thank you.
A doctor Yoshi I hope I'm saying
your name correctly.
Go ahead drive I.
Good afternoon thank you so much
for this opportunity my name is
Dr thank you Joshi I'm an OBGYN
and a representative from a cost
New Mexico representing local
providers and will be G. lands
here in our state I'm speaking
an absolute support and full
hearted endorsement of HB seven
every day I take care of folks
who are in desperate need of the
full continuum Care property
taxes jobs today I took care of
a patient who is eighteen years
old who had an abnormal
pregnancy who needed counseling
on preconception on services
offered and ultimately needed an
abortion because she had a
pregnancy that was abnormal
requiring surgical management
and she also needed care because
this I ended up being a
pregnancy that created cancer it
required immediate services and
she had yeah this past weekend
heavy heavy bleeding and if we
had not intervened with this
much necessary medical procedure
she may have died this young
person was eighteen years old
and I continue to be a strong
proponent as I think we all do
to ensure the safety and well
being of all the folks of our
state and adding the full
continuum of services that would
be safeguarded and secured to HB
seven and eight please please
I ask for you all to stand in
coalition in support of this as
well as gender affirming care
thank you so much thank you.
Heavenly cam.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is have been we can and I'm the
reproductive justice coordinator
at a table with then United I am
joining you virtually today on
behalf of the organization in
support of house bill seven the
reproductive and gender from
health care freedom Act table
women United is a native women
like community based
organization located in the
ancestral Telemann's of northern
New Mexico serving local rural
and indigenous communities we
support HP seven because we
believe that reproductive and
gender affirming care is health
care and health care is a
fundamental right rural
communities like those we are
part of the answer already face
limited access to reproductive
and gender affirming care.
Indigenous burning people have
disproportionately higher
maternal mortality rates and
native American LGBTQ plus you
faced a higher suicide risk
research shows that having
family support and affirming
educational environments reduce
the suicide risk by nearly sixty
percent among native American
LGBTQ plus you this bill ensures
that no New Mexican may be
denied or be discriminated
against accessing lifesaving
reproductive were gender from
health care this bill reflects
the belief of the majority of
New Mexicans as was mentioned
earlier.
That we can hold our own moral
views on reproductive health
care including abortion and
still trust and respect a person
to make the best decisions for
themselves along with their
medical providers we know that
people are experts of their own
bodies and every New Mexican
deserves unobstructed access to
the full range of care that is
needed to make well informed and
conscious decisions about their
own health that promoted Tanami
dignity respect and empowerment
so that they may live healthy
authentic and alternately happy
lives and this is in alignment
with our organization's
comprehensive approach to
building beloved community thank
you for the opportunity to speak
today and I urge you to support
house bill seven.
Thank you Elena Butler and if
Krista Jones is on the line
please raise your hand otherwise
I'll be going to the audience.
So Elena Butler you may speak
please.
Good afternoon my name is Ileana
Butler I'm the executive
director of sexual assault
services of northwest New Mexico
our agency.
Provides services to survivors
of sexual assault and their
families and caregivers in and
around San Juan McKinley
counties including at world
eight of American communities
and we began services in
Farmington in two thousand four
in Gallup in two thousand
fourteen the services we provide
include scene which is the
sexual assault nurse
examinations right prices
advocacy therapy community
education and primary prevention
of sexual assault educational
curriculums.
As a sexual assault service
provider we support house bill
seven.
It will provide a protective
factor for all people to have
body a time to meet when it
comes to making decisions
regarding reproductive and
gender affirming health care
that is right for them.
In our work survivors recovery
and healing increases
tremendously when they have body
economy after a sexual assault
to make the decisions and
choices they feel are best for
them and this includes access to
resources regarding pregnancy
and sexually transmitted
infection prevention covered in
this bill.
Passage of this bill will assure
that all people have access to
the care they need based on
their individual circumstances
and needs I encourage the
committee to pass house bill
seven thank you for your time
this afternoon.
Thank you I see a person named
Chris the.
He should yes are you Krista
Jones is that just another
Yes ma'am I just got married and
my name is.
Great congratulations you have
two minutes.
Members of the committee my name
is Christy peach and I'm import
talus resident representing
eastern New Mexico right thank
you I support house bill seven
reproductive and gender
affirming health care freedom
Act and I think you should too
and September twenty nineteen I
found out I was pregnant I felt
anxious and stigmatized and
isolated knowing that the care I
needed would not be fostered in
my community the following month
I travel to Albuquerque to
receive abortion care services
from southwest women's options
two hundred thirty one miles
away from home the staff for
welcoming respectful and
facilitated my needs by
presenting me with factual based
evidence I truly felt seen for
the first time in the entire
process know the nearly five
hundred mile journey was
strenuous three and a half years
later I'm confident I made the
best decision for my mental and
physical well being I was able
to accomplish this because of
the unbiased advice of a health
care provider a supportive
partner reliable transportation
and a job with paid time off as
well as an emergency cash fund I
was very fortunate to have this
level of access numerous eastern
New Mexicans don't have these
resources and many recently
passed county and city anti
choice ordinances secret got
access completely further there
are no OBGYN services and
Roosevelt County and limited
services and curry county
meaning those that want or
forced to give birth may have to
travel hundreds of miles for
prenatal care or risk not
receiving any at all this bill
is the first step in ensuring
holistic health care access to
all New Mexican residents so
please vote do you pass on H. P.
seven thank you for your time
thank you Krista well that
concludes the public comment
portion of our agenda I'll come
back to the sponsor anything you
wish to add before we go to the
committee thank you madam
chairwoman I'm happy to go to
questions of the committee very
good thank you I have
Representative read on my list
Madam chair representative
expert.
I'm trying to focus more this
parental notification issue
maybe if you could expand on
that a little bit how does that
factor into this legislation and
for example if if I have a seven
year old daughter who approaches
at a teacher or counselor and
let's say in this case wants
information on getting an
abortion what.
What is the responsibility of
that teacher or that counselor
to notify the parent if any
thank you madam chairman thank
you Representative for the
question and I will get it to my
experts on exiting we can speak
to on our accounts this bill but
I I would say and we I don't
typically to go into I posses to
much however with with the case
that that young especially that
would be referred to sexual
assault services and and further
but I I'm happy to refer to my
experts as well.
Madam chair representative it's
it's an important question and
like the Sanchez said a crime
has happened person has is a
victim of crime.
And I want to say first off what
an incredible teacher what an
incredible nurse that person
must be for that student to feel
comfortable and safe going to
them.
And I mean that.
I was raised by.
Educators nurses school nurses
memos a school nurse.
And my mother in law is a
retired public school teacher as
as as as my late father in law.
And I say all this because I was
raised by and continue to learn
from educators and public health
officials.
And so I know how deeply
important it is and how.
How deeply important it is for
students to have access to safe
adults.
And forced for those that don't.
Teachers nurses might be their
only safe person to discuss
these issues with.
And.
I know and hope that no matter
what that an individual's
personal beliefs religious
teachings.
If they're in a position of
public trust they will want to
do what is the best interest of
that child.
And like the sponsor
I think hypotheticals flatten
the discourse right because
we're talking about really wants
issues here and and so subject
schools already have a duty to
provide education free from
discrimination and to create
safe environments for students
to come to them with really
complicated and situations and
vulnerable.
Please.
And.
Here yet again.
I I look to to work in
hypotheticals because they they
don't really encapsulate the
complex situations that we're
talking about particularly in
schools and particularly with a
young person who is a survivor
of sexual violence and.
We have numerous safeguards in
place and professionals in a in
a Catholic teachers and school
nurses
have professional judgment and
they are held to really high
standards and so I know the
teachers the teachers that I
know the school nurses that I
know the school administrators
that I know.
Would do everything they can to
help that student.
The chair expert.
I guess I mean I like to work in
hypotheticals because that's how
I kind of understand really what
the situation would be maybe if
I word it this way because you
know let's see that was a very
young child madam chair expert
okay so what if it was a twelve
year old my daughter's twelve
and she's had that's a
consensual sex with a thirteen
year old and comes to a teacher
and is looking for information
on receiving an abortion.
Does the teacher is a
responsibility for the teacher
or the counselor to call the
parent and is there any type of
age limit on this or.
Or is there no responsibility to
order for to give them some
information of their options
art's sake you know notify the
parents so that the parent I
mean that's a child and talk to
them about what their options
are and and and just give them
information and so I'm not
seeing that in this bill so is
this bill you're not allowed to
do that thank you Madam thank
you Representative for the
question in in terms of this
bill in that in those in these
cases this is why we go back to
you know your your previous have
that it will that it's a crime
he will all stay the same as
they stand today regarding you
know any kind of any anything
along these lines you know in
New Mexico we know that often
times you know the trusted adult
may very and and we know that
families don't necessarily you
know look like they they haven't
in previous you know or or you
know on TV on the Jetsons or
something but we we know that
our families look may look
unique and so this bill does not
addressed how current law stands
what it does it insurers that
across New Mexico health care is
applied equally madam chair
Representative I guess I'm still
not CNN then answer so when you
say the laws and to determine
mandatory reporting of crimes
thank you Mr thank you
Representative yes and and and
again any statute the currently
oversees those interactions in
terms of yes okay so what if my
twelve year old told the teacher
I don't want you to tell my
parent and there's no crime
twelve year old thirteen year
old to have sexual intercourse
consensual in there's no crime
what's the responsibility of the
teacher or counselor at this
point.
Representative are you talking
about the what in this bill
makes that responsibility I
heard them say heard our
witnesses say there are other
laws that govern these things
and I would prefer that we not
get in the conversation about
other laws so if if it's in if
you're wondering about what's
going on in this bill perhaps
you could clarify what you're at
what specifically you're you're
thinking of Madam chair
representative of expert I guess
my question is what is the
responsibility of the counselor
or the teacher is our
responsibility or are they
allowed to notify the parent
thank you Madam one thank you
Representative you know again
with this with this bill really
looks to do is ensure that
people are not treated in a
discriminatory Lee
discriminatory fat fashion
should they be seeking a
reproductive health care along
the entire spectrum reproductive
health care or gender affirming
care and so that is the
objective here.
Madam chair if it if let's say
they were to tell the parent
the counselor or the teacher it
subjects them to this liability
that's in this bill thank you
madam chairman thank you
Representative for the question
you know I I think and a you
know I know this specially this
committee you all know there's
so many details to how these how
that would work and so and if I
I make quarter before she says
it in my expertise in the past I
appreciate is that.
Person if the student is being
treated in a certain manner
because they're seeking
reproductive health care or
gender affirming care and that
may be seen at that may be seen
as District Court however if
that is a standard practice
House someone addresses issues
then it would it would not just
a policy that has to be
discussed overall and so that's
how we typically kind of look at
this overall but in terms of the
hypotheses again what this bill
does ensure that people are
district equally for and and and
for the freedom to approach a
trusted adults on on these
issues Madam chair
representative when you say
people you're here also
including children minors and
that definition.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative yes it you
know it can so far as the
children as students and
interactive public bodies yes of
course.
In on page four of your bill
section five.
A.
Can you describe what.
The person claiming to be
aggrieved by this violation and
can you explain what that means
aggrieved.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative for the
question again and if we wanna
get a technical amendment headed
and over to the side but I I do
think it's important as many of
us know the line between an
emergency C. section and a
pregnancy is planned you know
perfect is is momentary and it
is second sometimes in the
making
and for that reason you know
that what this provides ensuring
that there are protections in
place if any discriminatory
practices gone the way of
someone receiving the health
care that they needed you know
for their well being
that the does that answer.
I kind of I guess it so there's
no definition in here of what an
aggrieved party is basically
thank you madam chair when I'm
I'm happy to turn of my experts
going to go for the Madam chair
representative
similar to to other areas of
lost somebody who has
experienced a violation of their
own rights under this act.
Madam chair expert thank you and
the other issue I have is so
this this bill also and I know
we've had some.
Comments on this of receive so
many emails on this talked about
the local government control on
the passing their own ordinances
and obviously these rural
communities is a mind also did
and that takes the basically the
ability of them to pass any type
of ordinance that they feel is
right for their community make
their own laws that their
community wants and to make
Madam chair representative of
experts that takes that ability
completely out of their hands
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative when it comes to
health care it is important that
we that New Mexicans know what
rights and and what access they
do have on as you know on both
sides we heard people testify
that on the received health care
and different counties and you
know far away we know that you
know service is very very very
much so we want to make sure
that people feel confident in
the healthcare that they can
receive health care without
making feared additional burden
on on that access madam chair
and representative expert I
appreciate your answers I I
would I just really I go back to
this the the children and the
parents not knowing what is
going on here and I just have a
really huge problem with this
why respect what you're trying
to do so I'll leave it at that
and all interment Representative
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair I guess
the follow up of on a statement
something I don't know what is
the age of consent for minors
seeking medical care generally.
Representative and gentleman
actually milliseconds and head
over my expert on this Madam
chair representative generally
most young people have the
ability to consent to sensitive
services including mental and
behavioral health sexual and
reproductive health
if they are emancipated for
already parents themselves if
they are living apart from their
parents or in an emergency
situation and so much like
standards of care it depends it
depends on the certain
circumstance the kind of health
care they are seeking and
And so what we know is that most
young people included all
trusted adults in their
healthcare decisions we know
that to be true and when they
when they don't it's often for a
very good reason maybe they are
at risk for abuse for being
kicked out of their own homes
and so you know the public
policy of this state has
supported young people's access
to health care
for four years and and I that's
a firm's in consent statutes in
medical standards of care and
medical practice.
Madam chair that's a lot of
words but I've been here number
well
Maybe so Mister Representative
but the bill is about whether
public entities can.
Block access to certain kinds of
care I'm not really sure why and
number
would be relevant.
With the quote to the question
they don't have a number they
don't have a number so if you
will have a second question that
go ahead madam chair I have more
in the second question but okay
Madam chair representative of.
That's why I use the word
generally.
Is it eighteen is a fourteen is
at ten AM on I have no idea I
would have has to collect from
the it's not a gotcha I just
kind of wanted to know what the
general age is that a.
Minor could go into a medical
provider and require services
without their parents consent
and thank you if you could help
me understand how that ties to
this bill that would be best
what we're talking about this
bill so it was following up on
on the prior question you and I
just could not live to get some
clarification thank you madam
chair thank you Representative
it you know they think that the
shorter L. answers it it depends
on the kind of care on and as
you know oftentimes you know
doctors will speak individually
with with their patients you
know with others not around I
know that with both my
pregnancies you know they would
ask my husband not just be in
the room for when they asked me
certain questions to make sure
that I felt safe home and that
they and they were able to
provide the best healthcare and
so often times you know it just
depends truly on some of these
things.
The manager of I went to law
school madam chair and so it
depends his answer to a lot of
things soon.
I'll try to look that up at some
point in time Madam chair
representative.
Have you.
Have any of.
Do you have any estimate of how
much money.
The state of New Mexico will
have to pay for providing such
services
To to people thank you madam
chair thank you Representative
the FIR looked at it thank you
is negligible the amount that I
can.
Yes.
But it is it the had it it's
through an equitable the amount
Fund.
Estimate from.
For the fiscal impact is zero
dollars they don't anticipate
that will.
And madam chair and
representative.
You mentioned the FIR and.
If I read the FIR correctly.
The department of corrections
did not weigh in on this issue
today I did not receive HSD
the manager I'd Garcia they'd
see can also so let's look at
page three.
Winds.
Five through nine we will be
focusing.
You would agree madam chair
representative that the
department of corrections is a
public body for as you've
amended it an entity or
individual acting on behalf of
our within the scope of
authority of a public body would
you not Senator think
Representative yes.
So if I read Representative be
correctly.
Department of corrections shall
not deny restrict or interfere
with a person's ability at the
prisoner's ability.
To access.
Reproductive health care.
Is that correct thank you madam
chairman thank you
Representative just.
What was.
The president would not be able
to.
Deny restrict or interfere with
the person or the person's
ability for provide reproductive
health care is that correct.
I'm sorry.
The just right in the language
that that the the the presence
couldn't divide restrict or
interfere with a person's
ability to.
I'm gonna skip over access since
we're recovered to provide
reproductive health care thank
you madam chairman thank you
Representative yes.
So if I understand that
correctly.
We have a person incarcerated in
prison.
And they choose to.
Have.
Some of.
Reproductive health care or
gender affirming health care.
Sensei are awarded the state.
The state is going to have to
find that under this law is that
correct thank you madam chair
and thank you Representative
this is our existing and yes
this also explains that here
yes.
And yet we have an FIR that says
that that amount is negligible.
Does that seem to be a
reasonable response thank you
madam chairman thank you
Representative I believe so and
the reason why is that you know
as you know our our budget is in
the billions of dollars and I
believe with these talk about
the amount when you're looking
at when they're rounding their
numbers that sounds correct to
me yes.
madam chair and Representative
do we have any experience to
date on the numbers of
people incarcerated that would.
Go through these types of
procedures thank you madam chair
when the representative I don't
have the money but as as
mentioned already the department
corrections already anticipates
taking care of these things
already that's already part of
when they make the the budget to
include health care for
reproductive and gender
affirming care this just ensures
that is applied across all
counties and all municipalities
in any public or crossed county
disabilities.
But I don't have a number thank
you madam chair and
representative.
Are there any other statutes
that require the department of
corrections to.
Find.
That type of health care thank
you madam chair and thank you
Representative yes that is the
current law that they are
required to provide reproductive
and gender affirming healthcare
we just wanna make sure that is
in
it
respected across the state.
And madam chair representative
so is it is it your testimony
that this is not an expansion of
existing law with respect to the
department of corrections thank
you madam chair one thank you
Representative notice on
expansion it is what they do and
we want to make sure there's not
a a checkerboard of how
healthcare can be accessed in
the state.
Let's move to paragraphs the
that's lines ten through
fourteen on the same page
I'm wondering.
If.
Under this paragraph whether the
state.
For any instrumentality thereof
could.
Arrest and prosecute a pregnant
woman.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative for the
question again
Approve this is ensuring that
this is not that they're not
acting discriminatory against
individual because of their
having the being being at that
meeting reproductive health care
or gender affirming care so does
not.
Stipulated any other terms and
as I mentioned earlier again if
this is within the scope of what
they would typically do that
would not change that however it
just and if they're
particularly arresting them or
or or persecuting them in some
way prosecuting them is weight
because of their status as
needing reproductive health care
needing gender affirming care
that would be different.
Well I'm not sure that's what
the words on the page read
Because it says that the public
body.
Shall not.
Directly or indirectly.
Deprive.
To prosecution.
Punishment or other means.
Run a little differently than
that a person's ability to act
to refrain from acting during
the person's pregnancy.
Those on based on potential
actual or perceived affect on
the pregnancy I don't know what
the last part of that sentence
means that.
He tells me that the the state
can't.
Prosecute or punish.
A person's.
Ability to act to refrain from
acting during the pregnancy and
and I I I did I struggle with
that language because I think it
could be read the state can't
arrest or prosecute.
A woman during that period of
time.
Regardless of what they did.
And I'm not sure we want to go
there but but that's how I think
a person could read that
language would you agree or
disagree with with that thank
you madam chair and thank you
for asking the question is
always always respect the
question
I I do think the end of that
line is is really critical
because it ends with based on
the potential actual or
perceived effects on the
pregnancy so based on their
status but you cannot arrest is
a pregnant person based on the
fact that they actually might be
pregnant or perceived or
perceived to be so cannot be
because of that.
Well.
Madam chair representative it
seems to me that getting
arrested.
In going to a prosecution in a
court.
Is very stressful.
And I would think that that
stress would have an actual
effect on that person's
pregnancy.
I've never been pregnant so I
would know but Madam chair
representative of it seems to me
that that stress.
Is something that would be.
Possibly even complicate that
person's pregnancy and therefore
you can't engage in that
activity is a public body.
Thank you madam chairman.
Thank you Representative for for
the comment again I I think that
how specifically how we phrased
it could not solely be because
of the person being pregnant to
the action is taken and again
what this is doing is ensuring
that our current law is is the
same across the state so that
should be person feel that they
have been prosecuted or brought
forward in this way they know
they have that right to the law
they they have whether it be in
Sandoval county or in Dona ana
county.
Madam chair representative I'm
just looking at the language
here I mean we can get in to.
Some other effects because
there's criminal and and civil
penalties associated with that
so if you're the district
attorney.
Do you prosecute a pregnant
woman because that could have an
actual or perceived effect on
the on the woman's pregnancy.
Do I do I want to take the risk
as a public official.
In prosecuting that action if it
causes stress on a woman who is
pregnant and it may affect the
pregnancy.
I I hi.
I read the language on the page
and I think that's what it says
this is not thank you madam
chair thank you Representative
what I what it reads and.
From our perspective is that are
you can not make the decision to
prosecute because they are
pregnant you alone that's it now
we all that they is that valid
other I don't experience
anything to it.
Madam chair representative at I
do disagree with that reading
that.
Based on a person's ability to
act to refrain from acting this
doesn't have anything to do with
the perceived action for actual
fact that the prosecution might
have on a pregnancy the light
that wouldn't be incredibly
stressful circumstance.
The arrest the prosecution
excuse me the prosecution simply
can't be based on the person's
actions during pregnancy.
Related to their pregnancy.
Madam chair representative bug I
would encourage you to take a.
Very critical look at at the.
That paragraph and frankly the
paragraph above and make sure
that it doesn't.
Pre vent.
Some things that I think the
need to occur regardless of a
person's pregnancy.
And and I think that we need to
make sure that we're not.
Presenting our agencies from
carrying out their
responsibilities and I read this
Madam chair month month one
final point is with the
amendment.
Even as amended.
This.
Bill.
I think does not allow in the.
Conscientious objection from a
medical provider or public
official
And I think we have to.
Certainly give those actors who
are professionals usually in the
health care center.
You may be working for a state
agency or for state entities
such as UNM hospital.
The ability to to not violate
their own conscience and dealing
with this and and and you know I
I think of the language on the
page.
The language it's in this bill
even with the amendment.
Does not clearly spell out that
one can continue to exercise
some conscientious objection to
performing or providing certain
services and and so I think that
if that was your intent as you
stated when we discuss the
amendment I think you need to
look at the language in the bill
and specifically provide for a
provision that deals with that
issue to make it clear to the
professionals and others the
that state can continue to
exercise
Their their rights with respect
to the services they wish to
engage in as an employee of that
hospitals or other providers and
I don't think you get their here
so madam chair and
Representative thank you
Certainly can't supported anyway
but I think you need to look at
some paragraphs and really get
some some
Some people around here and and
probably clarify because I think
it's going to have some
implications that you're not
intending thank you madam chair
representative.
Representative now I was a
little confused about which of
you two gentlemen wish to
operate Representative free.
At spring.
Thank you madam chair
Madam chair and representative
I'm gonna try not to plow
through some of the same land
but let's go to page two and.
When we look at three we go
about law local government that
would give of on line three and
then we go down the line seven
we talk about school districts
only.
First of all I don't I think I
really believe in home rule.
You know it we should allow home
rule.
Let's talk about school
districts so madam chair and
representative I think we can
all agree that of children under
the age of eighteen cannot
consent to a lot of things
because they are minors.
they can't get into contracts
they can't do multiple things
and do we agree on that thank
you madam chair and thank you
Representative of their there
are many cases where they are
not allowed to the.
And madam chair and
representative I think.
By this excluding.
Whether they're going to raise a
family or not raise a family.
I think is outside the bounds of
our philosophy of what the.
What the should be able to
consent to it not consent to
without their parents
involvement.
In.
Just a point I'm not sure this
bill has anything to do with
parental consent but I'm just
trying to keep people on target
to the bill so.
Feel free to answer it within
those understandings thank you
sorry to interrupt
Representative.
Madam chair I I think it is on
point because.
In this bill if I understand it
maybe I misunderstand it
of a child will more you know
and under eighteen year old will
not need the consent of parents
to to have an abortion.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative what what
this.
Right is that what this bill
does that just insures that
health care is accessible
equally across the state without
individuals being fearful of
persecution or prosecution but
it does not address anything
about
About about the consent to work
for those pieces that is that
they have access to the health
care as it stands in the law.
Madam chair and representative
can a child today was a fourteen
year old go and get an abortion.
Thank you madam chairman thank
you Representative again in
consultation with their health
care providers you know yes it
may have madam chair I'm sorry
Representative without the
consent of their parents could
they go and get an abortion to
the thank you madam chair that
you're present of that is that
is not necessarily in this bill
what this bill does ensures that
they can get their treated the
same whether they are in
Sandoval county or in Santa Ana
County or in San Juan or
anywhere that that is the same
access across the board yeah
madam chair and Representative
I'm trying to hone in on on a.
Maybe we can get a yes or no
answer so a.
Fourteen year old girl who was
pregnant can she get an abortion
today without her parents
parents consent thank you madam
chair and thank Representative
and I do appreciate the question
but because I I don't want to
confuse what this bill does with
what is already statute would
already exists what this bill
does is ensure is that whatever
access to health for that
individual gets they are not
discriminated against by the
public bodies that they may tend
to students or otherwise and
that's really the the the effect
of what this bill would do thank
you madam chair I think the
avoidance of answers so is the
answer welcome Representative I
don't think we need comments
like that thank you madam chair
let's uh let's move over to page
three line ten and we start
talking about that paragraph
State and madam chair and
representative I want to see if
I understand this right.
If.
A woman was pregnant.
With this pre vent the court
after they find that they're
guilty from sentencing them to
prison because our pregnant
thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative know it no.
Thank.
Madam chair and a.
And representative I would take
you to page four.
And one seven reasonable
attorney fees.
And then we can also just for
speeding it up go to page five.
Line one to court share all
award a prevailing plaintiff
reasonable attorney fees and has
been this committee's position
that that is a discretionary
matter for the court.
And in the past we of removed
that shelves and just left it as
of may.
And I don't know if this
committee wants to follow its
past practice award or not.
And I guess kind of a question
to the committee more than
anything.
Whether we want to follow past
practice or leave it shell.
Representative don't know how to
answer that other than to say if
you want to propose an amendment
that we can then discuss that's
the way to I think address such
a question okay Madam chair of.
Then I will propose on page five
one one and that shall be
stricken and replaced with the
word may.
This line one line one.
Yes madam chair I'll second
Motion by.
Three.
discussion on the motion to
amend both.
The manager was wonder with this
be friendly or unfriendly.
It makes them answers will I
think you mentioned well I
appreciate the amendment no this
is not friendly on the
development of this bill really
came from the communities that
are impacted by the health care
access and because those
typically don't have access to
funding for court fees and
otherwise we do not want this to
be a reason they do not bring
forward six.
Many this.
Representative.
Thank you madam chair of.
Madam chair representative dream
I I just want to note that this
the structure of the provision
his for a prevailing plaintiff
so it's not if the of course of
the plant does not prevail there
would be no fees
so I I think what we're talking
about is the infringement of
someone's rights by the public
entity if they prevail in that
claim I want them to recover
their fees so I'm I'm happy with
language as it is thank you
madam chair.
Madam.
to table.
But it cuts off debate.
All right well okay so.
Speaking Representative.
Talk about.
Appreciate that madam chair
thank you.
madam chair so I think we need
to understand sort of the basic
foundational.
Common law.
American approach to attorney's
fees so far typical approach is
it's always discretionary.
whether you propeller not the
American system is you pay your
own way the English system is
what's being proposed here.
In my experience what happens
when you're talking about local
public bodies.
Is when you use shall rather
than may it it doesn't
necessarily lead to
Legitimate lawsuits being the
only type there followed are
there filed my experience in
impressiveness laws is this.
Issue comes up for local of
bodies that don't have a lot of
resources is they feel like
they're on the right side of the
issue but they can't roll the
dice.
To face a large internet bill at
the end of it.
what made does.
To represent the queen's point
is if you have a bad actor the
gives the court discretion the
court can still awarded terms
fees if this is a particularly
egregious case
and it but it's not obligatory
and so it can't be used as a
hammer against a poor local body
thank you madam chair.
Anyone else wishing to speak on
the proposed amendment
I have litigated many civil
rights cases over the years and
there's numerous instances in
our laws that allow for the
provision and maybe even some
cases require providing for the
attorney's fees of those
prevailing parties I would agree
in the absence of such a
provision in the normal rule
would apply and everybody hears
their own costs that's why we
must be very cognisant of the
fact when we are putting these
kinds of provisions in we are
doing so to ensure that those
who have limited access to means
have the ability to hire
attorneys because without
provisions such as these low
income people can't get
attorneys to assist them in
ensuring that their rights are
observed so I I think this is an
appropriate provision and I'll
support
Support maintaining it we have a
motion to table as anyone else
wish to speak to to to the
amendment.
We have a motion to table is our
second motion we don't need a
motion a second so what would
you call the roll on the tabling
motion.
Madam chair.
Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey table.
Representative Lane no to table.
Mr speaker yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert.
Representative read no to table.
Representative green no ma'am.
Representative Penske yes.
Madam vice chair.
Yes.
Madam chair yes.
Madam chair you have seven yeses
and four nos the motion fails
for still yours Representative
ring.
Enter the motion passes it was a
motion yeah yeah thank you the
the desired result fails there
is no amendment the table
emotions thank you.
Madam chair that's open question
greatest thank you for.
Any other discussion of bills
all right Representative Lane.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam question
The word person is not defined
in this bill can understand why.
Madam chair representative.
The word person appears
throughout our state
constitution other statutes and
it is.
It's not a word I believe needs
definition in this act.
I'm sure you're familiar with
all the the New Mexico Human
Rights Act defines a person.
Madam chair representative I can
I can pull it up helpful.
Madam chair I I asked the
question because I think
actually it matters very much
The way the human rights code
defines a person it's not like
you would you and I would
probably thinker how we use in
common parlance.
It certainly includes human
beings but it includes
corporations includes
partnerships includes many
things.
And so madam chair if we don't
define what this applies to rely
on.
Other provisions in statute that
are in this bill.
I think we're going to open this
up to more than just
individuals.
So I guess I'm curious why again
why why don't we take the time
to find what a person is that
this is attending to protect.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative for the question
on and had handed over however
what I I will say is that what
this bill is in regards to is
accessing reproductive and
gender affirming health care and
in many bills that we all seen
the term person is not
necessarily defined on to make
what that scope is and so
because of the scope of what
this bill covers it we feel it
is defined have a happy and
relaxed as well.
Thank you madam chair
representative I want to make
sure that we're on the same page
so I'm pulling up the the Human
Rights Act.
Thank you know a thank you madam
chair representative now I I
have the contacts for your
question
Yes the Human Rights Act defines
person more expansively
again.
I I continue to assert I don't
think the definition of person
is needed in this bill.
Madam chair so.
We we don't take the time to
provide the work person in this
bill.
I'm told that it's a clear
understanding what a person is
but I just point to another
statute that defines person in
the context of the Human Rights
Act.
To something other than a human
being.
So.
Can understand why you think
it's abundantly clear when
there's another statutory
provision in a similar context
defines person differently than
what's being described thank you
madam chair and thank you
Representative for the question
this is about individuals
accessing health care and so and
and not to dismiss what you're
asking that you know I I
appreciate that the debate on
you know I I cannot think of an
example or cannot think of a
something we're corporation
would need to access gender
affirming health care or
reproductive the full spectrum
reproductive health care they
need madam chair so I think what
were to become an issue as
whenever you talk about being
able to have the the owners of
that entity be able to afford
and and access these things and
and trying to to Marshall it
that way in terms of having
different things paid for but
beyond that I'm not I'm not so
concerned about if an LLC means
a person madam chair.
I think what this highlights too
is there's no minimum age.
Within this bill is that correct
thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative no.
So.
When I read.
Paragraph be.
How do we as a body invest.
Health care rights.
In a small child independent of
his or her.
Parents.
Since we're not defining.
There's no age limitation on the
person.
Thank you madam chair one thank
you Representative for the
question
and I think again with this bill
addresses bodily autonomy in a
number of a in it passed by the
autonomy when we're for
reproductive health care and we
talk about minors you know again
that there's gonna be a crime
though the different
conversation and I would I would
like to do is handed over to my
experts document claim about how
gender affirming health care is
actually access you know in in
the reality
in in her experience with
families of different ages.
And I'm on a plane my part of
this year's thank you for having
me here
the way that it works in New
Mexico and my experience of
doing this kind of care for the
past five years is that families
come to our clinic actually
never had to use come to my
clinic by themselves
and families as a group consent
or don't consent to the process
they make the decision I'm a
medical adviser I don't make
decisions for them and
oftentimes families take a long
time and what therapy to assist
them in making the decision
which I support wholeheartedly.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you and I I would just to
continue on that point you know
again when we're especially this
is we took great care about we
discuss what these care the care
is because it is a full spectrum
of care for gender from health
care not you know what you may
receive at a different age or
different point your life may be
different but it's a different
point so again it it I hope that
clarifies a point for you.
I'm sure it does clarify the
point I think actually it it
what you're what I'm hearing is
that the practices actually
consistent with what I'm
suggesting the bill should read.
Whatever managers that in the
experts.
experience you don't have small
children who come and seek these
things independently that's not
what the bill says.
There's no minimum age in here
so my concern is we're attaching
Rights.
And it makes sense to me you
know thirteen up I think is the
current age to have an abortion
New Mexico without parental
consent is my understanding.
We can disagree about whether
that's right or wrong but I
think at least at age thirteen
we can have a serious discussion
about.
A child acting independently
from their parents at least in
some rooms.
This doesn't have an image of
thirteen so this bill as written
would apply to an eight year
olds that correct thank you
madam chair and thank you
Representative what this bill
ensures is that they have access
to the healthcare they need and
then I
I think we is as New Mexicans as
we've heard time and again is
that we know we can hold our own
beliefs and allow others to have
other beliefs as well and so
there are times that children
will rely on trusted adults that
may not be their parents as a
parent I think it's incredibly
important that my child receive.
The support that they they need
when they need.
Madam chair I I appreciate the
comment that sometimes she'll
rely on people who are their
parents.
I've had children that statement
frankly terrifies me
An eight year old.
I should as the father my wife
as the mother should be the ones
involved in decisions over their
medical care.
so again is this a bill reply to
an eight year old.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative because we
know gender affirming health
care is a life saving care for
children it is important for us
and for all individuals is
portent that they know they have
the right to access health care
no matter where they live in New
Mexico and matter where they're
seeking care.
So madam chair I don't I don't
know what the teacher wants to
do I I just a very
straight for questions about
does this apply to any or older
not not getting an answer.
Representative maybe because
it's probably covered by another
law we're talking about this law
if I understand the answers to
the questions that I've been
here.
Madam this this bill right here
creates new statutory rights.
So I want to know what person it
applies to.
And I'm not getting answers on
the
I think they're answering your
questions just.
The.
So if you have another question.
May I ask.
Madam I'm.
I'm a little frustrated
I'm not trying to play games I'm
not trying to be cute.
I just want to know is the bill
played to an eight year old or
not.
Thank you madam chair when the
Representative again I I respect
our discourse in this committee
and I and I want to be focused
on what the bill does and what
it.
I want to focus on what the bill
does what I think is important
is to know that that they would
have access to that care.
And madam chair would that be
independent of their parents.
Could it be independent of their
parents.
Madam chair representative
I think you know many of us
understand the the rules of
statutory construction right and
they are statutes unless they
say otherwise are to be read as
you know.
In conformity and searching for
work.
not in conflict with one another
and so when we talk about a
young person accessing
consenting consulting with an
adult we're talking about
separate rules separate statutes
in our code This act does not
create conflicts nor does that
attempts to invalidate existing
law.
Madam chair so I understand
statutory construction well.
That doesn't apply when the bill
changes existing law.
And madam chair.
This is when we asked this
question is this create anything
new.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative what this
bill does insurers of the law
that exists in New Mexico the
access to healthcare to legal
New Mexico is remains that way
across the state and that
they're not there's not a
checkerboard the what that
health care looks like.
So madam chair at this doesn't
do anything new I'm not sure
what what's the need why the
need for the bill thank you
madam chair and thank you
Representative it reinforces
insurers the people have access
to that care because we we do
not want anyone to feel
discriminated against by their
public bodies and we know that
there individuals crawl in every
single county that may require
some of these health care that
we've outlined yet not all
counties not all municipalities
not all school boards will treat
this the same and it is
important that we make it
abundantly clear that this is
the law of New Mexico to act to
access healthcare is that you
may need.
Madam is there another statute
that says that a public body
cannot indirectly restrict
someone's access to reproductive
reproductive health care.
So Madam chair representative
the term directly or indirectly
appears.
Well over four hundred times in
our our state statutes and I
think over two hundred times in
our regulations and so to what
this bill does is ensure that
when a person is attempting to
access health care a public body
can't get in their way.
Madam chair is there and another
statue that you can point me to
that in that says that a public
body cannot indirectly restrict
a person's ability to access
reproductive health care.
Madam chair representative this
is a clarification certainly I
can point to the New Mexico
Human Rights Act where
individuals cannot be
discriminated against on based
on their sex and their gender on
their pregnancy related
conditions.
This bill clarifies that and
insurers that public bodies.
Despite.
Some efforts are not allowed to
interfere with an individual's
access to health care.
Madam chair the Human Rights Act
applies to it's in the context
of employment it's in the
context of real estate.
Madam chair it's not in the
context of of local school
districts dealing with students
that's not what the Human Rights
Act us and so here's my point
and I am not sure it's I feel
like the way the answers are
coming out as we're actually.
Making the budget debate much
longer than it needs to be.
I would submit madam chair that
paragraph B. creates new rights
that don't exist currently in
law.
And that's fine that's the
prerogative this body to do that
that's well within the Sanchez
rights to do that as a member I
don't Roger and and the least
for that.
This is not just duplicative of
existing law this is creating
new rights that don't otherwise
exist when this concept of
indirectly restricting is
different than discriminating
and somebody's a different legal
concept.
And so madam chair the reason
why I think this is important
again.
whenever we talk about creating
these these new rights that
don't otherwise exist when it
comes to accessing reproductive
health care is I I again I come
back to this idea of person that
we're creating new rights.
Within small children.
That don't exist otherwise in
law and it's okay I think if we
do that but I don't think you
can separate from the parents or
legal guardians.
I think that's the road.
Is you know we can we can talk
about indirectly restricting we
can talk about the line directly
all of those things.
Whether it's right or wrong but
I don't understand how we can
create new rights dealing with
medical issues independent of
parents for for young children
under the age of thirteen.
Madam chair.
Paragraphs the.
Can I get some clarification on
so it says a public body or
Asian of a public body shall
not.
Directly and indirectly deprive
through prosecution punishment
or other means what is what is
what again that we see other
means chair thank you
Representative the question are
you I sorry on page three is
that yes thank you so you're
looking at section C. should
look more clear yes per page
three programs and
impossibilities can you read to
the court I was looking at the
wrong page that archer madam
chair so I understand depriving
through prosecution and
punishment can I get some
clarification about what other
means would entail.
You mentioned.
Madam chair representative at
what we know is that other
states and indeed
Counties and cities and our own
state are attempting to
criminalize people for accessing
basic health care with fines
with jail and prison time.
She.
Through arrest investigation we
know that it's not simply a
matter of prosecution we know
that arrest warrants we know
that investigation can turn
people's lives upside down.
And that is included and
contemplated in that section.
So.
Madam chair here sounds like
you're talking about.
A piece of power from all police
departments that what you're
envisioning.
But Madam chair representative.
It could be an abuse of power
yes.
I just chair Mister get into
these.
For what I would call squishy
terms other means whenever
we start putting that is
statutes especially when in the
context of having penalties and
and attorney's fees and all of
that it it just makes me nervous
because I don't know what that
means from a legal perspective
we talk about other means.
So.
Chair thank the rest my points
are made
Thank you.
Thank you other members wishing
to speak on this bill.
Questions Madam moved to pass.
As amended.
Motion made to a do pass motion
made by Representative Martinez
seconded by Representative Lujan
ski.
Any further comment.
To call the roll please.
I actually didn't know.
The regular system that please.
I didn't know if this would be
ready in time but I think if
that Sanchez our.
Interested in making a further
clarification that.
This doesn't apply to individual
actors but to the body like we
did in our Civil Rights Act so I
kind of knew then it prepared
for us to do that so that it's
consistent with it and
I need to show to I think you
know that working on right.
Yes we have a motion for a due
pass any of.
I think
okay and then we can.
The do that so let me get a
competent Sanchez and then we
can pass this out.
I think I don't think there will
be anything and friendly about
this amendment to anyone who's
favor of the bill or even in the
post opposed to the bill.
Can I get this distributed.
They need to.
Yes in two senses thank you.
Okay.
This is.
The.
The facility of that.
Use that I think.
I I just want to return it to
its rightful maybe after.
Basically thank you very.
Yes I'm sorry.
So and then
The to to is point two two five
zero six five point one.
What this does is add a new
section excuse me new subsection
two sections for and I.
Each of them will be a new
section subsection do and this
is for the changes is claims
pursuant to the reproductive and
gender affirming health care
freedom Act maybe brought
against public bodies and
entities acting in the course
and scope of authority of a
public body claims arising from
the acts or omissions of
individual employees and agents
of the body for entities may be
brought against the public body
or entity but not against
individuals and this is the
statute of our Civil Rights Act
so we wanted to make it
consistent with us.
The question for them to thank.
Yes ma'am gentleman.
The friendly amendment.
Madam asked some questions sure
I'm really not trying to do with
the processor so I appreciate
that thank you so I and madam
chair Representative Chasey I
and I don't remember a lot of
the details of the Civil Rights
Act but
Is there any exceptions when you
have an egregious bad actors so
if it's oil for anything like
that for the.
Madam chair representative laid
not to my recollection we we
made it.
It was a compromise on the Civil
Rights Act when we passed it
initially the individual actors
were held to be responsible and
that was a change that we made.
In the course of the Civil
Rights Act I do I do think it's
an interesting discussion but I
won't I won't belabor the
discussion but whether or not
frankly the the bad actor should
be held accountable
you know the since distance to
remove that that component of it
and I understand sort of from a
fiscal standpoint why that may
be helpful.
From a public policy standpoint
I'm not convinced that it does
but thank you madam chair.
Any other questions or comments
about the proposed amendment.
It's a friendly amendment the
bill is amended I move to adopt
the minutes.
There's a motion to adopt the
amendment would you call the
roll please.
Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey yes.
Representative Lane yes.
Mr speaker yes.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative Nibert.
Representative read yes.
Representative Rehm yes ma'am.
Representative semansky yes.
Madam vice chair Beth.
Madam chair yes.
Eleven yeses madam chair.
You have a bill that is twice.
Representative Martinez and
tribal would do passes twice
amended.
Second.
We have a motion from
Representative Martinez two
passed motion and a second by
Representative Stansky but
please.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey yes.
Representative Lane.
For Mister speaker.
Yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert.
Representative read no.
Representative green government.
Representative Representative
semansky yes.
Madam vice chair yes.
Madam chair.
Yes.
Madam chair you have seven yeses
and for nose for do passed with
amendments.
Thank you presenters thank you
Committee for.
Session you have a due pass as
amended on the bill thank them
for the session.
Okay if we could
those of you are not saying if
you could quickly and quietly
exit the room we'd really
appreciate it committee.
Representative.
Senator
mission.
We're start hearing Sir so to
do.
All right.
Representative Lara Cadena we
have House Bill to ninety seven
floor is yours thank you madam
chair and committee.
and we expect to have a few more
folks tickling and as we switch
over from the previous bill to
this one and also just want to
say out loud that we did lose a
couple of folks over the the
long afternoon so thank you for
your patience and flexibility.
I'm really grateful to be here
today.
In presenting house bill two
ninety seven.
I've had the honor to be part
of.
Several legislative proposals
that mattered a lot to New
Mexicans.
And I have to say for me this
one is among the closest to my
heart.
And it's been something.
In concept in conversation that
we've pulled together over many
many years.
With the depth of our lived
experiences and our expertise.
Given the hour I'm going to
quickly.
Give a high level outline of the
bill I'm glad to have spoken to
most of you.
Answer any questions and walking
with a lot of humility to say
that today we have a fairly well
defined concept but feel certain
there is questions we have asked
considerations that we should
take in front of us and a lot of
room to make sure that we Polish
this work this bring this to
life in the way that would have
the impact that we intended so
just to share today is not a
hands off process but rather an
invitation to help us figure out
a way to make this impactful for
The New Mexicans that are
implicated in this effort.
HB two ninety seven at a high
level does three things.
First of all it attempts to
compel the corrections
department to go to rulemaking
process like many other state
agencies already do.
When I had the opportunity to
work at the corrections
department the previous
administration under governor
Martinez.
I remember working on
substantial pieces of policy and
turning around to my colleagues
and saying okay I think I'm
close now who do I go to to get
ready for rulemaking.
And I was
Right my questions were answered
with blank stares.
What do you mean rulemaking and
I'd say well you know I'm I'm
almost ready we vetted this we
talk to the advocates we talk
the stakeholder groups how do we
get this to rural.
It turns out that over decades
the corrections department has
never gone to rulemaking
process.
Again this is spans
administrations this spans many
many many years and there are of
course examples in statute where
in establishing our legislative
intent we've instructed the
department to go into the world
and make rules and that's just
never happened so one key piece
of this legislation is to try
with more clarity and
instruction.
To compile the corrections
department to go to rulemaking.
The other two pieces are
interconnected.
After many years and after again
working at the department.
I really held the responsibility
of what it means that we as a
government have the authority to
lock people up.
For me it's.
At the question of what it means
to.
Respect our constitution to
value liberty and to then
infringe on that liberty.
In my mind if we have the
authority to lock someone up
then we as a government beyond
the agency have an
accountability to that
authority.
As such this act creates a
corrections advisory board.
In my mind so that we can be a
in partnership and assistance to
the corrections department.
In meeting the immense
responsibilities of their
agency.
This board would be appointed.
by different members including
Legislative Council the
governor's office the
administrative office of the
courts The New Mexico's
sentencing commission and the
union that represents the
hardworking new Mexicans
employed in part of the project
person teams at the corrections
department.
Finally in the third component.
Tasks this advisory board.
With bringing on and on but the
person.
That number is person would be
sent.
In their capacities to do
objective review.
Of the corrections department
making sure that once they start
to have those rules in place and
otherwise have policies and
procedures.
That they're living up to those
standards and that also of
course they have the resources
and support investment from us
as a legislature.
To to meet those
responsibilities so again three
parts corrections needs to go to
rulemaking.
We establish and advisory board
for objective review and when it
when needed and appropriate to
offer back of recommendations
that both the administrative and
legislative level level and we
would allow for the hiring of in
budgets person and and staff
team to field complaints handle
objective review and
investigation and when the
person who filed a complaint
consented are requested to
provide those key findings back
to the Department should they
decide to take up those findings
and act and and move toward some
resolution so we'll keep it
basic for today.
My incredible expert here Barron
Jones is someone I met many
years ago feels like a lifetime
ago when he was reporter Kate
UNM.
I am a big fan of public media
and public radio and when Barron
and I connected.
I felt like there was a voice in
the world that wanted to tell
truth.
That wanted to lift up important
narratives and that wanted to
center what was happening in the
lives of our New Mexican
families every day thankfully
burn and I got to connect and
since then and there multiple
iterations of professional and
personal lives we get to be in
this effort together so thank
you bear an alternate to thank
you so much for that thank you
madam chair members of the
committee for allowing us to be
here today as the representative
that I am Barron Jones ACLU of
New Mexico senior policy
strategist.
Well there are several important
criminal legal system built up
the session I sort of believe
this is this is the the the this
is the one right this is the one
because historically US prisons
are all rate opaque AT best rate
and then worst they're they're
straight up secret of and New
Mexico is no different to my
work at the ACLU my work as a
reporter and lived experience I
have fielded countless
complaints on from folks and CDC
employees and incarcerated
people regarding issues ranging
from.
Source staffing to folks not
being given access to
rehabilitative rehabilitative
programming that will help them
better themselves right and so
yeah we see that
That that that revolving door
over the last that a risk
management has several numerous
lawsuits because in the state
tens of millions of dollars and
object to reduce to be seen as a
tool to provide much needed
assistance to reduce costly
litigation improve health and
safety outcomes for incarcerated
individuals as well as working
conditions for The New Mexicans
who go into those facilities
every day this concept is not
new I think it's been around for
decades and several states in
our region of Arizona just it by
by the governor and the
secretary of war on set up
office of ombudsman so we we can
the leaders in this in here in
New Mexico and our prison site
population is the perfect size
was such a home office thank
you.
Thank you
let's go to the audience those
wishing to speak in opposition
to the bill would you please
raise your hand.
Yes secretary.
You madam chair members names
for this era in the great
secretary I'll start I think
first I appreciate the work that
Representative has put into this
we have spoken just briefly
before the bill was put out and
there have course have been
numerous iterations of it over
the past few years and I will
look forward to continuing to
work with the sponsor as we move
forward at this point in its
current form I feel that there
are a number of concerns issues
with with the bills I think
there are quite a lot of
redundancies in that we are
ready over the or under the
oversight of the executive
office there are numerous
external audits that we undergo
every year and of course we're
also accredited in all of our
facilities areas by the American
correctional Association popcorn
that I.
Bility overreach and abuse
because of the fact that the
definition of the word ombudsman
applies not only to them but it
is by all of their staff members
as well as any person who
chooses to volunteer with that
and in the bill there's no
language restricts those parties
have the finance interest in
their participation with the
office of the investment and so
those are some of the items that
I would really like to speak
with the sponsor about offline
and perhaps see if there's
something that we can do to come
to us and agreement and and
possibly in the future a
substitute or some language
changes to the bill thank you
madam chair thank you madam
secretary anyone else in the
audience wishing to speak
against the bill let's so when
me go online I see one hand
raised if you are wishing to
speak against the bill keep your
hand up but if not please keep
your take your hand down.
Yes so could try okay all right
now let's go to the audience
back to the audience those
wishing to speak in favor of the
bill please raise your hand.
J. C. some a number of people
please keep your comments to two
minutes and now let's start with
the lady in the purple and the
side here.
Hi good.
Chairman representative my name
is nana Derek and the mother of
a prisoner at a formal civil
rights for the sport of
prisoners on social matters
twenty years ago hi I believe
this bill is it is part of it my
son is currently in in the
system well as an as a minor and
then was unable to rehabilitate
through this the way the program
has his age twenty five has been
in the penal system at the state
level not going into federal as
a parent I can speak to the fact
that there's limited reach that
a parent has wanted this in the
system as an adult as a minor
and as an adult as an adult
there's no way that I can assist
my son and this this increase be
greatly because my son calls me
regularly to tell me about the
conditions in the system what
would concern me the more is
that many of our correction
facilities are private by geo
and that has that is something
we need to have reach and to see
how that privatization prisons
is affecting our car straight
individuals because I believe
that individual is unique and
able to be rehabilitated to join
society because if I didn't I
would have no help hope for my
son thank you for hearing me
please pass this bill thank you
I think the gentleman over here
had to stand up thank you claims
right road and the.
Most of these from prison in
October fifteenth of of twenty
twenty one.
Two months later they dismissed
all my charges
and after four years of of
working with to always in.
First of all of them so central
for sure state that the native
plating and stay there for a
year and a half right when they
they change from up.
Private to state and a and I've
been each other Saturday so I
knew once again I knew they
would go over to my charges and
so it's impossible I am that's a
because of the volume is a bit
that they're they have from
people in those movie right with
this bill is that it was in the
movie both of public face
there several days I I
productive if I had everything
to know looks the way that they
did my case when the court of
bill of over two hundred
they are they set me back
Clovis.
And so the
ms Currie the warden at at a
certificated the time.
Wouldn't allow me to take my
stuff back and of.
The about a month to month to
have later well I got I said I I
called that day they didn't have
any loss or so all the
documentation that I had
inventories of the book of the
law libraries which is a farce
everything that I mean I I table
but so but to to cut it short
When they when they do when you
do an audit that they spent
weeks literally weeks played up
to make it look right here
people will move out of the
things or
if there's an opportunity this
bill goes through I would
volunteer to be a member of the
committee so thank you for your
time thank you Sir anyone else
on the side no would you raise
your hand if you wish to speak
on this side so let's start from
the money left in just move over
from the front row here yes.
The last minute but my name is
Courtney one twenty and with the
millions for prisoners Mexico
and the national incarcerated
workers organizing committee and
the New Mexico hookers workers
organizing committee I feel that
accountability is important in
the comes to the New Mexico
department of corrections I was
a former librarian of the
penitentiary of New Mexico for a
short time and the egregious
human rights abuses that I was
witness to live with me for the
rest of my life and always will
that's why I feel that
accountability is important and
Thank you thank to yes ma'am.
The standard process also
another of an incarcerated
person and I have found over the
years that there have been so
many.
Discrepancies between what I
have been told and what is
actually happening and one of
the one of the.
Would like to mention just very
briefly that medical through out
the whole prison system is
horrible.
Or.
And even though I've been told
that everybody gets to see a
doctor when they need to it is
not true it's not but that's
just kind of I
I do know though that when there
is an inspection the warden
gets.
Notice seven beforehand and so
everyone goes out and they get
all three years to get
everything changed over the mold
in the walls and.
Whatever and they make it
spotless for the inspection.
But then.
Nothing happens you know they
they know that they're being
infected so that isn't food and
so they will be able to talk to
people.
But that's just for when there
inspection and afterwards and
this is going on commitment.
So after the team that's
inspecting leaves and everything
goes back to normal and the
large so.
Hit and miss you can go in one
day and that we're watching the
next day and you'll see it in
the policies it's okay to wear
watch the next day you go in you
can't wear that in here you're
not allowed to wear watches here
it's just you know it's so
difficult to even know what the
policies are because they've
changed.
So thank you thank you.
Yes Sir did you have your hand
yes yes but the White when we
present.
foreman Karcher ID search over
seventeen years in the state of
New Mexico on I've been impacted
by.
All all type of ways when it
comes to.
Policies on practices go with
the corrections department
I'm in support of this bill
because anytime that.
And guidance legislation that
prevents harm statement on
opportunity to do that we must
take advantage of that on.
The New Mexico.
What we struggle like up like
our state.
Contracts for over half the
prison.
No
to have over five in the with
with private interests without
the legislative intent without
any notice the first time I step
up and give them guidance you
know with the intent of
provided they can completely
drop the policy director
comments towards the committee
yes we with the guidance is
provided if they can about the
policies in accordance with this
legislation and in the bill of
rights and one of assault on.
I just you know just dealing
with the the the process of them
trying to of development
processes of policies to address
the issues that I'm really never
in the interests of us prisoners
and no I've been to all the
purpose of the fifty trying to
find I am not I have not been
active I don't see them doing
right I think this is
opportunity by the and our
legislative taking the
opportunity to take advantage
guidance and make law that
allows them on the about
policies that.
I thank you I'm cert you have
hand.
Marty Haynes the cursory I have
years I'm actually planning on
saying anything but I decided to
just do a lot of some things
that I was that was
set before and
I think I had to do with like
the hearing about this and I
wanted to do something about
that specifically yeah they have
the letter but you know and I've
even seen people get locked up
to have a voice in the prison
who are speaking out of cases
because in get locked up before
the audit and then that that
food members accused good for
those.
We go to secure orders of
residential.
State board.
Should be locked up.
Then I've just seen so many
people this is a suffer a lot
and are seeing my friends try to
go to medical the money he was
medical over over again trying
to get the pain is coming and
listen back would have to be
small right over and over again
is appendix person died and they
wrote off of something else they
told everybody knows is
something else you know you know
it's probably a as a result of
an audit you know so that's
alright.
Thank you and what else on the
side the gentleman with the blue
in the dark shirt yes ma'am good
afternoon on madam chair woman
and members of the legislative
body my name's Adam Griego and I
am and forever will be an impact
member of society.
I'm here to tell you what
happens behind the fence behind
bars in the walls of
institutions you will have to
adapt and overcome every moral
ethical fiber in your body will
be challenged if you've never
had a fist fight in your life on
day one you'll be confronted.
You lose your dignity repeated
strip searches your belongings
are subject to constant rifling
through you'll be told
repeatedly that you're worthless
you'll be denied essential
health care if you're diabetic
as I am.
Your subjected to constant
scrutiny and challenge daily on
the basis of race class and
gender.
You'll hear and see things that
will make you ill effects of
which are visceral the scars
will never heal I have lost
everything in the process and I
mean everything.
You will experience a lifelong
tag or label.
By the overcrowded and
understaffed facilities you'll
deal with there's zero
accountability we deserve better
we deserve to be treated as
human beings incarceration fixes
nothing we need social reform
CENIC engagements know that we
will one day be for rules why
put in the work I'm here to give
a voice to the impacted members
of society House Bill to ninety
seven for the family members
that are left behind thank you.
Thank you and the gentleman over
here in the tan jacket thank you
thank you madam chair members
thank you madam members of the
committee.
My name is Justin our
I spent seventeen years New
Mexico department of corrections
and what what I've experienced
was not rehabilitation.
I was sexually assaulted by a
prison doctor Dr mark Walton and
when I initially reported it I
was left at the transfer to
another facility.
Of what we're subjected to.
I it's introduce and we reported
sometimes were retaliated
against
stereo for rights of well it up
and said were beaten.
and then the on top of all that
one a correction officer abuses
one of us he's paid leave which
was basically a reward so I'm
asking this committee to pass
this bill.
Thank you.
yes ma'am in New Mexico hi Karen
May Day and the tax
I'm not personally.
Affected in my own body but I'm
so glad to see each region
ninety seven urge you to vote
yes on this highly anticipated
an impact for legislation that
would allow transparency in the
workings of the DLC and
legislative mechanism for
inmates as well as staff to see
what their concerns arise
present to be a very dark place
for everyone involved my own son
has been there is an H. P. to
ninety seven channel like that
is so desperately needed.
Thank you Diane yes Sir.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my except by
county community engagement
specialist ACLU and also
individual capacity volunteer to
the public comment on this cause
as communications specialist I
interact a lot with families who
have loved ones or people are
training and conservation and I
can speak to how difficult it is
for families not to note on.
I and also.
We
have.
Alright
I think that this building
ninety seven day off.
I.
Families and I.
I mean there's there's.
No health how about.
Thank you anyone else Josh.
Your members of the committee on
fairness and without me we are
expanding the four section of
this bill and want to Preciado
responsible for reaching out for
having it be part of the
discussion a couple things I do
want to recognize us to actions
of the legislature and the
administration we have found
ways to reduce overcrowding our
facilities which is helpful and
we brought three five percent
back online treatment is amazing
for us not only of those
incarcerated but of the officers
and other staff that we
represent on the bottom line is
this we take the safety and our
facilities very seriously want
to do everything we can to make
our facilities safe not just for
members of of for the
incarcerated as well and we just
want to make sure that we're
part of the discussion in this
he was he was will legislature
on how this news for want to
make sure our discussion because
this is a significant change for
everyone at the table so again
we appreciate being invited to
be part of this and also do want
to recognize recognize a
necklace on the comments that
was made by our secretary if
there are ways that we can work
up to address concerns on this
bill from the from the secretary
side we're open to that as well
because of this is something
that truly is going to be for
the transformative we want to
make sure that we up past the
best bill possible it is in the
best interest for for everyone
involved thank you madam chair
thank you miss I thank you.
Thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is that that
was hi everyone gold futures as
an organization we work with
folks who are currently and
formerly incarcerated.
And we stand in terms of this
bill is no secret told us twenty
one in this committee that ours.
Isn't that jails have in humane
conditions that there's abuse an
over reach I right.
So I think that this bill gets
closer to having some sort of
transparent or staff that we are
not getting so for those reasons
we strongly support each
between.
Thank you is there anyone else
in the audience who wishes to
speak on the in favor of the
bill okay and let's go online I
see a few hands so we are now
are to people's wishing to speak
in favor raise your hands up
Katrina Griego you have up to
two minutes.
Katrina.
You are no I did not raise my
hand you didn't okay
I'm trying to read the next
person nor.
North.
This morning I thank you.
It you may speak.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is
learning so to Sean I'm a
resident of Santa Fe New Mexico
I'm here to urge you to vote on
yes on a need to maybe seven
corrections.
I'm sorry I'm having a hard time
pronouncing every time I read
it.
Percent and advisory board act
thousands of people in prison
suffered abuse and inadequate
care because of the lack of
accountability.
Regarding the concerns of
inmates and staff under no
circumstances should New Mexico
allow for this to happen.
Multiple lawsuits against New
Mexico corrections department
and its medical contractors
reckless medical medical act of
incarcerated people's critical
illnesses since COVID has
impacted our community these
lawsuits involved tool and and
maybe medical neglect and MCD's
and has to be individuals and
which their treatment has been
referred to as medical torture.
HB two ninety seven allow
corrections.
District one to provide
transparency and accountability
in several ways including
compliance to evaluate rules and
policies ensuring that the needs
and concerns of staff and then
because the individuals are
being heard and acted upon
through media reports no
following input from the public.
And for and their families in a
transparent rulemaking process
please vote yes on HSD two
ninety seven thank you thank you
Molly Gil.
Go ahead hi.
I thank you so much for the
opportunity to speak before the
committee today and thank you to
Representative for introducing
such a wonderful bill my name is
Molly Gil I am a Moriarty high
school alumnus and now I live in
Washington DC and Representative
group called pfam FAM am we work
nationwide on sentencing and
prison reform and we support H.
B. two ninety seven I wanted to
just note that in the national
landscape we have done quite a
bit of work on this and recently
conducted a public opinion poll
and found that eighty two
percent of Americans think that
prison oversight is a
Intuitively see prisons as a
dark place a place where we
don't know what's going on and
we need to like twenty
transparency we need
accountability and those numbers
were extremely high across all
political parties I will say
that recommend as bill is in
line with what's being done in
other places around the country
Washington state Ohio
Pennsylvania New York all have
oversight bodies with very
similar powers so is New Jersey
and numerous other states are
considering adopting a similar
measure like Virginia Maryland
Missouri Mississippi and as very
mentioned the Arizona governor
just created an independent
oversight commission as others
have said here there are other
forms of oversight like audits
they are sporadic and they are
notified in advance and so as
they said that they can hide
problems.
Is operate twenty four hours a
day three hundred sixty five
days a year we need oversight
they can be in there every day
so the legislature knows what's
going on and knows what the
problems are and how to fix them
thank you thank you.
for trying to read the names.
Ivan.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
even but just I am involved in
two separate organizations in
New Mexico I'm the director for
policy change not a member the
smart Justice advocacy program
and that you know you can
access.
Firstly I would like to outline
how each feature ninety seven at
the back to the legislation our
our our course of the thank you
see in your Mexico has the
potential to bring the much
needed change of reform are not
just New Mexico the bill known
it HB nineteen ninety seven this
is the correct and on the first
of the New Mexico correct part
and we all know the criminal
justice system in our country
and long been in need of reform
there are many instances of
abuse neglect another indication
that are present and H. B. two
ninety economic correction point
putting more just affect.
But one that prioritizes the
well being in human dignity of
all individual a correction on
the first because that was right
behind it will be a neutral
objective individual will have
the power to validate compliance
with statutes review the
efficacy of everything
programming and identify
systemic issues that may lead to
neglect or abuse that in making
prisoners and parolees
additionally additionally eighty
to ninety seven establishes the
public and transparent
rulemaking process this mean to
the point the party people the
family the general public will
be heard consider the decision
making process doctors will also
have the ability to investigate
complaints promote
accountability and thank you and
at the the benefits of HB to
ninety seven or where it will
improve the lives of those
impacted by our criminal justice
in New Mexico and about
accountability and transparency
and help create more more more
adjusted that for all in
conclusion I urge you to for
each ninety seven the both the
critical step towards being more
after the luncheon in New Mexico
for all that is working that
means positive change and lastly
I think that the most important
point is that you all here today
or the the formally party people
and I wish those the the voice
that they can remind us when
considering a to support
legislation thank you thank you
and Leslie Riley Johnson.
Riley.
You need a new year's I there
you go.
The floor is yours Riley.
Riley we're having trouble
hearing you are you.
Riley.
I think maybe there's some
problem with your your audio or
something really because we
can't hear you so sorry about
that but glad you joined us and
help you stay on the line of
okay back to the sponsored is
there anything to say in
conclusion Representative before
we go to the committee the madam
chair thank you right so I have
Representative McQueen.
Thank you madam chair.
The.
In a hi
I support what you're trying to
do I have some
questions answered about the
mechanics of how you do it in in
particular the.
The structure and function of
the commission.
as I mentioned previously in our
conversation.
I've worked on a number of
different bills commission type
bills I I have one.
Working its way through the
legislature now
I've become adept at.
Figuring out problems and
lessons that that sort of.
the story of our lives.
So Madam chair representative
on.
Story on page three section for
the commission.
You have a wide variety of
people.
And then you choose they will
coordinate.
and that's going to be you know
herding cats.
it I think you might want to
consider a different approach.
you could give the governor a
certain number of appointees.
With certain requirements
the approach I've used in
my bill is the governor has
would have three appointees and.
The governor would have to pick
one from each congressional
district.
And no more than one from anyone
County since our congressional
districts.
Sometimes include
Kelly sometimes include multiple
congressional district.
You could do a similar approach
with the Legislative Council.
I'm sorry I'm second after.
As a problem
Of.
For some of these positions
ointments said having The New
Mexico sentencing commission
appoint someone.
You could make and I don't know
much about this hello I think
that's sentencing commission.
You can make the head of the
sentencing commission or their
designees a member of the
committee.
the same could be true for the
administrative office of the
courts me I think it it makes
sense to.
Have those points of view on on
the committee but rather than
going to process them appointing
someone.
just a short term on the
committee right.
The labor union
A press different ways to
address that as well.
When the questions I had you
have a program staggering the
terms.
everyone tries to secretary Ms
and no one keeps the staff
So the so the question is if
someone's appointed to four year
term in the Sir for here in the
state it's too much work.
In in the new person this new
person get a three year term or
do they get their own four year
term.
So how do you keep the stagger.
Yeah of course part of how you
keep the secretary Madam chair
representative.
It raises questions of have TV
removed.
You know are you when you get a
four year term.
Can the appointing a person or
body.
Remove you it will.
Or is there some standard
process
because we've seen on there's
lots of committees that.
One of the first things and you
governor will have to do.
Is you know fill out all the the
boards and committees and it's
it's I think it's a.
It's a major effort so that's
something to think about.
Of.
And then also whether there's a
standard.
for that removal.
in finally.
I believe the secretary had some
concerns about.
Office of interest and things
like that.
Madam chair representative you
do say that there.
the title to per diem it it
makes sense to me that they
would also be subject to.
Think it will conduct act in the
gift act which I think with
address many of those concerns
about potential conflicts.
So that this would be my
thoughts about the the
structure.
And madam chair I can I think
I'll just leave it at that thank
you thank you so I have
Representative Nibert lanes
said Penske and Chasey so
Representative nine point oh and
Representative all on.
Thank you madam chair just a
couple of probably more comments
and questions but Madam chair
representative of United talked
a little bit about the who would
oversee this this role and I and
I'm not on page two you say goes
to department of finance and
administration and I don't know
if you had a chance to consider
maybe some of my comments
whether there's another agency
that should really
Be overseeing their size
suggested maybe that part of the
public safety but it just seems
like there may be another agency
that should do that I understand
why you don't want to be part of
department of corrections but
department of finance and
ministration just seems like an
odd agency to put this under
them my second comment madam
chair and representative of I
think we saw some somewhere
legislation a year to go I just
ask you in light of the sectors
COVID maybe to sit down to try
to resolve some of those
differences with the secretary
and I'd certainly like to see on
paper what those might be
the resolution because I I think
I could really support this
particularly if it's something
that the secretary can by so I
just encourage you to to maybe.
Sit down see if there's some
things that can be done and and
likewise address some of the
things that Representative
McQueen brought up thank you
madam chair thank you.
Secretary might have a minute
not actually debate but just to
confirm and clarify starting of
thank you for the concrete
tenant tangible suggestions
madam chair and Representative
McQueen I also I feel like we
might have sent spent a
frustrated our in my office like
coordinate that sounds very
lofty to expect all these
appointee buddies to somehow
coordinate but the sale item for
the listening public we've seen
these fiascos right PRC also the
places we did get anyone from
southern New Mexico we don't get
any indigenous people so we were
admitting to ourselves we don't
know the answer we got to go
there's gonna be some really
helpful and supportive people
that will help us figure this
out so certainly I know that we
would like to explore some of
these possibilities that you
suggested and also agree with
your other suggestions
and thank you the the one
clarification representative
Nibert we have begun considering
that and if folks have what they
feel to be a more appropriate
landing spot to clarify we don't
think there should be a home
that oversees the work of this
independent board but that just
serves as an administrative arm
for the initial set up we picked
DFA that's where the ethics
committee got its home but
really as I've understood that
process so money was moved to
DFA I believe they contracted
with someone to send out the
email say that these positions
are available do some of the
behind the scenes coordinating
with the appointing bodies and
then once the committees in this
case the board is up and
established they then can move
through their own operations so
it's not to oversee or engage in
any direct way but it's really
just an administrative place for
that initial.
launch if the and and if there
is clarifying language or or
things we need to do to fix that
and and state in that order
start that lunch somewhere else
will will hold some openness and
still hold openness for that.
Madam chair and in in that
regard
I don't think unlike the ethics
commission which was
constitutionally mandated I
don't think you want to have
just a body out there that.
Isn't.
Under somebody
and so it seems to me that you
need to pick an agency.
For a variety of reasons number
one.
Some some control rulemaking
authority a lot of other things
that would go with that but
probably most importantly
budgeting so so I mean if if DFA
is it.
Fine but it just seems are not
fit and I I would suggest
department of public safety or
some some other agency would
maybe be more in line with what
you're trying to accomplish
thank you madam chair after.
Thank you Representative lane.
Thank you madam chair I the
question is Google suggestions
And I don't.
I don't know if the sponsor
answers Madam but why why is
there no rulemaking with regard
to this agency.
Thank you madam chair
representative laying we went
back and forth on that and had
that in one of the draft's of
our legislation.
We decided at the onset of
course that the focus of this
was to try to compel the
corrections department to go to
real making themselves here we
stuck to policies and procedures
it's something that we would
consider putting back but for
now we felt that the advisory
board and the kind of
transparency and public
engagement they're set to have
the impetus of that could
potentially be enough to get
going in this way at this point
they have a pretty limited
budget they don't have staff and
they don't have the capacity and
I've I see is the obligation of
state agencies to go to rules in
that same kind of way but if it
was something that the members
felt like we should commit to
and follow through and then yes
we've had that in previous
drafts we struck it out of this
one.
We were back and forth on that
point the.
Madam chair of section six of
the bill.
In the rate of the line.
So.
Madam as I understand this
provision the ombudsman can come
in and.
And do investigations and look
into sort of what's going on
with the particular incident and
the manager I'm just wondering
something for the sponsor think
about.
paragraph in particular kind of
what you're it for me but
Bussmann has access to all of
the records and documents of the
in me and I just think of things
like medical records that are
that are very private and so I'm
just wondering if you want to
invest in here concept of upon
the request of the inmate for
with the consent of the in maybe
because of the way that I read
these paragraphs is them but
then just has the authority to
just going to do these things
whether the the in may once or
not and so maybe just build in
that concept to make sure that.
Nothing that's private and
confidential is a building
bridge there.
And then madam chair the lasting
a page for
so the board that's being
comprised.
Just a suggestion if you're
gonna.
Stick with the current framework
and if you're gonna have four
members from ledge Council.
I would request that you have to
from each political party the
one make this is non partisan as
possible and.
not suggesting that the let's
councils and table of that I
think they are
but just the numbers on there I
think what's council's self
would in theory prevent
representation from from a minor
political party so thank you
madam chair thank you just to
kind of get a feel for where we
gun what I'm hearing is people.
Like the concept like the bill
have some suggestions my city my
recommendation as we hear
people's issues I think we're
going to probably ask you to
work with the committee and come
back with the committee order so
let's get those issues out and
then we can help Representative
I think the concept people are
very much behind in much of your
bill so with that we are on
Representative some pants.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative on brief but
first of all Representative an
expert I just wanted to thank
you for working with the agency
working with the community I
know it can seem daunting to
testify in front of a committee
like this but it's so important
and it makes our process better
so thank you for for doing that
important work Representative
McQueen covered many of my
suggestions
as someone who had to deal a lot
with making appointments
recommendations for appointments
I got very familiar with some of
the holes that we have in our
existing boards and commissions
statutes
I think my only additional
suggestion would be to consider
either having the board adopt a
code of ethics or code of
conduct
and also contemplate financial
disclosures I think
My colleague suggested also
making the board subject to the
G. CA the governmental conduct
act the gifts Act which make may
cover some of those concerns but
I think you could look toward
the bioscience Authority or the
S. I see.
or the ethics commission access
models for those kinds of codes
of conduct and financial
disclosures particularly the S.
icy requires an extensive
financial disclosure which which
may be more than you need but
just a suggestion for places to
look.
You madam chair.
Representative.
Thank you so much madam chair
and I really appreciate
Representative cut and is work
on this and
and Barron Jones I appreciate
your your unsupported testimony
and so I don't have specific
suggestions but I'd like to make
a few comments because this is
an issue of actually worked on
for over ten years myself
nothing came to fruition but
I remember driving.
From a ski trip in Colorado on
February third of nineteen
eighty and seeing smoke coming
out of all may.
And
it was before you were born
Representative Martinez.
And
it was very disturbing.
This is not been.
This is the time to do this this
was not right you had a lot to
fix them and Meghan is some of
the people we.
Hear from regularly interviewed
prisoners Jeff Bingaman marked
on a tally and they.
Stated in the area of of what
happened in.
One eight some people died and
some people didn't die but
I first learned about
independent oversight
corrections from the founder of
Peavey NJ family services who
had looked at the work that
president George W. bush
initiated when he appointed the
prison rape elimination act
board and it was a public and
private and public board and
congressional board so there
were members of both parties in
Congress and members of the
public who developed the prison
rape elimination act and they
made recommendations and one of
their top recommendation was
that recommendations was that
every state should have
independent oversight of
corrections and
I.
I.
Never brought this up.
To punish.
A correction secretary or the
system I want the best system
you know we heard from Josh
representing the workers
we have colleagues who have who
have friends and neighbors who
work in the in our facilities we
want them to feel safe we would.
We wanted to be a real
correctional system and we want
it to work well we will and
frankly I think we should you
know really elevate the
profession of the corrections
officers in that that maybe for
another day but this could be
this could be the beginning so I
I really wanted to
To.
Explain my commitment it's it's
not about.
All the wrongdoing of either the
presenters or the
folks in the presence but it's a
tough job and one of our own
actually since that time there
I'm sure we're gonna hear from
him along the way.
And
He was forced to be there though
so.
Which is a good thing and I
I I just really want the best
for our state and for our
community and what the people
get out when they're standing
next to me in the grocery line I
want them to be.
Really healthy and productive
and
I I just I want the best and we
really do want to try to help
thank you madam chair
Representative.
Representative L. column Rehm
and then Martinez.
Thank you madam chair you know.
Admit that are a lot of hard
work with this hello do this
because I just don't see what
the number.
But not receive packet to the
state to work with the I would
ever to be appointed to a whole
lot.
We remain three of the days when
US impression.
They would take the grand jury
from mom Senator Paypen.
And welcome to this to the
facility.
And just like that how do we go
when we we just of others at the
facility they would just see the
best part of the facility.
They wouldn't to the whole
facility because of the open it
up to everybody I guess the
whole thing I mean they can't.
So I believe it's just totally
the of this person.
I'm in.
They're not in power to do
anything really I'll be going to
do is be a reporter and take
records and then complain to
somebody.
But they have no power.
And right now I can tell you
this because it's no different
than when I was in person a long
long time ago and I say that I
was in prison.
Not because I was Representative
Chasey said it I wasn't I wasn't
locked in the person but once
you got into that person you
didn't know if you were going to
leave because you did not leave
until somebody took your keys
away from you and the to go
home.
So they give you their for
sixteen hours they get to the
for sixteen hours that's all
there was to it it didn't matter
what I do the same thing today.
Even today those currents a lot
of answers do not know would
give them the whole they don't
know they're going to go to
their son's little league game
that of their equipment and
their granddaughter their
daughters a
dance rehearsal they don't know
that all they know is that
they're going to go to work.
The hardest job in the world
it's the most underpaid job in
the world and to all honesty to
be a correctional officer you
have to learn to really be.
I don't know how to say this to
really take be.
The hard way.
Because not only does that seal.
Get mistreated by the people
that he is supposed to be
supervising but if anything goes
down.
That top comes down on them so
that C. O. that is we are
underpaid gets hit from every
side but now we want but
somebody else here.
That's going to.
I don't know what to do I don't
know what.
And I don't care how we up until
how we appointed people that a
point this person.
Thank.
Because the department of
corrections is the hardest
Department in the state of New
Mexico to run I'm going to say
to keep those corrections
secretary how many correction
secretaries have we had enough
working here for fifteen years
set up the and the legislature I
get.
The state governor bill.
Correction secretaries are
almost a school superintendents
whenever you go to the school
system school superintendent fly
back and forth let's see a
correction secretaries are just
the same.
And to keep a good correctional
secretary we gotta make it to
where we can work with that
person.
And in order to make it to where
we can within that person we got
a fund that person and not
funding somebody that's going to
sit there and.
And do what I don't know.
They have no power to take
report I.
The newspaper does that.
The value of New Mexican
eternally that every day I
really don't understand the
purpose of this on but.
with that that in chair I I just
don't know if you're gonna
correct if you could fix this if
you do whatever you do with it
you still get improved to me
that this is a position that we
need I and that's all I can say
thank you madam chair thank you
thank you representative
Representative Rehm thank you
madam chair and representative
thanks for stopping by yesterday
unfortunately I hadn't read the
bill at that time but when we go
to page one and we go to one
twenty two we talk about a
volunteer I'm unaware of a
volunteer in the
of the prison system can you do
we have volunteers I guess all
of.
I'm Madam chair representative
absolutely voluntary Servilia
important roles and connecting
people that are incarcerated in
under the supervision of the
department back to communities
back to purpose back to working
on themselves so those folks in
in the time that I was at the
corrections department it was
actually the chaplains at each
present that would oversee the
volunteer programming and they
had the rumen Authority if
someone came to them with the
proposal whether it was a book
club or a prayer group um or
something of the sorts sometimes
it was more substantial and I
had to do with the programming
for someone sometimes I had to
do with something like family
reunification and parenting
classes but there are people who
routinely as far as I still
understand come inside the
correction facilities and serve
in different capacities to do
different elements of inmate
programming.
Thank you madam chair let's uh
go to page for the bottom one
twenty five the four members of
formerly incarcerated goes over
on page five I think you want to
make those individuals that
their final doubt you know the
they've done their term at and
then I think you want to make
sure that that they were do you
know of in good standing at the
present not a disruptive
individual.
Of you do but in the.
I would certainly appreciate
those considerations and.
Thank you.
you madam chair and
representative we go to page six
down to one twenty four and
twenty five.
You know I can understand why
you want to I could go directly
to your group but I think you
want to use the current process
within the present first
otherwise everybody's gonna skip
it comes straight to use so you
may want to think about how to
do that Madam chair
representative on that one
to be clear as pointed out by
our colleague over here this
body will have no means to
actually enforce any resolution
at the end of their
investigation well if the person
who filed the complaint
consensus they can then find the
key findings of that
investigation back to the
Department which may or may not
pick something up and address
something within their thirty
and within their department
but this part that's why it felt
separate for us because we will
have no mechanism to bring
resolution they may decide in
fact that they've either pursue
that grievance process or not
but this could be part of a
greater collection of reporting
of documentation of
Objective review into what's
happening that could turn into
something different like a
legislative recommendation or
administrative recommendation so
we do see those a separate
because again there's no
enforceability or resolution to
come with the investigations and
the findings through them but
the office for the M. eight
percent and on the board.
KM madam chair and
representative take you to page
seven one seven the you know the
what they're not going to
investigate and I think you
ought to put in there also
prosecutor and the defense
attorney.
So that you know which not
complaining about I had a poor
turning.
And I think that's all thanks
madam chair thank you thank you
representative Representative
speaker Martinez thank you madam
chair and thank you
Representative Lara Cadena for
bringing this forward
I I we didn't we get to talk
directly about this bill but I
did talk to to my staff earlier
and and just sitting here doing
my due diligence reading through
and reading the analyses
Probably very much needed Madam
chair and representative.
Whenever you have a.
The structural power
particularly in government.
That is not.
That is not checked in that
power by some agency
That's a problem and we see it
throughout state government.
as it relates to a number of
different departments and a
number of different issues about
a number of different subject
areas.
I think what you for today is
very constructive feedback
Some of the feedback I've heard
I think it's it's pretty.
Black and white I think makes
you feel stronger of the one
about the the advisory board
it's harder because I don't
think there's a right answer
although we did hear really good
feedback on how to structure
that I appreciate my colleagues
A commendation that maybe you
have.
Majority minority party well
represented
That's that's a good that's a
good suggestion but I don't know
that you'll find the perfect fit
right so I I can appreciate how
hard that's going to be but I do
want to
speak in support of this I think
this is needed to my surprise
some of the gentleman who spoke
you today actually know that
from my other life and and I
know that they struggled
horribly behind prison walls up
that's not a judgment on the
institution itself on the good
people that work there and run
it
two Representative Michael's
point those folks also are
behind those walls and and
struggling sometimes with
Work shifts are too long and pay
that is probably too low so very
much needed very refreshing in
terms of a policy and you know I
hope that you can take the
suggestions of building into
bill and and I look forward to
seeing it back again soon thank
you Representative Lara and I
think you chairwoman thank I
just have a couple comments and
we can talk about process going
forward
I think this is definitely need.
And what I I would ask the
secretary and the employees in
the department to be open to
this this is gonna help the
institution long term I there's
always a reticence to have
another entity come in and work
on issues and it is a
threatening thing that's a very
natural human reaction that any.
Person or entity or group of
people who definitely I'm sure
are working very hard to do a
good job there's no way this is
not a criticism of the secretary
previous secretaries or and
definitely not the staff in the
prisons they have very hard jobs
very hard jobs but this could be
a mechanism to assist in that as
well because they will have
opportunities to raise concerns
that can be elevated and
addressed and so I think this is
a potential for a win win if we
can get the administration and
those working in the prisons to
embrace it as well so this could
be very helpful on the whole so
going forward Representative
you've heard some suggestions I
saw you taking very good note so
members are very open to up
being approached if you need
clarification or suggestions or
whatever so
we would recommend you roll the
bill come back with the
committees of will take it up
again as quickly as we can will
focus on the changes you made I
don't want to re visit the whole
thing and hopefully we can help
you passes out of so thank you
for your hard work both of you
you as well parent Preciado
thank you L. yes Representative
sorry madam chair before she
brings a committee set back
officially it might be helpful
to have a draft circulated to
maybe look at real quick thank
I'm sure the Representative yes
the amendment very good okay
thank you all right well thank
you for the great bill and
working from four to thank you
all right just a few
administrative things we are
meeting on Friday we are not
meeting this weekend because
there are so many special things
happen.
That I have no interest in and
didn't even know was going on
until I suggested Sunday
afternoon.
We may have a little bit longer
agenda on Monday.
There's always pain somewhere.
Even.
