Testing, testing, testing.
That's not it.
Yeah, and then halls here. OK,
so he was here? Yeah, actually.
OK, all the,
you know,
I, actually,
no.
And
Instead of
95.
I see.
That's
Yeah I get it now.
Marine has.
It's too.
Testing, testing.
OK.
OK
I suppose.
Testing, testing, testing,
testing.
But there is
The sing, ting, testing.
Just
S.
Testing, testing, closed
caption, 123.
testing.
Justin.
Just
Testing 123.
123.
I
Testing
Yes.
Testing, testing.
Yeah, I'm just curious. Uh, I
can hear you. Um.
For some reason it's showing up
as a meeting. I don't know why
to show up as a webinar.
But it's OK. Uh, I'm just
confused. I know, I think the
one that's meeting here, do you
know 309, I think it's gonna be.
H
HJC
Um, let me make sure though.
Say that again,
the, the committee that's
meeting in here, the, the Zoom
account that you need to be in.
Should, I think it's uh
Did, did they tell you or did
they just say it was, it says
H E C H O R.
They told you it was gonna be
that today?
I'm not sure. I haven't asked.
OK. Let me, let me find out, um.
So we have HS.
That's what she says. It's
supposed to be HJC.
Yeah.
Pitch
OK, that's House Judiciary
Committee. All right, um.
Uh, sign out of this one and
then sign into HJC.
Got you. All right.
I'm gonna leave, OK? All right.
Thank you.
Just
Testing
HJC test.
You guys can hear me, right?
Thumbs up.
But
I can hear you now.
Yes we can hear you too.
Webcast is working too.
For Zoom. All right, I think
we're good to go.
So they're gonna set um do you
have that laptop? It's supposed
to be there at the presenter
table with an HDMI cable.
OK, I.
American, can you ask the
question again?
Where's the, the laptop?
Are you asking about my laptop
or is there any laptop for?
There's supposed to be a
presenter laptop in the middle
of the table.
Um, I believe Karen Romero might
have it.
Um
Let me find out.
Yes, I do have the laptop.
OK, so I have 3 extras.
OK, um, just plug it into the
middle of the table and test
that.
Make sure it's logged in.
Um,
get out of here.
But in what table, Ramiro?
The presenter table that's
underneath the
In the middle of the room. Oh,
got you, got you.
And uh do you see HDMI cable.
Plugged into that area. If not,
it's probably underneath the
cabinets.
Where the remotes were.
Uh, yeah, I do see the HMR.
Testing, testing.
Loud and clear
All right. I'm using the mic
that's next to the laptop, the
presenter's table.
OK, log in to uh HJC user
session. What does it say there?
What's, what's the, what's the
username there?
Houses.
Uh,
it's interesting.
Uh, yeah, log into HJC.
Other user and password session
25
2025.
OK, what's the username? HJC.
No, just, just uh HJC. That's
it.
Yes
All right, um, signing in.
And just um check, make sure
that the, that the um
Click on the email. I just want
to make sure it's signed into
all the apps.
Um, open up the, the outlook.
It was supposed to be already
set up. It it is.
All right. So, um, open up
PowerPoint, make sure that
that's working and then that's
it, just PowerPoint and then uh.
There are more points
minimize the teams and stuff
like all the unnecessary stuff.
I have
34 emails saying that uh
judiciary.
OK, we'll just leave that open
in case they wanna send HJC the
presentation, they can open it
from there.
Um
And then, uh
When
I, the, the hard part's gonna be
Um, trying to keep life captions
open.
So keep life uh turn on life
captions.
And when they open a
presentation,
It should just uh fit on the
screen with the like captions.
Uh,
do you want, you want me to open
the live captions on the ground.
President or laptop or the one
that we're using on the
That's a good question, um,
because if you switch screens,
Yeah,
yeah, it's not gonna captions
here, yeah, where you're at now.
So just keep the live captions
up on there and then when the
guy, when the presenter opens up
the laptop.
Just need the, the laptop
running the way it is. Make
sure, uh, the sleep settings are
set to never sleep.
And um,
There's a, is there a charger
there? Make sure it's charged up
too.
There's no charger, um,
I don't see any charger here.
OK.
Maybe I'm a chick at the back.
OK.
Yes, I got the torture in the
back.
Mm
OK, cool.
All right,
the live actions on the
presenter lab.
Probably, uh,
information.
And uh, are, is it working when,
when you're speaking cause this,
I can't see it.
They don't.
Right.
Yeah,
let me
going to the question.
Does, does, does.
123,
no, no.
Or, um, and then you gotta go to
the gear.
Right, and enable the microphone
on the settings. So go to the
gear icon, pre preferences.
Enable Mike.
Yes, yes, it was just.
We can we can
Cool.
All right.
That looks good.
And you right, I wanna, uh,
I'm gonna sign off.
All right, thanks.
So
There's test.
Test, test.
Yes
this
Hey guys, it's not gonna let
you, um, if you
slide show, the closed captions
disappears.
Yeah, so, so there won't be any
closed captions if it's uh.
full screen slide show, but.
Rami, can you see the screen?
Are you guys sharing it or what?
I,
this is not.
Is this a a subcommittee?
Mhm
I
Yeah, sorry.
Just
Testing.
The
Madam Vice Chair.
Madam Chair, here.
We have a corn.
Thank you. um, and thanks to
Madam Chair, uh, for helping us
in organizing this meeting,
we've called folks together, um,
today to provide some
information from our experts in
the state to talk about how
federal funding flows into our
state agencies and local
governments, um, we, um, have
had some
Interesting times, um, in
dealing with what the
implication is, how the systems
work, and I think for our
lawmakers here, we'd really love
to be informed about what it is
that um our how it is our
systems work, so, um, we've
called in our um New Mexico
Department of Justice, um, our
Department of Finance and
Administration.
And to just provide some
information regarding how that
all works. So we'll just offer
the floor and we'll take
questions from the members after
each presentation.
Go ahead. You have the floor
mark. OK, Madam Chair, good,
good afternoon. Thank you for
having us today. I'm gonna go
over a quick presentation kind
of on the state agency side of
of the flow of of the federal
funding in and out of the state
agencies, Cecilia next to me,
she can talk a little bit more
about the local public body side
of it and then James from the
office so
moving on to the second slide.
How, how do federal funds get
into New Mexico and there's,
there's a handful of ways that
that fund funding comes to our
state for direct payments and
that's usually in the form of
payments to individuals like
Medicaid or Medicare, SNAP, um,
just.
direct payments. Then the second
is, are the grants. I don't know
if this is cutting in and out,
sorry.
Our grants and the grants are
kind of the big piece that we'll
be talking about today because
that's the money that comes to
the state and the local
governments, which includes like
Medicaid, highway programs,
education assistance, and and a
lot of the things that are in
our budget.
Just,
yeah,
can't do two things at once.
Um, then there's procurement, so
the, the federal purchasing of
goods and services from from
folks in New Mexico and then you
have salaries and wages paid to
the folks that live here that
work for the feds both on the
the civilian and the military
side. So those are kind of the
four buckets of money that the
state would see from the federal
government.
Moving on to the, the next slide
here.
Excuse me. This is kind of a
breakdown of what we see at the
state agency level from a
budgetary perspective and, and
the numbers that I've provided
for you here, this is um audited
financial statement numbers from
fiscal year 24. So in fiscal
year 24, the biggest bulk of
federal funding that we received
was from 8.5 billion and that's
the Health and Human Services
which includes Medicaid and
that's gonna be the biggest
portion of the federal funding
that we see as a state within
our budget.
And then 2.6
This is cutting out. 2.6 is um
interior, which is like federal
mineral leasing rights, that's
the royalty rights that the feds
pay the state for for the lands
and the and the general rights
here in New Mexico.
And then just a few of the
smaller ones, 636 million for
transportation, 364 for
education, 341 for for
agriculture. So that's, that's
kind of the bulk of, of what
we're seeing as a state and it
changes a little bit year over
year, but that's kind of what's
built into our base budget and
that's from fiscal year 24's
audited financial statements.
Moving on, what's uh the types
of federal funding and the types
of grants at the state and even
local public bodies can, can,
can receive from the feds, which
makes up that that budgetary
number you have block grants.
Um, kind of for broad purposes
approved or appropriated to the
agencies are awarded to the
state and in block grants like
the CDBG, um.
Cecilia is very familiar with
the community development block
grant we receive every year and
so do some of the local public
bodies. You have competitive
grants which are those that
states and locals have to kind
of apply for and go through a
competitive process to, to
receive, and you have
formula-driven grants where the
the recipient is predetermined
and how much they receive is
based off of like a mathematical
calculation built into the
federal funding formula.
you have project grants.
Um
again, very similar, you apply
for those project grants and
then you follow the criteria
matching grants and the
conditional grants. So so
there's, there's a lot of
different types of grants. Some
are things that you have to
competitively apply for.
apply for
You want to switch? Try this one
in the middle.
Sorry, it keeps
Cutting out. Can you
go.
OK. There's a lot of grants on
that you have to apply for some
that are just kind of um on a
mathematical calculation and,
and then you also have things at
times like ARPA and SLRF which
don't always fall into these
buckets, but those are, you
know, during disasters and
things like that. So that's kind
of the, the, the realm of what
the federal funding is.
Sorry, can you say what SRLF is
SLRF is the state and local
recovery funds which we saw
during the COVID times. That was
one of the big programs out of
the ARPA, yeah.
Sorry.
So moving on to the next slide
here, how does this state and I
think this is, this is probably
one of the really important
things for all of us to be.
Um
Kind of aware of is how do we
get the money?
The, the feds really of the
federal government gives you two
options mainly for receiving
money from, from their coffers
and reimbursement, meaning you
have to expand meet all of the
criteria and then submit like
drawdown requests from the
federal government to be able to
receive the funding. So you're,
you're in essence kind of
floating the upfront costs and
then they're reimbursing you on
the back end for all those
eligible costs.
And then advance payment. So you
can, you can apply and most
times they will give you a
percentage upfront and then you
have to request the rest. So
those are the two main options
that the federal government has.
For state agencies.
We pretty much receive
everything at the state level on
a reimbursement basis. We are
floating almost all of the
federal grants that we have.
And then we're submitting a
drawdown request, whether it's
weekly, monthly or quarterly
depending on what the grant is
at the local level, that might
be a little bit different and
and can share that.
But that's, that's, those are
the two ways and I think
Monday and Tuesday of this week
was when some of this, where we
saw a disruption in some of this
um.
the executive order that was
issued didn't reference a lot of
the programs that we have, but
some of the portals where folks
go and um submit their
drawdowns, kind of, I don't want
to say they were shut down, but
folks are having trouble
accessing them. They're having
trouble getting in and
submitting the drawdowns. As of
today, as far as I know, most of
that's been taken care of and
they're still able to, that,
that's what we saw on Monday and
Tuesday and that's where a lot
of the chaos and kind of
confusion started at the
beginning of this week as far as
I know for now it's, it's gotten
a little bit better there.
OK.
Trying to kind of jumped ahead
to the next slide, but uh the
state of New Mexico we do
generally get most of our
funding from, from on the
reimbursement basis, you know,
that, that requires the
agencies, the recipients to
track all their expenditures,
know the oversight guidance,
make sure that they're following
the rules, make sure that
they're reconciling that they
have all the proper
documentation because if you
don't and you submit a drawdown
request to the feds. There's
times where they would deny that
if you're not following all the
rules, and that last, the last
point there I think is really
important, timely drawing.
What sometimes what we see is
folks are waiting to draw down
on a monthly basis or a
quarterly basis when they may
have the ability to do it
sooner, like daily drawdowns or
weekly drawdowns. So it's really
important for, for all of us in
state government to know what
we're allowed to draw down for
and as soon as we're ready to do
it, we should do it and not
wait, and that's something that
we really need to focus on, I
think right now in case there's
any other disruptions if we're
drawing down, you know, weekly
instead of monthly, we'll be
getting that cash coming in
quicker.
So that's my quick kind of
presentation over just the
overall process for the state,
um, just so you all are aware
because I haven't been in front
of this committee before, but
the state controller's office
were part of a financial control
division at DFA. We oversee the,
the financing and the accounting
aspects of this of state
government for for all the state
agencies um that includes
setting policies and, and
preparing and issuing the
comprehensive um financial
report every year, the AC for we
do that, we, we maintain the
state's payroll system.
All 23,000 employees get paid
through our office. We manage
all the vendors, we manage all
the payments that go out of our
AP system.
We also monitor, reconcile and
manage cash balances, which
really has an important effect
on federal funding here.
Cash is cash is important when
you're, you're doing those
drawdowns and things so our
office is managing the, the flow
of that and then we oversee the
the state's ERP system, so
share, so the system that all of
these state agencies are using
to receive their federal grants
and make their expenditures, we,
we manage that within our
department at DFA2, which is one
of the biggest ones you'll see
across the country.
And um we have a chief financial
officer who we call our mobile
chief financial officer who we
can dispatch around the state to
to any state agency that has
lost their CFO or just need some
help and you're struggling and I
can tell you federal funding is
one of the things that we're
always going to assist with
because a lot of agencies
sometimes struggle with the
reporting aspects, the drawdown
aspects. So we also have folks
in our office that can do that.
And I will stand for questions
after.
The folks go
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, um,
it's great to see you all today.
This is a very complex topic. I
think Mark did a fantastic job
of going over what federal funds
look like.
Granted, there is a little bit
of a different oversight role
that DFA has for our local
entities when it gets to that,
but I will briefly go over some
of those examples with you all.
Understanding that this topic as
it relates to federal funding in
the state of New Mexico is
neither one that is brief nor
simple to elaborate on. We will
do our best to consolidate the
information relating to the
receipt of these federal
dollars, their expenditures and
how this money may be used in
practice and varying degrees of
government within our state.
There are several types of
federal funds, and I can explain
to you a little bit of that flow
if you'd like to, um, Mark, I
think did a great job of doing
that, uh, with the difference
that at the local government
level, you have individuals that
go and apply for these grant and
exercise their roles as the
grantee independently of the
state in some cases.
The use and applicability of
these funds vary greatly between
the local levels of government,
as well as the state agency
levels in regards to oversight
again uh funding does not.
Necessarily always have to flow
through a state agency to get
down to our local, our local
governments.
However, in accordance with
section 662, the Department of
Finance and Administration,
local government division, and I
apologize. My name is Cecilia
Mavro Mattis. I am the local
government division director. I
apologize.
I now you know that our
division, um, we authorize the
proposed budgets and their
expenditures for our local
governments. However, it is
important to note that this
measure only applies to the use
of general funds. Sometimes, um,
your communities will tell you
that they present their budgets
to DFA and they work with us to
balance their revenues and their
expenditures, and that is the
local government division, um,
keeping in mind that is the use
of their general funds, not
necessarily everything else that
they're, they're working with.
Um, while we provide assistance
to our local entities and
relations to their finances and
expenditures, the use of federal
funds unless it's received at
the state level, such as HUD,
um, they're monitored and
operated explicitly at that
local government level. Um, uh,
again, I can go over some grant
examples of of what you might
have in your community if you'd
like in regards to competitive
grants or formula grants, um,
there is no one size fits all
with local governments. I'm sure
you are all very familiar.
with that, the autonomy is the
beauty of New Mexico and the way
that they operate and exist with
grants and federal grants is, is
unique to their communities and,
and what they intend to serve.
Um
However, our division, I, I know
I'm sitting before you all today
and I'm letting you know that we
work on balancing their revenues
and their expenditures and it
only relates to general fund and
and GRT and these things, uh.
This is something that has been
jarring to our community as well
as our nonprofits, uh,
especially what's happened on
Monday.
So however or whatever it is
that our division does in
regards to those budgets. It, it
is to be reminded that our
division will always remain open
for consultation regarding the
use of any funds should the
local public body require
assistance whatsoever. We may
not be able to do the drawdown
requests. We may not be able to
do everything, you know, cradle
to grave for them, however, I do
believe we have the expertise
that they need to, to at least
consult with us, I think that's
what we're here for.
Um, we understand that there may
be more questions that present
themselves both at this hearing
as well as the coming days and
weeks, however, I can briefly
highlight some of our more
frequently received questions
that we've received at the local
government level, um, this also
goes along with our nonprofits
at the state. I know we hear it
every time, um, we do not anti
donation, we don't work directly
with nonprofits. That's not
necessarily what I'm referring
to here, what I'm referring to
is we have nonprofit
organizations that work with.
The cities is that get federal
money and they're a little
freaked out. Think of your
domestic violence shelters, you
think about, um, serving the
youth and sometimes they just
look for a resource that will
answer their phone and, and
that's what we're here for, so,
um,
I can go over these, but I think
I will save them for the end
because I might have those
answers, but with that, Madam
Chair, I will pass it to.
James
James.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
members of the committee, uh,
thank you for the opportunity to
speak to you today. I'm James
Grayson. I'm the chief deputy to
the New Mexico Department of
Justice, and I just wanted to
share a couple of things from,
from the perspective of an
NMDOJ, um, we are tracking um
disruptions in funding, um, we
are um working very closely with
the governor's office, and we
want to make sure that New
Mexico both at the state level
and the local government level.
That all federal funds that are
due are received, and so we are
paying attention to that. We're
involved in active litigation
and so I won't be discussing
that litigation because this is
a public hearing, but I can't
tell um.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, at least from a
public perspective where things
stand in terms of that
litigation. There was a lawsuit
filed in the District of
Columbia by
Democracy Forward and the judge
in that case issued an
administrative stay.
Um, that was that related only
to open grants and that that
stay exists until February 3rd
at 5:00 p.m.
The state's 22 states in the
District of Columbia filed an
action in.
The District of Rhode Island.
was a hearing on a motion for
temporary restraining order and
the judge has not yet ruled on
that motion.
So that's where things stand in
terms of litigation um from a
public perspective, but I, I
can't tell this committee that
that the New Mexican Department
of Justice is very carefully
monitoring the situation. It is
a situation that is developing
day by day.
We intend to continue working
with the governor's office to
monitor it.
Thank you.
Ah, thank you so much for the
presentation and the overview. I
don't know if there's any
questions from the members.
I just have a question on the
local government front, um, so
when we talk about the
consultation piece and we say we
were to get calls or folks
having access issues is DFA the
sort of bat phone for.
How we can figure that out.
Madam Chair, Madam vice chair,
that is.
A loaded question. I feel like a
lot of stuff ends up coming our
way, so I, I'm inclined to say
if, if there's a question and
it's administrative and it's
financial nature that we are
likely their best resource to
start if the federal grant or
whatever it is that they're
asking for, such as maybe
domestic violence things. There
are other resources in the
state, and we can, um,
coordinate with them with who
they could speak with and I, I
also brought a handful of cards
so you can take some with you
and and share them with whoever
you need to.
Thank you for that. Um.
And I guess just more sort of
globally if we.
I mean, we're looking at the
budget options for federal funds
being $12.7 billion which is way
larger than our state budget. So
as far as implication goes.
If the taps were turned off from
the federal government.
How do, how do we even function
as a state government.
There's two ways, I guess, um.
Madam Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
there's, there's two ways I
think.
This can go, there is a.
devastating impact at all levels
of government with any loss of
funding and loss of projects,
how we decide to remediate, um,
I believe we're all in this
uncharted territory together.
Um, we got a lot of phone calls
on Monday and we're navigating.
What that potential loss looks
like as well. So, um, I think
scenarios are something we could
always come up with, but I'll
defer to Mark to speak about the
state.
Thank
Madam Chair.
What, what I would say is, you
know, the bulk of of the budget,
the number is is Medicaid and
those things that that we
wouldn't anticipate.
Having an impact from these
executive orders and things, um.
But we do need to monitor it,
obviously. I think it's really,
it's something to think about,
it probably is something for for
this body to, to consider if at
some point that ever were to
happen, there would need to be a
mechanism in place budgetarily
to to cover that. So while we're
We don't have numbers for you.
We can tell you that the, the
pieces that are really big in
the budget are are generally
Not part of these executive
orders, so we wouldn't expect
that big number to come out
unless something more were to to
come up or change, so I, but I
do think it is something this
body will, will have to consider
and think about for the future
because if something were to
happen after the session ended.
may have to.
deal with that at that time. But
it is a good conversation to
have just to be prepared for the
future.
Uh
Thank you, um, Madam Chair, and,
and experts, um, I don't know if
you can answer these questions.
I'm just curious.
Um, you know, I know that uh a
lot of us have been expecting a
lot of change. I'm not sure that
we expected it to occur in such
a sudden.
Fashion or with the potential of
You know, one day operating
under a certain budget in the
next day, not really knowing
whether that money was going to
continue from the federal
government. So, um,
What are the questions that I
have been thinking about, Madam
Chas is, um, matching funds, so
a lot of federal grant programs
rely on matching funds, we often
do that at the state level too,
local governments, but if we,
um, for example, if a particular
city had um a grant agreement
with the federal government.
Where they had put in a certain
amount to match a federal
investment.
Um, I think a lot of the
infrastructure programs,
grantmaking is done that way, in
particular, um, what happens if
the federal government suddenly
decides, you know what, we're
not gonna pay for that bridge
anymore. We're not gonna do
this, um, what you, whatever,
um.
What happens to, is there
something written into those
grant agreements or or
contractual language that sort
of
Protects us and allows us to
continue to draw that money
down, even though.
Um, you know, some new policy
maybe saying we don't want to
give you the money anymore. #1
and 2, if we're not able to
access that federal money.
happens to the
To the matching fund at the
local level that's been
invested, so say the city has
already invested in the plan,
design of this bridge.
And that was their chunk of that
maybe they put up 10%.
And then we were counting on the
feds to put in the 90%.
Um
Do, is that money just just
lost, um, even though the feds
haven't.
Honored their part of that
contractual agreement.
Madam Sheriff, if you don't
mind, I'd like to call up our
our legal counsel George um
Hippolyte, he can help us answer
this. George, please.
Let me compose myself.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, um,
to, to answer the question,
Madam Chair, typically most.
Typically most sources of
federal funding are confined to
statute.
And as a result that they're
confined to statute, there are
statutory protections at the
federal level. So in the
circumstances scenario that
we're talking about here.
To the extent that the federal
government, um, based on the
policy of the executive branch
decided to claw back funding for
a particular project that had
already been funded under a
statutory scheme. There's a
specific process that the
executive would have to go
through, um.
The
The specific statute that
governs how that happens it's
called the Congressional Budget
and Impoundment Act.
And it will require the
executive to specifically send a
notice to Congress, uh,
specifying which funds he wanted
to claw back and and the reason
or rationale for those funds
being clawed back and then
Congress would have 45 days to
act upon that and to the extent
that Congress did not act upon
that within 45 days, that money
would then have to flow.
Yes, the money would have to
flow.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
expert.
Oh, apologies for the uh.
Or chair and microphone on
behalf of the house, um, and I.
I'm just wondering.
So
Is is is that um enabling act
and thank you for giving us the
name cause I want to look at
that.
Um, not enabling Act, is that
congressional budget in and
impoundment Act is that.
I meant to be used.
On a project specific basis or
would that be?
You know what would, does the
federal government have the
opportunity to say.
Um, to Congress, we would like
to cancel this.
Bridge
In this specific locale, we're
going to claw back the funds or
we're going to validate this
grant agreement, or is it
something that is more at the um
grant program level like this
entire grant program is
invalidated, and this is why I
have you, has there any examples
of it having been used in the
past.
Madam Chair, I'm Madam
Representative.
I want to
be careful with the words I say
and use.
because I do not certainly want
to cause panic, um, the
empowerment, the congressional
budget and Empowerment Act, um,
dates back to the Nixon
administration. So during the
Nixon administration, the
executive during that time um
attempted to what is called an
impoundment attempted to stop
spending money that had been
congressionally authorized.
And
And as a result, Congress
passed.
During the Ford administration,
Congress passed the
congressional budget and
Empowerment Act that took back
some of those powers that the
executive perceived that they
had, um, that act has been
tested in the courts and the
Supreme Court has held up uh the
constitutionality of that act.
Under every uh federal program.
I'm aware of, um, they all flow
from statute, um, many of the
large federal programs.
That would
Uh, be
Relevant to bridges are the
federal highway program, for
example, which is a function of
statute and comes from formula
funding, so it is less likely
that's not considered what is
called discretionary spending,
so it's less likely that that
would arise in this particular
context of the example you're
giving. Um, however, to the
extent that the federal
government wanted to use.
a particular contract or a
particular grant agreement, uh,
and cancel that particular grant
agreement, not an entire
program. It would have to follow
the procedures in that
particular grant agreement and
Whoever was affected by that
grant agreement would have an
ability through the
administrative procedures Act,
which is a federal statute that
allows you again to bring action
for violation of any
administrative procedures that
are required. So to the extent
that
will of the executive was not
based in law statute, rule, or
regulation, they would be able
to use the administrative
Procedures Act to challenge that
action.
And that's a lot of lawyer
words.
And I apologize, uh, essentially
they would have recourse if that
action happened.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um, and
so.
Uh, and general counsel, and so,
so basically it sounds like the
state has an on all states have
some tools.
To
Seek to.
Um
Continue that federal funding,
or at least make the argument.
And if
Administration were to choose to
weaponize a particular grant
program to um invalidate some
states grant agreements, but not
other states grant agreements.
The states have some tools to
make that argument.
That um that this is not holding
to either the statute or the
specifics of that grant
agreement through the
administrative procedures Act.
And, and Mr. uh, Madam Chair and
Mr. General counsel.
uh, who's the ultimate decider
in the administrative procedures
Act.
It be a federal court
a federal court, so it would
Most administrative procedures
Act, uh, claims are filed in DC
District court or the Federal
Claims Court.
Um, thank you for that. So I, I,
I'm feeling at least encouraged
that there will be some recourse
and some avenues that the state
can pursue if actions that
either unfairly punish a certain
uh some municipalities and on
others, for example, some
counties and not others, some
states and not others that there
would be, um, a way to um.
Bring those issues forward and
and really fight for those those
funding projects, um.
The second set of questions I
had is just it's on the actually
on the individual level. So for
example, um, if I am a uh
patient on Medicaid.
And I give birth to say I gave
birth to my child yesterday
while the portal was down and
say the portal.
Had not
Been, um, reinstated.
Cutting off anyway to build
federal government for the cost
of labor and delivery, which we
know is thousands.
Um, what
To do
And this may be a question for
the attorney General or Mr.
counsel.
To, um
What protections do we have in
place for those patients, so
that hospitals are not either
balance billing or treating them
as self pay and billing those
patients.
In the event that Medicaid is
suddenly turned off for some
unknown amount of time.
Um, and then what protections do
we have as a state to to demand
sort of reimbursement of those
costs for that patient.
Here.
Madam Chair, Madam
Representative, um.
I am not 100% uh familiar with
the exact uh.
of Medicaid reimbursement, um,
but what I can say is that the
scheme that I talked about, the
administrative Procedures Act is
available not just to um states
or governmental entities is also
available to individuals.
Additionally, there's the
Federal Tort Claims Act, so to
the extent that a person was uh
eligible for Medicaid funding
and submitted the appropriate
paperwork.
and the cost was eligible to be
paid, and that cost was not
paid.
They would have a federal tort
claim that could be reimbursed.
I don't.
I know that is not uh uh
prophylactic uh help, right,
because the person is gonna be
out of pocket and dealing um
with the hospital provider that
wants their money, but from a
legal perspective, again, they
would have recourse to seek
those funds back in the event
that they weren't paid. But I
also want to be clear to the
best of our knowledge.
existing executive orders should
not affect the Medicaid program.
Thank you, thank you. um.
And Madam Char it just seems to
me that maybe in a and I'll just
say maybe I should do some
investigation on.
You know, what kind of
commitment do we as a state
Obviously
When someone is enrolled in
Medicaid, they're interfacing
with the state agency. You know,
we are the arbiter of uh
eligibility. We are the ones who
enroll them in our state program
in Medicaid and as such, like I
think we should also, um,
Understand what commitments we
have made and maybe what
commitments we should be making
to people who are enrolled in
healthcare to um.
To protect them from being
responsible for and obviously if
you're enrolled in Medicaid, you
do not have a lot of additional
resources to go and find an
attorney to file a federal tort
claims, tort claims case, right,
um, so is there something we
need to put into place so that
if changes are made to the
Medicaid program that we're
allowing ourselves a buffer to
pay out the liability on the
incoming claims, um.
Even at the time that the
changes are being made, because
people are not gonna understand,
oh, I'm eligible today, but
tomorrow these major changes
have been enacted and my card no
longer works, right, so I think,
um, given the
Suddenness of the portal being
shut down and then coming back
on and not really understanding.
But the implications of that
are, it just seems like we
should put something in place to
protect, particularly because
it's our largest source of
federal funding is for the
Medicaid program.
Um, thank you, thank you very
much.
Um, and, um,
There's a piece that we'd like
Rebecca to respond on um that I
think supplements what George
was saying.
Thank you, Madam Chair, really
appreciate the opportunity to
just add one thing, um, and just
thank you for having this
dialogue, um, really appreciate
it. It's incredibly important,
even as we're all still figuring
it out. Um, one thing I wanted
to add Representative Skanski
and Madam Chair to your question
about infrastructure grants, um,
in addition to what you heard
from general counsel, is that,
um, each individual grant
agreement between a federal
agency and, and a local state.
other entity as the recipient is
a contract with legally binding
terms and what we're doing for
across the cabinet and what we
encourage other entities in the
state who have a grant
agreement, a contract with a
federal entity to flow funds is
to take a close look.
At the specific terms and
conditions of that grant. What
are the
Terms under which the federal
agency can amend the grant. What
are the terms under which that
federal entity can rescind or uh
terminate the grant.
In some cases, the uh, sorry
about the mic here. Uh, in some
cases, the.
Uh, terms and conditions will
not allow for unilateral.
Changes by the federal entity.
They have to get the consent of
the grant recipient. So in those
instances, if that federal
entity goes beyond their
authority.
To pull back funds,
unilaterally, and the grant
agreements don't allow for that.
That's a cause of action.
Right? Um, so,
The grant terms and conditions
around amending and rescinding
or terminating grants varies, so
we really have to look grant by
grant, uh, and there are
opportunities for us to.
The strategic
Certainly as the state executive
with it's a much with we rely on
federal grants, and we also want
to be a resource for local
entities, universities,
nonprofits, and others in the
state to the extent that we
have, have the ability to do
that to help them navigate that
as well.
Did, did you have any more
questions, I'm sorry, Madam
Chair. I just wanted to add one
more thing, um.
Which is and I, and it's
probably this way for
infrastructure projects,
certainly for healthcare, having
been involved in the wind down
of a very large, federally
funded health insurance program.
Um, claims were filed up to 18
months after the end of that
program. And you have to carry a
balance.
Of funds in order to pay out
those claims because I get seen
today. My, my physician is not
billing.
Um, United Healthcare today or
billing Medicaid today. They are
billing when they're billing
process is uh completed all the
paperwork, etc. Um, it took 18
months and in some cases we had
a few claims that went out uh to
up to 24 months later.
Which means that, um, and I, I
am.
Incredibly sure that the federal
government has not tuned in to
listen to our amazing meeting of
House Judiciary this afternoon,
but if they are listening, I, I
just wanna say that uh you that
cutting off the funds in such a
sudden manner is catastrophic.
For patients, for providers who
are unable to recoup those
funds, um, for state and local
and, and governments who uh
absolutely need to get these
projects paid for and maybe have
already encumbered and have
their own contracts with
contractors that they're gonna
have to fulfill, so I just
wanted to say that.
Ah, thank you, Rob. Um,
chairwoman Chandler.
Um, oh, thank you all for being
here and sharing important
information.
So, um Sapansy focused on me.
But there are also many payment
programs where we're not.
So entangled the state, Madam
Chair could.
I mean, I'm hopefully act on
behalf of the recipients and so
on, so.
Medicare.
Um
I don't know if snap is
something that what role the
state.
Um
So there we have kind of
wondering what the heck's gonna
happen if they're canceled.
Or um a federal pension.
Maybe I, you know, I'm trying to
think of different things.
Our, um, our madam chair, we
saying that.
They're the they're fortunate um
people who can rely on this.
statue that um Nixon prompt
prompted, and that's basically
where they're at, and I'm sure,
is that what we're.
we're at.
I
Obviously, individuals trying to
get their Medicare taken care
of.
Or their doctor who I'm so
sorry. This is really
ridiculous. It's OK, madam
chair, um, so.
The
the Congressional Budget and
Empowerment Act is a tool.
For Congress and or states to
use, I, I did not mean to
suggest, and if I did, I, I want
to correct the record for that.
I did not mean to suggest
individuals to think about using
that.
Um, from an individual
perspective, typically in many
federal programs.
the federal government.
Reimburses the state for those
costs. So I think as the
controller was sort of
indicating.
The
understand at this point.
It's not my day.
Not you, um
Based up all we understand at
this point.
Um
The large funding mechanisms
that the state fronts and the
feds reimburse us for are not
going to be affected by these
executive orders. Again.
To representatives depotsky's,
um, previous comment, these
things are happening suddenly,
they're moving.
targets, but what we're told and
what has been put out.
by the White House, those big.
should not be affected.
To the extent that they are
affected, um.
The state likely would be the
one standing between us.
And
Federal government because of
the way the program.
work, right?
Fronts the money and the federal
government reimburses the money.
So what likely would happen is
if there was a sudden cut off of
those funds, the state would
have a cash crunch and have to
figure out how to deal with that
cash crunch.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I, I
understand that piece, but the
piece I was trying to get at,
um, Madam Chair and Mr. General
Counsel is.
Individuals who let's say
Medicare.
Um
You know, that's a federal
program.
Are those programs being
implicated by these various
executive orders.
I see someone shaking now.
Madam Chair, to, to the, to the
best of our knowledge, to the
best of the information that is
being put out right now by the
White House. They are not
supposed to be implicated.
Very good. And that's very
reassuring, um.
on the individual level, of
course, it's a little concerning
for the state on the state.
connections to some of these
programs, but OK, thank you very
much folks, I guess just on the
idea. I and I interrupted myself
when I was in asking questions.
I haven't chaired this meeting
in a while, so forgive me, um.
But I guess just on the idea
that those failsafe options for
when we look at the
administrative Procedures Act
and, you know, for the claims
that will be from multiple
people. I can't imagine a
single.
You know, household or person
who would be um.
Sorry, uh, you know, trying to
navigate filing a claim and is
there a system with which we're.
Is it a class action or a way in
which, like you said, the state
is a buffer.
For, for being able to, if, if
it's going to be systemic with
everybody, you know, sort of.
Receiving a halted payment.
For the state to step in and do
we have a mechanism like that?
Or to protect folks that aren't
receiving their benefits.
Madam Chair, um, it's difficult
to answer your question in the
abstract because each program
differs, each grant program
differs in different formula
fundings differ, um, from a
legal perspective.
What I would say is
that to the extent that the
state is fronting the money,
right, to the extent that the
state is expending the money and
being bursed, reimbursed or a
local government is expending
the money and being.
re im b ur s ed that state or
the local government can step in
on behalf of those individuals
who are impacted and file those
claims and then share that money
flow that money back down when
that money is received.
Um,
I'm gonna let the state
controller provide.
any other additional
clarification, uh, that he
thinks is necessary.
Madam Madam Chair, thank you,
George. Um, no, I agree. I think
that's where
At that level where, you know,
the state and the local is
involved like we would probably
need you all to to pass some
type of legislation or something
in the budget bill to, to give
us the ability to do that if
that's necessary, because
without the, without an
appropriation, there wouldn't be
anything for us to be able to
step in right away and do at
that point, um, as George or
counsel has mentioned, the state
is fronting it, so there's,
there's, there's a short period
of time where that that's OK,
but long term, you know, we
would run out of.
Cash we would run out of the
ability to do that without
something from the legislative
body.
appropriating additional funds.
Thank you. um, thanks for that
response, and I, I feel like to
just even accessing portals and
things like that that we what,
yeah, it just goes away. What
are we doing to create those
access points and at least.
Have a means with which we're
responding to folks. Grayson,
did you want to say something?
A man chair
excuse me, Madam vice chair. I
just wanted to update the
committee um while we've been
here and this is a rapidly
developing situation, as I
mentioned earlier, uh, the
temporary restraining order was
issued by the judge in the
District of Rhode Island.
Can you elaborate? What does
that mean
for us? so what that means is
that the status quo stands and
the directive to suspend federal
funding has been paused until
that that motion can be argued,
the motion for preliminary
injunction can be argued before
the judge.
And do we know the date deadline
for how long that lasts, the
restraining orders it's on a
fast track.
So I believe that's within 14
days.
Great
Thanks for the update.
Alright, if there are no other
questions, um, thank you so much
for, for rapidly coming to help
us and organize this meeting,
we, this is a first of its kind,
trying to understand how this,
these mechanisms work. So thank
you so much for pulling all the
information together, um, I'm
sure many of us would love to be
in touch with you about how we
can act, react proact on these,
um, on this, this situation and,
and thinking through how these
systems work is, and when
they're not working.
We certainly know about it. So,
um, love to have you back with
any updates, whether it be in
the hallways or um to get an
update about what what you may
need to do.
