Representative mcqueen.
Here.
The.
Madam chair
madame chair okay
we have a quarm and we do not
have a vice chair who was here
on canada's regulation can
someone try to reach her please
and in the inner on.
We can try to move on do we have
someone here for meat
inspection.
Kind of important that people
come even though they don't show
on the agenda as first because
things move around based on
traveling legislators who are
going to other committees and we
have to accommodate them so
who's going to be presenting as
that representative armstrong
take.
And we have election changes so
we do have the sponsor on
election changes maybe we should
start there.
Alright.
Me too.
Right.
Minded that so whoever gets here
first is going to be the one who
gets heard first
so there's going to be a race
around the capital.
Okay and then you can maybe ping
I know you're having trouble
getting through
where it will we may get to meet
inspection are you doing meat
inspection
okay
yeah you get a prize the prices
you get to present house out.
Okay no that's alright.
So this is yes
i'm just gonna call rep garrett
and teller to come in a little
bit right.
I don't know this committee you
know how we are
all right so welcome represent
arms strong welcome
representative edata
we are now on let me see me
inspection house bill one sixty
two the floor is yours
representative in you may wish
to introduce your expert.
Thank you madame chair and thank
you committee my beautiful
expert is believed to garland
with the new mexical i've stock
board
madam chair I do have a
committee sub if we if you'd
like to get that passed out in
we've been mounted madame chair
and representatives we have been
working on this bill for
about four years madam chair and
kept getting hung up in a senate
judiciary finally senator
savantes just took it we're
luckily blending ireland gave
him the guidelines and he
reworked it and revamped it and
that's what your committee sub
is the new and hopefully
improved committee sub
as far as we know everyone the.
Fsious is on board the feds are
on board with this
approval of this and it's a much
a shorter version madame chair
than the the new one so this is
about to have this for new
mexico to be able to have in
mexico inspectors to someone
crops of the bill move the bill
for the amendment or the sub for
discussion
representative read has moved
and boy re is seconded and ream
has first so
the continue thank you madame
chair and and so I would like
a letter to be able to add any
comments that she
wants to if she would care to
add anything.
This.
Good afternoon mountain to
remembers of the committee thank
you for this opportunity to
discuss the spill with you this
afternoon.
Um we feel that this bill is
very important for a lot of
different matters in the state
it gives producers and avenue to
continue to sell their meat in
state instead of having to ship
their lives talk out of state to
be fed out and then processed
and then brought back into the
state.
And they think about ninety
seven percent of the meet in the
mexico is processed out of state
and then imported back young so
that will help our producers it
also gives a chance for more
processing plants to stand up
where producers can supply in
statement and that go to our
schools or senior centers or
food banks are retail sales
restaurant sales with a lot of
different avenues there for sale
so this is not a revenue
generating bill or program it is
funded by the government
nationwide but for us to get in
compliance with the food safety
inspection service we become
eligible for up to fifty percent
of reimbursement of the cost of
the program so we think that is
very important for us to be in
complaint with them which this
substitute bill does require
there's a lot of economic
development opportunity here if
these processing plants come
into production so thank you
you're welcome representative
editor
i'd like to think the committee
for hearing this spell this is
really this was the number one
egg last year and we couldn't
get through senate judiciary
it's still the number one egg
bill this year because it will
make a significant economic
difference in our state really
it's I can tell you that small
farmers and ranchers in the
north after go to colorado they
have a year to wait to just do
small you know small
median spit spare me meat term
processing excuse me I couldn't
come up with the word anyhow so
it's really an important bill
it's important for small egg
it's important for big egg it's
important clear across the
street you have unanimous
approval and we can hardly wait
to get this past thank you.
The audience now those in the
audience wishing to speak an
opposition to the bill please
raise your hand opposition
first.
This.
Don't see anyone
anyone online wishing to speak
an opposition to the bills
please reso.
I don't see anyone.
All right those in the audience
I bet they're going to be more
wishing to speak in support of
the bill please raise your hand
okay if you could keep your
remarks to about ninety seconds
and be super helpful so yes sir.
Good afternoon madam chair
middle members my name is tom
hatterson.
I made cattle rancher from luna
new mexico and catching county I
also have the privilege of
serving as the president elected
in the mexico is association
calibrators thanks or partisan
sponsors to this bill federal me
inspectors are relatively scarce
in new mexico it may take as
long as a year to get a slot to
process the beef here.
For whatever reason arizona
doesn't seem to have as bad a
problem.
I want to share with you.
A text message I received this
on yesterday from a bit
processing plant in eager
arizona.
It said
we need to have a discussion
about new mexico grown beef
producers to supply our needs
to process an arizona to fill
the new mexico food banks as
well as schools senior citizens
singer centers and so forth.
New mexico should not function
like a third world country that
exports its wrong materials to a
developed country so that they
can then process it get the
value added and then ship it
back to us
we should be processing the beef
here in new mexico we urge the
passage thank you thank you
whose next year sir.
I'm terrible members of the
committee howard
southwest part of the state.
Neighbors with mister patterson
I have purchased the.
Processed beef here in new
mexico from the mexico growers
first in saga then when I moved
to albert turkey and then moved
back to my home and.
Southwest in mexico.
The problem that are run into
now is the long waiting period
that the local producers have.
In getting their meat process
this is a excellent bill the
substitute bill is much more
streamlined and straight forward
and addresses the issue I urge
support thank you.
I'm chair committee members
camera representing from the
table the new mexico food
agriculture policy constantly on
the right national recommend
farmers unions are and we are we
are here in full support of this
as well and for the many reasons
that i've already been stated we
work more directly with the
schools in the senior centers
and i'll just give a couple of
of us of examples rather than.
Thousand dollars worth of new
mexico raised peace beef that is
actually processed here in the
state and you can just see as
one example of many examples.
Um I know development and good
for
health.
Madame chairman members of the
committee took me reveral with
the mexican apartment line
we have a lights talk sector
valued at two point three two
billion dollars all of those
animals are shift out of state
to be processing and brought
back in this program directly
support our states ranchers and
live stock industry like he'd
been those animals in state
allowing us to access more local
protein and really helping build
our local food so we ask that
you guys support this fan
appreciate the sponsor.
The.
Yeah thank you madame chair
committee members of jimberlier
beef produced her here in the
state of new mexico and I just
want to see this
bill move forward and have this
unfeed call and clayton or close
or whatever but they've got to
go to kansas and the rest of
texas or somewhere to be
processed in the meet back in
this dispute wonderful to
remember two box to help these
producers.
The.
Managed her members of the
committee my name is christian
tonsolan with the new banks cope
restaurant association we're
here to stand and support with
our local producers are local
communities to support this
legislation we need a
sustainable supplier source meet
that our customer's demand and
really would like to see on
their menus so we're happy to
support this bill.
Yeah.
Those.
Those online wishing to speak
and support please raise your
hand.
I don't see anyone raising their
hand okay let's go back to the
sponsors
would you like to add anything
before I go to the committee i'm
reps thank you madame chair the
only thing I would say as we
would love to see new mexicans
feeding new mexico
thank you who is first up
representative on.
Thank you
thank you madame chair.
Is okay we don't have a facility
right now to process the week if
we get this into this inspection
right.
Madame chair
representative we have a few
usda certified processors here a
new mexico right now but not
large plants there smaller scale
plants which is actually what
we're hoping to do is encourage
more people to open processing
plants here in new mexico that
are US d a certified
what we're doing madame chair
and
sponsors basically were sending
up the rules that we can get
this good that's what we're
looking at today yes yes madame
chair and representative thank
you miss better characters the
really would like to see this
going on there to go in into
a good cost we get okay and the
lamb that is there is from new
zealand from australia
and I live in the area there is
a lot of them being raced in
basically underneath a whole
nation and I have less to go to
the market and gallop you're not
going to get new mexico we
can go to you that the slots of
it out there
said that if you want to want to
buy some menobook review you can
have to buy something that comes
to but another
side of the world.
So the speak so
it's i'm really hoping this was
forward I
think we wait thank you very
much.
So representative lane made sure
I move a do not pass of house
but one sixty two but a due pass
of house judiciary committee
substitute for house bill one
sixty two second.
We have a dupass motion away I
do not house on house bill one
sixty two and they do pass on
house judiciary committee
substitute for one sixty two the
motion made by representative
lane second hand by
representative it's nice to have
a bike and he practice yes so
would you call the role please
represent about four.
Representative chase you.
Representative.
Yes
yes.
Yes
yes representative
right.
Yes.
Yes they have vote of ninety
zero we have a do not pass on
house bill one sixty two and a
do thousand judiciary committee
substitute her house bill one
sixty two thank you good luck
with your bill thank you very
much.
Schedule a little bit so wrap
remarries here are you ready to
talk animals bill and represent
chasing your working on.
Oh all in this year also I mean
representative martinez is here
also
we have you and.
So let me do let me suggest
this.
We I imagine the interlock task
force
may not take very long
imagining so and it as I
courtesy why don't we ask
representative martinez to go if
that works for everyone and then
then the order will be
represented remarried
representative chasing that
would give represent chasing
some time to make sure her her
experts online and so on so.
Good afternoon representative
martinez you are here on house
memorial thirty and the floor is
yours thank you manager right I
appreciate.
You can't dating me i'm running
between two other committees
but this was a pretty
straightforward memorial we see
the problem with the dwi across
the state and i'm trying to be a
little bit.
Um
creative on and how we approach
this this issue and i've i've
not always been a big fan of
task forces and but I think this
one would really serve its
purpose
we see the problem of people
getting the interlocked device
in getting a few months worth of
insurance and then.
The insurance goes waste what I
want to do as I want to come up
with some evidence based data
that we can then come back to
this body.
And dark introduced some
legislation to correct that
and with that madame chairey
stanford questions very good
first let's go to the audience.
Those wishing to speak an
opposition to this memorial
please raise your hand.
Those on line wishing to speak
in opposition to this memorial
please raise your hand.
Those in the audience wishing to
speak in support of this
memorial please raise your hand.
The.
Those online wishing to speak in
favor of this memorial please
raise your hand.
Right and on see any hands
raised.
Okay
back to you wrap any additional
comments before we go to the
committee
that you made him chair with
that I stand for questions very
good
members
representative lane do you have
a question
oh we see I think represent my
queen may have a question so
many chair
and represent martinis if you
know that there was a.
There is a period of time we
start amending all of our
memorials.
To specify whether or not.
In terms of remember exactly
what was out of wood.
It was make sure they are
subject to apra where it might
be the open meetings act.
And this was
even then one point propers
legislation where that would be
a standard requirement so we
didn't have to keep adding it on
to
memorials and the issue is man
chairman if you have a task
force and people are pointed to
the task for some people me this
task force
do other people get to listen in
participating you're all these
things to go along with I think
it's probably the open meetings
act.
Man charity martinez have you
are you familiar with that
madame chair representative
actually no I hadn't been around
when
when that was done but it seems
like a pretty decent proposal
I would want people to be aware
of what this task forces doing
and get as much attention on the
issue as possible
how would we propose to address
that I mean good point so many
chair I would I would think we
would move it along and added on
the floor if if wanted
it it's a little different
because
people are being appointed by.
The dependent of the
transportation is that correct
resignment in madame chair
representative that is correct
in
man cherrobs in martins without
this memorial could they go
ahead and do that anyway
matter represent the queen they
probably could I i've been when
I was with the department better
service we said a task forces
all the time
but the difference would be that
this would mandate that we come
back to the let's let you with
the data that's gathered.
Man terribles and martinez.
Is it mandatory.
Madam chair ribson queen this
would not have the teeth of uh
bill
it simply requesting that the ot
in and department modern
vehicles work together on this
issue right so man terrorist and
martinez they wouldn't
necessarily have to come back to
us because we were simply asking
that they do this
mantra i'd be fine advancing
this and taking a closer look at
that for the floor
so what I hear being said is a
representative mcqueen has
volunteered to work with you to
well he does that he's very
helpful sometimes
these kinds of things so
there'll be an issue about like
open meeting and maybe public
records and the requirement to
maybe report back because I
didn't see a very strong
requirement even to report back
but that's up to you all to to
sort out so there will be likely
amendments on the floor but we
don't want to hold this up it's
thus far so
there's are you let me just make
double check that make sure
represent mcqueen is through
yours through yes okay
representative outcome
thank you madame chair and the
representative might be this I
guess i'm just wondering it's
there a problem is to somebody
saying that there was a problem
with people not having the
insurance day happening
madame to represent about one
there is a problem and it was
it's been brought to me by a
couple of of constituents that
have been involved in traffic
accidents that then go back and
try to recoup some of that money
through the insurance and they
no longer have insurance.
Okay so i'm going to get this
straight began so what you say
that somebody was involved in an
accident basically saying and
they had a nick inner condition
in their rock and there he goes
and they were not the the people
that got the harm we're not able
to collect because these people
had a condition in their rock
and their vehicle.
Allowing them to drive did not
have insurance
that the short way say the
madam turbs and about a corner
of correct okay thank you
documentary
just a couple things I was
reminded mine by my vice chair
that we're really not debating
and putting memorials up for I
believe that's right for
consideration on the floor that
sounds right and the question is
than how do we get this done so
maybe we might want to talk
about the representative of
macqueen and you getting
together and we can bring it
back up on wednesday and just
hopefully quickly dispose of
whatever if that's okay with you
so that's one point I wanted to
bring up that you know a lot of
memorials probably won't get
called up because of the limit
time limitations and so on and
so forth so I would suggest that
let's see and I saw a
representative ream had some
comedy would like to share as
well.
Madam chair I would be receptive
to working with representative
mcqueen and all but the reason
why it's deotiged obtaining the
information is it is traffic
safety was under dot who
actually runs the internal
and so they have that data then
of course develops the one that
has the insurance thank you
okay any other comments because
I would really like to not have
to discuss this when we bring it
back on wednesday we'll just try
to move it out of here unless
there's something really
outrageous that our body that
are representative over here
comes up with so
a
thank you for coming well look
forward to seeing you on
wednesday after her to chance to
work with representative mcqueen
thank you madame chair and thank
you represent my queen I will
quickly be in touch with you
thank you enter thank you I
think now we will hear from
representative ramero.
The.
In that is on
house bill one twenty eight car
number regulation changes and I
would know.
There is a committee sub
available.
So the floor is yours
representative.
I think you madam chair members
before you as how should a share
committee substitute for a house
but one twenty eight like to
move this for a discussion
would you read the two or two
number the two two seven two two
seven nine four three point two
point two
yes okay
is that we have emotion we have
a second for discussion purposes
so we have motion by
representative second by
representative lane for
discussion purposes the floor is
yours representative think you
madam chair members this bill is
a has been a collaborative work
with the canada's control
division in the regulation and
licensing department and the
industry to continue to improve
our canada's regulation act
through the interim many of us
heard that attend the ccj
meetings about some of the
issues that had been coming up
on regulation and licensing in
some of the work that we could
do to stamp out some of our bad
actors so what you'll find in
this bill madam or committee sub
madam chair
members is essentially a lot of
clean up on some of the
definitions but we really define
illegal countries and here to
make sure that folks understand
what it is that we're trying to
regularly out of our state
we clarify some of the
provisions with which regulation
and licensing can then revoke or
suspend a license which we
hadn't given the power to do in
the past we also create that
disciplinary action for folks
and in who are bad actors who
are trying to seek out legal
licenses and unfortunately
do running a muck with some of
those licenses which we found
through the process we clarify a
background checks process with
the fbi.
We look at how we can package
and label canada's products as a
bipartisan effort from previous
sessions i'm to get clarity into
our laws and we also but get
contraband which was also by
partisan effort previously
ends create new penalties for
traffic in count of us in the
state and raise the plant count
for micros and effort that has
been
requested for many years now by
the our small producers so
that's a big broad overview it's
a it's it's many pages because
it's been a lot of work through
the inner amount and working
both again with the industry and
with
our regulation and licensing
department so I look forward to
the discussion and with that
manager i'll see questions.
Before we go to the panel let's
go to the audience those wishing
to speak in opposition to the
the bill please raise your hand.
Okay
i'm yes ma'am and then the
general behind you any majors on
the executive director of the
new mexico foundation for open
government and I don't actually
object to it more if we have
been talking with the bill
sponsored this year and we have
worked out a compromise where
the in the bill in the amendment
will mirror what is currently in
air so they will not have a new.
Our objections to the bill okay
thank you oh sir over here
now chairman community map
and confirm
we're came to this industry
association that represents a
small campus business across the
state.
What we do support the a.
This legislation we do have two
areas concerned.
First in the increase or
microphone users I mean like
producer.
Five hundred
the second provision were
concerned with is the call
location
of this as part of.
People or companies are doing
this.
Thank you
gentlemen.
So my name is stevenson the
director of the candidates
control division of new mexico
house under the regulation
licensing department first I
want to think the sponsor for
her hard work medication and the
community
has been amazing however
throughout this process we've
been very vocal with the sponso.
Almost everything else if not
everything else in this bill
they do to that and with all do
respect is as again we work very
closely with the sponsored
respect or
we would have to pose this and
agency bills.
Next anyone else in the audience
wishing to speak in opposition
I don't see anyone else
anyone online wishing to speak
an opposition to house bill one
twenty eight
please raise your hand.
The.
I don't see any hands raised
those in the audious wishing to
speak in support of house bill
one twenty eight
please raise your hand.
Yes sir.
Moscow's
canvassing issue for eleven
years I support this bill
because the certain things that
need to be changed that this
does address
I stand neutral when it comes to
the plan counting still kind of
actually collecting data with
the industry and i'm trying to
figure out what they want and
need some reading neutral when
it comes to that because there
are a couple of great arguments
that that but for the most part
this bill cleans up a lot of
languages I support it
okay thank you anyone else in
the audience wishing to speak
and support the bill.
I don't see anyone anyone online
wishing to surpey speak and
support the bill please raise
your hand.
Okay
emily.
It's paying adams to a members
of many unlike often box from
college
it makes
you know at this point we don't
we need a support or a pose the
bill but I do when the highlight
the pieces that we think are
critically important
and a couple areas of concern I
think that the packaging
protections are really important
and also we do support the plant
count increase for the micro
businesses that we believe that
change will increase equity in
the market place one of the key
reasons we supported
legalization but to begin with
we also are hoping that some of
the changes that were made that
then I don't will be reflected
in household one twenty six the
amendments that were made
intended judiciary improving and
clarifying the language on
working
as well as some of the changes
to the criminal penalties what
is confirmed
is new language on page twenty
seven line two three six which
gives the division the authority
to refuse the issues of under
reboca license if there's a
pending investigation in the
indictment or conviction
involving producing
manufacturing distributing
selling or giving away illegal
cabinet candidates product
we believe that conflicts with
existing language on page twenty
nine lines eight through
nineteen that says that a
conviction for which the related
sudden including
manufacturer distribution
etcetera of canada should not be
the full ground on which an
application is denied so we are
recommending stranging felony
indictment or conviction in the
new language and leaving pending
investigation because we
understand
the intent is around serious bad
actors but we also don't want to
make we want to make sure that
folks who may have a prior
felony from years ago have an
ability to participate in the
market place.
That's our main concern and you
know we do have some concerns
around the criminal the new
seventy penalties and so we're
recommending an amendment to
make intent to sell mister
meaner instead of combining it
would completed sale which would
remain a felony so I want to
think the sponsor i'm shared at
these
with her and really appreciate
the conversation we've had but I
just want to raise those those
two concerns thank you so much
thank you anyone else online
wishing to speak.
In support of the bill.
I don't see any other hands
reased
sponsor I don't know if you want
to address some of those issues
that it might be helpful if you
do yes should think you madam
chair
so a couple things the raising
of the plan count as we
discussed is is an equity issue
that has been tried in these
this legislature since we
started learning about some of
the challenges in
um
looking at the industry and how
some of these businesses have
been able to pencil out
increasing the planet count
helps these microgrowers from
the data that we've collected
and understood from various
constituencies within that micro
community
to this bill really truly mimics
much of the changes that have
been made in senate bill six
semi mirror bill aquasi mirror
bill if you will madam chair for
the things that the house
believes is is a right changes
to make versus what's been done
in the senate so
just to help with folks who are
referencing that bill that's why
it has been and so with that
matter what will sample
questions
well what about emily's comments
about investigation versing
conviction and the parent
possible conflict i'm curious to
know what your reaction to that
is madam chair
i'd be happy to look at where
that language is I know it went
quickly to to talk about page
twenty seven and twenty nine I I
had not had a
a moment so sort of look at that
microscopically to make those
changes in advance of this
committee but if it's the will
of the committee i'd be happy to
discuss that
okay
do we have people yes where you
have people who are interested
we're going to go to the
committee now we'll do
representing rebe and then
representative hambury.
Okay thank you madame chair and
representative for merrill.
And through the internet to talk
about this and this i'm not sure
what you know what I think about
the plant count because i'm you
know but i'm trying to balance
the what work you did in this
bill and obviously the things
that you put in there that
supported what I really wanted
to see which was the packaging
and I see its pervadam in their
home I have filed my bill in and
wanted to get those opaque
packaging and things like that
done have you talked to madam
chair a representative law
enforcement and whether they're
in support of this bill with the
enforcement issues in the higher
penalties that we heard about
over the intern madam chair
representative yes as far as we
understand girl and concert with
each other it's already current
law that are all d should be
working with law enforcement
what we've done in this bill is
really tight not what the
penalties would be for
trafficking in sort of broad and
those who are trying seeking to
truly traffic canabas in our
state and allow for law
enforcement to do their jobs
with some of the
bad actors that we have seen in
the state so as far as I
understand that creates that
more collaborative effort in law
and they keep medicare and
representative one more area um
just so I want to make sure i'm
understanding the the
delinquency part of it and as
you know one of my concern to
spend that we aren't doing
anything with the kids when
they're violating this kind of
similar to alcohol we we've
talked about making it a
delinquent act of day possessed
under the age of eighteen and so
going I think it's on page forty
four
starting kind of a line five in
addition to the penalties
provided the delinquency can you
just explain madame chair and
representative if that i'm kind
of reading it is that is that
going to is that what that seem
I know add some more trafficking
for other you know in the
juvenile delinquency code where
I saw that you laid that out
which is that was great.
But could you explain if that's
going to address that issue that
I had manager madame chair
representative yes of this was
the change that was I believe
made in senator disheary with
how to really tighten up both
um one of the risks that we had
flagged in the interim was that
because the penalties were so
low for juveniles which was a
few hours of community service
that they would be targeted by
the trafficking industry
to essentially get a slap on the
risk if they were
targeted so we wanted to make
sure that there were actually
you know there was a judicial
process within the delinquency
act that they could follow i'm
so that language has been
provided here to address
the some of the conflict in what
we were trying to achieve I
think in protecting juvenile's
who were being targeted so madam
chair and representative so it
just so i'm clear the way it's
worth it now
if
child is found to have possessed
marijuana or been using canada's
there's the ability that they
can go through the juvenile
system now get services that
they need to help them or their
families you know deal with
maybe an addiction problem and
then at their over the age of
eighteen to twenty one then they
would go through the magistrate
court similar to a minor
position of alcohol very very
correct madame chair
representative that's what we
looked at in order to be a not
compliance with the current law
and other areas of while yes and
think you are manager and
representative romaro I mean
i've I was never a supporter of
canaba originally but it is here
and we have to deal with it so
for me why not sure about the
plant increasing the plan issue
i'm i'm trying to balance for
good this bill does for a
packaging and the things that I
wanted to see done for children
and so I appreciate a hard
you're working on this and i'm
going to be supporting this
thing to representative thinking
manager thank you represent of
him.
Thank you madame chair
representative romero thank you
I do agree that a lot of this
needs to be cleaned up
but I do I do have some concerns
my first concern is on page
I believe on page thirty five
starting
line twenty three
you're you're striking the
hundred and twenty five thousand
dollars
for for the
application fee and then the
annual renewal fee for for the
license why are you why are you
striking that care madam share
thank you for the question
representative henry so this is
what we originally had hoped
would be about fair share in the
industry so currently the
largest producers of
counterbests are capped from
paying fees beyond a hundred and
twenty five thousand dollars on
what we have learned though even
in the session is that right now
plant fees are at about five
dollars a plant to regulate
for those big producers who were
up to twenty thousand I believe
there are two of them in the
industry right now they don't
have to pay a few beyond a
hundred and twenty five thousand
dollars i've learned that
there's some fear out there as
as some of these canaba scrowers
are expanding their businesses
that that plant fee could be
raised to fifty dollars in rule
and so we have been sort of
thinking about how it is that we
can
you know well that fear one of
the potential suggestions having
had those discussions would be
to remove this strict and
language
madame to representative
working through the interim arm
to fix that or to to call that
for your further would be
something that we would be open
to
thank you representative matter
chair representative romero yeah
I
might my concern on it is if you
ha.
Have
you know the the language I
believe currently in the in the
legislative the law is that it
can be up to fifty dollars per
plan and and if that was to
happen
I know I realize currently the
rule making hazard at five
dollars per plan but if it would
go to fifty dollars per plant
and you don't have some sort of
cap then what you have done is
made
the legal retail market
marijuana
more expensive and people are
going to go looking to illicit
markets and and so
if we can.
Do something there III think
that would you know address some
of my concerns there
madam chair representatives of a
recommendation
I i.
Madame chair representative
romero I i'm not sure whether it
is it is.
Somehow maybe reducing the per
plant fee in the bill vs a
a cap
keeping the cap in or maybe at a
slightly.
You know elevated level or
something like that madam chair
representative I like the latter
opportunity having learned from
the industry about the worry
that the plant fee could be
raised between now and accession
we don't have any fee provisions
per say that talk about plant
fee i'm in in current law other
than with us deferring that to
however
you know bringing back to
slangage is something that we'd
like we would be open to working
with the industry on
perhaps raising the cap a bit
but nevertheless the open to
that suggestion thank you
representative madame chair
representative
the other thing that I I seem to
recall that you you mention
there's a twenty thousand plant
maximum right now and that was
going to sunset
in maybe neck at the end of next
year twenty twenty five was that
and and.
You were or this bill would
uh remove that sunset provision
can can you
tell me why you want the the the
twenty thousand max left in
madame chair representatives so
the sunset is broader it's about
the rule making process that we
would defer back to again to to
make that determination
since we don't have the plant
count in law today and we that
was a value proposition that we
had at the time that we were
legalizing canada's
recreationally to give that
authority to not only study the
market but to increase or
decrease plan count as needed so
we remove the sunset in this
bill to continue to give that
authority
madame chair representative you
know that's apology policy
decision that we would still be
in favor of of course however if
we look at the market data and
we're not making the adjustments
that are necessary
we believe in future years we
might want to re address
potentially the plant count and
how we might put it into life
we're not seeing those changes
made either thank you
representative of madame chair
representative romero I I too
noticed the provision it's on
page twenty seven beginning the
point two
that that the emily on the
public comment brought up and
really I guess the the me of it
begins on page twenty six line
three where says the division
may refuse to issue suspend or
revoke a license and then we've
got all these things but number
five over on page twenty seven
is a pending investigation and I
I think that's
a could be a little.
A steep
you know that that seems it if
the
license is revoked because of a
pending investigation
may have some real sort of due
process issues madam chair
representative I don't think we
disagree on that point I think
it was just a think thanks to
the folks who are flagging these
things for us in the process
and I I don't disagree with you
about that
okay thank you representative.
Madame chair representative and.
You know I was just trying to
see in this in the committee
substitute I think originally
the bill was going to remove the
ability for for retail stores to
have drive through us drive
through this was that correct
madam chair representative we
don't know what the senate's
doing but no that was never in
the bill okay okay
thank you representative madame
chair representative I just had
a concern about those who are
just using medical
canoes and I know that the
convenience of drive throughs
for medical canabas is a is that
in this bill manager
representative yeah thank you
representative thank you
thank you speaker martinez they
can matter chair and thinking of
my colleague for saying the s
word in committee
senate.
Well you said it too
interesting.
Sounds like five committee
sentence for your bill
just get thank you for the bill
thank you for all the work you
put in a man chair
representative.
You really take it I think
a lead role in something that is
very complicated very new very
new ones and I really appreciate
madam chair and representative
your efforts in your work I want
to go briefly through some of
the elements of the bill and
correct me from wrong because
there are other bills
or out there and get some
confusing at times but
your bill is is raising plank
out for my girl license at
correct madame that's correct
mr speaker madam chair from two
hundred to five hundred plants
and I apologize if you've asked
their answer to this already
that is too.
Provide competitive advantage
to.
To that to the smaller elements
of the industry that correct
that's correct madame chair
representative it's inequity
issue that we're trying to
address in manager presented
went when when we carried this
bill for years ago you and I
together one of the things that
came up over and over again was
how we wanted to make sure this
was in industry that.
Um sure anchored by big
producers big manufacturers big
retailers but also one where
smaller operators is
particularly particularly in in
rural communities can excel and
enhance a business enterprise
that that is
that is profitable is that right
madam chair that's absolutely
correct and manshares mister
speaker
does your bill deal madame
chairpresentative with tax rates
at all
madame chairman it does not at
this point.
That's pretty something we want
to think about in the future I
think the tax rates if i'm not
mistaken started at twelve
percent and they go up to twenty
percent or so their faced in.
And you know i'm not sure that
something that
means that part of this bill but
i'm not sure that something i.
Agree with anymore given where
we are in this industry but
that's that's a conversation for
another another bill
in terms of
in terms of trafficking I think
you addressed it earlier but
your bill addresses the issue of
juvenile trafficking and some of
those criminal elements that we
know operate in any industry but
particularly in this one madam
chair representative madam chair
representative that's correct we
learned a lot about some of the
operations in state or coming
from out of state into our state
to seek to traffic count of us
grown in other places but also
operate illegally in our state
under the guys of potentially
having a license or those who
are just simply still in the
elicit market or producing
elicitly within the state and
trying to seek a venue on legal
shelves so what this really
tamps down on some of those
elements that we've learned and
have been brought to our
attention to tighten that up
madam chair mister speaker thank
you representative in jan lady
in terms of background checks we
know that this has been.
I don't know that it's a blind
spot like we've known this all
along we had in the original
legislation but for some reason
there said this connect between
the federal government and the
sea government with regard to
background checks that something
that you bill addresses to a
mister amanchair mister speaker
that's correct I know that the
regulation in licensing is still
in negotiations with the federal
of an investigation on how to do
this correctly what's proposed
today is what is a twenty twenty
four version of what we think
couldn't work they're still
looking to have to do that
effectively to my knowledge
madam chair mr speaker but this
gets us to a place of at least
having an ability to address
that thank you and madam chair
representative
does your bill address
this was another blank spot the
issue of liquor licensees also
having a canaba's license and
just for the benefit of the
public the intentively original
legislation was not to prohibit
you from.
Having both licenses so long as
you weren't operating.
The both licenses within the
same place in other words we
don't want you to have a bar we
can also sell cannibers
mount her mister speaker that's
correct my favorite example of
this is in madrid where one of
the same owners owns the entire
strip mall throughout that town
and they can't have accountable
license and a liquor license
currently for all of the
visitors who come through
the madrid in which case madame
chair representative that was
never the intent of
having the same named licensee
to be able to have something in
the same vicinity on there would
be zoned perfectly fine for
something like that madam chair
mister speaker we just don't
want the sale point of sale to
be in the same square footage of
of you know that that sale so
that was the original intent and
I think we clarify that here
thank you that's a good example
the the other one I had heard
about a year to go was in
thinking some in park think
there's some sort of like r v
camp situation and because they
have a liquor license they were.
Economist license any type of
his license whether it's
production manufacturing retail
etcetera a last question manager
and you alluded to we're earlier
so you're built currently deals
with licensing fees it sounds
like you're a minimal to taking
that out of your bill parking it
in the intro along with it
discussion and taxes that we can
work on over over the course of
the next several months into the
sixty days session would you be
able to manter mister speaker we
would you know we don't want to
create fear that platfies could
be out of control overnight and
I think we're open to that
change mister amount of chair
mister speaker appreciate that
madam chair and representative
appreciate flexibility I think
it shows a great deal of
maturity as as allegedly toward
to be able and willing to do
that because there is a lot of
fear of that you know in the
next three months license and
fees could a skyrocket and
obviously for an industry that
is so new
that by all accounts is thriving
and it's thriving in the right
ways which is even more
um you know.
Amazing for me we want to make
sure that we don't disrupt that
too much so I appreciate taking
that composition to the interim
again also along with taxes
something that we should talk
about later on last question i'm
and I think we said read as I
was walking in was looting to
this but you also addressing
your bill issues of contraband
packaging which i've been issues
that we've worked on since last
session and that's in your bill
as well yep madame chair mister
speaker that's a bipartisan
effort things that were flagged
that we absolutely agree with
and that's why we're working
together to get it all in one
build to make sure it gets
through.
Thank you appreciate that thank
you venture
you speak her representative of
lane and clean and then
you're not all i'm sorry you
were just pointing at him
okay
representing.
Thank you member venture or same
romaro there was some discussion
in the papers before the session
about limiting the number of
licenses
is there in this madame chair
represent i've not at all thank
you matter
because I know sapansk madame
chair representative just a
briefly
I had shared with you previously
of a concern about just insuring
that
patience who are qualified for
medical canabas are able to be
fully employed with appropriate
protections for employers and
employees.
Umm so I just wanted to say I
i'd love to keep trying to work
on that language and potentially
get that into this substitute
wonder if you're open to that
affordable term crash that in
the way it needs to be a madam
chair
representative I would be very
open to that we've just even
through testimony have discussed
some of the changes that we feel
strongly that need to be made
I think if the chair is
amendable to rolling the spell
and making those changes for a
vote we would be happy to do
that
we've been listening in short
manager representative
settlement the i'm certainly
open to that let's get
everybody's feedback so we only
have one thing we have to deal
with so that was representative
of answering anyone else you
want to bring something else up
sure
sorry then have my my because
madam chair representative I
know we're I saw the list were
doing bringing contrary and into
prisons coming on wednesday and
so I see it in your bill but I
think would we also need to have
the criminal bill in order to
have that separate so I think
madame chair we're going to have
to have a criminal bill on that
and then this possibly is
clarified in in here would you
agree with that I just want to
make sure we're
I I don't know how we get rid of
a criminal bill like that madam
chair representative this
contraband is a stand alone bill
I understand would be fine if it
made it through the process as
it's been proposed we saw in
consumer in public affairs and
we agreed that it would be fine
as a stand alone bill it's also
featured directly in the spill
so madam chair represented we
were hoping that the broader
efforts by the both the industry
of course then the agency would
be what we hope to carry through
that's my preference but you
know if the it's the well of the
house to.
Just do contraband alone that's
fine too many chair
representative thank you a
manager for let me ask
additional question thank you
sure anyone else represented
suburb okay
I just want to clarify an
appointment of chair so.
The bill deals with contraband
you have a separate proposal is
there completely both pass now I
don't think the matter of chair
mister speaker that there would
be it literally it's a
representatives of more as in my
bill and it basically is
defighting candidates as
contraband being added into what
you can bring into a prison then
that's a court degree felony
along with all the other things
that's listed but it's a
separate criminal statute I
don't think there would be
conflict at thirteen I think
they're exactly the same they
are but don't know madame chair
mister speaker if you could just
do away with that criminal bill
because it deals with a lot of
other substances and things it's
not just kind of
thought I someone think about I
just
we can talk about it more as we
craft the substitute yeah so
keep in mind representative for
me is going to roll our bill and
be bringing a back up my
recommendation as the two of you
and if speaker if you want to be
involved of course get together
and decide how that should that
peace should be handled should
it be in representative reebs
bill or so to be in this but I
personally don't think we should
have to so it is the in they
certainly shouldn't be in
conflict if some maybe we could
work that out before
wednesday okay
till that's that i'm
representing lane I think I saw
your hand
it did this time and correct
thank you and I had a side bar
comma with a certain member in
and it sort of triggered this
and just a curiosity manager
it minorson is the
the market seems to be pretty
floated right now.
And i'm wondering if there is
any discussion about.
Um.
Here in the pause button on some
of the license that are being
issued allow detail catch up
with staffing and and allow for
compliance which I understand.
Specification in mexico made her
leader lane we've definitely
looked at some of the different
options through the interim and
this has been suggested with
more looking at the authority
that we're giving to regulation
and licensing to do their jobs
and certainly what prohibits
somebody from continuing to
carry a license that's what's
proposed in this bill
is a way for which they can
revoke or suspend a license
which is actually the crucks of
the issue when we're looking at
various licensees who have not
started a business those that
have potentially started a
business but are not paying
their taxes or are a number of
other provisions that we're
saying madame chair leader lane
that we would essentially give
that authority for regulation on
licensing to do their job to
prevent those folks from
continuing in the industry i'm
ending in addition madam chair
leader lane we've also
improved the budget process for
how we're funding the canada's
control division there was still
some lingering question about
the fact that we were funding
medical counties through HSD
and made sure that there since
that program is actually managed
by
the count of its control
division that they would get
that funding completely so they
will have the ability now to not
only hire additional regulators
but through this process be able
to temp down on precisely what
you're
the concerns about you know too
many licenses are how is it
going and being able to look at
that holistically both with
funding and with the provisions
within this bill to do that work
manager i'd certainly
you know sort of my base phone
free market system but you also
need when you're going to
regulate an industry in make
sure you have enough staff to
not how to enforce what we do
have on the books.
The way I
read.
And it's all good the section.
The.
Section five is a lot of new
language and section five and I
I read this language I think
consistent with what you were
just sharing which is this is
one of the ways that we can kind
of go after some of the bad
actors which will in theory
reduce
the over saturation in the
market
and so I I see that as one tack
but it's sort of still depends
on which what it what I think is
one of the fundamental problems
right now in this industry is
this type of enforcement still
depends upon
the having enough staffing
enough men power to be able to
go and tackle these things
thank you manager.
Thank you represent.
I have a few questions.
So what is the reasoning for
raising the plant limit to five
hundred which seems like an
awful lot to me
mount her one of the
consistent messages that we've
been hearing from the
microcommunity is that they have
a lack of access to capital for
the things that they're trying
to do are even within the house.
Within the legislative budget
process we tried to help with
some of the micro businesses to
be able to access grants etc
based on the way that many of
these businesses pounds at
pencil out and related to plant
count that they weren't actually
able to survive as businesses
because the plant count was too
low and so madam chair that's
precisely why we're trying to
help raise the sort of equitable
access to
gain some traction within the
industry not all not everyone's
just going to start growing five
hundred rates something that you
typically work up to but that
said madam chair we're just
trying to help with being able
to
understand what's what's
happening right now in the
industry and the fact that
they're not able to arm have a
viable business without that
plant increase
so representative how much space
do you need for a five hundred
plants and i'm asking this
because you know I have little
communities that have
growers in there you know I
guess you call them producers in
there area and it's the draw on
the water of the area
and frankly some of my
constituents have complained
about.
Various aspects associated with
the growing of of the countries
and so now we're increasing the
number to so and that's more
bigger bigger more water more
energy more impact you know and
so help me understand how much
without increase the size of
such an operation if we got to
five hundred while I know
members of the industrial here
managed her so that's a kind of
a loaded question because there
are some vertical programs there
are some horse until there some
outdoor grows their indoor
growth so it really is relative
to the grow operation that they
may have so it's not a
consistent when being an
inconsistent answer about the
sort of space needed that said
madame chair representative
madam chair there's some.
There's a lot of provisions
within this within current law
about all of the provisions for
both energy needs water needs
that need to be in place before
someone could expand an
operation in which case the
microsoft no exception to all of
those needs so they have to you
know make sure that those
provisions are in place before
they could do any of that
and so and and of course each
plant is regulated manager okay
so what I remember is what we
put in like the earlier
legislation that maybe the
speaker carried is and maybe you
were on that bill as well
representative
things like you had to establish
you had water rights in advance
sufficient to address.
The production needs.
That's still correct manager and
all of those in also show that
your
use trying to use the most
ecologically and conservative
conservating water type
techniques like drip your gation
but the i'm okay yes
the loss and you've established
your source of water because I
remember at the time I was very
concerned about the mutual
domestics because if you
remember some not all but some
of the producers were just
signing up in
for mutual domestic water when
it wasn't really appropriate and
and things like that so you may
have called me and you know that
me about that one a couple times
when yes i'd have and actually
he was very accommodating which
I was very impressed by.
Such a rear thing I know
so it's all it's all good I was
very pleased that people were
willing to have those
conversations in address those
issues for the loan were rock
small road community so that's
great so now on the issue of the
epra.
Where is that in the bill
I want to see want to see if
there's any suggestions I might
be able to make so madam terror
it's I believe in section
five.
You have a page number i'm
working on it
um.
The.
Page three piece so
oh yeah information developed or
obtain.
During enforcement investigation
okay so let's see
it says right to inspect
record's exceptions
so this is.
And I know there's a lot of
exceptions already in the
original bill so let me look at
this so are you okay so we're
fourteen dash two dash one is
that the public records act is a
a reference to the
which where are h two correct
manager
yes.
Okay yes so
representative
I had always had in mind
maybe misremembering but there
have in there's another
exception somewhere in this in
the act that already talks about
investigatory materials and if
it's in the process of
investigation you can't get them
because you you don't want to
disrupt the investigation but
once the investigations done it
most of that's available so
where is that in here at madame
chair so be
we can go through some of the
other pending investigation that
I think that's where I was
headed leader in the bill but as
it pertains to this the
suggestion that we agree with
is to essentially mimic what
happens with current
investigations for law
enforcement so you you can ipra
for law enforcement
investigation currently but
there's private information
that's redacted
so that in a separate law that's
not in infra I believe it isn't
if brave
if it's an import why do we have
an at separate paragraph why
wouldn't we just rely on the
paragraph that all reads this
either yes what i'm looking for
madame chairs so it's a this is
a civil process that's the
difference because of the grey
area between the fact that it's
illegal product but it's
federally
scheduled it's not if bond
forcement related investigation
okay so i'm I see I don't
usually do this but miss majors
from
foundation are open government
if I could just get a sense I
may be able to clarify that for
you in two thousand and twenty
the mexico
issue a ruling.
Not.
Therefore that information if it
is reque.
Can be.
No children
two thousand
okay so I guess what i'm hearing
is if we want to protect the
information during an ongoing
information we actually have to
be very specific about that in
the wall correct madam children
all right so that's another
thing that I would request that
you work with far gone when you
come back with the bill now i'm
talking about that you know
normally we have a twenty four
hour rule but i'm i'm asking
maybe the indulgence of the
committee that we we might not
get completely within the the
twenty four hours if if the
representative is prepared to
delineate the changes so that we
can move us along I don't want
us to get barged down in twenty
four hours and then will be
friday and and that kind of
thing so i'm seeing people are
nodding their heads by
participantly wise so i'm so
okay so you have a lot of work
to do there
will still try to hit the twenty
four hour old mountain well as
but I just saw some sense of
concerns but don't take
advantage will not do never
never I wanted to like an hour
before never madam chair
will try to get it today if we
can all right very good so you
have your marching or thank you
thank you very much
representative
so.
Cheer chapresentative gear it I
see you waiting in the audience
you're welcome to join us.
The.
It is a big bill on its
complicated.
Yeah.
Representative gear welcome.
You are here on house bill one
ninety
your favorite subject a whole
world and our favorite subject
in the whole world public
private partnerships so the
floor is yours thank you madame
chair and I have a house to
decirity committee sub for the
house transportation so for
house bill one ninety.
Yeah two two seven eight five
five point two okay somebody
want to make motion to consider
the sub for discussion
second advice we have emotion to
consider this made by the
speaker second by
representatives of pansky for
discussion purposes the floor is
yours rep
thank you madame chair
how studio committee sub as as
many view no many of you heard
last year hospital two thirteen
that after some amendments in
this committee passed
unanimously on the floor and
then starled in the senate since
that time working with the new
mexico finance authority working
with the municipal big we've
come up with what we believe is
a streamline approach to
establishing.
Um.
Oh mechanism to do public
private partnerships and
so this will streamline
surprises it now requires the
state board of finance to
promulgate the rules rather than
new mexico finance authority.
Er they have to review approved
the public partnership public
private partnership agreements
it amends in the next poor
sections of the procurement code
and the reason why we have a
committee sub from
transportation is that the
committee subcorrects the former
language stating that the board
of finance division of the
department of dfbate would
promotate the world's it's
actually the board of finance
itself so that's been corrected
in the sub and all of the
division words have been
replaced with word.
Also per discussions with the
deputy director of the board of
finance division which provides
the stuff in for the board of
finance we add an appropriation
of a hundred and sixty thousand
support the additional staffing
and contractual services that
they would need to carry out
so i'll just review a couple
sections section one has
definitions and it has a private
partner in the public partner
and note that.
Um.
It only applies to the
construction of public
transportation facilities public
transportation infrastructure
public track construction of
broadband till communications
networks and we did a add even
charging facilities as since
you're
section two three
procument cord procurement code
changes
section for has a what the board
shall do.
Um section five has rurals
evaluation and performance
section six ads and amendment
about multiterm contracts in the
specified period as requested
by people who responded and with
that i'll stand for questions
first let's go to the audience
those wishing to speak in
opposition to house bill one
ninety please raise your hand.
Those online wishing to speak in
opposition please raise your
hand.
So mr kensi you wish to speak an
opposition to the bill.
The.
Mister mckanzie.
You need to under yourself yes
i'm unmetered so my name is a
jim mckenzie
m citizen lobbyist and I would
like to speak just very briefly
about this bill I think this
bill has kind of assorted
history
and I want to go back to.
Government johnson's
administration and the
rebuilding of
state highway five fifty which
was done with a public private
partnership and it turned into a
quarter mess
it and I don't know all the the
minutes of it but apparently the
contracts or with the private
entity weren't sufficiently
embedded so there was a twenty
year maintenance contract that
was part of that and it wasn't
very well written from the
state's point of view and in
order so that's one one thing
and then two years ago
this bill are appeared to be
helping aimed at helping some of
the escalating hydrogen facility
development and
that is problematic from my
point I give so that's that's
kind of where i'm standing thank
you very much thank you mister
mckensie we're speaking an
opposition anyone else online
wishing to speak an opposition
raise your hand please.
Care of see anyone else those in
the audience wishing to suspect
and support the bill please
raise your hand.
Mr more
madame chairman committee my
name is brent more and a
registered lobbyist for the
american property casualty
insurance association and we
stand in support of the bill and
the concept we think that these
types of projects are very
helpful do you believe that
there is one important piece
that is missing from this bill
and that is the provision that
would require the private
partners in a three p project to
come forward and have a payment
and performance on that bond
would clear up any issues
related to the private partner
and it would ensure the projects
get done and that a sudden
contractors and workers get paid
on projects we have seen in
other states where those types
of projects have been in default
and problems have occurred so we
believe that that additional
amendment to the bill would be
appropriate we spoke with the
sponsor.
Very good anyone else wishing it
speaking sport carter
chairman many carter bunding
faster we have a lot of
reservations about p three
generally but the sponsor of the
last five years or so has worked
with us and when it has been
never to just the construction
of public transportation
facilities or other structural
road and broadband we have
students support of it in the
past including public
construction of what vehicle
charging facilities some worried
that's not we think encroach on
traditional public activities
government run court activities
and so we are able to stand
strong support in the sponsor
for working with this thank you
john please.
Thank you madame chair members
of the committee john lipsheets
with the new mexico veteran of
laboratory l representing all
forty thousand of our union
members
we echo the senate of my
colleague mister bondy
with these appropriate guard
rails this is definitely a job
creator for those in our private
sector in our construction
industry and so for that reason
you think the sponsor introduced
part thank you i'm jd.
Thank you madame chair members
of the committee good afternoon
my day my name is jady
bullington or registered
lobbyists for the city a santa
fe
with the supporting the whole
time
to flip your art
take a moment to say that for
different groups have been
supporting it but the city a
sanity while this bill has been
reduced we do have a
redevelopment project going on
at midtown it's a big project in
their some elements is built we
think we'll be favorable to help
that thank you thank you anyone
else in the audience it's
wishing to speak and support
okay
those online wishing to speak
and support please raise your
hand
okay ryan mast.
Ryan.
You're good afternoon manager
members of the committee my name
is rian mass and the new mexico
state weed for sustainability
partners were a public benefits
company that offers a unique
form of private public
partnership that can provide a
flexible service and and in that
we believe these these provide
communities the uproar capital
project management support that
they need to deliver on their
essential infrastructure and
partner with them to actually
keep this safe reliable and
improving over time we know the
search agreements can address
significant challenges that many
community space to get projects
off the ground including meeting
cautious and match or federal
and other capital sources for re
addressing risk and reducing
risk associated with major
projects including on the
capital side the construction
side of performance risk over
time as well as increasing
communities ability to access
and leverage the private markets
to meet their prestructure needs
we stand and support this bill
because it offers another unique
pathway for communities to
access innovative finance
support for the priority
projects and we greatly
appreciate the sponsor at her
engagement with us over time for
ensuring that we can deliver for
communities thank you very much
thank you anyone else online
wishing to speak and support of
the bill.
I don't see any other hands
reased i'll go back to the
sponsor anything you wish to add
before we go to the committee
I would just say that as the new
mexican finance authority points
out that new mexico legs behind
other states in establishing p
three frameworks and it's often
overlooked but a private sector
investors able to implement
public projects more efficiently
while sharing the risk and it's
a tool in economic two bucks and
just in response to mr more he
did approach me and what he's
talking about is friendly
addition to make the built
better and with that I send per
questions i'm very good I have
representative hembry who I
think might have the magic
language
thank you madame chair and I do
however
the
language the references to the
page and line are incorrect
because it was based on the
original bill and not the
committee substitute so we're
trying to get that fixed
madame chair mine says on.
Page nine nine seven two
okay the one I have says only
page nine line eighteen which
was what it was in the original
well there's a so on
after subsection sea insert a
new subsection d is that what
we're talking about this is what
I have
representative so.
Yes I think that if we can just
I can amend the line number to
it says eighteen and it should
say seventeen okay and I think
this should be seventeen and
eight was served something that
was handed out that I are your
hand out yes I don't we ended up
a cent rep did you want.
Yes this is our yes
yes so what
the language looks like and
where it will go and maybe we
can talk about process while
it's being handed out
sure so don't know how to
do
this has always been one of the
tricky things
the staff you're can h.
So
what i'd like to do if this
we've done this before I think
is when we've had an amendment
like this on a sub that's our
so.
We agree on the language we
reissue this would be a point
three
and that's the version that goes
to the floor is at night right
smarter people than me on this
process we don't have to bring
it back that's what i'm trying
to get
it's really complicated yeah um.
Yeah
what i'm saying that it was
I know our beloved ellen is no
longer here
yeah okay.
So let's let's proceed along
their possibility and so
represent if he you have the
floor
okay
i've never done this before not
sure what i'm supposed to do so
you have sent out the two to
eight number into the eighths
now well it's zero eight one
point one is that right and you
wanted you said there's a
mistake and we think it on the
number paragraph one seventy
nine eighteen correct yes and
then and do we think i'm on
paragraph two was that correct
or is there an error I believe
there's an error there to should
be between lines seventeen and
eighteen.
And this is just for us to keep
good notes it's not like an
official type amendment okay all
right the floor still thank you
madame chair and this amendment
which I think is addresses the
current concerns of mr more and
and that the that representative
garet was fully aware that this
was
coming and it was just to
require the private party to
have bonding in place as well.
Thank you madame chair
thank you.
Any questions about this
particular item
and i'm trying to think this
through now we have a proposed
additional language is there a
second
okay so further discussion of
the proposed additional language
I will call it emotion
on that particular adding this
paragraph at the appropriate
place it public private
partnership agreement shall
require a private partner to
provide or cause to be provided
performance and payment bonds as
required for similar to section
thirteen dash four dash eighteen
nmsa nineteen seventy eight and
i'm assuming representative gear
it and representative hambury
that this is language that's
been run by the council service
is at correct.
Madame chair yes and it has been
in past versions okay of the
bill okay and I see
representative chasing is this
kind of a helpful just on
discussion whenever you want to
discuss okay i've you have to
represent hamburger you have
anything else to add until we go
to the other members on this
motion to a man no ma'am I do
not
okay
represent of chasing and then
read if you have okay represent
chasing amount of turn think a
representative from
i'm wondering if
this might have addressed one
person comment on line in
opposition and it seems to me
that this may have
his objection maybe addressed by
this particular amendment and I
just wondered if you had had any
feedback on that
manager if mister mart
who brought it to my tension can
hear us that because I I do
think it does address with that
prisons okay sure
chassis unfortunately I wasn't I
didn't hear the comment that was
on that the person online was
making so many sure exactly what
it is but I will try to respite
venture
a representative and mister more
I think what I heard is that
when the work was substandard we
had no recourse
madam chair a representative
chasing what this is trying to
do is to ensure that so if you
take the your original situation
of a public project it is bonded
when you're talking about public
private partnership you're
adding in a private party this
will ensure that the private
party is bringing forward a bond
so there is no question in terms
of if there is an issue so that
if there is a default or there
is a some type of issue that is
there that private bond will
also insure.
That the work gets completed
that all the subcontractors get
paid that all the workers on it
get paid it will take it to
conclusion and then the the
entity is showing that the bond
while seek um
funds from that from from those
who are are available
to does that answer the question
I hope I think so manager thank
you thank you anyone else
wishing to speak to this
proposed amendment.
Is there any opposition to the
proposed amount.
Opposition so just remind
everyone we have an adopted
amendment it's going to be put
into a sub as a point three and
i'll make sure represent a
hembry looks at it and to make
sure everybody's copied.
Did you have a another point on
this year a motion for the bill
as adopted.
Is there any opposition to the
amendment none so we have an
adopted amended bill do you have
a motion on the bill
representative cause I have a
question from.
Is that okay representatively.
Thank you matter.
Uh
manager is a housekeeping matter
I keep reading the wrong bill
because i'm not in the committee
subs i've asked a couple times
have my assistant included on
the distribution list and I have
her print things for me so I
just want to reiterate that
request.
She was added to one list I
uploaded I editor to the
amendment subslists today and I
sent her son that she wanted
okay thank you matcher
sorry
so many chair sent care
you know how I feel about this
bill
I continue let him share it he's
trying to say he really loves an
entourist
I continue to have reservations
about this type of structure and
I have it as my questions
first off
in the past when we've been
turning this bill there has been
a large amount of money in the
budget
that was continged on passage of
a bill like this is there any
money in the budget for this
bill
no matter i'm sure the
representative that many doesn't
before it came out of the ms now
they can use what to pull
sources they could even apply
frankly to the public project
revolving fun
if they wanted so the only money
in the budget is for the
additional staffing for the or
to finance division that
supports the board of finance.
In manchesters and pure it so
it's it's interesting this this
bill source willing upstream we
will see a lot of bills it start
with him appropriation and it
gets stripped out this one
actually had one added
mentioner reserve carrot.
Does this mean that you're going
to house preparations.
Madam share and representative
this is my grow money.
Mentor resume here excuse me
it is what money you're roman
she's growing up wonderful
process that we went through
earlier in the session I think
that's what she might be
referring to she's putting your
own money into this baby so that
some of their security i've
called it the not junior money
which seems seems okay but but
there's a propriation in the
bill which is not the growth
process
madame chair and representative
I discussed this with the chair
of have see how to do it and and
this is what we concluded we
would do.
There
you're looking at the
appropriation.
Unpigs.
Twelve section seven write the
hundred and sixty thousand
ventures and care yes yep
madam chair representative the
money is to carry out the staff
being in the contextual services
that division just slice the
attorney that was I believe with
the ageism
and so they concluded that this
would be a adequate funding to
do the services they'd need to
do.
So many characters
this is the process maybe I
don't fully understand I had a a
single and appropriation for a
particular project I funded it
with my not junior money and
then in conversation with the
chair investor of preparations
they simply tabled my
appropriation until
my mind and again I don't
understand the process if this
bill passed in the growth money
past you would have three
hundred and twenty thousand
dollars not under sixty.
Cause I think they're too
separate appropriations to
separate bills.
I think.
Madame chairman representative
this bill doesn't go to
appropriations so into
transportation now it's due to
shari and then
based on passing it would go to
the floor
named chair resident care that I
appreciate that but the bill has
an appropriation in it so if
that appropriation stays in the
bill and the bills signed in the
law the terms of the bill
appropriate hundred sixty
thousand from the general fund
for this purpose.
Presumably your grow fund is in
the separate grow bill also for
under sixty thousand.
I don't think those get combined
I think they're separate.
Madame share and representative.
As far as I know this is the
only amount that would go there
and i'm happy to take it up with
the chair to i'm confirmed that
men chair resent year that
that's not my concern about the
bill just technical issue
so many chair resent care
looking on and page through the
public project definition.
It says transportation
infrastructure other than the
toll ruth with this include
other roads.
Yes madam chair representatives
the construction of public
transportation infrastructure
but it cannot include a tall in
ma'am chair represent your can
you give me example of how AP
three structure would be used to
construct a public road.
Yes I can madam chairman
representative and example is b
and s
give this run being a separate
road wanted to work on a real
road cross scene and so they
could work with dot together the
public private partnership I
originally got interested in
this bill when representative
brown who said cosponsor on this
bill
had a bill because some of the
oil and gas companies in south
east new mexico wanted to
contribute to building the
horrible roads but it couldn't
be done there was no mechanism
so there's different
transportation practice multi
model projects are in up
incoming area that the house
transportation committee is
looked at so this are some
examples
in ma'am chair rivers of care
like some curious about how the
money flows in in that situation
like is it
the contractor builds the roo
and gets the money to build the
road from the public partner I
mean I just how how is.
How do you build a road with a
private partner this difference
from simply hiring someone to
build the road.
Madame share and representative
this each agreement each p three
agreement is an individual
contract that's worked on by the
two parties there's not like a
standard way to do it so it
depends on the rules promigated
by the state where to finance
and then that specific pea three
agreement how it's paid for.
It in themselves year who pays
who
who pays who were where's the
money come from and we're
disagreed
to
madame chair and representative
again it's the specific contract
I can't give an example because
we don't really have it in law
yet but let's take the real road
crossing
the public private partnership
agreement which are so first it
has to be allowed by the rules
for the state board of finance
and then the actual agreement
has to be reviewed so it's
possible that does he would put
a certain amount of money in the
rare road would put certain
amount of many and it all has to
be agreed on and then approved
so it goes before the board of
finance twice once two
approved the entering of the
agreement and then once the
agreement is done has to be
approved by the board of
finance.
Okay mim chair
uhm
i'm still trying to understand
how how this actually please out
in um
I guess i'm not maybe not on the
same age with that
memory let me move on.
And solicited proposals um to a
rivers and gear it
can you can you just explain
how.
A public entity funds in
unsolicited proposal.
Madame chair and representative
it doesn't if there's an
unsolicited
project suggested if you look.
On
page five.
A prospective private partner
may submit an unsolicited
proposal to a public partner
however there's a whole process
a public partner has to notify
the board within ninety days the
public partner has to decide if
they even want to consider any
action at which point the public
partner has to provide public
notice discussion of the project
shall not be deemed a
solicitation of the projector
its concepts after public notice
is given they have to do step
one provide information.
Um it's not a secret thing it's
a public you know it's publicly
it's transparent
then they have to provide notice
on the home page of the public
partners that they have received
this they have to request
comments
it has to be posted for thirty
days if it's below five million
posted there's a whole process
so if if bns of railroad comes
with you know and and solicited
proposal it has to be
transparently publicised
and then upon it and be on page
six upon the end of the public
notice period the public partner
may consider the proposal and
competing proposals if the
public partner determines it's
in the best interests of the
public partner to implement
summer of the concepts of the
public partner may begin an open
competitive procurement process
so that unsolicited proposal may
trigger a process that then gets
competitive alternative bids to
it.
So there's no obligation to do
it or even to consider it.
Mancher ribs and curious.
How ear competing offerers to
understand what the scope of the
projectors it's publicised their
public partner has to publicise
what would go into a potential
agreement that send.
What's an unsolicited project
calms
then it if they think it's
something worthy to be
considered they go back to page
three requests for proposals and
the public partner has to
request proposals.
And explain the proposed
parameters this is on page for
proposed duties duties
responsibilities plans for
financing it goes back to the
original if the public partner
was actually initiating the
proposal so it has to be totally
transparent and again.
Significant rules had to be
propolegated by the state where
to finance.
So many chairms and curious
after
the publication for thirty six
year ninety days if the
um public partner wants to move
forward they have to go back and
start over with the rfp process
as I correct
yes
madam chair representative yeah
it has to be then opened up in a
very public way published the
parameters of what they'd
consider.
And they're not obligated to
consider the insolicited
proposal if
it's not something they are
interested in doing or want to
do.
The.
Ma'am chair represent curious
we very amended the community
sub wants I would suggest
another amendment
on page
six line twenty five.
Er it says.
The public partner me begin and
open I believe that should be a
shell.
Medame churner presentative but
if you read the whole sentence
if the public this is line
twenty two if the public part I
see if the public partner
determines it is in the best
interests of the public partner
to implement somewhere of.
I agree it should be share.
Because they're a green that it
should be considered so they
have to open it up to that whole
process you're correct thank you
monterey with have a move there
in our point three version
the may on line twenty five
became too show.
Yeah.
And.
I see.
Think you meant here and thank
you for that percent care
i'm on turned down to the next
page and this is.
This is sort of the robert
online three.
Uh that was the ending in the
other privilege of law.
So first of all ma'am chair rubs
and care at my understanding is
that this language is the kiss
of death and search of this area
h seven page seven mind three.
And what the issue is here I
think
is
when preparing an rft
you're not supposed to talk to
the offers and the reason is
cause it they don't mind the
public partner tailoring the rfb
to her particular company.
And man chair sent cared I was
once an attorney for the state
in the mexico I did our peace
for the state in the mexico and
it was very clear that we
weren't too communicate with
anyone about there are
in her prepared get the bids
admitted sealed the bids are
evaluated there can be no
communication and what what I
think this is is because of the
unsolicited proposal process
there's clearly been
communication.
And so I think a man chairs of
gear I think you have a
problem with the drafting
but I also think there's a
subset of concern there where
you have this private partner
essentially scoping out the
project for you and so it's not
the public partner saying this
is something we need who can
provide this service at the best
cost you know and a qualified
product.
It's actually private partners
proposing this.
So any thoughts on either those
issues.
Madame share representative I
see your point
but on the other hand.
The thinking is if somebody has
a good idea and it's recognized
by a public entity that it is a
good idea that it that
the proposals put forth in the
agreement
to do the re the further peace
wouldn't necessarily favor the
original person whose idea was.
That does my opinion
in
mancher ribs care.
Can I
do
you you can draft the contract
so.
You know who's going to respond.
Either I would say the
the legislature sometimes does
this when they like to find a
county that elise this
population and not more in this
population and you look listed
counties there's only one county
fits in there you know that kind
of thing.
Um madame chair and
representative I understand your
point but I also understand the
point that.
So do we never consider and
solicited proposals
and there's no guarantee that
the person or company doing then
solicited proposal will actually
get the contract if the public
party.
Um it's considering them.
And I don't have a statistics on
other states who do have similar
laws and I have statistics
unlike how often the unsolicitor
proposal gets chosen ultimately
as opposed to the other
proposals also we don't know how
often this would even be used
because essentially the majority
are going to be public entities
determining that this is the
best mechanism to use.
Mentioners in care that to
concern for me
it is something that um.
Could be an issue for you moving
forward
one final question map here
you start your prison
presentation by nothing that
this bill had passed you the end
mislead on the house floor and
you're not wrong I voted for it
and then chair resent here you
might recall I visit for it
after you had is a four minute
and my request
the language of the floor
amendment I think is still
relevant and I don't see it in
your bill
madam chair representative I
honestly don't recall with the
language was because at that
time it was that no one.
On the committee had a
relationship to the party the
private party is that correct
uhm
chair sort of it it basically
said.
No public official who is
received a campaign contribution
from any of the private parties
could participate in the
process.
So
made share representative
are you proposing that that be
added for the state where to
finance the statement of finance
is the entity that's gonna
promotate the rules.
But they're not the entity
that's going to enter into the
contract right that would be
between the private partner in
the public partner yes that's
correct so i'm in that that's my
concern that here's a private
partner they think they have a
good idea they make a couple
wallplace campaign contributions
yet to make sure they get the
attention of the public partner
and then they move for and
that's what i'm trying to
protect.
But.
Madame chair representative are
you proposing an amendment at
this time or would you like to
do this of floor amendment ma'am
chair
it's
it a conscious amendment to
propose it on the fly
since you have to get a point
three version of this.
Maybe that would be a good
opportunity to look at the floor
man from last year in.
See if you're willing to
incorporate
an issue with that because the
point three version that we're
talking about we're all seen in
the language right here so to
create another point three based
on language we think we remember
and what it looks like and
putting it in and saying that's
part of the committee's vote I
have a problem with that mansion
respect that you know I I have
the language of pro me from last
year's amendment.
I haven't tried to figure out
where it's a terminologies
right.
Or where would that well it
might be appropriate for a floor
I would say just in advance of
our conversation it means is
there some amount you know if
you get a hundred dollars is a
time limit you got a hundred
dollars five years ago you know
there are things like that that
kind of make this suggestion not
as
obviously help you know if
useful I certainly think if it
were five thousand dollar
contribution or something that's
different from a hundred dollars
so just a thought but if if
people are comfortable will just
move on and you can present it
as a floor amendment as
appropriate madame chair
representative I would prefer to
support amendment.
In in light of some of the more
griss a deep dive comments of
the chair okay
thank you manager.
Thank you thank you representing
the phone speaker martinez rm
and representative garrett I
just want to go back to the last
page in the appropriation
language.
The.
And i'm sorry if I missed this
earlier but is is it something
that you're minimal to take in
out given that you already
appropriate it grow funding to
this concept
yes it can be taken out in might
of that money.
If it has been properly
put in house bill two.
It's that whole fluid funding.
From the grow yeah yeah i'm just
I am i'm a little concerned that
this might be repetitive and if
we can have a point three are we
gonna vote on a point three
version on wednesday you're
gonna water it today
mr speaker what we decided was
unless it gets really
complicated is we only had two
little amendments that people
understood we were going to
issue a point three as if it
were approved yeah voted out you
know to not hold it up any
longer mister would you consider
just adding to that point three
striking section seven
because I don't think I
bought some disaster I think our
growth funding will be okay
at least on this side of the
little process madam chair and
speaker martinez yes.
Thank you mr speaker anyone else
wishing to talk about.
The amended bill amended
substitute
okay
so I do
yeah we we adopted two
amendments and I thought i'd
review them so there.
Three well that now this one but
we haven't had a motion on that
so we have a believe the motion
is to strike on page twelve
section seven that's correct
seconded by representative for
merrow made by speaker martinez
any opposition to striking
section seven I see
discussion we can discuss you
need to amend the title to very
good good catch
they're making an appropriation
line sixteen strike
okay and they'll end striking
the semicolon and putting a
period
online fifteen okay.
All right so
that was discussion the motion
is to strike seven and strike
line sixteen on page one and
strike the semicolon online
fifteen page one and add a
period okay any opposition to
the motion.
Okay so.
I'm happy to entertain a motion
on the substitute that we have
in front of us.
The.
Then I was then do that and
thinking with the recharges now
you might want it got we're not
finished we have another bill in
the table we can well okay we
can try
we can't account for health ask
something's going to come out of
out of.
Legislative council service and
I wouldn't count on it because
they have proofers and all these
other kinds of things that they
have to do whenever they do
something like that so I
wouldn't count on to say so my
suggestion as we move forward we
have emotion what I haven't
heard emotion so i'm happy to
hear well I had to offer to make
okay
sorry
okay madame charlie mover do not
have house transportation public
words and capital improvements
committee super hospital one
ninety in a due pass and house
to disheart committee substitute
for that same bill
version.
Eight five five point three ok
six second.
Okay well there's been a motion
maybe representative chasing for
it do not pass on house
transportation public works and
capital improvements committee
substitute for house bill one
ninety but I do pass on house
judiciary committee substitute
for house transportation public
works and capital improvements
committee substitute for house
bill ninety that I get that
right and it's gonna be a point
three and remember there is an
amendment that relates to
bonding for a public private
partnerships there is a change
in the word made a shall page
six line twenty five there's a
striking of section seven on the
back and there's a correction on
the title and that's going to be
a point three version
so let's call the role on that
motion.
Representative of
representative chase you
representative cambridge yes
lane.
Yes.
Representative of clean
representative read
yes
representative rain.
Representatives fee yes
madame chairs yes
yes.
It's a long and winding growth
representative i've been waiting
to say that all for the whole
painting so we'll see you on the
floor
thank you thank you.
Next on our agenda is
representative of chasing
and it is house bill one eighty
two and I believe there's a sub
also that was out and about
that not right representative.
A week we need to get your
expert
in the meeting I think uh
representative do we not in its
melony moses okay and i'm told
by
ours committee assistant that
she's on and muted I see so the
floor is yours and I know
there's a sub might wanna it's
up to you how you present
mancher committee members thank
you very much with me today at
the table I have seen barclays
on the secretary of states
office she is the director of
legislative and executive
affairs and I have my cheapest
definitely so lower who has been
reworking since ncsl last suburb
with a state on a multi state
task force on artificial
intelligence and the many states
are
sturdy to make some initial
efforts in this area
in addition both the interim
science and technology committee
and the court's corrections in
justice many add some sounds in
technology had a little bit more
in depth on artificial
intelligence but we had a full
day on
when managed her was cheering
such at the university of new
mexico in.
I can't remember with september.
September and.
We had hearing madam chair in
the house government elections
and indian affairs committee and
representative ream pointed out
and we all agreed in including
our experts that we could use
some clarification and a few of
the sections of the bill so we
are.
R
efforts to do that resulting in
the committee sub and doctor
melanie mosis was when of our
experts who presented at ccj and
she was with us at the first
hearing in house government so
if you
want to I will move the
substitute for a discussion
purposes and their to to number
it needs in nine zero zero point
six
we have emotion to consider the
sub for discussion purposes
there's a second
second by
representative ream
may discuss the sub
representative
and what we
let me just tell you the purpose
of the bill initially and we
hope this is a better version of
it but husband wanted you to
immense our campaign reporting
act to add disclaimer
requirements for the use of
sympathetic images visuals and
audio created by
artificial intelligence
sometimes referred to as dude
fakes and keep this keep in mind
that this is bill is limited
only to do thanks in campaign
advertising it's not going
anywhere else into our statutes
and.
The committee sub in.
It's provides clarifying
languages are regarding excuse
me clarifying language to
address questions regarding
consistency simplification and
tried to eliminate potential
ambiguities and keep the bill as
narrow as we can which is to
make the public aware if or when
deep things are used in
campaigns so
in section one hurts c page
three lines
let me get my.
Committee said out here.
Yeah.
The.
Lines.
Well didn't look to get
completely at lanes three
through seven this is the
definition of artificial
intelligence for purposes of
this bell means machine based or
computer base system that
through hardware or software was
and uses input data to ambulate
the structure in characteristics
of input did it in order to
generate some debit card hand
including images video or audio.
So.
I can't think of another
mechanism other way to do it but
that's
the the proper definition now
and then in.
Page sticks you go to loans.
Seven.
The distribution platform means
a website internet form or
message board or a published
newspaper magazine or other
periodical of general
circulation including an
electronic excuse me and
including an internet or
electronic publication the
currys knows or commentary.
And then
also then online seven through
eleven removed descriptors
regularly and returnly and of
general interest so it reduces
the areas of ambiguity or the
basis of for people to debate
the meaning of those terms then
on section two.
In section two beginning page
nine.
The.
Line fourteen.
The.
We removed um
january in hollar and part.
By using artificial intelligence
and replaced it with three
simple materially deceptive
media because the death
initiation of that term includes
the element of artificial
intelligence and.
Then.
On.
Page ten line seventeen.
The.
That's where the material
deceptive language is also used
again and.
The.
This is a particularly in
response to representative ream
raised in house government so
that
and represent it block where was
giving scenarios where we might
have
used the.
Photos of animals are something
like that that would not you
know we wouldn't care if they
were materially deceptive as
long as we were.
There was no claim
somehow there was that they were
somehow used in that in it in
that particular way but the
materially decepted media which
is fine earlier as we point it
out in section one
I encourage seven lines twenty
one through twenty five limits
the concerning use of a eye to
instances depending on
individual emergage in conduct
or speech in which the depected
individual did not engage so
the example of which many might
be aware and and when I was
talking to someone
of the press about this
inquiry in the recent new
hamster primary
there was.
I add on.
The radio with
president by apparently saying
please don't vote in the primary
so he didn't do that but it
sounded exactly like him so this
is to protect it all parties all
candidates from having this um
used against against them then
if you belong to page ten
part dealing sixteen through.
Oh well I where I better we went
over that already so
sixteen.
Through twenty three.
I don't know this this is this
is important the disclaimer
shall appear in a clear and
conspicuous manner and shall
indicate so this ad or this film
or this.
Um publication has been in
manipulated or generated by
artificial intelligence and the
choices are image video or audio
so the image would be honor a
photo or in a written campaign
and so all of the rest of that.
Let's see on page eleven.
To page thirteen line seven all
of that is clarifying the non
violations so it's it doesn't
apply in those situations when I
give some examples of that.
I'm not sure.
One of the nine very violations
would be for visual media that
is video
and contains a disclaimer
for that it.
Disclaimer that's consistent.
The cell is long as you are you
can use it but you have to say
that you use artificial
intelligence in generating it
okay so if it's in printer has
to be in print and it can't be a
little tiny print it has to be
in print the same size as the
rest of the material and if it's
some um.
It has to be understandable it
can't be like similar zours
where they go at a hundred and
eighty miles in our foreign this
was chat for about it
in our that can't be a lot
it has to be at the same time
it's kind of money after say
something has to be
understandable but okay
right.
And so all of all of those
disclaimers are laid out in in
here and.
I'm I think we get it so yeah
secretaries that it's going to
just close up yeah
madame chair members of the
committee really quickly I just
want that at a comment to the
great presentation on on behalf
of the sponsor certainly the
secretary of state's office
engages with other counterparts
across the united states and in
those meetings and discussions
it's been clear that there has
been a rise in the use of
artificial intelligence in
campaign advertisements there
are discussions going on with
the ftc i'm in other federal
agencies as to how to best
regulates but we believe a
disclaimer as described in this
bill will give voters sort of
the heads up that this is
something they should be
considering as they're taking an
information in regards to
elections it also is just needed
transparency i'm generally so
and that concludes my comments
thank you.
Did you want professor moses to
speak briefly let me see if
doctor moses once to out I
because I don't see her it's
really hard to remember that
she's behind me
on the screen professor moses
did you want me yourself and add
a few words I do I am unable to
unmute there you are
are you able to hear me a good
okay excellent wonderful thank
you yes I just want to say thank
you madame chair leader chasey
this is an important and timely
bill
i'll keep my mermarks brief but
I want to know what i've i've
been a professor of computer
science are you an m for the
last sixteen years before that I
studied artificial intelligence
back in the nineties
and it's really come a long way
in many better fishalways but
now really in this last year a I
has made it possible to create
these fake images video audio
that are almost entirely in
distinguishable from reality
the tools to create them are
readily and freely available
most of you have seen her heard
probably multiple deep fakes in
the last month
generative ai has now gotten to
the point where it makes it
impossible to turn determined
what is true and what is fiction
and the technology is
fascinating and complicated with
conflicts implications for
society but I think for this
bill the important point to make
is it's a very simple bill
particularly as it's been
amended this bill is narrowly
focused on one simple issue that
requires disclaimers for
materially deceptive media
generated by a I depicting an
individual engaged in speech
actions they didn't actually
engage in
so that establishes it is a
crime for anyone of you
to have been put in a video
appearing to do something you
are say something that you
haven't done or said right
before you are up for an
election.
And of course then also
establishes the rules for
disclaimers
conclude I think it fix her
really problematic in a number
of areas that are not addressed
in this bill but I think at this
point in twenty twenty four it's
important to take a first step
and this bill is that important
for stepped towards governing
some of the problems that we
will see in the future for a I
so I encourage the committee to
pass this bill to protect the
voters of new mexico in this
election year and i'm happy to
answer the questions thank you
thank you professor I do want to
know professor moses has been
super helpful on many issues
that we've consulted her on and
she was a great speaker at her
and house you know courts
corrections and just a so good
to hear from you again and maybe
i'll see sometime soon
let's if we can a sponsor of me
we go to the audience and just
see who's an opposition to the
bill house bill one eighty two
anyone in opposition in the
audience no anyone online in the
wishing to speak and opposition
to the bill.
I don't see any hands raised on
those in the audience wishing to
speak and support the bill
please raise your hand okay so
let's start over here back there
and then over here
thank you madame chairman
committee grammar the policy
direct.
Government trans.
Took interest in this bill dear
like those confirmation
unfortunately are official one
thousand technology has already
been used to
this in franchise and passed
this information on the boat or
so we definitely do address
directly this this growing trend
of misinformation this bill is
not only time for the protection
of our elections what will help
you sure that our holders are at
least aware of the content
they're doing was not created by
human roaders deserve nothing
less than the fast through
campaign and election.
I'm h.
Thank you.
Manage members of the committee
my name is now dean i'm a person
with multiple distabilities and
a disability advocate and nice
in the interest of time I am in
support of the bill thank you
very much thank you anyone else
in the audience wishing to speak
in support
those online wishing to seek
speak and support raise your
hand
I see merit information.
Matter chair members of the
committee i'm married matrian
speaking on behalf of the
american association of
university women and we want to
thank the sponsors for bringing
forth this bill and secretary of
state for working on it this is
very very important for the
integrity of our elections and I
am glad that we're joining the
other states that are putting
these protections into law I am
confident that this will make it
across the finish line and get
to the governor's desk is so
important for the integrity of
our elections thank you thank
you
yo
zero jonah.
John.
The.
You need to under yourself john.
Thank you so much john and
michael soon speaking on behalf
of public citizen
echoing the the sentimental and
words of other speakers also
adding the we're working around
the country with with other
states they're now thirty eight
states that have either
introduced her past similar
legislation
and noting that this issue is
been a big issue an
internationally as well as slow
back in argentina are too
nations where deep fakes played
a significant role potentially
in the outcome of their
elections recently and just
today
facebook was was addressing I
deep fake showing president by
in as a penalty file saying that
they couldn't remove it from
their platform based on their
current standards
so this is an urgent issue for
our nation to address for states
to address and we're really
grateful for the sponsor and and
your leadership in addressing it
thank you thank you
john martinez.
Yeah.
Thank you madame chair and thank
you members of the committee my
name is john martinez I am
representing conservative voters
in mexico and for all of the
previously stated reasons and as
an organization that engages in
electoral politics
step behind this bill to pass it
thank you very much thank you.
That concludes our public
comments back to the sponsor i'm
representative chasing and he
can other remarks before we go
to committee okay I have on my
list of representative murals
and ream and then mcqueen
are thinking about chair thank
you leader chac and experts are
any attempts to
try to regulate speeches super
deeper complicated.
I don't.
Think that that this is any
exception to that because of uhm
how challenging it can be and
i'm reading through the bill
and I follow a lot of aa content
on various platforms because I
think it's super fascinating to
see how these likenesses are
created on whether or not
they're seeking to memic
likenesses.
Or whether it is a completely
sympatic what you define it as
something creation or something
like that
so that gives me pause for for
some of these questions about
what is political speech that
we're seeking to regulate aren't
for instance madam chair the
thought that I had was what if I
wanted to a I generate blond
hair or blue case for myself I
am now subject to this
if I wanted to change my
likeness or improve it perhaps
in a different way what I be
subject to this act madame
chair.
I think i'll see if doctor music
once to address that.
The.
Yes thank you leader cheesy and
and representatives and so
the I guess i'll start with two
things I think that the
the intent is not to regulate
political speech but to regulate
the representation in the past
for representation of reality so
I think that helps in navigating
that that the space between free
speech and earn an and and what
is actually this sort of new
artificially generated contents
for your second point however if
you
yourself generate an image of
yourself and change your hair
color I think that that's worth
describing where in there in the
legislation do we do intend this
to apply to people changing
their own images
I think that that could be
something that
could be it could be regulated
in either direction I do think
that.
There are the intent was rate
someone producing entirely as it
says rate entirely new speech or
actions that you did not create
so if if you were speaking and
you now edit a video with
photoshop to give yourself blond
hair I don't think that that
actually would spall under the
during stiction of this
legislation.
So I think that you know but
that does not mean that there
will not ever be a case that is
sort of a close call I think
that's why this is something
that is brought up and studied
by.
Um.
The appropriate government
agency right to look at the at
those close cases I think the
vast majority of these are not
at all close cases right all of
the examples that we
the slovakia and person running
for president and joe biden and
trump and and and these cases
where individuals are entirely
shown.
In situations that they were
never involved in.
Represent I think there's an
additional response down madame
chair
representative romero I just
like to underscore that the
definition of materially
deceptive media which is on page
seven i'm definition
hope that the dying your hair
would are coloring your hair
when fall within that definition
because it's engaged in
conductor speech in which the
depicted individual.
And so I I think changing your
appearance would night.
I'm come within that definition.
Marriage manager representative.
I think that's part of my
concern is that when we look at
sort of some of the definitions
i'm concerned are a little bit
circular
just as how we talk about aid
generally and we know the a I is
incredibly difficult to wrap our
hands around.
As we say talk about synthetic
content if I photo shot myself
and created a video where the
images essentially using a
sympatic filter to create that
and we've seen these you know
some of the fan ones where it's
like look at yourself as a
doctor look at yourself as a
blonde or a red head or whatever
i'm looking yourself as an older
person versus a are very young
person some of these ares are
just sort of um
you know in perhaps in ocus but
nevertheless if i'm seen as
deceiving to some about being
younger than I am are older than
I am as a political person the
way that I read them deceptive
media is that I could be open to
potential last year
if i'm generating this contact
even if i'm generating this
content.
In holler in part by using that
aa and so I i'm a little
concerned that there's that
circularity and potentially
putting myself into a position
where if I post this content and
it doesn't have a disclaimer I
am subject to these laws um even
if it wasn't necessarily like
political speech madam chair
leader does that make sense
matter
present representative if I may
I I
the definition of artificial
intelligence has worked in
compasses the synthetic
recreation using inputs
and data into software system or
computer system and then that's
term artificial intelligence I
so used well it's used to define
material at least decept of
media but again it's the engaged
in conductor speech it's not
just a synthetic image.
Madame
chair representative.
So if I so the way that we're
talking about a I right now and
I my colleague just handed me a
a suggestion for huge
page six um
line three
is that it would be if somebody
else was generating at versus
um.
Versus me generating it however
I think that still gets us into
that circularity of.
If I am if I am trying to be
deceptive as a political person
i'm also generating it myself
so I I just find that sort of
question a bit problematic and
how i've seen some of these
platforms be used where um and
so let's just take that
hypothetical or not hypothetical
because it's currently happening
so on like an a platform like
instagram currently there are
number of ai accounts that are
just a hundred percent aa
generations uhm.
In my home opinion all speeches
political so whether or not
they're trying to
just make some money on only
found or perhaps you know how
folks and mother because they're
these you know image generations
that people support.
Would that fall under the
subject of this act
madame chair leader chase.
Madame chair representative from
arrow so the depicted individual
is just defining the term that's
used within the materially
deceptive media it's a not their
likeness or image it's just the
the conduct first speech in the
way I like to conceptualize this
are explained it is people
should be able to own and
control their own autonomy their
own images their speech and not
being manipulated by a unknown
forces or.
Show them as doing something
that they didn't do so it's your
autonomy it's kind of the words
it's not just speech it's not
making a statement about some.
Mountain chair
we don't chase to an experts
part of I think part of the
challenge of thinking about that
too is that whether or not an a
I generated mage that I could
potentially copyright or own the
lakeness of.
Uh given image that I want to
make money off of if somebody
caught then copies that too were
now we're in the layers of a I
madam terror leader cheesy.
If the depicted individual is an
ai.
That's being portrayed now that
would fall under the the subject
of this hour madam chair
representative um.
The.
Within those layers does that
count on here I don't know if
that we are making that account
for that method representative
so this is confirmed by the
boundaries.
Three
advertisement campaign
advertisement context so
somebody's here you are
interesting and advertisement or
it
space on a platform for a
campaign advertisement it would
be that would be the application
of it
madam chair.
Leader chac experts so I guess
that's part of the question so
we don't we don't classify air
images yet as um.
Sort of like cartoons or
necessarily like
animation which in large part it
is
so madame chair leader tc these
images and likenesses whether be
of a real person or of an air a
I generated likeness of a
person.
Um.
If that is then copied and use
politically.
It has to are we are we
describing just so i'm clear
mountain chair learn to see that
it has to be a likeness of a
human person not the likeness of
an a I generated.
The.
Madame chair representative yes
it's an individual.
Engaged in conduct.
And and it's not politically not
all political speeds or uses.
The campaign.
This is really tough madam
chairs yeah
i'm turned i'm not entirely
clear about what you're
describing but if you do it and
it's you producing it about
yourself.
It but you're using
but
you're only needing this bill
only applies if you're doing
something material a deceptive.
And that's if you decide you
want to do it who is going to
read and if you would have to
just say I
disused a.
Madame chair leader chases so
that gets me to the question so
I can hire an ai today
to
be the people in my campaign ads
that say you know i'm awesome
vote for me.
So many charlier t c f i'm
producing that content what it
where has likenesses of you know
community members whether or not
they've ever been you know it's
just it's basically complete
fiction I would be subject to
this act with if I didn't have a
disclaimer that all of these are
generated images supporting me
as a candidate.
We're.
We're supporting me mountain
chair leader chasi
I believe I believe that the
hint is took it correct being
doctor moses to buy run man
chair but yes you would just say
that the crowd images were
generated by
so madame chairleader chase we
don't do that currently though
for like cartoons i'm sorry for
what like animated animated
videos we don't say these like
this is for her animated their
fake
how you don't
political campaign manager just
madam chair representative if I
had you know an automated short
saying a drayer of mirror was
awesome but for her if it was
animated vs a I that would be
not fall under the confidence of
this act manager leader chasing
madame chair representative or
maril I believe that the harm
that we're trying to aim out is
disinformation misinformation
people not being able to trust
what's real and what's not real
so in the case of an animation.
People would understand that
it's.
Created
an in the case of something
that's using artificial
intelligence to create a
sympatic image people don't know
what's real so it's messing with
the reality and it's really
insidious because um if people
can use it for uh to create
something positive about
somebody
or they can they can use it to
create something negative and it
also creates deniability so
something that really did
something in fact and there's
been recent stories in the press
about
people that have made a really
damning statements then they can
deny it that they made that and
say that it was just artificial
intelligence and so it's it's
trying to protect people's since
the reality and protect against
a really harder to te.
Manipulation of somebody's image
were activities for speech man
mentally leader tc experts III
totally get what we're trying to
achieve and it is extremely
difficult until you see like
seven fingers on a an argument
that it speak
you know these are the tough
sort of like questions that
we're trying to answer i'm my
concern is that as this is
continuing to evolve that this
language is the best bride for
how it is that we're trying to
regulate it and i'll just point
zero.
Even as we get into satire on
page twelve or parity you know
if someone's just trying to tell
jokes with like uh a good a I
you know how are we regulating
that it's extremely difficult
madame chair you know
leader chasey to think through
you know what the intentions
versus what we're trying to
regulate
and that make that gives me
pause too because there's a lot
of great comedians out there
using a iced sort of improved
humor and sometimes about us and
so.
How this is top I don't i'm i'm
probably not articulating I
think my concerns well enough
having not having seen this bill
for the first time now but
if they're eating any response
to them represented remarry
the
exclusion that parent is in sad
tires is limited but it's only a
place in advertisements when
they're used in advertising a
political so again.
And so we
out of their requirement that
the disclaimer be contained in
those because it would be a
major loophole or gap in the
bill because they make it say oh
we we used to act that.
President following down the
stairs because we were just
there's a terribly t.
Situations.
The.
Their explanations of
or definitely.
If I may matter representative
a I I could perhaps try to
excellent
thank you
madame chair and and
representative so so these are
excellent questions and I think
that uhm I am not a lawyer but I
am a computer scientist and one
of the things that's really
important in computer
programming is is going back to
definitions and and simply sort
of looking very carefully I
think that this is a big
improvement in the bill that it
repeatedly refers to materially
deceptive media and the
definition there says it has
three parts the third being that
it was produced by aa but the
first two
we talked about already depicts
an individual engaged in contact
or speech that they didn't
engage in and the second piece I
think addresses your concern
upon viewing or listening a
reasonable viewer or listener
would incorrectly believe that
the depected individual should
say was engaged in the conduct
or speech depicted so a cartoon
characters is completely
excluded from this right and
animation that is not a
representative of realistic
looking representation of the
person that makes it seen the
person did something that they
didn't
I think an an amendment that
says individual is a human
individual perhaps perhaps it's
becoming necessary at this point
and and that would clarify the
intent but I I do think that the
thing that is new about this
technology is the ability to
appear entirely as though a
video is you or me or any other
human when in fact we aren't
doing that so anything that
falls outside of that realistic
depiction that would lead
someone to incorrectly believe
that a picture individual was
that person actually engaged in
the conduct I think it's not
covered
that may leave quite a few
things that you might want to
cover out but I think it's
actually defined quite narrowly
in that way.
The.
Thank you
experts madam chair leader chase
so so let's just go back to how
this is going to work.
So currently on pretty much
every social media platform
there's a I generated content.
Um and we have a extremely hard
time
regulating that federally much
less in new mexico.
Perhaps so how would this work
for her if I flagged something
that was my likeness madam chair
leader chac I would bring it to
you the secretary of state what
the platform was no okay and how
does it work if I found some.
Um content that might fall under
the.
Madam chair members of the
committee the way that process
currently works under the cray
is that when a disclaimer is
required for example paid for
language when everybody runs for
office if there is an apparent
violation that comes through our
office through a complaint the
state ethics commission has to
restriction over civil
processing they can also pursue
without a referral from our
office and then there are
additional provisions for
criminal i'm activity under the
cray and those referrals and go
to the eg
that's a lot
I didn't really see the criminal
penalty is in this can you point
those out men.
Madame chair members of the
committee I was I was providing
how the statute to operate
generally under the sierra in
terms of referral and
complaints.
The.
Okay.
Seeing the.
Provisions.
Okay madame chair.
Leader chasey so
going through that process if
it's found that someone
violated this.
On subsection.
Are you in section three so i'm
just trying to clarify what
could be of misdemeanor or a
felony
for violation of this act so if
we.
Didn't disclaim essentially that
it was a I generated likeness of
another in a video
radio ad so these are specific
to advertisements if we didn't.
So let's let's work through that
matter
leader chase.
Ads are typically disclaimed
anyways as being paid for by a
specific campaign or pack or
so they are currently already
regulated by the.
Leader.
Madame chair members of the
committee
there are requirements under the
campaign reporting act for that
any violations investigations
and sort of regulation falls
within the state ethics
commission upon referral or in
pursuit of something they
believe needs to be investigated
and the attorney generals
office.
Madame chair leader chase when
we're looking at campaign
related funds and expenditures
that are made
under the perview of a campaign.
We're limiting this act to
solely to advertisements is that
correct madam but leader chasi.
Yes
so if i'm understanding this now
manager leader chase the
we're not actually so a I
generated content.
Overall anything that i'm
looking at currently that may be
deceptive as was the sort of
example of somebody falling down
the stairs and it being fake
news whatever
i'm sure learn taste the
that that currently does not
fall under this act it would
have to be an active and like
advertisement about that person
amount of charlie or chasing
it would have to fall under the
campaign reporting active.
Okay well that is interesting
it's a little bit more limit
thank you for the experts
explaining the limitation.
It's a little bit more political
I just don't like the idea that
we would fell and I had to hit
for two thousand but i'll think
that through
that's all the questions I have
right now thank you I have
representative ream
thank you madame chair and
represent chasing things I see
this is a lot shorter
and yesterday addresses a lot
page seven young twenty four we
use engage I wonder if it
wouldn't be a better word of
participate but that's not a big
deal you know we can move on I
have some other questions that
i'd rather spend that time with
them so let's go to page tier.
And wines twenty four twenty
five and over the page eleven so
I need to insert in their it's
an image it's a very poor and
audio I think you need a number
four or a combination of an
image video or audio.
What if I
make a badly image and do an
audio with it.
Just a moment madame turned
wrapped my head around the
question.
It's uh provides for multi
media.
Subsection three there
eleven lines turn through six to
and let me add to that um madam
chair representative
subsections one and two.
I don't see madame chair and
representing I don't see you
know if I use multiples I see I
could I just need to say I used
one when in fact I use
multiples.
There it provides the
mark madam chair representative
room uhm
subsection subactually party
uh lays out that there is
disclaimer means
for various forms of media.
On that point madam chairman
leader I think if you
I see what the representative is
mentioning I think if you on
page timeline
twenty two.
Just said the blank line in the
disclaimer shall be filled with
one or more of the following
terms that most accurately
describes the media and I think
the scenario you might be
describing is.
A picture of some line with
audio
both of which were a I
generated.
And so then the statement would
need to say this image and
rdo.
Has been manipulated or
generated by artificial inter.
I I guess let me just ask you at
this hard just imagine august
madame chair representative
reading sapansky.
The weird is now they really
don't have to have one
disclaimer even if it's got all
three it seems to me.
Would you.
I'm it does this make them does
this make it more burdensome or
the person placing the.
III do understand your single
what if there's an image and a
text and.
Madame madame chair and madame
leader I I think it you're jist
inserting.
Um.
A more accurate description of
what has been artificially
generated
so it would be.
It would be the same single
disclaimer madame chairman
madame leader it would be.
Just what exactly has been
artificially generated whether
it ee.
The emergency audio or just the
image.
But madam chair and lead madame
leader so for example the
example you gave where president
items voice was
artificially generated if that
had been accompanied by a
picture of him and posted on
twitter or a website
then in that scenario the
disclaimer would say this this
image and audio if it was a fake
image of him holding up a sign
saying don't vote today or
something like that.
Mount her deductor posed secure
and could you just walk me
through it again.
Madam chair madame leader so it
would be
page to handling twenty two just
inserting after the word one.
Or more.
Okay okay.
Is that is that it that does
everything that takes care of
the.
I could suggest our wording
change madam
chair.
But I believe would cover all
the cases.
Dr moses i'm
sorry you're not here with us
but
yes you want a way in on this
one yes it was going to I think
that the uh thank you madame
chair I think that the
suggestion is a very good one
and actually a more
comprehensive.
Replacement would be to replace
the word one with the word all
and cut the word most so that it
had filled with
all of the following terms that
accurately described the media
so if it was one two or three
terms that were.
Acculate accurately describing
it then they would all be
covered and you wouldn't have to
specify
another is one or more seems to
give you a choice
but all says.
That any manipulations in video
image or audio would all have to
be to that's one suggested way
to make that very good
suggestion so let's repeat work
doctor moses just said she
suggested and I I guess I think
it has merit so let's start with
fourteen since we're on fourteen
it would read page fourteen line
twelve we would say blank line
in the disclaimer shall be
filled with all.
Of.
So I guess just the word all
added in between one
might wait no no scratch one
scratch one right and then put
in for all of the following
terms that most accurately
describe the media.
Mm have a lot of people with
english grammar stuff going on
so
okay doctor moses because you're
the doctor so
I slammer shall be filled with
each of the following yes
that's what representative
ramaro says but
I I agree that that that could
work I think all does require
each I don't know if we need an
english professor here I don't
know if each requires.
The each or all I think either
is fine.
Great as long as it you take out
the word most rate each of the
following terms but accurately
described the media would also
work well we have in on fourteen
it says one and we were gonna
strike on and put in right and
replace replacing it with I
think each or all is logically
equivalent but I would remove
the word most because that
implies you only need to take
to.
Am I on i'm sorry i'm on page
ten yeah filled with move to
page fourteen sorry about that
that's okay
so page twelve we could put
strike one.
And we can say each and then
online thirteen
eliminate most.
Accurately.
Right because yeah that right.
Brect
yes and I think a madam chair to
strike the **** underscribes.
Fourteen page fourteen nine
thirteen strike for us
underscribes yes
okay so it will go back page by
page were unfourteen.
We're going to talk we're
talking about line twelve and
line twelve shell be filled in
scratch one
ad each of the following terms
were now online thirteen
scratch most.
And and strike the s on the
describe so it reads this blank
has been manipulated or
generated by artificial
intelligence the blank line in
the disclaimer shall be filled
with each other following terms
that accurately describe the
media okay good that's one and
now shall we go back to twelve
to make sure we will be back to
ten ten okay.
That.
All right so ten
one line twenty two we had put
in.
One or more we had talked about
putting one or more in a scratch
that in we'd say the blank line
in the slammer shell be filled
with strike one
ad each correct of the following
terms that strike most
accurately and then strike the s
underscribe
so it would be the blank line in
the disclaimer shall be filled
with each of the following terms
that accurately describe the
media and then there's a colon
people got there
okay
is that a motion.
So
it's representatives of answer
letter do it matter if would
move that amount those in my
mind it's been so moved by
representatives of the pansky
seconded by represent our frame
i'm assuming that's a friendly.
Now interrupt I really like this
editorial committee it's a whole
new one yeah
i'm not sure I do but it's okay
that's a friendly i'm assuming
it's a friendly any opposition
to the motion.
I see no opposition so we have a
mended the sale bimmer and have
to talk about that in a minute
because that always confuses me
when the amount subs but we have
amended that language according
to what we just described okay
so who you will still have the
four
years and thank you madame chair
and representative on the leven
when we go to numbers one six we
talked about every
and to me that's a little
ambiguous you know I don't know
how it tired it down.
I just see that as being
argumentative something we could
go ahead and
start but I don't know if you've
got a comment on that
how we've.
Mentioned her doctor moses has
wished when it we sit here
looking in each other which is
automatically out of her
sorry I actually thank you
better chair I
did not catch the line for page
eleven so I I didn't have a
response
okay of all say it again
so we're on page eleven wanting
six m the words average viewer.
Yell madame church should it be
reasonable.
We're letting doctor mosses
respond
thank you madame jared and right
leader chasi I don't have
the expertise to come and and
whether reasonable or average is
the right sort of viewer but
perhaps just readable would be
just a period
the only thing I can see at this
point it is this is what
this is the this of the
description I please do not put
reasonable at this point
averages which used in the
michigan statute they just
passed it I think average is
better than reasonable.
Know what averages because
nobody really admits to being
average correct
year I think
you just strike my the average
viewer on most of this it's if
it's readable if it's readable
if it's heard easily heard.
It doesn't have to be buy any.
Type of person um
just generally
they aren't starting right now
and disclaimers in
advertisements in the campaign
reporting act is
the statement choose clearly
spoken.
If it's transmitted by audio
visual maybe their statement
shall be written by legibly and
spoken clearly.
Yeah so the the suggestion i'm
hearing from representative ream
and others frankly is on page
eleven striking on page line by
the average viewer and on page
online twelve of the same page
by the average listener
in line six again striking by
the average viewer
so the just get rid of the
average parts yes.
We're getting to a point where.
I'm wondering about whether it
will have to be brought back.
We're getting to this kind of
editing where i'm just sharing
with you I think we might need
to bring it back on.
Let me
reveal what it is that you're
saying so i'm lying six.
The semicolon.
We're gonna strike after
readable the rest about life.
Correct and then on the.
My
nine
after readable.
With strike by the average
bureau.
Semi common less striking
anything further.
And then.
That can be easily heard.
Yeah.
Nancy are you having trouble
hearing is.
I'm sorry I can't hear you nancy
i'm sorry.
Oh oh I see.
Okay are all right appreciate
that I thought you're having
trouble hearing us no I think
we're gonna stay on the team
here in terms of
actually it was no problem
good idea.
Yes representative capacity also
that language appears on page
fourteen.
Oh yes so online on page
fourteen
line twenty one.
Page fifteen.
I'm trying to find it i'm sure
line one o k.
Okay.
Yeah.
Um.
Hmm men change its worth the
committees consideration
that
obviously a person who heard of
hearing isn't.
Going to hear all of the ideo or
person who has visual impairment
minutes the other visual any may
want to consider using typical
where we had used average and
and leave that in I don't know
but
yeah.
Yeah
I honestly think
any fact finder is going to
figure out that if there is
somebody who can't ordinarily
hear them.
The person who tries to provide
an audio disclaimer shouldn't be
held accountable for the fact
that that person
he had ordinarily
well that person wouldn't have
been able to hear the right fate
voice also so this is and i'm I
don't want to take the floor
away from representative reading
I think I believe you still
have.
Man of tear yes I think that we
need to delete those lines that
we have gone through right and I
would make that much okay.
We have a motion
so this is getting a little
complicated and I kind of feel
like let's give you the feedback
and you're coming we have
another bill with you not on
wednesday representative chase
and we can we can re look at it
so you've got now feedback we've
made notes let's stop the motion
price go ahead and then will you
come back with another sub and
it would be helpful if maybe
there are you know we'll check
marks by where you changes were
made or something so we can I
would like madam charter make
sure that everyone has waited in
yes before we leave so that
point won't have to become point
ten agreed okay oh great so
you're still have the floor
representative
madame chair and representative
so.
I want to go back to
representative
romero's point and so when we go
to page twelve in the was trying
to jump up and down on that same
but go to page twelve and we're
looking at you know wines wonder
twelve we were or you know all
the weekend twenty and what came
the mind to me was
there is an image on tv and it
says to night president biden
speaks with jimmy fallen
you know it's obviously not
and all and I think that goes to
represent ramaros point and I
don't know how to tighten up the
language in there
you know you've got saturday
night live you've got jimmy
fallen they're always making fan
of elected officials that I
think we've got to figure out
some way
tighten up the line which in
them in the bill.
Manager I think that what your
describing is not an
advertisement and this is really
limited advertising because
you're depicting things that are
escaped sir
and so I don't think that would
apply there I mean it wouldn't
apply there well madame chair
and representing what i'm seeing
is the advertisement to listen
to jimmy fallen tonight at ten
thirty
saying something like that.
The.
A manager.
What that would not do is be
covered in the campaign
reporting.
Well man chair III think you
need to look at it we can move
on that some input that I think
you need to address I then
represent it remarried night
both have heartic without.
But we can move on.
Madam chair and representative
let's go to page fifteen and we
look at the penalty for the
second on fence a line fourteen
of fifteen it's a five year
penalty and most all of the.
Felonies in the campaign
reporting act of four degree
felonies and i'm wondering why
we're not seeing a fourth degree
felony
rather than making a specific.
Years that's not in our
penalty scheme.
The.
And madam chair and
representative we don't have to
make it right this minute that
i'd like to see revisit that
yeah i'm sorry would you say
that it would like to see what
the managed hearing
representative i'd like you to
revisit we're doing well yeah
but we don't need the second
right his point is we should we
don't need to keep making up
different fines in different
things we need one methodology
and we should have some
consistency through the will
think that that remember saying
we'll look at the election code
and yeah
i'm not trying to figure it out
right now I just want anything
in medicare and representative
and then since will be working
on a serb
my car men on page seven line
twenty four I don't know if you
want to change engaged
articipate but i'm not wrapped
around the excellent then i'm
fine
thank you manager thank you
represent a macqueen
thinking manager
venture of some chase did you
have something before I ask
so many chairs that chase if
to plenary come into one is a
resent chase thank you for
taking this on.
There there is to the committee
thank you for your careful read
of this challenging bill so I I
mean I think to me this is what
to the share is supposed to do
is you know figure the step out
I just had two sort of general
questions.
Mentioner representative chase
the first since.
This only applies that to either
that correct so if someone is
really good at for the shap or
in personations voice
impersonations they can still do
whatever they want and this bill
on the place.
Yeah.
Themselves representative you're
right okay and make my second
question is.
We're not actually banning any
others it's just requiring a
disclaimer so you can still do
some something that's really
looks really real and is really
offensive.
But as long as you acknowledge
there's not real then you're
good
as long as you acknowledge its a
I generated
that's it thank you membership
thank you and I would see who's
on my list next humbry
thank you madame chair and
representative chasing III agree
and and I think this is a very
important issue I I think it's a
very nuanced issue as well and
we have to be very careful about
it so but I I do appreciate you
bringing this
I I just have I have some
concern about enforcement of it
because you know you think about
tracking down the old corporate
shell game
you know you've got an l l c
that a
has a limited partnership that
is the member of it that's a got
a corp offshore corporation
that's the general partner of
that you know that corporate
shell game that's used in a I
generation a lot of times
it can be hard to track these
things down I I mean
that that's a concern on me as
the actual enforcement if if you
would.
Can I address that if you could
please.
Mountain representative big it's
all within the confines of the
campaign reporting after and
then we tried to narrow it
within their so we're not
talking about the whole world
okay
okay okay that's very helpful
thank you thank you
so
I guess and and i'm still have
some concerns about how this
exactly works but I would say.
If I did
use a I to create a radio ad
that said.
And it's some voice saying my
name is mike smith I live in
ross will new mexico and I
support jared hambury none of
that is true the person doesn't
exist but I say this this ad was
created or whatever it is using
a I then I haven't violated this
act.
Okay all right thank you very
much appreciate that thank you
madame chair.
Suggestions would be helpful
because i'm sure the sponsor
would like to collect them all
one before she comes back
okay so can I make a suggestion
to you to work with yeah
and you know I guess I just
wanted to kind of bring policy.
The focus a little bit on this I
am assuming that the reason
we're going to disclaimer route
is that there's a question about
first amendment is that what's
going on here when you're
creating images and saying
things i'm wondering if that's
why some of the states have gone
this route it's like you're
saying you can say that we're
not saying regulating speech and
all of our but if it's fait you
know if it's we're just saying
you have to let people know is
that kind of why we're sits
we're doing it that way as
opposed to you know so like you
know that sort of thing is out
where we're coming from on this
known to a precisely okay okay
just wonder bring that
you know represent my queen made
a very good point we're not
saying that some of this
behavior obviously at some of
it's just horrific but we get
into stepping into first
amendment issues and it could
really complicate thanks okay
very good so I think our path
forward representatives you've
gotten feedback
representative ramiros had some
very good points I better cease
closer to ai than some of us so
she
and she can help you know i'm I
would encourage you to
collaborate like maybe right
after this meeting so that that
leader can get the input you
need so we can get it nice draft
for us on wednesday okay do we
have any other business I don't
believe we do before us
represent my queens going to be
speaking with representative of
martinez about his memorial
which we really appreciate him
doing super helpful and so I
guess that's the end of our
agent I think everybody yeah
situation and thank you for
bringing us it's important
legislation and when I think my
experts are not them to talk to
me absolutely and if you have
anything to add doctor most i'm
sure that represent of chase he
would love to hear from you and
I know you know how to reach her
and.
We so appreciate your
participation with us over the
summer and now as well
thank you very much manager
thank you so.
The.
