Madam Vice Chair.
Madam Chair
understand that um
representative.
Do you want me to address the
amendments first?
Just tell us a little bit about
the compact and then maybe tell
us
about the amendments. Madam
Chair and members of the
committee, I have 3 compacts
today, I believe you probably
will hear 12 before the
hopefully before the session is
over, so I'm just gonna give you
a brief overview of what a
compact is, so hopefully we can
save time in the future, so
essentially what a compact is is
we join with other states.
Um, a compact so that a license
in, let's say, and I'm not sure
which states are members of the
compact, um, uh, you're, you're,
uh, uh, uh, speech and language
pathologist or an audiologist in
New Jersey and you wanna move to
beautiful New Mexico because who
wouldn't, um, instead of going
through the normal process of
having to go through the
licensing board in New Mexico.
We have made an agreement with
the other states in the compact
that we will take their uh.
We will accept their license as
to be able to be qualified as a.
And I will add a madam chair
that um this has these, these
have been going on, uh, we've
been trying to get compacts for
several years and the Department
of Defense has met with some
folks who are carrying compacts.
I missed those meetings, but
they have, um.
Advised us that if we don't pass
these compacts, they may be
forced to either pull back some
of our missions or not bring new
missions because.
Um, spouses or significant
others also have to work who may
not be in the military, and we
don't want them to be able to
come, you know, to, to not be
able to come here because they
can't get a license, so it's to
improve the practice of all of
these physicians, hopefully to
draw in people from out of
state, but also to to work with
the Department of Defense to
make sure that we're not going
to lose any of our missions, and
I think with that, Madam Chair,
and shall I go on to the
amendments.
We have 2 and I, I was just
talking with my vice chair, we
may ask that this be brought
back as a um a sub, so we have a
nice clean bill to present,
assuming it gets through to the
floor and we don't have all
these little pieces of paper
floating around in people's
files, but I agree with you. OK,
very good. So, uh, if somebody
wants to move them for
consideration,
Madam.
Yeah, we will vote separately,
but I think it's fine if we
discuss them.
For discussion, yes, and maybe,
um.
Madam Chair, if you could share
with us the 202 numbers. So the,
the short one is 230272.2.
And it's basically just clean
up, um.
And I'm not sure why it didn't
get put into one.
One amendment, but so basically
audiology on page 3,
Audiology licensing board.
was just left off of lying.
So it's a speech language
pathology licensing board, but
it doesn't include the
audiologist, so that was just an
oversight.
Um, and then on page 8 line 9.
Strike seeking to practice.
And then on page 9, line 13,
strike licensing board and
insert in lieu thereof
commission.
OK.
And then again on page 9 lines
23 and 24 strike, seeking
privilege to practice.
So these are just kind of
cleanups.
And then on the second one,
Madam Chair.
It's a little, uh, well.
What we don't have in our
current law is requiring
background checks, and that is
part of the compact.
That we require background
checks for practitioners. So we
are adding it into our law.
So that we will be in compliance
with the compacts, which is one
of the requirements of the
compact.
And that was left off the
original bill.
OK
Yeah
So, um,
anyone, let's talk about the
first one, any questions about
the first one, which is the
short one.
Any objection to right.
Now we have house bills the
second one. Any questions about
the second one?
OK.
Any of um objection to adopting
this.
So, what I'll plan on doing if
this bill passes is we'll ask
that a sub be um prepared
incorporating these amendments,
and I'll bring it back to the
committee because I want we can
vote on the sub, but it should
be identical to what we're
talking about, OK.
All right.
So, um
Did you want to say anything
more about the particular bill.
I will let my experts say a few
words, brief words.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee.
Um, I'm Doctor Michael Kaplan.
I'm a speech language
pathologist. I'm also the vice
chair of the speech language
pathology, audiology, and
hearing aid dispensing practices
Board.
So I appreciate the opportunity
to be here this morning. The
board does support this bill.
Um, as, as uh representative
Thompson has said we've tried
several years already to try to
get the compact through. There
are now 34 states.
that our members of this
interstate compact and one
territory, the US Virgin
Islands.
Um, but adopting this would,
would give the ability for, you
know, there's a, there is a
shortage of speech language
pathologists and audiologists
throughout New Mexico and being
a part of the impact would allow
us to utilize the services of
other speech pathologists and
audiologists and the other 34
states that would either want to
come here and work as a speech
pathologist or audiologist or to
provide services through
telehealth.
And we do have telehealth
services offered in in New
Mexico currently, so they would
be able to, it would make the,
it would make it easier and more
beneficial for the population in
New Mexico.
needs access to speech pathology
and audiology services. We serve
everything.
In addition to the schools and
hospitals, we're in clinics,
we're in private practice, we're
in rehab, um, we're in home
health, so on and so forth.
This would really give us the
opportunity to increase our
numbers and provide the services
that we are having difficulty
providing now.
representative before I go to
the audience? No, we're ready
for,
um.
People in the audience wish to
speak in opposition to the pill
where they approach the
gentleman with the microphone.
Don't see anyone, um, anyone
online wishing to speak in
opposition to the bill.
Please raise your hand.
One
um those wishing to speak in
support, we're going to limit it
to up to 10 and 1 minute each,
and then I'll do 5 online.
Um, so just line up if you don't
mind.
Richard Romero, I am a
registered lobbyist works I
worked with the Metropeech and
Hearing Association, and we are
fully.
Behind this bill. Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. I'm
Melissa Salzer. I'm the director
of boards and commissions at
regulation and licensing
department.
We only wish to point out that
the additional operating budget
um request as contained in our
FIR uh was not included in our
original budget request.
Therefore, should the bill pass?
An appropriation or an
authorization to carry out the
mandate. OK. Thank you.
I guess that's a support.
It's a little on the line there,
OK.
All right, JD, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, I'm JD
Bullington speaking to you today
on behalf of the Greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce.
We all know we have a shortage
of all medical professionals in
New Mexico, including those in
audiology and speech pathology,
making it easier for licensed
providers in other states to
treat New Mexicans, either in
person or via a telehealth
setting is a real way to begin
to get more into Mexicans the
care they need and address the
lack of providers here while at
the same time.
urging them to practice here and
perhaps even move to our state.
Uh, good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name's Alan Sanchez. I'm the
executive director of the New
Mexico Conference of Catholic
Bishops, of the bishops, uh, as
we search and and discern the
common good, this is in that
realm, the compacts all three
that we see here and the others
that are coming uh very
important and we just ask, uh,
ask everybody to ask yourself a
question.
How long are you waiting for
your appointments and how long
is too long.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name's Danielle Duran, and I am
the intergovernmental affairs
manager for Los Alamos County.
The county council fully
supports all medical and
healthcare related compacts
during every New Mexican
deserves.
Better chance at actually
finding a doctor and finding the
healthcare that.
Chairwoman Chandler, members of
the committee, my name is Fred
Nathan. I work at Think New
Mexico. We're very proud to be
part of this broad coalition of
supporters. We enthusiastically
support this bill and thank the
sponsors, chairman Thompson and
minority Leader Armstrong for
bringing it today. As you may
know, there's 10 major
interstate healthcare compacts,
New Mexico is only party to one
of those. By contrast,
Colorado's in all 10.
2009, Oklahoma's in 8.
Arizona's in 6, even Texas is in
5.
Um, the single most impactful
thing that this legislature can
do this session to address the
healthcare shortage is to join
all of these compacts and make
health care more accessible to
New Mexicans and incidentally,
the state would from the income
tax paid by these new providers.
Um, typically, when there are
these bills to license
professions, it's usually an
occupation trying to keep people
out. What's so remarkable here
is that these, these
professionals are asking the
legislature to bring in
competition.
Um, online, I'm gonna take the
1st 5.
So, um, Deborah Conn.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
Deborah Condit and I'm a
registered lobbyist for Voices
for Children Action Fund, and we
stand in strong support of all
of these compact bills, um, as
well as the others that you have
not heard in this committee, so,
um, I don't know, um, so I'm
supporting all three, but we
need, we need more doctors. This
is a public health issue. It
protects children and if there's
a way where we could make it
quicker to have these qualified
folks come to New Mexico and
practice here.
Especially in the rural areas,
um, we should, we should
hopefully do that. So I stand in
strong support in this uh for
this bill and the two others
after.
Um, just to clarify, we're not
on the doctor's compact just
yet. We're on the speech
language pathology, just to,
just FYI folks, um.
Let's see, Kathleen Moseley.
Cha Chandler and the rest of the
committee, one point I haven't
heard highlighted yet is that
even according to the Federal
Trade Commission, these compacts
enhance the state's ability to
protect the public's health and
safety by enhancing the exchange
of licensure investigatory and
disciplinary info, so please do
support this bill. Thank you.
Thank you. Um,
we have cherry dots.
Madam Chandler and members of
the committee. My name is Cherie
Dotson. I'm an advocacy
volunteer for AARP New Mexico on
behalf of the 240,000 AARP
members statewide. We support
the interstate licensure compact
bills to help alleviate some of
the workforce shortages that
often impede access to quality
care, especially for New Mexico,
New Mexico's aging population
and those who care for them. We
urge you to pass House Bill
7981.
and 82 to improve health care
outcomes throughout New Mexico.
Thank you for hearing these
important bills and thank you
for volunteering to serve the
state of New Mexico in the
legislature.
OK.
Um, next one is.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Megan Dela
Rosa. Um, on behalf of the New
Mexico Military Base Planning
Commission. We strongly support
House Bill 79 and all in
compacts, ensuring that our
servicemen and women receive
timely, effective care to
maintain their health,
readiness, and quality of life.
This, these bills help our
heroes recover and thrive,
ensuring they remain at their
best. They are a win for New
Mexicans and our service
members. Thank you.
Thank you. Um,
Ana
Uh, good morning. Good morning,
Madam Chair and members of the
committee. I'mma Conec speaking
for the League of Women Voters
of New Mexico. We strongly
support this bill and all the
health compact bills to address
the critical shortage of medical
care in New Mexico. Thank you.
Thank you, um, that concludes
our public comment.
Back to you, um, Chairwoman
Thompson, to entertain
questions.
Representative Hall.
Representative expert witness.
I
By making the criminal, I know
we already do criminal
backtrack, background checks,
I'm pretty sure in New Mexico,
but by codifying it in this
compact.
The idea is to keep up.
On the level, if I understood
your explanation earlier.
Just to make sure on the same
playing field with everyone else
in this compact. Is that
correct,
Madam Chair.
So there are certain
requirements to be part of the
compact.
So that all the states are doing
the same thing and in the
background checkers already do
them and some do not, so we're
just making sure that we are.
Within the parameters of the
compact.
So I have medam Chair. Thank
you.
But do you pass on, uh, well,
we're waiting for CS, correct.
So I, I have questions actually
so.
Appreciate your willingness,
but, and we will wait. My
suggestion is we'll wait for the
CS cause I don't want us voting
twice, I think there might be
some level of or, you know, you
know.
I don't want to be challenged on
voting on a bill twice.
Lord only knows, um.
So help me understand this.
Um, when one
As we're in a compact.
We have a, a New Mexico.
Pathologist, speech
pathologists.
They are licensed here.
And they want to practice in
Arizona and I'm just making up a
state, so don't quibble with me
about whether they're part of
the compact, OK? Um.
What do they do? They apply
there.
Uh, Madam Chair.
Um, if a, if a speech
pathologist in New Mexico wants
to go and work in Arizona and
they're part of the compact and
Arizona is part of the compact,
then Arizona through reciprocity
would accept the license from
New Mexico in Arizona, so they
would not have to apply again to
get a different license in
Arizona, New Mexico license
would cover them as part of the
compact in another state and
they can either do it in person
or they could do it through
telehealth. OK.
that called what they call a
compact license.
I hear terminology like that.
we do have um someone from, oh.
From, um, CSG Council of State
Governments is on Zoom, and her
name is Nahali if she could
answer that question if that but
if you, if you're OK with that,
madam. Absolutely.
Oh, see, I'm sorry, she's on
Zoom, OK.
Yes, Naholi.
Can you answer that question?
Hi, thank you. Yes, madam Chair,
Madam Vice Chair, members of the
committee, thanks for the
opportunity, um, yes, so through
through the compact, there's a
home state license and the home
state license is, of course,
where you reside, and that home
state license, if, if that
state's a member of the compact
punches your ticket essentially
for you to have entry into the
compact portal and then every
other member state to the
compact and territory this, at
this 0.37.
then have the privilege to
practice in those other member
states, the privilege to
practice confers the same rights
in billing opportunities as any
other um lis of a typical
license would and it works much
like your driver's license, so
you have your New Mexico
driver's license, you have the
privilege to drive in those
other states without having to
stop and get a new driver's
license in each state, but you
have to follow the rules of the
road in each state. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
OK.
So, um.
And if you move to that state,
then you have to get a
different um different kind of
license, is that right?
Correct, Madam Chair, through
all of the compacts, if you
change your, well, all of the
compacts that have a home state
license requirement. If you
change your residency, then you
need to, you have a period of
time. It's typically about 6
months that you change your
residency. Um, of course, we see
a lot of use of telehealth with
these. So often you'll have
someone not really changing
their home state that often, but
practicing via telehealth into
other states should they choose
or practicing, you know, vice
versa. You can practice via
telehealth.
using um the compacts. It, it,
it's, it's allowed, if one has a
telehealth law, like why do we
need a compact?
Yes, thank you so much, chair,
for the question. Um, so the
difference in a telehealth law
or even for that matter, a
universal licensure recognition
law is it allows you to practice
in into uh a state. What it
doesn't allow for is for the
practitioner to also be able to
practice out of the state and
the reason that we've seen the
proliferation and increased
numbers, um, really a huge jump
in numbers in all of the
compacts is because states are
finding that
practitioners have the
expectation to be able to have
that freedom to practice because
telehealth during COVID, you
know, showed the world that they
could, they could practice in
multiple states and still live
in the state and practice in the
state that they want to in
person by providing
telehealthcare and that's been a
good recruitment and retention
tool for talent in the states.
OK, so help me understand this.
We have people practicing here.
You know, as human, you know,
life.
They might want to practice in
Arizona.
How does that increase?
The number of people practicing
in New Mexico when we're gonna
have people going to Arizona to
practice.
Thank you, Madam Chair for the
question, um, because you have
37 other territories that could
be feeding folks who want to
practice via privilege to
practice, even though they don't
currently live in New Mexico.
All of those 37 territories and
states, then can feed folks in
who would like to practice in
New Mexico. There are lots of,
particularly in the language of
in the profession of speech
language pathology and
audiology. There are large
companies who do contract work
and have folks licensed in
sometimes in as many as.
25 states under single state
licensure, but a compact makes
it much easier, faster and more
economic for them to allow for
more folks to practice via
telehealth or otherwise in your,
into your state.
OK.
So we're, we, we have, we we're
surrounded by wealthier states.
Right? Arizona.
Colorado.
Ace
Probably pay better.
Um, so are we gonna be bringing
people in, look.
Um, I don't need people shaking
their head at me in the
audience. I just like to ask
questions to test.
Hypotheses and information that
is provided to me. You shouldn't
interpret it necessarily as
objecting to something, but I
like to taste test
representations. I hope that's
OK with everybody.
So, um, we have, you know, so it
would be great. You know, you
live in in Silver City.
You know, you might be able to
hop into Arizona.
Um
But what what what's gonna
prompt all these people from
Wisconsin to come to want to
practice here via telemedicine.
Madam Chair and Representative,
uh, um.
So
I mean, there's no guarantee
we're gonna get more that
they're what, what's happening
now is that if you we since we
are not in the compact, if you
are a speech and language
pathologist in Louisiana, and
again, I don't know if they're
in the compact.
Um, they cannot do telehealth
here at the moment.
So, we, we, uh, on the Health
and Human Services Committee,
uh, in the interim Health and
Human Services Committee as well
are working really hard at
incentives in terms of tuition
forgiveness and you know,
perhaps housing and assistance
depending on which bills, so
we're doing everything we can to
draw people in, um, and.
New Mexico itself is a big draw,
but of course, there's no
guarantee that there, you know
that.
That there's gonna be a a giant
inflow we hope in terms of even
if it's just telehealth, so
folks in other states and we
have heard of it, not it wasn't
speech and language pathologists
and audiologists, but a family
with a child with cancer wanted
to get a second opinion and
because we are, it is positions,
but because we are not part of
the compact, the family had to
travel to Texas to do a
telehealth visit.
Um, so the doctor could only
speak with them if they were not
in New Mexico, so we're just
we're trying to open all the
doors that we can and you know
whether the people come in or
come out, we can't guarantee,
Madam Chair. OK, um, appreciate
the honest answer.
Um
So, um.
You know, I am concerned about
some of the representations. I'm
not saying we shouldn't do it,
but how are we gonna validate
that we're gonna get more
doctor, you know, nurses. I, we,
we are in the nursing compact.
We all know that, and all we
hear about is a shortage of
nurses.
And
We and that we've been in that
compact for a while, um, have we
not, Madam Chair, Madam Chair
and committee, there's a
nationwide shortage of nursing.
There's a nationwide shortage
of.
I think every type of healthcare
provider. Exactly. So, um, it's
just one, it's just one attempt
other many other states have
done it. We, we feel like we're
kind of the um stragglers on
some of these. And as, as I
said, it, I, I can't sit here
and say yes, we're gonna get,
you know, 500 more nurses, but
we open up some opportunities to
folks who might want to come
here, but if it's taking a long
time to get licensed, then they
will go elsewhere, so we're,
we're trying to streamline.
process and and hope and do our,
do our homework that we can draw
more folks in.
And I, you know, I think, you
know, I'm gonna support this
bill, but I don't think um it's
the panacea that I've been
hearing from people.
And I think we need to kind of
temper some of our
representations that we're
making about this is gonna help
us with our shortages, you know,
it may help some of the
professional development of some
of the folks that are part of
these or join the compacts, but
um, we haven't seen this great
uptick in nursing, and we've
been in that compact for a while
and you know, I just want to
caution people. I get a lot of
stuff uh emails, you know, stuff
out there and a lot of it's just
exaggeration.
And this isn't the only area we
get that, but um we're talking
about healthcare, and a lot of
emails with people telling me
stuff's gonna happen that I
really am skeptical about and.
Even I get a little hostility
when I actually even question
it. So, um, maybe we need to be
thinking critically. I like to
think of us as a state that
thinks critically, not as one
that's a scraggler, but um if
anyone else wants to weigh in on
any of this Madam in response to
that, um, we, I mean, we are
like as I said, we are doing
many things we have increased
our Medicaid reimbursements,
which has been a problem, there
is no silver bullet if there
was, I would sleep much better
at night.
And then trying to figure out
how to fix healthcare in New
Mexico after decades of.
And there are 48 states that
have doctor shortages, so, you
know, just let's all keep in
mind that I get a lot of
representations that we do X, Y,
Z, we're gonna be better in the
doctor's situation. I'm to this
is, this is not a silver bullet.
This is not the only answer.
It's one piece of the the what
we're trying to do and, and I
will say this out now, you know,
to everyone if you have ideas on
how we can recruit and retain
professionals of any sort, I
will be glad to carry that bill.
Absolutely representative Paul.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
When you first spoke to our
military bases and our mission
readiness, um.
Has that been?
This genuinely does aid. This is
something they look at.
Or is there?
I'm not doubting your word. I'm
just saying, is there anything
that says that because to me
that is critical.
Since we have
A SOCOM base in the southern
part of the state as well as
Kirtland Air Force Base with its
multi-resources and another one
in Alamogordo. I was just.
maybe you could elaborate just a
second on that please, madam
Chair. Thank you, Representative
Madam Chair Representative Hall,
so as I stated, some folks, and
I wasn't one of them and met
with DOD officials through the
interim, I do have letters, but
I, I don't have them printed out
if you want me to, Madam Chair,
I can email those letters from
the Department of Defense.
To you or your committee
assistant and, and they can be
passed out, but they, they, we,
I have received letters of
support.
Thank you, that was all my
ma'am, thank you I have a policy
of not taking flyers from
people.
because they have an opportunity
to visit with individuals and I
don't think this idea exists
for.
Lobbying efforts and I'm not,
you know, I appreciate we're
talking about the military, um
but you know, they certainly
could have gotten up during
public commenting.
You know, spoken of defense on
Zoom and and
not to pass out, but I do have
the letters if if.
Sure, I don't know how you want
it.
After meeting in the back room
afterwards or I don't know how
we.
They can always be dropped off
at people's offices. OK, all
right, thank you, ma'am.
Um
I'm happy to entertain
emotionless so anyone else has a
question. Oh, that's right,
we're not.
Um, any, any opposition or
concerns so that we're only here
when we.
consider this, we will not have
further debate, just so you
know, we'll just come in and.
I assuming I need to be here?
Um, I don't think so, you know,
we can just have someone present
it. Thank you, we'll just verify
that it was done correctly. OK.
And I want you guys to verify it
was done correctly too, so we're
not.
Relying on understood, very
good.
Um, the next one is.
Occupational therapy, licensure
compact.
You met him here, so um I've
given you the overview of, um,
To see which therapy I'm on now.
OT occupational therapist, and,
and I won't go over the same.
The same spiel, it's an
interstate compact, right? I'm
my expert is Linda Siegel, and
she has numbers, etc. if you
would like to know the number of
in there or, or Madam Chair, I'm
not exactly sure what to talk
about because it's essentially
the Arizona currently an
amendment on this one too, and I
think it's similar to the one we
did on '79.
Which was um
Background check thing and.
And I'm sure, that is correct.
I don't have a copy we can get
you a copy.
Madam, I'll just move for
discussion, OK.
I can't send a copy, please.
And it's essentially doing the
same.
I'm sure that is correct. You
want me to
Madam Chair, just briefly what I
basically said, so basically,
um, the occupational therapy
board does not have in in their
statute to do background checks,
and that's one of the
requirements to be part of the
compact, so we are just adding
that language in so that we are,
I mean they have to be standard
throughout the country, putting
it in to be in compliance with
the compact.
If or when we join it, OK.
Question about this particular,
any opposition to it? OK.
So, um, a couple of you weren't
here on the earlier discussion.
We're going to turn this one
into a committee sub, so we'll
hear the bills.
adopt the amendments and we'll
bring back the sub.
won't hear the bill again on
Monday, we'll just, you know,
put it out so we have a nice
clean bill to send over.
For the floor and, you know, for
the Senate to consider.
Um
Assuming it makes any other
comments on this.
Me just just a very brief, just
a comment. We have 1200
occupation approximately 1200
OT's licensed in the state of
New Mexico and the latest
workforce solutions report,
there were advertised jobs for
of course for nurses there were
over 7000, so as you have said
and others, there is a shortage
of providers, um, the nursing
compact past 2018, so that has
been the only compact we've been
in for.
I will now go to the audience,
those wishing to speak in
opposition.
The bill, please approach the
gentleman with the mic goes
online, um, wishing to speak in
opposition as a reminder this is
up in opposite, so I see a hand
raised Kelly Douglas, are you an
office?
Oh no, no. OK. Um, well, we'll,
we'll reserve your hand there
for the in support of um those
wishing to speak in support of.
The compacts.
Please.
Step up
Once again, I'm gonna limit it.
About a minute each.
Good morning again, Madam Chair,
Committee voters, we just was to
reiterate the same concern that
we had with Alaska. OK. Mountain
chair members of the committee,
my name is Alan Sanchez,
executive director of the New
Mexico Conference of Catholic
Bishops, and again we're
supporting the compacts of the
common good, uh, we need to try
and do everything we can, and
again, the question is how long
are you waiting for your
appointments and how long is too
long.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, JD Bullington
speaking on behalf of the
Greater Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce. As we know, this bill
will allow licensed occupational
therapist from all states in the
compact to practice in New
Mexico without having to jump
through more licensing hoops.
This will help everyone from
children with developmental
delays and adults with
conditions that make daily
activities more difficult to
veterans, and with 31 states in
this compact, including Arizona
and Colorado. It has the real
potential to increase care
options for New Mexicans.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Dana Gray,
executive director of Desert
State Physical Therapy Network.
We'd like to thank
Representative Thompson for
introducing this legislation.
The network is comprised of 30
independent private practices
throughout the state. While
there are 116 providers working
for network clinics, recruitment
remains a top priority and a top
challenge for many clinics. New
Mexico is at a disadvantage when
it comes to recruiting OT
providers, joining the compact
could help ease the challenge
our clinics face and provide
better access.
to care for New Mexico patients.
We stand in full support of
House Bill 81. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Nathan
Bush. I'm with the University of
New Mexico and we are uh here to
proudly support this bill and
all three of your uh compact
licenser bills this morning, so
thanks for listening to our
testimony. Good morning, Madam
Chair, again, thank you
committee members. Los Alamos
County Council supports all of
the medical and healthcare, uh,
compact bills that are in the
session this year. We are not
often without um medical
professionals in Los Alamos, but
occasionally we are, and we also
have an issue of trailing
spouses or those who come to
work at Los Alamos National
Laboratory, and we know that
this is an issue for uh the
Defense Department as well, and
we think that
More New Mexicans would have,
uh, health services as well as
help the spouses and find a
place within our economy.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I'm Fred Nai,
executive director. We're proud
to be part of this very broad
coalition, and we
enthusiastically support this
bill and the other two today,
want to thank uh the sponsors
chair Thompson and minority
Leader Armstrong or other states
that have already joined this
compact.
We will now go online. I'll take
up to 5,
Miss Douglas, Kelly Douglas.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Kelly May Douglas and I
represent the Department of
Defense. I'm here to express
strong support for the policy
addressed in House Bill 81, a
measure that would enact the
occupational therapy licensure
compact in New Mexico. In
addition to HB 79 and HB 82.
Professional licenser has been
an enduring problem for military
spouses. The short duration of
military assignments, coupled
with lengthy relicensing
processes can discourage
military spouses from seeking
Messenger, causing them to quit
an occupation or pause their
career, or the service member to
lead the military. State
policies enacting interstate
licensure compacts, such as the
OTLC facilitate greater career,
uh, sustainability for military
spouses, improving their
family's financial security and
overall well-being. These
compacts help states to increase
their pool of available
professionals to provide needed
services to the community, which
also benefits over 42,000
service members, spouses and
children who are currently
stationed in New Mexico.
Finally, I just wanted
you know, that to address the
question that came up for the
audiologist Douglas that we're
not gonna be addressing
questions. This is a pro and
con. I'm sorry.
Um
Uh, we'll move to the next
person, um.
Let's see, um, Miss, are you
speaking for um.
Miss
Natali
Yes, ma'am. Yes, madam chair.
Thank you so much. I, I also
represent the occupational
therapy compact and work with
the council of state governments
and I'm expressing support for
this bill as well and I'm
available for questions. Thank
you for your time. Thank you.
Um, anyone, um, we see Jessica
Salazar.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Jessica Salazar, and I'm an
occupational therapist as well
as the legislative chair for the
New Mexico Occupational Therapy
Association, and I'm here to
express NMOTA support for HB 81.
As we all know, there's a
shortage of votes in many areas
of the state, and access to OT
services are limited or
non-existent. We need to
increase the number of
occupational therapy
practitioners with the New
Mexico not only to improve
access to care for New Mexicans,
but also to support the growth
and sustainability of our
in the state. And you're right,
Madam Chair, the compacts are
not the ultimate solution to
increasing OTs in the state.
This is just one step forward.
We need to do more for all our
healthcare professions and NMOTA
is committed to supporting other
legislation that can help
achieve this as well. But for
now, on behalf of the New Mexico
Occupational Therapy
Association. I urge you and the
committee members to support HB
81, HB 79, and HB 82. Thank you.
Santa Maria El Mirador.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Patsy Romero. I'm uh
speaking today on behalf of the
National Alliance on Mental
Illness. I want to thank the
sponsors and want you to know
that the National Alliance on
Mental Illness supports all
three of the compacts House Bill
81, House Bill 79 and House Bill
82
individuals with mental illness,
individuals with disabilities.
ities of all kinds are in
desperate need of these
services, and we just do not
have enough in the state of New
Mexico, along with the 3034
other states. I think this is a
great step forward for New
Mexico. It's not the only
solution, but we certainly
support that step forward and
thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee for saying yes
to the compacts. And thank you
to Representative Thompson for
always being a champion for
The most at risk in New Mexico.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
OK, one more per Megan Dela
Rosa. Madam Chair, members of
the committee, Megan Dela Rosa
on behalf of the state
military-based planning
commission. This legislation
supports the Department of
Defense's ongoing commitment to
our service members by reducing
the barriers they face when
relocating. By prioritizing
these compacts, He 81 helps
ensure that our military
personnel can focus on their
mission while their families are
supported. Thank you.
No, madam Chair, we're ready for
questions.
Right. Any questions, comments?
I moved to adopt, OK.
Any opposition we are gonna
incorporate come back. I'm gonna
treat that as a housekeeping
item first on our agenda, we're
not gonna have a.
discussion, we'll just bring
them back. We'll verify they're
correct. We'll vote on the
committee sub, so as I said, we
have a nice clean document to
set down to the floor.
Um
So with that, we'll go to the
next one.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, I
don't want to repeat, but this
is my favorite, of course,
because I'm a PT, um.
Painting and I do believe that
we.
The pity board licensing board
is one that does have
requirements for fingerprints.
And so we don't have that
amendment, um, so we're pretty
much the same thing and.
Where, uh
At the last report from UNM and
health case of uh work
workforce, um, we are over 600
PT short, uh, the, you, the only
school in New Mexico is UNM and
they graduate 31, 32 every year,
so you do the math if no one
retires like I did and no one
leaves the state will, we'll
catch up in 20 years, you know.
And
We don't have an amendment for
this one. No, we do not, as the
PT board already requires the
background checks, OK.
All right, very good.
Um
Happy to go to the audience now,
those wishing to speak in
opposition.
Please approach the gentleman.
like
I don't see anyone, I was
wishing to speak in support.
Um, please, oh wait, we'll go to
online, but I have a strong
suspicion we're not going to see
any.
OK
Those wishing to speak in
opposition, please raise your
hand.
Um, Kathleen, I have a strong
suspicion you're not opposing
this um compact.
Is that right?
OK. We're gonna go to the
audience, um.
Please keep your comments to
about a minute.
Adam Chair Committee members,
I'm Melissa Salazar with
regulation and licensing
department, and I just want to
reiterate again our same concern
regarding an appropriation for
uh to carry out the mandate.
Thank you.
Madam Chair and committee
members, my name is Gretchen
Johnson Santa Fe for 37 years.
I stand in support of this bill.
I currently practice with 6
other PTs in a private practice
in Santa Fe.
We experienced it taking months
and years to hire a new PTs with
nationwide record recruiting,
not being a part of the compact
has been a deal breaker in some
instances we currently have a
wait lists for patients of 3
months to get into our clinic.
2 PTs as of last week have
recently submitted their
resignations, which will
Take effect May 1st, as of two
weeks ago, the clinic's owner
made the very difficult decision
to stop accepting new patients.
Because we don't feel like we're
gonna be able to replace them in
time.
This spiel, I realized is not
the be all end all.
We are getting more PTs to
practice here. There are many
other factors.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. Once
again, Los Alamos County Council
supports, uh, all the healthcare
and physical um and medical
practitioner related compact
bills, uh, both because of
trailing spouses at Los Alamos
National Laboratory, looking for
work, as well as the need across
New Mexico on a personal note,
uh, my father, who
Experience some sort of strange
um mobility issue last year, was
told to go to physical therapy
by his doctor and experienced a
5 month wait and he has never
been to physical therapy yet.
So, it's also
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Ellen Sanchez, New
Mexico Conference of Catholic
bishops and again for the common
good, the bishop's stand in
support of all these compacts.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, JD Bullington
speaking on behalf of the
Greater Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce. These compacts are a
means to get more medical
professionals into New Mexico
and more medical care to New
Mexicans who need it. Anyone who
has had an injury or a surgery
knows how essential high quality
physical therapy is to full
recovery and how hard it is to
get an appointment when you
really need it, and House Bill
82 is an important part of that
solution.
Hello again, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Dana Gray, executive
director of Desert State
Physical Therapy Network. We
continue to thank Representative
Thompson for her hard work on
this legislation.
is comprised of 30 independent
private practices throughout the
state.
Recruitment remains a top
priority and top challenge for
our 30 clinics. New Mexico is at
a disadvantage when it comes to
recruiting PT providers as we
heard, joining the compact could
help ease this challenge for our
clinics and provide better
access to care for New Mexico
patients. We stand in full
support of House Bill 82. Thank
you.
Good morning, Madam Chair. My
name is Doug State. I apologize
for my.
Um, salaries, I don't know how
we compare to all the states uh
surrounding us and for all the
profess I note from what I've
seen that perhaps other people
here can speak.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, good afternoon. My
name is Marcus Luhan. I work
with Think New Mexico. We
figured you were tired of
hearing from Fred, so they sent
me up.
But
But we are in full support of
this compact, the other two that
you heard today, and the next
one's coming down your way.
Thank you.
Thank you.
All right, let's go online um we
are gonna take the 1st 5 online.
OK.
Um, New Mexico chapter of
leadership is what I see.
Oh, that's uh I see a person
online called.
Um, New Mexico chapter leaders.
And can you hear me? Yes.
Hi, um, Chairman Chandler and
members of the committee. My
name is Karen Browning. I am a
practicing physical therapist.
I'm a 4th generation native New
Mexican, and I'm currently
serving as the president of the
New Mexico chapter of the
American Physical Therapy
Association. We represent 350
practicing therapists, 80
physical therapist assistants
and 150 New Mexico student
members, as well as the 2000
licensed therapist in the state
who all are in full support of
Compact legislation. Um, I do
have some answers to some of
your questions, Cha Chandler,
um, from a PT perspective, but I
know you're not taking
questions.
Yup, I just wanted to let you
know. Absolutely. Thank you.
You're welcome.
Um
Let's see, um,
Jeff Roca.
Jeff Rosa
Yes, uh, Madam Cher, um, can you
hear me? Yes.
OK, uh, Madam chair, members of
the committee. My name is Jeff
Rosa, and I am the compact
administrator for the PT
Compact, and I'm here to testify
in support of House Bill 82, and
if anyone has any questions, I'd
be more than happy to address
them.
OK, um,
All right, um, Kelly um May
Douglas.
Madam
Madam Chair, yes, uh, members of
the committee, again, Kelly May
Douglas for the Department of
Defense, the secretaries of the
military departments have made
the importance of military
spouse licensure explicitly
clear, as they consider the
availability of license
reciprocity when evaluating
future basing or mission, uh,
alternatives. This consideration
was codified by Congress as a
requirement in the 2020 National
Defense Authorization Act, um,
and if, uh, New Mexico considers
compacts such as the PT compact,
it will, um,
position itself to retain its
current mission installations
and attract additional missions.
Thank you.
OK.
Let's see.
We've got one more, I think.
Um, how about aana Peck?
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. I'm a
Cone speaking for the League of
Women Voters in New Mexico. We
support this bill and all the
compact bills very strongly.
For the same for all the good
reasons you've already heard.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you. We'll go back to the
sponsor.
We stand for questions, Madam
Chair.
Anyone have any questions? You
were.
Um
Do a physical therapists do, um,
tell them.
Madam Chair and committee, um,
that's why I retired because I
was working with infants and
toddlers and doing uh.
ET with infants and toddlers
over Zoom was not in my
wheelhouse.
COVID COVID, correct,
but is it the practice to do.
telemedicine.
Um, with PT physical therapist,
Madam Chair, there, there are
circumstances, there are
practitioners who do, um, I'm
old school hands on, so.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Janet
Poph. I'm a physical therapist
in Albuquerque and.
Um, uh, so yes, I mean, there
are instances, um.
Uh, there's different types of
education, um, maybe working
with bone health, um, there are
times when it can be delivered
in a telehealth format, um, but
telehealth is allowed for the
practice of physical therapy.
So what about the exercise I've
been to to um.
physical manipulation, yeah.
Right, exercises, right, we're
not living in Madam Chair and
member Star Trek, um, but, um,
so manipulations, mobilizations,
those are not possible, but
there is the education piece um
uh instructing in the models
that have been test iles that
are shown to.
Um, for, uh.
Fall prevention, for instance,
it can be delivered at tele.
OK.
Um, and you understand my point,
the other two compacts we just
had, I mean, I can obviously see
there's a medicine, but this
one.
You know, we can, it's fine, we
can pass it, but um, you know,
I'm skeptical that it's really
gonna increase very much, so
I'll look forward to data.
Are we gonna be doing follow up
data on all these compacts, so
we can start counting.
You know, the waves of people
that are gonna be coming in to
practice, Madam Chair, we, we
kind of do keep track of of um
folks coming in and out through
this the workforce study that
UNM does annually, I believe,
but it's one of those things
where there's so many factors.
Is it the increased rate
Medicaid reimburse reimbursement
rates is that, you know, some
Google factory has come here
with, you know, 10,000 engineers
and 5000 of their spouses.
are therapy, I mean, it's it it
it would be hard to say that one
factor was the the magic wand.
Um, Madam Chair, may I add to
that? Um, Madam Chair, members
of committee, um, so, um, the
compact privileges that are
issued are.
Um, are trapped, um, in the
licensing board gets that
information weekly. So the New
Mexico licensing board knows who
has been issued a compact
privilege to practice in New
Mexico, um, another piece of
data piece that is being tracked
is um the new grads in New
Mexico over a 4 year period of
decrease in um the the rate of
um new grads seeking licenser in
the state um compared to other
compact states where it's.
increasing or changing or
slightly different looking at
bordering states so that kind of
data will be tracked and maybe
attributed to the compact, but
at this point.
Um, now it's not known. OK.
So maybe um in a couple years we
can have LFC for a report.
On these compact licenses that
just tells us who's got a
license that does a compact
license, Madam Chair, that's
correct, and that's, that's been
an issue, that's how we've
tracked.
I think all of the healthcare
providers is the number of
licenses, um, and so we don't
know if they're.
in New Mexico if they are
practicing, you know.
So I will tell you, Madam Chair,
that Representative Eleanor
Chabas and I have a, a bill for
a million dollars for studying.
Particularly the costs of health
care, but we, looking at work.
Because we can't, we can't
answer the questions if we don't
have the data. Well, I think
that would be very we're kind of
shooting in the dark here as to
what we need to be doing and if
we can get some.
Actual studies, um.
Do maybe through LFC or someone
like that, then we can maybe
target some of our initiatives,
I, I couldn't agree with you
more, Madam Chair. We, we, uh, I
mean, on many things, all things
healthcare pretty much we are
shooting in the dark because we
don't have good uh and I will
tell you that several years ago
we passed a bill.
Um, mandating that, um.
I think it's the health care
authority have all payers claims
data so we can see what what
services are being used, etc.
etc. and um they're still
working on it, so we, we, we
feel like on the Health and
Human Services Committee that we
are frequently shooting in the
dark, unfortunately, so we're
trying to fix that and get more
data.
Right, um,
Anyone else with questions, I
would note there are no
amendments on this one, so we
could pass it out a committee of
people or.
committee, son, Madam I'm sure
I'd like to know if I do pass
emergency.
All right.
Well, I'm sorry if I didn't hear
your mumble, but did you have
something you wanted to say?
I'm sure I did mumble. I'm happy
to second the motion.
Um
We have a motion for a due pass
on House Bill 82 made what you
call the rule?
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Abeta, yes.
Representative Chavez, yes.
Representative Hall.
Representative Hockman B. Hill,
yes.
Representative Martinez.
Yes
Speaker Martinez,
Come on
Yes.
Representative McQueen. Yes.
We, you had a deal?
Is he gonna get a compact
license and you're gonna get a
compact license and then you can
switch.
I'm sorry, go ahead.
Represented McQueen.
Yes
Representative Reed.
Leader Sapansky
Madam Vice Chair.
Madam Chair, yes.
Madam Chair, you have a due pass
on House Bill 82.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of very good, thank you,
Madam Chair, the speaker does
owe me because he keeps
referring bill after bill to my.
Well, he's on the same to me
girlfriend, so you know, so
when, when you have a bill in
here, he better vote for you.
So alright, we're adjourned, um,
there are, there are salads in
my office, so please, there's
really delicious looking healthy
salads in my office, so please
